
Wild excitement, expectation strung to the highest pitch, and
party-feeling, both for and against, had always, of course, been rife
here; but to-day they were manifest in an acuter form--hatred had
added its taint and lent virulence to every emotion. The heathen were
oppressed and angered, their rights abridged and defied; they saw the
Christians triumphant at every point, and hatred is a protean monster
which rages most fiercely and most venomously when it has lurked in the
foul career of envy.

The Christians could hate, too, and they hated the idolaters who gloried
with haughty self-sufficiency in their intellectual inheritance; the
traditions of a brilliant past. They, who had been persecuted and
contemned, now had the upper hand; they were in power, and the more
insolently they treated their opponents, the more injustice they
did them, and the less the victimized heathen were able to revenge
themselves, the more bitterly did the Christians detest the party they
contemned as superstitious idolaters. In their care for the soul--the
spiritual and divine part--the Christians had hitherto neglected the
graces of the body; thus the heathen had remained the undisputed masters
of the palaestra and the hippodrome. In the gymnasium the Christian
refused even to compete, for the exhibition of his naked body he
regarded as an abomination; but on the race-course he had lately been
willing to display his horses, and many times had disputed the crown
with the hereditary victors, so that, even here, the heathen felt
his time-honored and undisputed supremacy endangered. This was
intolerable--this must be averted--the mere thought of being beaten on
this ground roused the idolaters to wrath and malice. They displayed
their color in wreaths of scarlet poppies, pomegranate flowers and red
roses, with crimson ribbands and dresses; white and green, the colors
formerly adopted by the competitors, were abandoned; for all the heathen
were unanimous in combining their forces against the common foe.
The ladies used red sun-shades and the very baskets, in which the
refreshments were brought for the day, were painted red.

The widow Mary, on the other hand, and all the Christians were robed in
blue from head to foot, their sandals being tied with blue ribbands;
and Dada's blue shoulder-knot was in conspicuous contrast to her bright
rose-colored dress.

The vendors of food who wandered round the circus had eggs dyed blue
and red, cakes with sugared icing and refreshing drinks in jars of both
colors. When a Christian and a Heathen found themselves seated side by
side, each turned a shoulder to the other, or, if they were forced to
sit face to face, eyed each other with a scowl.

Cynegius did all he could to postpone the races as long as possible;
he was anxious to wait till the Comes had finished his task in the
Serapeum, so that the troops might be free to act in any emergency that
might arise before the contests in the Hippodrome were fairly ended.
Time did not hang heavy on his hands for the vast multitude here
assembled interested him greatly, though he had frequently been a
spectator of similar festivities in Rome and Constantinople; but this
crowd differed in many particulars from the populace of those cities.
In the topmost tiers of free seats black and brown faces predominated
greatly over white ones; in the cushioned and carpeted ranks of the
stone podium--the lower portion of the amphitheatre--mingled with Greeks
and Egyptians, sat thousands of splendidly dressed men and women
with strongly-marked Semitic features: members of the wealthy Jewish
community, whose venerable head, the Alabarch, a dignified patriarch in
Greek dress, sat with the chief members of the senate, near the envoy's
tribune.

The Alexandrians were not a patient race and they were beginning to
rebel against the delay, making no small noise and disturbance, when
Cynegius rose and with his white handkerchief waved the signal for the
races to begin. The number of spectators had gradually swelled from
fifty to sixty and to eighty thousand; and no less than thirty-six
chariots were waiting behind the carceres ready to start.

Four 'missus' or races were to be run. In each of the three first twelve
chariots were to start, and in the fourth only the leaders in the
three former ones were to compete. The winner of the olive-wreath and
palmbranch in this final heat would bear the honors of the day; his
party would be victorious and he would quit the Hippodrome in triumph.

Lots were now drawn in the oppidum to decide which shed each chariot was
to start from, and in which naissus each was to run. It was Marcus' fate
to start among the first lot, and, to the horror of those who had backed
his chances, Hippias, the hero of the Hippodrome, was his rival, with
the four famous bays.

Heathen priests poured libations to Poseidon, and Phoebus Apollo, the
patron divinities of horses and of the Hippodrome--for sacrifices of
blood were prohibited; while Christian presbyters and exorcists blessed
the rival steeds in the name of the Bishop. A few monks had crept in,
but they were turned out by the heathen with bitter jeers, as unbidden
intruders.

Cynegius repeated his signal. The sound of the tuba rang through the
air, and the first twelve chariots were led into the starting-sheds. A
few minutes later a machine was set in motion by which a bronze eagle
was made to rise with outspread wings high into the air, from an altar
in front of the carceres; this was the signal for the chariots to come
forth from their boxes. They took up their positions close behind a
broad chalk line, traced on the ground with diagonal slope, so as to
reduce the disadvantage of standing outermost and having a larger curve
to cover.

Until this moment only the privileged possessors of the seats over the
carceres had been able, by craning backwards, to see the horses and
drivers; now the competitors were visible to the multitude which,
at their first appearance, broke out into vociferous applause. The
agitatores had to exert all their strength to hold in the startled and
eager teams, and make them stand even for a few short minutes; then
Cynegius signalled for the third time. A golden dolphin, which had been
suspended from a beam, and on which the eye of every charioteer was
fixed, dropped to the ground, a blast on the 'salpinx', or war-trumpet,
was sounded, and forty-eight horses flew forth as though thrown forward
by one impulsion.

The strength of four fine horses whirled each light, two-wheeled chariot
over the hard causeway as though it were a toy. The down-pour of the
previous night had laid the dust; the bright sunshine sparkled and
danced in rapidly-changing flashes, mirrored in the polished gilding
of the bronze or the silver fittings of the elegantly-decorated,
semicircular cars in which the drivers stood.

Five blue and seven red competitors had drawn the first lots. The eye
rested with pleasure on the sinewy figures whose bare feet seemed rooted
to the boards they stood on, while their eyes were riveted on the goal
they were striving to reach, though--as the eye of the archer sees
arrow, bow and mark all at once--they never lost sight of the horses
they were guiding. A close cap with floating ribbands confined their
hair, and they wore a short sleeveless tunic, swathed round the body
with wide bands, as if to brace their muscles and add to their strength.
The reins were fastened around the hips so as to leave the hands free,
not only to hold them but also to ply the whip and use the goad. Each
charioteer had a knife in his girdle, to enable him to release himself,
in case of accident, from a bond that might prove fatal.

Before long the bay team was leading alone. Behind were two Christian
drivers, followed by three red chariots; Marcus was last of all, but it
was easy to see that it was by choice and not by necessity that he was
hanging back. He was holding in his fiery team with all his strength and
weight--his body thrown back, his feet firmly set with his knees against
the silver bar of the chariot, and his hands gripping the reins. In a
few minutes he came flying past Dada and his brother, but he did not
see them. He had not even caught sight of his own mother, while the
professional charioteers had not failed to bow to Cynegius and nod to
their friends. He could only keep his eyes and mind fixed on his horses
and on the goal.

The multitude clapped, roared, shouted encouragement to their party,
hissed and whistled when they were disappointed--venting their utmost
indignation on Marcus as he came past behind the others; but he either
heard them not or would not hear. Dada's heart beat so wildly that she
thought it would burst. She could not sit still; she started to her
feet and then flung herself back on her cushions, shouting some spurring
words to Marcus in the flash of time when he might perhaps hear them.
When he had passed, her head fell and she said sadly enough: "Poor
fellow!--We have bought our wreaths for nothing after all, Demetrius!"

But Demetrius shook his head and smiled.

"Nay," he said, "the boy has iron sinews in that slight body. Look how
he holds the horses in! He is saving their strength till they need it.
Seven times, child, seven times he has to go round this great circus and
past the 'nyssa'. You will see, he will catch up what he has lost, yet.
Hippias, you see, is holding in his horses, too; it is his way of
giving himself airs at starting. Now he is close to the 'nyssa'--the
'kampter'--the 'meta' they call it at Rome; the smaller the bend he
can make round it the better for him, but it is risky work. There--you
see!--They drive round from right to left and that throws most of the
work on the lefthand beast; it has to turn almost in its own length.
Aura, our first horse, is as supple as a panther and I trained her to
do it, myself.--Now, look out there! that bronze figure of a rearing
horse--the 'Taraxippos' they call it--is put there to frighten the
horses, and Megaera, our third horse, is like a mad thing sometimes,
though she can go like a stag; every time Marcus gets her quietly past
the Taraxippos we are nearer to success.--Look, look,=-the first chariot
has got round the nyssa! It is Hippias! Yes, by Zeus, he has done it! He
is a detestable braggart, but he knows his business!"

This was one of the decisive moments of the race. The crowd was silent;
expectation was at the utmost pitch of tension, and Dada's eyes were
fixed spell-bound on the obelisk and on the quadrigas that whirled round
the bourn.

Next to Hippias came a blue team, and close behind were three red ones.
The Christian who had succeeded in reaching the nyssa second, boldly
took his horses close round the obelisk, hoping to gain space and get
past Hippias; but the left wheel of his chariot grazed the granite
plinth, the light car was overset, and the horses of the red chariot,
whose noses were almost on his shoulder, could not be pulled up short
in time. They fell over the Christian's team which rolled on the
ground; the red chariot, too, turned over, and eight snorting beasts lay
struggling in the sand.

The horses in the next chariot bolted as they were being driven past
this mass of plunging and neighing confusion; they defied their driver's
impotent efforts and galloped across the course back into the caiceres.

The rest had time and space enough to beware of the wreck and to give it
a wide berth, among them Marcus. The melee at the Meta had excited his
steeds almost beyond control, and as they tore past the Taraxippos the
third horse, Megaera, shied violently as Demetrius had predicted. She
flung herself on one side, thrust her hind quarters under the pole, and
kicked desperately, lifting the chariot quite off the ground; the young
charioteer lost his footing and slipped. Dada covered her face with her
hands, and his mother turned pale and knit her brows with apprehension.
The youth was still standing; his feet were on the sand of the arena;
but he had a firm grip on the right-hand spiral ornament that terminated
the bar round the chariot. Many a heart stood still with anxiety, and
shouts of triumph and mockery broke from the red party; but in less than
half a minute, by an effort of strength and agility, he had his knees on
the foot-board, and then, in the winking of an eye, he was on his feet
in the chariot, had gathered up the reins and was rushing onward.

Meanwhile, however, Hippias had far outstripped all the rest, and as
he flew past the carceres he checked his pace, snatched a cup from
a lemonade-seller, tossed the contents down his throat with haughty
audacity amid the plaudits of the crowd, and then dashed on again. A
wide gap, indeed, still lay between him and Marcus.

By the time the competitors again came round to the nyssa, the slaves in
attendance had cleared away the broken chariots and led off the horses.
A Christian still came next to Hippias followed by a red agitator;
Marcus had gained on the others and was now fourth.

In the third round the chariot of the red driver in front of Marcus
made too sharp a turn and ran up against the granite. The broken car was
dragged on by the terrified beasts, and the charioter with it, till, by
the time they were stopped, he was a corpse. In the fifth circuit the
Christian who till now had been second to Hippias shared the same
fate, though he escaped with his life; and then Marcus drove past the
starting-sheds next to Hippias.

Hippias had ceased to flout and dally. In spite of the delay that Marcus
had experienced from the Taraxippos, the space that parted his bays
from the black Arabs had sensibly diminished, round after round; and
the interest of the race now centered entirely in him and the young
Christian. Never before had so passionate and reckless a contest been
fought out on this venerable race-course, and the throng of spectators
were carried away by the almost frenzied rivalry of the two drivers. Not
a creature in the upper tiers had been able to keep his seat; men and
women alike had risen to their feet and were shouting and roaring to the
competitors. The music in the towers might have ceased, so completely
was it drowned by the tumult in the amphitheatre.

Only the ladies, in the best places above the starting-sheds, preserved
their aristocratic calm; Still, when the seventh and decisive round was
begun, even the widow Mary leaned forward a little and clasped her hands
more tightly over the cross in her lap. Each time that Marcus had driven
round the obelisk or past the Taraxippos, Dada had clutched her head
with her hands and set her teeth in her lip; each time, as he happily
steered clear of the fatal stone and whirled past the dreadful bronze
statue, she had relaxed her grip and leaned back in her seat with a sigh
of relief. Her sympathy made her one with Marcus; she felt as if his
loss must be her death and his victory her personal triumph.

During the sixth circuit Hippias was still a long way ahead of the young
Christian; the distance which lay between Marcus and the team of bays
seemed to have become a fixed quantity, for, do what he could, he could
not diminish it by a hand-breadth. The two agitatores had now completely
altered their tactics; instead of holding their horses in they urged
them onward, leaning over the front of their chariots, speaking to the
horses, Shouting at them with hoarse, breathless cries, and flogging
them unsparingly. Steamy sweat and lathering foam streaked the flanks of
the desperate, laboring brutes, while clouds of dust were flung up
from the dry, furrowed and trampled soil. The other chariots were left
further and further behind those of Hippias and Marcus, and when, for
the seventh and last time, these two were nearing the nyssa, the crowd
for a moment held its breath, only to break out into louder and wilder
cries, and then again to be hushed. It seemed as though their exhausted
lungs found renewed strength to shout with double energy when their
excitement had kept them silent for a while.

Dada spoke no more; pale and gasping, she sat with her eyes fixed on the
tall obelisk and on the cloud of dust which, as the chariots neared the
nyssa, seemed to grow denser. At about a hundred paces from the nyssa
she saw, above the sandy curtain, the red cap of Hippias flash past, and
then--close behind it--the blue cap worn by Marcus. Then a deafening,
thundering roar from thousands of throats went up to heaven, while,
round the obelisk--so close to it that not a horse, not a wheel could
have found room between the plinth and the driver-the blue cap came
forward out of the cloud, and, behind it now--no longer in front, though
not more than a length behind--came the red cap of Hippias. When within
a few feet of the nyssa, Marcus had overtaken his antagonist, had passed
the point with a bold and perilously close turn, and had left the bays
behind him.

Demetrius saw it all, as though his eye had power to pierce the
dust-cloud, and now he, too, lost his phlegmatic calm. He threw up his
arms as if in prayer and shouted, as though his brother could hear him:

"Well done, splendid boy! Now for the kentron--the goad--drive it in,
send it home if they die for it! Give it them well!"

Dada, who could only guess what was happening, looked round at him,
asking in tremulous tones: "Has he passed him? Is he gaining on him?
Will he win?" But Demetrius did not answer; he only pointed to the
foremost of the flying clouds on which the second was fast advancing,
and cried in a frenzy of excitement:

"Death and Hades! The other is catching him up. The dog, the sneak! If
only the boy would use his goad. Give it them, Marcus! Give it them,
lad! Never give in now! Great Father Poseidon!--there--there!--no! I can
hardly stand--Yes, he is still in front, and now--now--this must settle
it! Thunder and lightning! They are close together again--may the dust
choke him! No--it is all right; my Arabs are in front! All is well, keep
it up, lad, well done! We have won!"

The horses were pulled up, the dust settled; Marcus, the Christian, had
won the first missus. Cynegius held out the crown to the victor,
who bowed to receive it. Then he waved his hand to his mother, who
graciously waved hers in return, and he drove into the oppidurn and was
lost to sight.

Hippias flung down his whip in a rage, but the triumphant shouts of the
Christians drowned the music, the trumpet-blasts and the angry murmurs
of the defeated heathen. Threatening fists were shaken in the air, while
behind the carceres the drivers and owners of the red party scolded,
squabbled and stormed; and Hippias, who by his audacious swagger
had given away the race to their hated foe--to the Blues, the
Christians--narrowly escaped being torn in pieces.

The tumult and excitement were unparalleled; but Dada saw and heard
nothing. She sat in a blissful dream, gazing into her lap, while tears
of joyful reaction rolled down her cheeks. Demetrius saw her tears and
was glad; then, pointing out Mary to the girl, he informed her that she
was the mother of Marcus. And he registered a secret vow that, cost what
it might, he would bring his victorious brother and this sweet child
together.

The second and third missus, like the first, were marked by serious
accidents; both, however, were won for the Red party. In the fourth,
the decisive race, there were but three competitors: Marcus and the two
heathen winners. Demetrius watched it with less anxiety; he knew that
his Arabs were far superior to the Egyptian breed in staying power, and
they also had the advantage of having had a longer rest. In fact, the
final victory was adjudged to the young Christian.

Long before it was decided Dada had been impatiently fingering her
wreaths, and could hardly wait any longer to fling them into Marcus'
chariot. When it was all over she might perhaps have an opportunity of
speaking to him; and she thought how delightful his voice was and what
fine, kind eyes he had. If only he were to bid her be his, she would
follow him whither and wherever he desired, whatever Karnis and Herse
might say to the contrary. She thought no one could be so glad of his
success as she was; she felt as if she belonged to him, had always
belonged to him, and only some spiteful trick of Fate had come between
them.

There was a fresh blast of trumpets; the victor, in obedience to a
time-honored custom, was to drive round the arena at a foot-pace and
show his brave team to the multitude. He came nearer and nearer, and
Demetrius proposed that they should cross the little watercourse that
parted the podium from the arena and follow the chariot, so as to
give his brother the wreaths instead of flinging them to him. The girl
colored and could say neither yes or no; but she rose, hung one of the
olive-crowns on her arm with a happy, bashful smile, and handed the
other to her new friend; then she followed him across the little bridge
on to the race-course which, now that the games were over, was crowded
with Christians.

The brothers exchanged pleased greetings from afar, but Marcus did not
see Dada till she was close to him and stood, with a shy but radiant
glance of intense delight, holding out the olive-wreath for his
acceptance. He felt as though Heaven had wrought a miracle in his favor.
Never before had he thought her half so lovely. She seemed to have
grown since he had seen her last, to have gained a deeper and nobler
expression; and he observed, too, the blue favors on her shoulder and
among the roses that crowned her fair curls. Gladness and surprise
prevented his speaking; but he took the garland she offered him and,
seizing her hands, stammered out: "Thanks--thank you, Dada."

Their eyes met, and as he gazed into her face he forgot where he was,
did not even wonder why his brother had suddenly turned away and,
beginning some long-winded speech, had rushed after a man who hastily
covered his head and tried to escape; he did not notice that thousands
of eyes were fixed on him, and among them his mother's; he could merely
repeat: "thanks" and "Dada"--the only words he could find. He would
perhaps have gone on repeating them, but that he was interrupted; the
'porta libitinaria'--the gate through which the dead or injured were
usually carried out, was thrown open, and a rabble of infuriated heathen
rushed in, crying: "Serapis is fallen! They have destroyed the image of
Serapis! The Christians are ruining the sanctuaries of the gods!"

A sudden panic seized the assembled multitude; the Reds rushed down from
their places into the arena to hear the details and ask questions--ready
to fight for the god or to fly for safety. In an instant the victor's
chariot was surrounded by an angry mob; Dada clutched it for protection,
and Marcus, without pausing to reflect--indeed hardly master of his own
