
The musicians, who had displayed the most praiseworthy promptness,
would arrive three days earlier than she had expected.

The royal lady readily admitted that the utmost haste was necessary.
Yet she knew that, if any one could accomplish the impossible, it was
Quijada, where the object in view was to serve her and the Emperor.

The influence of this eulogy was doubled by a tender glance from her
bright eyes, and the Spaniard promised to do everything in his power to
secure the success of her beautiful surprise.  There would undoubtedly
be difficulties with his Majesty and the treasurer on the score of the
expense, for their finances were at the very lowest ebb.

"There is always the same annoyance where money is concerned," cried the
Queen irritably, "in spite of the vast sums which my Netherlands pour
into the treasury--four times as much as Spain supplies, including the
gold and silver of the New World.  You keep it secret, but two fifths of
the revenue from all the countries over which Charles reigns are
contributed by my provinces.  Torrents of ducats inundate your treasury,
and yet--yet--it's enough to drive one mad!--in spite of this and the
lamentable parsimony with which the Emperor deprives himself of both
great and small pleasures--it is simply absurd!--the story is always:
The finances are at the lowest ebb--save and save again.  To protect the
plumes in his new cap from being injured by the rain, the sovereign of
half the world ordered an old hat to be brought, and waited in the shower
until the shabby felt came.  And where are the millions which this
excellent economist saves from his personal expenses?  The dragon War
devours them all.  True, he has vanquished foes enough, but the demon of
melancholy, that makes even Dr. Mathys anxious, is far worse than the
infidels before whom you were compelled to retreat in Algiers--far more
terrible than the Turks and heretics combined.  Yet what are you and the
wise treasurer doing?  The idea of lessening the salaries of the
physician-in-ordinary and his colleagues has never entered the heads of
the estimable gentlemen who call themselves his Majesty's faithful
servants.  Very well!  Then put the musicians' travelling expenses upon
the apothecary's bill.  They have as much right to be there as the senna
leaves.  But, if the penny pinchers in the council of finance refuse to
advance the necessary funds, why--charge this medicine to my account.
I'll pay for it, in spite of the numerous leeches that suck my
substance."

"It certainly will not come to that, your Majesty," replied Quijada
soothingly.  "Our sovereign lord knows, too, that it beseems him to be
less rigid in saving.  Only yesterday he dipped into his purse deeply
enough for another remedy."

"What was that?"  asked the Queen in surprise.

"He paid the debts of my colleague Malfalconnet, not less than ten
thousand ducats."

"There it is!"  exclaimed the regent, striking her hands sharply
together.  "The baron dispels the Emperor's melancholy by his ready wit,
which often hits the nail on the head, and his nimble tongue, but my
medicine must provide the fitting mood for Malfalconnet's dearly bought
jests and witticisms to exert the proper influence."

"And, moreover," Quijada added gaily, "your Majesty will present the
completed deed for the treasurer's action.  But now I most humbly entreat
you to dismiss me.  I must inform the quartermasters at once, and look
after the matter myself if your Majesty's costly magic pills are not to
be spoiled by this wet April weather.  Besides, many of the musicians are
not the strongest of men."

Bowing as he spoke, he prepared to take leave of the Queen, but she
detained him with the remark:

"Our invitation went to Sir Wolf Hartschwert also.  He is a native of
Ratisbon, and can aid you and the quartermasters in assigning lodgings."

"A fresh proof of the wise caution of my august mistress," replied
Quijada.  "If your Majesty will permit, I should like to talk with my
royal patroness about this man shortly.  I have something in my mind
concerning him which can not be easily explained in a few words,
especially as I know that the modest, trustworthy fellow----"

"If what you have in view is for his benefit," the Queen eagerly
interrupted, "it is granted in advance."

The promise reached Quijada just as he gained the threshold; ere he
crossed it, Queen Mary called to him again, saying frankly: "I will not
let you go so, Luis!  You are an honest man, and I am ashamed to deceive
you.  The cure of his Majesty's melancholy is my principal object, it is
true, but one half the expense of this medicine ought to be credited to
me; for--but do not tell the treasurer--for it will afford me relief
also.  I can endure these rooms no longer.  The forest is putting forth
its first green leafage.  The birds are returning.  Red deer are plenty
in the woods along the Danube.  I must get out of doors into the open
air.  As matters are now, I could not leave his Majesty; but when the
band and the boy choir are at his disposal, they will dispel his
melancholy moods, and I can venture later to leave him to you and
Malfalconnet, whose wit will be freshly seasoned by the payment of his
debts.  O Luis! if only I can get out of doors!  Meanwhile, may music do
for my imperial brother what we anticipate!  And one thing more: Take
Master Adrian with you.  I released him from attendance upon the Emperor
until midnight.  It was no easy matter.  When you have provided the
favourites of Apollo with lodgings, come to me again, however late the
hour may be.  Sir Wolf Hartschwert must call early to-morrow morning.
The nuncio brought some new songs from Rome.  The music is too high for
my voice, and the knight understands how to transpose the notes for me
better than even the leader of the choir, Appenzelder."




CHAPTER II.

The April sun, ere it sank to rest, had won the victory and kindly
dried the garments of the horsemen who were approaching Ratisbon by
the Nuremberg road.

A young man who had ridden forward in advance of the great train of
travellers behind him checked his steed above the village of Kneiting,
just where the highway descended in many a curve to the valley of the
Danube, and gazed at the landscape whose green spring leafage, freshened
by rain, appeared before him.

His heart throbbed faster, and he thought that he had seen no fairer
prospect in all the wide tract of earth over which he had wandered during
the past five years.  Below him were green meadows and fields, pleasant
villages, and the clear, full current of the Danube, along whose left
bank extended a beautifully formed mountain chain, whose declivity toward
the river presented a rich variety to the eye, for sometimes it was
clothed in budding groves, sometimes displayed picturesque bare cliffs,
and again vineyards in which labourers were working.  From the farthest
distance the steeples of Ratisbon offered the first greeting to the
resting horseman.

What a wealth of memories this pleasant landscape awoke in the mind of
the returning traveller!  How often he had walked through these charming
valleys, climbed these heights, stopped in these villages!  It was
difficult for him to turn from this view, but he let his bay horse have
its way when the companion whom he had left behind overtook him here, and
the animal followed the other's black Brabant steed, with which it had
long been on familiar terms.  He rode slowly at his friend's side into
the valley.

Both silently feasted their eyes upon the scene opening with increasing
magnificence before them.

As they reached the village of Winzer, the victorious sun was approaching
the western horizon, and diffused over it a fan of golden rays.  The gray
cloud bank above, which a light breeze was driving before it, was
bordered with golden edges.  The young green foliage, refreshed by the
rain, glittered as richly and magnificently as emerald and chrysoprase,
and the primroses and other early spring flowers, which had just grown up
along the roadside and in the meadows, shone in brighter colours than in
the full light of noon.  The big fresh drops on the leaves and blossoms
sparkled and glittered in the last rays of the sun.

Now Ratisbon also appeared.

The city, with its throng of steeples, was surrounded by a damp vapour
which the reflection of the sun coloured with a faint, scarcely
perceptible roseate hue.  The notes of bells from the twin towers of the
cathedral and the convent of Nieder Munster, from St. Emmeram on the
right, and the church of the Dominicans on the left, echoed softly in
this hour when Nature and human activity were at rest--often dying away
in the distance--to greet the returning citizen.

Obeying an involuntary impulse, Wolf Hartschwert raised his hat.  Within
the shelter of the walls of this venerable city he had played as a boy,
completed his school and student days, and early felt the first quickened
throbbing of the heart.  Here he had first been permitted to test what
knowledge he had won in the schools of poetry and music.

He had remained in Ratisbon until his twenty-first year, then he had
ventured out into the world, and, after an absence of five years, he was
returning home again.

But was the stately city before him really his home?

When he had just gazed down upon it from the height, this question had
occupied his thoughtful mind.

He had not been born on the shore of this river, but of the Main.  All
who had been dearest to him in Ratisbon--the good people who had reared
him from his fourth year as their own child, the woman who gave him
birth, and the many others to whom he was indebted for kindnesses--were
no longer there.

But why had he not thought first of the mother, who is usually the centre
of the circle of love, and whose figure precedes every other, now that he
was approaching the place where she rested beneath the turf?  He asked
himself the question with a faint feeling of self-reproach, but he did
not confess the true reason.

When the summons to Ratisbon had reached him in Brussels, he had been
joyously ready to obey it--nay, he had felt it a great happiness to see
again the beloved place for which he had never ceased to long.  And yet,
the nearer he approached it, the more anxiously his heart throbbed.

When, soon after noonday, the rain drenched him, he had experienced
no discomfort, because such exquisite sunny visions of the future had
hovered before him; but as the sky cleared they had shrivelled and doubt
of the result of the decision which he was riding to meet had cast
everything else into the shade.

Now the whole city appeared before him, and, as he looked at the
cathedral, whose machicolated tower permitted the rosy hue of the sky to
shine through, his heart rose again, and he gazed with grateful delight
at the verdant spring attire of his home and the magnificence with which
she greeted him; her returning son.

"Isn't it beautiful here?" he asked, suddenly breaking the silence as
he turned to Massi, the violinist, who rode at his side, and then was
secretly grateful to him when, after a curt "Very pleasant," he disturbed
him with no further speech.

It was so delightful to listen to the notes of the bells, so familiar to
him, whose pure tones had accompanied with their charming melody all his
wanderings in childhood and youth.  At the same time, the mood in which
the best musical ideas came to him suddenly overpowered him.  A new air,
well worth remembering, pressed itself on him unbidden, and his excited
imagination showed him in its train himself, and by his side, first, a
romping, merry child, and then a girlish figure in the first budding
charm of youth.  He thought he heard her sing, and old, unforgotten notes
of songs swiftly crowded out his own musical creations.

Every tone from the fresh red lips of the lovely fair-haired girl
awakened a new memory.  The past lived again, and, without his volition,
transformed the image of the child of whom he had thought whenever he
