had approached in order, like that other Caesar, to come, to see, and to
conquer.  But she was only a woman, and pity in a woman's soft heart was
as hard to silence as the murmur of a swift mountain stream or the
rushing of the wind.

Yesterday she had learned from the violinist Massi that the knight's
condition was much more critical, and he desired before his death to
clasp her hand again.  So, believing that disobedience committed to
lighten the last hours of a dying man would be pardonable before God
and human beings, she had visited the unfortunate Wolf.

The helpful and joy-bestowing power of good works, which the Protestants
denied, had thus become very evident to her; for since she had clasped
the sufferer's hand an indescribable sense of happiness had taken
possession of her, while the knight began to improve.  The news had
reached her just before this, the Emperor's, arrival, had made her happy,
and, in spite of her evil conscience, had put her in a very cheerful
mood.  But now this beautiful evening had become the saddest one of her
whole life.

Fresh tears, and the other means of conciliation inspired by her loving
heart, then induced the angry lover to forgive her.

Barbara felt this as a great piece of good fortune, and made every effort
to curb the refractory temper which, hitherto, had found nothing less
welcome than humble submission.

Day after day since that evening the confessor had been informed that
nothing interrupted the concord of the lovers, and that Barbara often
prayed very fervently in the private chapel.  This pleased the almoner,
and when Cassian told him that, on the evening after the quarrel, the
Emperor had again come to the castle to remain a long time, he rejoiced.

To Barbara this visit had been a true heavenly blessing, but though
Charles showed himself sufficiently loving, she felt, even during the
succeeding visits, that since that fateful episode something difficult
to describe or explain had rested like a gloomy shadow on the Emperor's
joyous confidence.

This change in her lover could scarcely be due to her, for she had
honestly endeavoured to avoid everything which could anger him.

How should she have suspected that the great student of human nature to
whom she had given her heart perceived the restraint which she imposed
upon herself in every interview with him, and that the moderation to
which she submitted from love robbed her of a portion of the charm her
gay unconcern had exerted upon him?  Charles suspiciously attributed this
change in the disposition of the woman he loved sometimes to one cause,
sometimes to another; and when he showed her that he missed something in
her which had been dear to him, she thought it a new token of his
dissatisfaction, and increased the restraint which she placed upon
herself.

If the gout again attacked him or the pressure of business, which at that
time constantly made more and more imperious demands upon the Emperor
Charles, detained him from her on one or another evening, torturing
anxiety assailed her, and she had no sleep all night.

Besides, the marquise did not cease to press her with entreaties and
expostulations, and Frau Lerch constantly urged Barbara to profit by the
favour of such a lover.  She ought to think of the future, and indemnify
herself with estates and titles for the sad fate awaiting her if his
Majesty wearied of her love.

The ex-maid knew how to describe, in vivid hues, how all would turn from
her if that should happen, and how little the jewels with which he
sometimes delighted her would avail.

But Barbara had cared only for her lord's love, and it was not even
difficult for her to resist the urgency.  Yet whenever she was alone with
Charles, and he showed plainly how dear she was to him, the question
forced itself upon her whether this would not be the right time to speak
of her future, and to follow the counsel of the experienced woman who
certainly meant kindly toward her.

This made her silent and constrained for a time, and when she saw that
her manner annoyed her lover she thrust aside the selfish impulse which
was rendering her unlovable, and sometimes showed her delight in the
victory of love over every other feeling so impetuously, that her nature
seemed to have lost the unvarying cheerfulness which had formerly
delighted him, and he left her in a less satisfied mood.

Besides, the marquise had received a letter from Paris, in which her son
declared that if his gambling debts were not paid by the first of August
he would be completely disgraced, and nothing would remain for him except
to end an existence which had lost all charm.  The wretched mother again
opened her heart to Barbara and, when she still resisted her lamentations
and entreaties, threw herself on her knees and sobbing besought her to
let her heart be softened.

The sight of the aged noblewoman writhing like a maniac in the dust was
so pitiful and touching that it melted Barbara's heart, and induced her
to promise to use the first favourable opportunity to intercede with the
Emperor in behalf of her son and his child, a little girl of six.  From
that time she awaited at every new interview the opportune moment; but
when Charles was less gracious, the right time certainly had not come,
and when he was especially loving the happiness of possessing his heart
seemed to her so great that it appeared sinful to risk it for the sake of
a stranger.

This waiting and conflict with herself also did not remain unnoticed, and
it was characteristic of Charles to reflect upon and seek reasons for it.
Only the spell of her voice and her beauty had remained unchanged, and
when she sang in the Golden Cross in the presence of the guests, who
became more numerous the nearer drew the time of the opening of the
Reichstag, fixed for the fifth of June, and he perceived their delight,
vanity fanned the dying fire again, for he still loved her, and therefore
felt associated with her and her successes.

So the days became weeks, and though they brought Barbara a wealth of
happiness, they were not free from gloomy and bitter hours.

The marquise, who saw her son's doom drawing nearer and nearer, made the
mealtimes and every moment which she spent with her a perfect hell.  Frau
Lerch continued to urge her, and now advised her to persuade the Emperor
to rid her of the old tormentor.

In another matter also she was at a loss what to do.  The Wittenberg
theologian, Erasmus Eckhart, found that his own songs, when she sang them
to him, seemed entirely new, and the gratitude he felt merged into ardent
love, the first which had taken possession of his young soul.  But
Barbara resolutely refused to receive his visits, and thereby deprived
him of the possibility of opening his heart to her.  So, in despair, he
wandered about her house more and more frequently, and sent her one fiery
love letter after another.

To betray his unseemly conduct to the Emperor or to the confessor would
have brought upon him too severe a punishment for an offence which, after
all, was the most profound homage.  She dared not go to the Hiltners,
from fear of a fresh misunderstanding, and it would be a long time ere
Wolf's health would permit him to be excited by such matters.

So she was forced to content herself with censuring Erasmus's conduct,
through Frau Lerch, in the harshest manner, and threatening to appeal to
his foster-parents and, in the worst extremity, to the magistrate, to rid
herself of his importunities.  Nearly two thirds of May had passed when
the Emperor found himself prevented by a second attack of gout from
visiting her.  But Barbara's heart drew her toward him so strongly that
during the usual noon ride she hit upon an idea, for whose execution she
immediately made preparations by secretly entreating young Count Tassis
to lend her one of his suits of clothes.

The merry page, a handsome boy of sixteen, who had already crossed
rapiers with one of his companions for her sake, was about her height,
and delighted to share a secret with her.  His most expensive costume,
with everything belonging to it, was placed in her room at twilight, and
when night closed in, disguised as a page, she entered the litter and was
carried to the Golden Cross, where Adrian received her and conducted her
to his royal master.

The elderly man thought he had never seen her look so charming as in the
yellow velvet doublet with ash-gray facings, the gray silk hose, and the
yellow and gray cap resting on her glittering golden hair.

And the Emperor Charles was of the same opinion.

Besides, her lively prank transported him back to his own youth, when
he himself had glided more than once in page's attire to some beautiful
young lady of the court, and gaily as in better days, tenderly as an
ardent youth, he thanked her for her charming enterprise.

After a few blissful hours, which crowded all that she had lately
suffered into oblivion, she left him.

When she again entered the little Prebrunn castle she would gladly have
embraced the whole world.

From the litter she had noticed a light in the windows of the marquise's
sitting-room, but she could now look the poor old noblewoman freely in
the face, for this time, sure of experiencing no sharp rebuff, she had
found courage to speak of the son to her royal lover.

True, as soon as Charles heard what she desired, he kindly requested her
not to sully her beautiful lips with the name of a scoundrel who had long
since forfeited every claim to his favour, and her mission was thereby
frustrated; but she had now kept her promise.

With the entreaty to spare him in future the pain of refusing any wish of
the woman he loved, the disagreeable affair had been dismissed.

When Barbara took the lute, he had begged the fairest of all troubadours
to sing once more, before any other song, his beloved "Quia amore
langueo," and the most vigorous applause was bestowed on every one which
she afterward executed.

Now she had done all that was possible for the marquise, but no power on
earth should induce her to undertake anything of the sort a second time;
She was saying this to herself as she entered the little castle.

Let the old noblewoman come now!

She was not long in doing so.  But how she looked!

The little gray curls done up in papers stood out queerly from her narrow
head.  Her haggard cheeks were destitute of rouge and lividly pale.

Her black eyes glittered strangely from their deep sockets as if she were
insane, and ragged pieces of her morning dress, which she had torn in a
fit of helpless fury, hung down upon her breast.

The sight made Barbara shudder.  She suspected the truth.

During her absence a new message of evil had reached the marquise.

Unless ten thousand lire could be sent to her son at once, he would be
condemned to the galleys, and his child would be abandoned to misery and
disgrace.

While speaking, the wretched mother, with trembling hands, tore out a
locket which she wore on a little chain around her neck.  It contained
the angelic face, painted on ivory by an artist's hand, of a fair-haired
little girl.  The child bore her name, Barbara.  The singer knew this.
How often the affectionate grandmother had told her with sparkling eyes
of her little "Babette"!

The father chained to the rowers' bench among the most abominable
ruffians, this loveliest of children perishing in hunger, misery, and
shame--what a terrible picture!  Barbara beheld it with tangible
distinctness, and while the undignified old aristocrat, deprived of all
self-control, sobbed and besought her to have compassion, the girl who
had grown up amid poverty and care went back in memory to the days when,
to earn money for a thin soup, a bit of dry bread, a small piece of cheap
cow beef, or to protect herself from the importunity of an unpaid
tradesman, she had washed laces with her own delicate hands and seen
her nobly born, heroic father scratch crooked letters and scrawling
ornaments upon common gray tin.

The same fate, nay, one a thousand times worse, awaited this wonderfully
lovely patrician child, whose father was to wield the oars in the galleys
if no one interceded for the unfortunate man.

What was life!

From the height of happiness it led her directly to such an abyss of the
deepest woe.

What contrasts!

A day, an hour had transported her from bitter poverty and torturing
yearning to the side of the highest and greatest of monarchs, but who
could tell for how long--how soon the fall into the gulf awaited her?

A shudder ran through her frame, and a deep pity for the sweet creature
whose coloured likeness she held in her hand seized upon her.

She probably remembered her lover's refusal, and that she only needed
to allude to it to release herself from the wailing old woman, but an
invisible power sealed her lips.  She was filled with an ardent desire to
help, to avert this unutterable misery, to bring aid to this child,
