there not been that in the twinkle of his eye which seemed to say
that, in spite of all that his gait said to the contrary, the cockles
of his heart might yet be reached by some play of wit--if only the
wit were to his taste.

Mr. Carter was a man of personal means, so that he not only was not
dependent on his profession, but was able--as he also was willing--to
aid that profession by his liberality. In one thing only was he
personally expensive. As to his eating and drinking it was, or might
have been for any solicitude of his own, little more than bread
and water. As for the comforts of home, he had none, for since his
ordination his missions had ever been migrating. But he always
dressed with care, and consequently with expense, for careful
dressing is ever expensive. He always wore new black gloves, and
a very long black coat which never degenerated to rust, black
cloth trousers, a high black silk waistcoat, and a new black hat.
Everything about him was black except his neck, and that was always
scrupulously white.

Mr. Carter was a good man--one may say a very good man--for he gave
up himself and his money to carry out high views of charity and
religion, in which he was sincere with the sincerity of his whole
heart, and from which he looked for no reward save such as the godly
ever seek. But yet there was about him too much of the Pharisee.
He was greatly inclined to condemn other men, and to think none
righteous who differed from him. And now he had come to Ireland with
a certain conviction that the clergy of his own church there were men
not to be trusted; that they were mere Irish, and little better in
their habits and doctrines than under-bred dissenters. He had been
elsewhere in the country before he visited Drumbarrow, and had shown
this too plainly; but then Mr. Carter was a very young man, and it is
not perhaps fair to expect zeal and discretion also from those who
are very young.

Mrs. Townsend had heard of him, and was in dismay when she found that
he was to stay with them at Drumbarrow parsonage for three days. If
Mr. Carter did not like clerical characters of her stamp, neither
did she like them of the stamp of Mr. Carter. She had heard of him,
of his austerity, of his look, of his habits, and in her heart she
believed him to be a Jesuit. Had she possessed full sway herself in
the parish of Drumbarrow, no bodies should have been saved at such
terrible peril to the souls of the whole parish. But this Mr. Carter
came with such recommendation--with such assurances of money given
and to be given, of service done and to be done,--that there was no
refusing him. And so the husband, more worldly wise than his wife,
had invited the Jesuit to his parsonage.

"You'll find, Aeneas, he'll have mass in his room in the morning
instead of coming to family prayers," said the wife.

"But what on earth shall we give him for dinner?" said the husband,
whose soul at the present moment was among the flesh-pots; and indeed
Mrs. Townsend had also turned over that question in her prudent mind.

"He'll not eat meat in Lent, you may be sure," said Mrs. Townsend,
remembering that that was the present period of the year.

"And if he would there is none for him to eat," said Mr. Townsend,
calling to mind the way in which the larder had of late been emptied.

Protestant clergymen in Ireland in those days had very frequently
other reasons for fasting than those prescribed by ecclesiastical
canons. A well-nurtured lady, the wife of a parish rector in the
county Cork, showed me her larder one day about that time. It
contained two large loaves of bread, and a pan full of stuff which I
should have called paste, but which she called porridge. It was all
that she had for herself, her husband, her children, and her charity.
Her servants had left her before she came to that pass. And she was a
well-nurtured, handsome, educated woman, born to such comforts as you
and I enjoy every day,--oh, my reader! perhaps without much giving of
thanks for them. Poor lady! the struggle was too much for her, and
she died under it.

Mr. Townsend was, as I have said, the very opposite to Mr. Carter,
but he also was a man who could do without the comforts of life, if
the comforts of life did not come readily in his way. He liked his
glass of whisky punch dearly, and had an idea that it was good for
him. Not caring much about personal debts, he would go in debt for
whisky. But if the whisky and credit were at an end, the loss did not
make him miserable. He was a man with a large appetite, and who took
great advantage of a good dinner when it was before him; nay, he
would go a long distance to insure a good dinner; but, nevertheless,
he would leave himself without the means of getting a mutton chop,
and then not be unhappy. Now Mr. Carter would have been very unhappy
had he been left without his superfine long black coat.

In tendering his invitation to Mr. Carter, Mr. Townsend had explained
that with him the _res angusta domi_, which was always a prevailing
disease, had been heightened by the circumstances of the time; but
that of such crust and cup as he had, his brother English clergyman
would be made most welcome to partake. In answer to this, Mr. Carter
had explained that in these days good men thought but little of
crusts and cups, and that as regarded himself, nature had so made him
that he had but few concupiscences of that sort. And then, all this
having been so far explained and settled, Mr. Carter came.

The first day the two clergymen spent together at Berryhill, and
found plenty to employ them. They were now like enough to be in want
of funds at that Berryhill soup-kitchen, seeing that the great fount
of supplies, the house, namely, of Castle Richmond, would soon have
stopped running altogether. And Mr. Carter was ready to provide
funds to some moderate extent if all his questions were answered
satisfactorily. "There was to be no making of Protestants," he said,
"by giving away of soup purchased with his money." Mr. Townsend
thought that this might have been spared him. "I regret to say,"
replied he, with some touch of sarcasm, "that we have no time for
that now." "And so better," said Mr. Carter, with a sarcasm of a
blunter sort. "So better. Let us not clog our alms with impossible
conditions which will only create falsehood." "Any conditions are out
of the question when one has to feed a whole parish," answered Mr.
Townsend.

And then Mr. Carter would teach them how to boil their yellow meal,
on which subject he had a theory totally opposite to the practice
of the woman employed at the soup-kitchen. "Av we war to hocus it
that, yer riverence," said Mrs. Daly, turning to Mr. Townsend, "the
crathurs couldn't ate a bit of it; it wouldn't bile at all, at all,
not like that."

"Try it, woman," said Mr. Carter, when he had uttered his receipt
oracularly for the third time.

"'Deed an' I won't," said Mrs. Daly, whose presence there was pretty
nearly a labour of love, and who was therefore independent. "It'd be
a sin an' a shame to spile Christian vittels in them times, an' I
won't do it." And then there was some hard work that day; and though
Mr. Townsend kept his temper with his visitor, seeing that he had
much to get and nothing to give, he did not on this occasion learn to
alter his general opinion of his brethren of the English high church.

And then, when they got home, very hungry after their toil, Mr.
Townsend made another apology for the poorness of his table. "I am
almost ashamed," said he, "to ask an English gentleman to sit down to
such a dinner as Mrs. Townsend will put before you."

"And indeed then it isn't much," said Mrs. Townsend; "just a bit of
fish I found going the road."

"My dear madam, anything will suffice," said Mr. Carter, somewhat
pretentiously. And anything would have sufficed. Had they put before
him a mess of that paste of which I have spoken he would have ate it
and said nothing,--ate enough of it at least to sustain him till the
morrow.

But things had not come to so bad a pass as this at
Drumbarrow parsonage; and, indeed, that day fortune had been
propitious;--fortune which ever favours the daring. Mrs. Townsend,
knowing that she had really nothing in the house, had sent Jerry to
waylay the Lent fishmonger, who twice a week was known to make his
way from Kanturk to Mallow with a donkey and panniers; and Jerry had
returned with a prize.

And now they sat down to dinner, and lo and behold, to the great
surprise of Mr. Carter, and perhaps also to the surprise of the host,
a magnificent turbot smoked upon the board. The fins no doubt had
been cut off to render possible the insertion of the animal into the
largest of the Drumbarrow parsonage kitchen-pots,--an injury against
which Mr. Townsend immediately exclaimed angrily. "My goodness,
they have cut off the fins!" said he, holding up both hands in deep
dismay. According to his philosophy, if he did have a turbot, why
should he not have it with all its perfections about it--fins and
all?

"My dear Aeneas!" said Mrs. Townsend, looking at him with that agony
of domestic distress which all wives so well know how to assume.

Mr. Carter said nothing. He said not a word, but he thought much.
This then was their pretended poorness of living! with all their mock
humility, these false Irishmen could not resist the opportunity of
showing off before the English stranger, and of putting on their
table before him a dish which an English dean could afford only on
gala days. And then this clergyman, who was so loudly anxious for
the poor, could not repress the sorrow of his heart because the
rich delicacy was somewhat marred in the cooking. "It was too bad,"
thought Mr. Carter to himself, "too bad."

"None, thank you," said he, drawing himself up with gloomy
reprobation of countenance. "I will not take any fish, I am much
obliged to you."

Then the face of Mrs. Townsend was one on which neither Christian
nor heathen could have looked without horror and grief. What, the
man whom in her heart she believed to be a Jesuit, and for whom
nevertheless, Jesuit though he was, she had condescended to cater
with all her woman's wit!--this man, I say, would not eat fish in
Lent! And it was horrible to her warm Irish heart to think that after
that fish now upon the table there was nothing to come but two or
three square inches of cold bacon. Not eat turbot in Lent! Had he
been one of her own sort she might have given him credit for true
antagonism to popery; but every inch of his coat gave the lie to such
a supposition as that.

"Do take a bit," said Mr. Townsend, hospitably. "The fins should not
have been cut off, otherwise I never saw a finer fish in my life."

"None, I am very much obliged to you," said Mr. Carter, with sternest
reprobation of feature.

It was too much for Mrs. Townsend. "Oh, Aeneas," said she, "what are
we to do?" Mr. Townsend merely shrugged his shoulders, while he
helped himself. His feelings were less acute, perhaps, than those
of his wife, and he, no doubt, was much more hungry. Mr. Carter
the while sat by, saying nothing, but looking daggers. He also was
hungry, but under such circumstances he would rather starve than eat.

"Don't you ever eat fish, Mr. Carter?" said Mr. Townsend, proceeding
to help himself for a second time, and poking about round the edges
of the delicate creature before him for some relics of the glutinous
morsels which he loved so well. He was not, however, enjoying it
as he should have done, for seeing that his guest ate none, and
that his wife's appetite was thoroughly marred, he was alone in his
occupation. No one but a glutton could have feasted well under such
circumstances, and Mr. Townsend was not a glutton.

"Thank you, I will eat none to-day," said Mr. Carter, sitting bolt
upright, and fixing his keen gray eyes on the wall opposite.

"Then you may take away, Biddy; I've done with it. But it's a
thousand pities such a fish should have been so wasted."

The female heart of Mrs. Townsend could stand these wrongs no longer,
and with a tear in one corner of her eye, and a gleam of anger in the
other, she at length thus spoke out. "I am sure then I don't know
what you will eat, Mr. Carter, and I did think that all you English
clergymen always ate fish in Lent,--and indeed nothing else; for
indeed people do say that you are much the same as the papists in
that respect."

"Hush, my dear!" said Mr. Townsend.

"Well, but I can't hush when there's nothing for the gentleman to
eat."

"My dear madam, such a matter does not signify in the least," said
Mr. Carter, not unbending an inch.

"But it does signify; it signifies a great deal; and so you'd know if
you were a family man;"--"as you ought to be," Mrs. Townsend would
have been delighted to add. "And I'm sure I sent Jerry five miles,
and he was gone four hours to get that bit of fish from Paddy
Magrath, as he stops always at Ballygibblin Gate; and indeed I
thought myself so lucky, for I only gave Jerry one and sixpence. But
they had an uncommon take of fish yesterday at Skibbereen, and--"

"One and sixpence!" said Mr. Carter, now slightly relaxing his brow
for the first time.

"I'd have got it for one and three," said Mr. Townsend, upon whose
mind an inkling of the truth was beginning to dawn.

"Indeed and you wouldn't, Aeneas; and Jerry was forced to promise the
man a glass of whisky the first time he comes this road, which he
does sometimes. That fish weighed over nine pounds, every ounce of
it."

"Nine fiddlesticks," said Mr. Townsend.

"I weighed it myself, Aeneas, with my own hands, and it was nine
pounds four ounces before we were obliged to cut it, and as firm as a
rock the flesh was."

"For one and sixpence!" said Mr. Carter, relaxing still a little
further, and condescending to look his hostess in the face.

"Yes, for one and six; and now--"

"I'm sure I'd have bought it for one and four, fins and all," said
the parson, determined to interrupt his wife in her pathos.

"I'm sure you would not then," said his wife, taking his assertion in
earnest. "You could never market against Jerry in your life; I will
say that for him."

"If you'll allow me to change my mind, I think I will have a little
bit of it," said Mr. Carter, almost humbly.

"By all means," said Mr. Townsend. "Biddy, bring that fish back. Now
I think of it, I have not half dined myself yet."

And then they all three forgot their ill humours, and enjoyed their
dinner thoroughly,--in spite of the acknowledged fault as touching
the lost fins of the animal.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

CONDEMNED.


I have said that Lord Desmond rode home from Hap House that day in a
quieter mood and at a slower pace than that which had brought him
thither; and in truth it was so. He had things to think of now much
more serious than any that had filled his mind as he had cantered
along, joyously hoping that after all he might have for his brother
the man that he loved, and the owner of Castle Richmond also. This
was now impossible; but he felt that he loved Owen better than ever
he had done, and he was pledged to fight Owen's battle, let Owen be
ever so poor.

"And what does it signify after all?" he said to himself, as he rode
along. "We shall all be poor together, and then we sha'n't mind it so
much; and if I don't marry, Hap House itself will be something to add
to the property;" and then he made up his mind that he could be happy
enough, living at Desmond Court all his life, so long as he could
have Owen Fitzgerald near him to make life palatable.

That night he spoke to no one on the subject, at least to no one of
his own accord. When they were alone his mother asked him where he
had been; and when she learned that he had been at Hap House, she
questioned him much as to what had passed between him and Owen; but
he would tell her nothing, merely saying that Owen had spoken of
Clara with his usual ecstasy of love, but declining to go into the
subject at any length. The countess, however, gathered from him
that he and Owen were on kindly terms together, and so far she felt
satisfied.

On the following morning he made up his mind "to have it out," as
he called it, with Clara; but when the hour came his courage failed
him: it was a difficult task--that which he was now to undertake--of
explaining to her his wish that she should go back to her old lover,
not because he was no longer poor, but, as it were in spite of his
poverty, and as a reward to him for consenting to remain poor. As
he had thought about it while riding home, it had seemed feasible
enough. He would tell her how nobly Owen was going to behave to
Herbert, and would put it to her whether, as he intended willingly
to abandon the estate, he ought not to be put into possession of the
wife. There was a romantic justice about this which he thought would
touch Clara's heart. But on the following morning when he came to
think what words he would use for making his little proposition, the
picture did not seem to him to be so beautiful. If Clara really loved
Herbert--and she had declared that she did twenty times over--it
would be absurd to expect her to give him up merely because he was
not a ruined man. But then, which did she love? His mother declared
that she loved Owen. "That's the real question," said the earl to
himself, as on the second morning he made up his mind that he would
"have it out" with Clara without any further delay. He must be true
to Owen; that was his first great duty at the present moment.

"Clara, I want to talk to you," he said, breaking suddenly into the
room where she usually sat alone o' mornings. "I was at Hap House the
day before yesterday with Owen Fitzgerald, and to tell you the truth
at once, we were talking about you the whole time we were there. And
now what I want is, that something should be settled, so that we may
all understand one another."

These words he spoke to her quite abruptly. When he first said that
he wished to speak to her, she had got up from her chair to welcome
him, for she dearly loved to have him there. There was nothing
she liked better than having him to herself when he was in a soft
brotherly humour; and then she would interest herself about his
horse, and his dogs, and his gun, and predict his life for him,
sending him up as a peer to Parliament, and giving him a noble wife,
and promising him that he should be such a Desmond as would redeem
all the family from their distresses. But now as he rapidly brought
out his words, she found that on this day her prophecies must regard
herself chiefly.

"Surely, Patrick, it is easy enough to understand me," she said.

"Well, I don't know; I don't in the least mean to find fault with
you."

"I am glad of that, dearest," she said, laying her hand upon his arm.

"But my mother says one thing, and you another, and Owen another; and
I myself, I hardly know what to say."

"Look here, Patrick, it is simply this: I became engaged to Herbert
with my mother's sanction and yours; and now--"

"Stop a moment," said the impetuous boy, "and do not pledge yourself
to anything till you have heard me. I know that you are cut to the
heart about Herbert Fitzgerald losing his property."

"No, indeed; not at all cut to the heart; that is as regards myself."

"I don't mean as regards yourself; I mean as regards him. I have
heard you say over and over again that it is a piteous thing that he
should be so treated. Have I not?"

"Yes, I have said that, and I think so."

"And I think that most of your great--great--great love for him, if
you will, comes from that sort of feeling."

"But, Patrick, it came long before."

"Dear Clara, do listen to me, will you? You may at any rate do as
much as that for me." And then Clara stood perfectly mute, looking
into his handsome face as he continued to rattle out his words at
her.

"Now if you please, Clara, you may have the means of giving back to
him all his property, every shilling that he ever had, or expected
to have. Owen Fitzgerald,--who certainly is the finest fellow that
ever I came across in all my life, or ever shall, if I live to five
hundred,--says that he will make over every acre of Castle Richmond
back to his cousin Herbert if--" Oh, my lord, my lord, what a scheme
is this you are concocting to entrap your sister! Owen Fitzgerald
inserted no "if," as you are well aware! "If," he continued, with
some little qualm of conscience, "if you will consent to be his
wife."

"Patrick!"

"Listen, now listen. He thinks, and, Clara, by the heavens above me!
I think also that you did love him better than you ever loved Herbert
Fitzgerald." Clara as she heard these words blushed ruby red up
to her very hair, but she said never a word. "And I think, and he
thinks, that you are bound now to Herbert by his misfortunes--that
you feel that you cannot desert him because he has fallen so low. By
George, Clara, I am proud of you for sticking to him through thick
and thin, now that he is down! But the matter will be very difficult
if you have the means of giving back to him all that he has lost, as
you have. Owen will be poor, but he is a prince among men. By heaven,
Clara, if you will only say that he is your choice, Herbert shall
have back all Castle Richmond! and I--I shall never marry, and you
may give to the man that I love as my brother all that there is left
to us of Desmond."

There was something grand about the lad's eager tone of voice as he
made his wild proposal, and something grand also about his heart. He
meant what he said, foolish as he was either to mean or to say it.
Clara burst into tears, and threw herself into his arms. "You don't
understand," she said, through her sobs, "my own, own brother; you do
not understand."

"But, by Jove! I think I do understand. As sure as you are a living
girl he will give back Castle Richmond to Herbert Fitzgerald."

She recovered herself, and leaving her brother's arms, walked away to
the window, and from thence looked down to that path beneath the elms
which was the spot in the world which she thought of the oftenest;
but as she gazed, there was no lack of loyalty in her heart to the
man to whom she was betrothed. It seemed to her as though those
childish days had been in another life; as though Owen had been her
lover in another world,--a sweet, childish, innocent, happy world
which she remembered well, but which was now dissevered from her by
an impassable gulf. She thought of his few words of love,--so few
that she remembered every word that he had then spoken, and thought
of them with a singular mixture of pain and pleasure. And now she
heard of his noble self-denial with a thrill which was in no degree
enhanced by the fact that she, or even Herbert, was to be the gainer
by it. She rejoiced at his nobility, merely because it was a joy to
her to know that he was so noble. And yet all through this she was
true to Herbert. Another work-a-day world had come upon her in her
womanhood, and as that came she had learned to love a man of another
stamp, with a love that was quieter, more subdued, and perhaps, as
she thought, more enduring. Whatever might be Herbert's lot in life,
that lot she would share. Her love for Owen should never be more to
her than a dream.

"Did he send you to me?" she said at last, without turning her face
away from the window.

"Yes, then, he did; he did send me to you, and he told me to say that
as Owen of Hap House he loved you still. And I, I promised to do his
bidding; and I promised, moreover, that as far as my good word could
go with you, he should have it. And now you know it all; if you care
for my pleasure in the matter you will take Owen, and let Herbert
have his property. By Jove! if he is treated in that way he cannot
complain."

"Patrick," said she, returning to him and again laying her hand on
him. "You must now take my message also. You must go to him and bid
him come here that I may see him."

"Who? Owen?"

"Yes, Owen Fitzgerald."

"Very well, I have no objection in life." And the earl thought that
the difficulty was really about to be overcome. "And about my
mother?"

"I will tell mamma."

"And what shall I say to Owen?"

"Say nothing to him, but bid him come here. But wait, Patrick; yes;
he must not misunderstand me; I can never, never, never marry him."

"Clara!"

"Never, never; it is impossible. Dear Patrick, I am so sorry to
make you unhappy, and I love you so very dearly,--better than ever,
I think, for speaking as you do now. But that can never be. Let
him come here, however, and I myself will tell him all." At last,
disgusted and unhappy though he was, the earl did accept the
commission, and again on that afternoon rode across the fields to Hap
House.

"I will tell him nothing but that he is to come," said the earl
to himself as he went thither. And he did tell Owen nothing else.
Fitzgerald questioned him much, but learned but little from him. "By
heavens, Owen," he said, "you must settle the matter between you, for
I don't understand it. She has bid me ask you to come to her; and now
you must fight your own battle." Fitzgerald of course said that he
would obey, and so Lord Desmond left him.

In the evening Clara told her mother. "Owen Fitzgerald is to be here
to-morrow," she said.

"Owen Fitzgerald; is he?" said the countess. She hardly knew how to
bear herself, or how to interfere so as to assist her own object; or
how not to interfere, lest she should mar it.

"Yes, mamma. Patrick saw him the other day, and I think it is better
that I should see him also."

"Very well, my dear. But you must be aware, Clara, that you have been
so very--I don't wish to say headstrong exactly--so very _entetee_
about your own affairs, that I hardly know how to speak of them. If
your brother is in your confidence I shall be satisfied."

"He is in my confidence; and so may you be also, mamma, if you
please."

But the countess thought it better not to have any conversation
forced upon her at that moment; and so she asked her daughter for no
further show of confidence then. It would probably be as well that
Owen should come and plead his own cause.

And Owen did come. All that night and on the next morning the poor
girl remained alone in a state of terrible doubt. She had sent for
her old lover, thinking at the moment that no one could explain to
him in language so clear as her own what was her fixed resolve. And
she had too been so moved by the splendour of his offer, that she
longed to tell him what she thought of it. The grandeur of that offer
was enhanced tenfold in her mind by the fact that it had been so
framed as to include her in this comparative poverty with which Owen
himself was prepared to rest contented. He had known that she was not
to be bought by wealth, and had given her credit for a nobility that
was akin to his own.

But yet, now that the moment was coming, how was she to talk to him?
How was she to speak the words which would rob him of his hope, and
tell him that he did not, could not, never could possess that one
treasure which he desired more than houses and lands, or station and
rank? Alas, alas! If it could have been otherwise! If it could have
been otherwise! She also was in love with poverty;--but at any rate,
no one could accuse her now of sacrificing a poor lover for a rich
one. Herbert Fitzgerald would be poor enough.

And then he came. They had hitherto met but once since that
afternoon, now so long ago--that afternoon to which she looked back
as to another former world--and that meeting had been in the very
room in which she was now prepared to receive him. But her feelings
towards him had been very different then. Then he had almost forced
himself upon her, and for months previously she had heard nothing of
him but what was evil. He had come complaining loudly, and her heart
had been somewhat hardened against him. Now he was there at her
bidding, and her heart and very soul were full of tenderness. She
rose rapidly, and sat down again, and then again rose as she heard
his footsteps; but when he entered the room she was standing in the
middle of it.

"Clara," he said, taking the hand which she mechanically held out, "I
have come here now at your brother's request."

Her name sounded so sweet upon his lips. No idea occurred to her that
she ought to be angry with him for using it. Angry with him! Could it
be possible that she should ever be angry with him--that she ever had
been so?

"Yes," she said. "Patrick said something to me which made me think
that it would be better that we should meet."

"Well, yes; it is better. If people are honest they had always better
say to each other's faces that which they have to say."

"I mean to be honest, Mr. Fitzgerald."

"Yes, I am sure you do; and so do I also. And if this is so, why
cannot we say each to the other that which we have to say? My tale
will be a very short one; but it will be true if it is short."

"But, Mr. Fitzgerald--"

"Well, Clara?"

"Will you not sit down?" And she herself sat upon the sofa; and he
drew a chair for himself near to her; but he was too impetuous to
remain seated on it long. During the interview between them he was
sometimes standing, and sometimes walking quickly about the room; and
then for a moment he would sit down, or lean down over her on the
sofa arm.

"But, Mr. Fitzgerald, it is my tale that I wish you to hear."

"Well; I will listen to it." But he did not listen; for before she
had spoken a dozen words he had interrupted her, and poured out upon
her his own wild plans and generous schemes. She, poor girl, had
thought to tell him that she loved Herbert, and Herbert only--as a
lover. But that if she could love him, him Owen, as a brother and a
friend, that love she would so willingly give him. And then she would
have gone on to say how impossible it would have been for Herbert,
under any circumstances, to have availed himself of such generosity
as that which had been offered. But her eloquence was all cut short
in the bud. How could she speak with such a storm of impulse raging
before her as that which was now strong within Owen Fitzgerald's
bosom?

He interrupted her before she had spoken a dozen words, in order that
he might exhibit before her eyes the project with which his bosom was
filled. This he did, standing for the most part before her, looking
down upon her as she sat beneath him, with her eyes fixed upon the
floor, while his were riveted on her down-turned face. She knew it
all before--all this that he had to say to her, or she would hardly
have understood it from his words, they were so rapid and vehement.
And yet they were tender, too; spoken in a loving tone, and
containing ever and anon assurances of respect, and a resolve to be
guided now and for ever by her wishes,--even though those wishes
should be utterly subversive of his happiness.

"And now you know it all," he said, at last. "And as for my cousin's
property, that is safe enough. No earthly consideration would induce
me to put a hand upon that, seeing that by all justice it is his."
But in this she hardly yet quite understood him. "Let him have what
luck he may in other respects, he shall still be master of Castle
Richmond. If it were that that you wanted--as I know it is not--that
I cannot give you. I cannot tell you with what scorn I should regard
myself if I were to take advantage of such an accident as this to rob
any man of his estate."

Her brother had been right, so Clara felt, when he declared that Owen
Fitzgerald was the finest fellow that ever he had come across. She
made another such declaration within her own heart, only with words
that were more natural to her. He was the noblest gentleman of whom
she had ever heard, or read, or thought.

"But," continued Owen, "as I will not interfere with him in that
which should be his, neither should he interfere with me in that
which should be mine. Clara, the only estate that I claim is your
heart."

And that estate she could not give him. On that at any rate she was
fixed. She could not barter herself about from one to the other
either as a make-weight or a counterpoise. All his pleading was in
vain; all his generosity would fail in securing to him this one
reward that he desired. And now she had to tell him so.

"Your brother seems to think," he continued, "that you still--;" but
now it was her turn to interrupt him.

"Patrick is mistaken," she said, with her eyes still fixed upon the
ground.

"What. You will tell me, then, that I am utterly indifferent to you?"

"No, no, no; I did not say so." And now she got up and took hold of
his arm, and looked into his face imploringly. "I did not say so.
But, oh, Mr. Fitzgerald, be kind to me, be forbearing with me, be
good to me," and she almost embraced his arm as she appealed to him,
with her eyes all swimming with tears.

"Good to you!" he said. And a strong passion came upon him, urging
him to throw his arm round her slender body, and press her to his
bosom. Good to her! would he not protect her with his life's blood
against all the world if she would only come to him? "Good to you,
Clara! Can you not trust me that I will be good to you if you will
let me?"

"But not so, Owen." It was the first time she had ever called him
by his name, and she blushed again as she remembered that it was so.
"Not good, as you mean, for now I must trust to another for that
goodness. Herbert must be my husband, Owen; but will not you be our
friend?"

"Herbert must be your husband!"

"Yes, yes, yes. It is so. Do not look at me in that way, pray do not;
what would you have me do? You would not have me false to my troth,
and false to my own heart, because you are generous. Be generous to
me--to me also."

He turned away from her, and walked the whole length of the long
room; away and back, before he answered her, and even then, when he
had returned to her, he stood, looking at her before he spoke. And
she now looked full into his face, hoping, but yet fearing; hoping
that he might yield to her; and fearing his terrible displeasure
should he not yield.

"Clara," he said; and he spoke solemnly, slowly, and in a mood unlike
his own,--"I cannot as yet read your heart clearly; nor do I know
whether you can quite so read it yourself."

"I can, I can," she answered quickly; "and you shall know it
all--all, if you wish."

"I want to know but one thing. Whom is it that you love? And,
Clara--," and this he said interrupting her as she was about to
speak. "I do not ask you to whom you are engaged. You have engaged
yourself both to him and to me."

"Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald!"

"I do not blame you; not in the least. But is it not so? as to that I
will ask no question, and say nothing; only this, that so far we are
equal. But now ask of your own heart, and then answer me. Whom is it
then you love?"

"Herbert Fitzgerald," she said. The words hardly formed themselves
into a whisper, but nevertheless they were audible enough to him.

"Then I have no further business here," he said, and turned about as
though to leave the room.

But she ran forward and stopped him, standing between him and the
door. "Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald, do not leave me like that. Say one word
of kindness to me before you go. Tell me that you forgive me for the
injury I have done you."

"Yes, I forgive you."

"And is that all? Oh, I will love you so, if you will let me;--as
your friend, as your sister; you shall be our dearest, best, and
nearest friend. You do not know how good he is. Owen, will you not
tell me that you will love me as a brother loves?"

"No!" and the sternness of his face was such that it was dreadful to
look on it. "I will tell you nothing that is false."

"And would that be false?"

"Yes, false as hell! What, sit by at his hearth-stone and see you
leaning on his bosom! Sleep under his roof while you were in his
arms! No, Lady Clara, that would not be possible. That virtue, if it
be virtue, I cannot possess."

"And you must go from me in anger? If you knew what I am suffering
you would not speak to me so cruelly."

"Cruel! I would not wish to be cruel to you; certainly not now, for
we shall not meet again; if ever, not for many years. I do not think
that I have been cruel to you."

"Then say one word of kindness before you go!"

"A word of kindness! Well; what shall I say? Every night, as
I have lain in my bed, I have said words of kindness to you,
since--since--since longer than you will remember; since I first knew
you as a child. Do you ever think of the day when you walked with me
round by the bridge?"

"It is bootless thinking of that now."

"Bootless! yes, and words of kindness are bootless. Between you and
me, such words should be full of love, or they would have no meaning.
