cannot, though your heir, return the compliment. Few of the first-born
of Israel," he added, recovering himself from the single touch of
emotion he had displayed, "can say so much with truth. But I will
convince you ere I go, that I am a true descendant of a house famed for
its memory of injuries."

"I marvel your Majesty will listen to him longer," said Prince Charles.
"Methinks we have heard enough of his daring insolence."

But James, who took the interest of a true gossip in such a scene as was
now passing, could not bear to cut the controversy short, but imposed
silence on his son, with "Whisht, Baby Charles--there is a good bairn,
whisht!--I want to hear what the frontless loon can say."

"Only, sir," said Dalgarno, "that but for one single line in this
schedule, all else that it contains could not have bribed me to take
that woman's hand into mine."

"That line maun have been the SUMMA TOTALIS," said the king.

"Not so, sire," replied Dalgarno. "The sum total might indeed have been
an object for consideration even to a Scottish king, at no very distant
period; but it would have had little charms for me, save that I see
here an entry which gives me the power of vengeance over the family of
Glenvarloch; and learn from it that yonder pale bride, when she put the
wedding-torch into my hand, gave me the power of burning her mother's
house to ashes!"

"How is that?" said the king. "What is he speaking about, Jingling
Geordie?"

"This friendly citizen, my liege," said Lord Dalgarno, "hath expended a
sum belonging to my lady, and now, I thank heaven, to me, in acquiring
a certain mortgage, or wanset, over the estate of Glenvarloch, which, if
it be not redeemed before to-morrow at noon, will put me in possession
of the fair demesnes of those who once called themselves our house's
rivals."

"Can this be true?" said the king.

"It is even but too true, please your Majesty," answered the citizen.
"The Lady Hermione having advanced the money for the original creditor,
I was obliged, in honour and honesty, to take the rights to her; and
doubtless, they pass to her husband."

"But the warrant, man," said the king--"the warrant on our
Exchequer--Couldna that supply the lad wi' the means of redemption?"

"Unhappily, my liege, he has lost it, or disposed of it--It is not to be
found. He is the most unlucky youth!"

"This is a proper spot of work!" said the king, beginning to amble
about and play with the points of his doublet and hose, in expression of
dismay. "We cannot aid him without paying our debts twice over, and we
have, in the present state of our Exchequer, scarce the means of paying
them once."

"You have told me news," said Lord Dalgarno, "but I will take no
advantage."

"Do not," said his father, "be a bold villain, since thou must be one,
and seek revenge with arms, and not with the usurer's weapons."

"Pardon me, my lord," said Lord Dalgarno. "Pen and ink are now my
surest means of vengeance; and more land is won by the lawyer with the
ram-skin, than by the Andrea Ferrara with his sheepshead handle. But,
as I said before, I will take no advantages. I will await in town
to-morrow, near Covent Garden; if any one will pay the redemption-money
to my scrivener, with whom the deeds lie, the better for Lord
Glenvarloch; if not, I will go forward on the next day, and travel with
all dispatch to the north, to take possession."

"Take a father's malison with you, unhappy wretch!" said Lord
Huntinglen.

"And a king's, who is _pater patriae_," said James.

"I trust to bear both lightly," said Lord Dalgarno; and bowing around
him, he withdrew; while all present, oppressed, and, as it were,
overawed, by his determined effrontery, found they could draw breath
more freely, when he at length relieved them of his society. Lord
Huntinglen, applying himself to comfort his new daughter-in-law,
withdrew with her also; and the king, with his privy-council, whom he
had not dismissed, again returned to his council-chamber, though the
hour was unusually late. Heriot's attendance was still commanded, but
for what reason was not explained to him.




CHAPTER XXXIII

---I'll play the eavesdropper. _Richard III., Act V., Scene 3_.

James had no sooner resumed his seat at the council-board than he began
to hitch in his chair, cough, use his handkerchief, and make other
intimations that he meditated a long speech. The council composed
themselves to the beseeming degree of attention. Charles, as strict
in his notions of decorum, as his father was indifferent to it, fixed
himself in an attitude of rigid and respectful attention, while the
haughty favourite, conscious of his power over both father and
son, stretched himself more easily on his seat, and, in assuming an
appearance of listening, seemed to pay a debt to ceremonial rather than
to duty.

"I doubt not, my lords," said the Monarch, "that some of you may be
thinking the hour of refection is past, and that it is time to ask with
the slave in the comedy--_Quid de symbolo?_--Nevertheless, to do justice
and exercise judgment is our meat and drink; and now we are to pray your
wisdom to consider the case of this unhappy youth, Lord Glenvarloch, and
see whether, consistently with our honour, any thing can be done in his
favour."

"I am surprised at your Majesty's wisdom making the inquiry," said the
Duke; "it is plain this Dalgarno hath proved one of the most insolent
villains on earth, and it must therefore be clear, that if Lord
Glenvarloch had run him through the body, there would but have been
out of the world a knave who had lived in it too long. I think Lord
Glenvarloch hath had much wrong; and I regret that, by the persuasions
of this false fellow, I have myself had some hand in it."

"Ye speak like a child, Steenie--I mean my Lord of Buckingham," answered
the king, "and as one that does not understand the logic of the schools;
for an action may be inconsequential or even meritorious, _quoad
hominem_, that is, as touching him upon _whom_ it is acted; and yet most
criminal, _quoad locum_, or considering the place _wherein_ it is done;
as a man may lawfully dance Chrighty Beardie or any other dance in a
tavern, but not _inter parietes ecclesiae_. So that, though it may have
been a good deed to have sticked Lord Dalgarno, being such as he has
shown himself, anywhere else, yet it fell under the plain statute, when
violence was offered within the verge of the Court. For, let me tell
you, my lords, the statute against striking would be of no small use in
our Court, if it could be eluded by justifying the person stricken to be
a knave. It is much to be lamented that I ken nae Court in Christendom
where knaves are not to be found; and if men are to break the peace
under pretence of beating them, why, it will rain Jeddart staves
[Footnote: The old-fashioned weapon called the Jeddart staff was a
species of battle-axe. Of a very great tempest, it is said, in the south
of Scotland, that it rains Jeddart staffs, as in England the common
people talk of its raining cats and dogs.] in our very ante-chamber."

"What your Majesty says," replied Prince Charles, "is marked with your
usual wisdom--the precincts of palaces must be sacred as well as
the persons of kings, which are respected even in the most barbarous
nations, as being one step only beneath their divinities. But your
Majesty's will can control the severity of this and every other law,
and it is in your power, on consideration of his case, to grant the rash
young man a free pardon."

"_Rem acu tetigisti, Carole, mi puerule,_" answered the king; "and know,
my lords, that we have, by a shrewd device and gift of our own, already
sounded the very depth of this Lord Glenvarloch's disposition. I trow
there be among you some that remember my handling in the curious case
of my Lady Lake, and how I trimmed them about the story of hearkening
behind the arras. Now this put me to cogitation, and I remembered me
of having read that Dionysius, King of Syracuse, whom historians call
Tyrannos, which signifieth not in the Greek tongue, as in ours, a
truculent usurper, but a royal king who governs, it may be, something
more strictly than we and other lawful monarchs, whom the ancients
termed Basileis--Now this Dionysius of Syracuse caused cunning workmen
to build for himself a _lugg_--D'ye ken what that is, my Lord Bishop?"

"A cathedral, I presume to guess," answered the Bishop.

"What the deil, man--I crave your lordship's pardon for swearing--but
it was no cathedral--only a lurking-place called the king's _lugg_,
or _ear_, where he could sit undescried, and hear the converse of his
prisoners. Now, sirs, in imitation of this Dionysius, whom I took for
my pattern, the rather that he was a great linguist and grammarian, and
taught a school with good applause after his abdication, (either he or
his successor of the same name, it matters not whilk)--I have caused
them to make a _lugg_ up at the state-prison of the Tower yonder, more
like a pulpit than a cathedral, my Lord Bishop--and communicating with
the arras behind the Lieutenant's chamber, where we may sit and
privily hear the discourse of such prisoners as are pent up there for
state-offences, and so creep into the very secrets of our enemies."

The Prince cast a glance towards the Duke, expressive of great vexation
and disgust. Buckingham shrugged his shoulders, but the motion was so
slight as to be almost imperceptible.

"Weel, my lords, ye ken the fray at the hunting this morning--I
shall not get out of the trembling exies until I have a sound night's
sleep--just after that, they bring ye in a pretty page that had been
found in the Park. We were warned against examining him ourselves by the
anxious care of those around us; nevertheless, holding our life ever at
the service of these kingdoms, we commanded all to avoid the room,
the rather that we suspected this boy to be a girl. What think ye, my
lords?--few of you would have thought I had a hawk's eye for sic gear;
but we thank God, that though we are old, we know so much of such toys
as may beseem a man of decent gravity. Weel, my lords, we questioned
this maiden in male attire ourselves, and I profess it was a very pretty
interrogatory, and well followed. For, though she at first professed
that she assumed this disguise in order to countenance the woman who
should present us with the Lady Hermione's petition, for whom she
professed entire affection; yet when we, suspecting _anguis in herba_,
did put her to the very question, she was compelled to own a virtuous
attachment for Glenvarlochides, in such a pretty passion of shame and
fear, that we had much ado to keep our own eyes from keeping company
with hers in weeping. Also, she laid before us the false practices of
this Dalgarno towards Glenvarlochides, inveigling him into houses of ill
resort, and giving him evil counsel under pretext of sincere friendship,
whereby the inexperienced lad was led to do what was prejudicial to
himself, and offensive to us. But, however prettily she told her tale,
we determined not altogether to trust to her narration, but rather to
try the experiment whilk we had devised for such occasions. And having
ourselves speedily passed from Greenwich to the Tower, we constituted
ourselves eavesdropper, as it is called, to observe what should pass
between Glenvarlochides and his page, whom we caused to be admitted to
his apartment, well judging that if they were of counsel together to
deceive us, it could not be but something of it would spunk out--And
what think ye we saw, my lords?--Naething for you to sniggle and laugh
at, Steenie--for I question if you could have played the temperate and
Christian-like part of this poor lad Glenvarloch. He might be a Father
of the Church in comparison of you, man.--And then, to try his patience
yet farther, we loosed on him a courtier and a citizen, that is Sir
Mungo Malagrowther and our servant George Heriot here, wha dang the poor
lad about, and didna greatly spare our royal selves.--You mind, Geordie,
what you said about the wives and concubines? but I forgie ye, man--nae
need of kneeling, I forgie ye--the readier, that it regards a certain
particular, whilk, as it added not much to Solomon's credit, the lack
of it cannot be said to impinge on ours. Aweel, my lords, for all
temptation of sore distress and evil ensample, this poor lad never
loosed his tongue on us to say one unbecoming word--which inclines us
the rather, acting always by your wise advice, to treat this affair
of the Park as a thing done in the heat of blood, and under strong
provocation, and therefore to confer our free pardon on Lord
Glenvarloch."

"I am happy your gracious Majesty," said the Duke of Buckingham, "has
arrived at that conclusion, though I could never have guessed at the
road by which you attained it."

"I trust," said Prince Charles, "that it is not a path which your
Majesty will think it consistent with your high dignity to tread
frequently."

"Never while I live again, Baby Charles, that I give you my royal word
on. They say that hearkeners hear ill tales of themselves--by my saul,
my very ears are tingling wi' that auld sorrow Sir Mungo's sarcasms. He
called us close-fisted, Steenie--I am sure you can contradict that. But
it is mere envy in the auld mutilated sinner, because he himself has
neither a noble to hold in his loof, nor fingers to close on it if he
had." Here the king lost recollection of Sir Mungo's irreverence
in chuckling over his own wit, and only farther alluded to it by
saying--"We must give the old maunderer _bos in linguam_--something to
stop his mouth, or he will rail at us from Dan to Beersheba.--And now,
my lords, let our warrant of mercy to Lord Glenvarloch be presently
expedited, and he put to his freedom; and as his estate is likely to go
so sleaveless a gate, we will consider what means of favour we can
show him.--My lords, I wish you an appetite to an early supper--for our
labours have approached that term.--Baby Charles and Steenie, you will
remain till our couchee.--My Lord Bishop, you will be pleased to stay to
bless our meat.--Geordie Heriot, a word with you apart."

His Majesty then drew the citizen into a corner, while the counsellors,
those excepted who had been commanded to remain, made their
obeisance, and withdrew. "Geordie," said the king, "my good and trusty
servant"--Here he busied his fingers much with the points and ribbons of
his dress,--"Ye see that we have granted, from our own natural sense of
right and justice, that which yon long-backed fallow, Moniplies I think
they ca' him, proffered to purchase from us with a mighty bribe; whilk
we refused, as being a crowned king, who wad neither sell our justice
nor our mercy for pecuniar consideration. Now, what think ye should be
the upshot of this?"

"My Lord Glenvarloch's freedom, and his restoration to your Majesty's
favour," said Heriot.

"I ken that," said the king, peevishly. "Ye are very dull to-day. I
mean, what do you think this fallow Moniplies should think about the
matter?"

"Surely that your Majesty is a most good and gracious sovereign,"
answered Heriot.

"We had need to be gude and gracious baith," said the king, still more
pettishly, "that have idiots about us that cannot understand what we
mint at, unless we speak it out in braid Lowlands. See this chield
Moniplies, sir, and tell him what we have done for Lord Glenvarloch,
in whom he takes such part, out of our own gracious motion, though we
refused to do it on ony proffer of private advantage. Now, you may put
it till him, as if of your own mind, whether it will be a gracious or a
dutiful part in him, to press us for present payment of the two or three
hundred miserable pounds for whilk we were obliged to opignorate our
jewels? Indeed, mony men may think ye wad do the part of a good citizen,
if you took it on yourself to refuse him payment, seeing he hath
had what he professed to esteem full satisfaction, and considering,
moreover, that it is evident he hath no pressing need of the money,
whereof we have much necessity."

George Heriot sighed internally. "O my Master," thought he--"my dear
Master, is it then fated you are never to indulge any kingly or noble
sentiment, without its being sullied by some afterthought of interested
selfishness!"

The king troubled himself not about what he thought, but taking him by
the collar, said,--"Ye ken my meaning now, Jingler--awa wi' ye. You
are a wise man--manage it your ain gate--but forget not our present
straits." The citizen made his obeisance, and withdrew.

"And now, bairns," said the king, "what do you look upon each other
for--and what have you got to ask of your dear dad and gossip?"

"Only," said the Prince, "that it would please your Majesty to command
the lurking-place at the prison to be presently built up--the groans of
a captive should not be brought in evidence against him."

"What! build up my lugg, Baby Charles? And yet, better deaf than hear
ill tales of oneself. So let them build it up, hard and fast, without
delay, the rather that my back is sair with sitting in it for a whole
hour.--And now let us see what the cooks have been doing for us, bonny
bairns."




CHAPTER XXXIV


  To this brave man the knight repairs
  For counsel in his law affairs;
  And found him mounted in his pew.
  With books and money placed for show,
  Like nest-eggs to make clients lay,
  And for his false opinion pay.
                        _Hudibras._

Our readers may recollect a certain smooth-tongued, lank-haired,
buckram-suited, Scottish scrivener, who, in the earlier part of this
history, appeared in the character of a protege of George Heriot. It is
to his house we are about to remove, but times have changed with him.
The petty booth hath become a chamber of importance--the buckram suit
is changed into black velvet; and although the wearer retains his
puritanical humility and politeness to clients of consequence, he can
now look others broad in the face, and treat them with a full allowance
of superior opulence, and the insolence arising from it. It was but
a short period that had achieved these alterations, nor was the party
himself as yet entirely accustomed to them, but the change was becoming
less embarrassing to him with every day's practice. Among other
acquisitions of wealth, you may see one of Davy Ramsay's best timepieces
on the table, and his eye is frequently observing its revolutions, while
a boy, whom he employs as a scribe, is occasionally sent out to compare
its progress with the clock of Saint Dunstan.

The scrivener himself seemed considerably agitated. He took from a
strong-box a bundle of parchments, and read passages of them with great
attention; then began to soliloquize--"There is no outlet which law can
suggest--no back-door of evasion--none--if the lands of Glenvarloch
are not redeemed before it rings noon, Lord Dalgarno has them a cheap
pennyworth. Strange, that he should have been at last able to set his
patron at defiance, and achieve for himself the fair estate, with the
prospect of which he so long flattered the powerful Buckingham.--Might
not Andrew Skurliewhitter nick him as neatly? He hath been my
patron--true--not more than Buckingham was his; and he can be so no
more, for he departs presently for Scotland. I am glad of it--I hate
him, and I fear him. He knows too many of my secrets--I know too many
of his. But, no--no--no--I need never attempt it, there are no means of
over-reaching him.--Well, Willie, what o'clock?"

"Ele'en hours just chappit, sir."

"Go to your desk without, child," said the scrivener. "What to do
next--I shall lose the old Earl's fair business, and, what is worse, his
son's foul practice. Old Heriot looks too close into business to permit
me more than the paltry and ordinary dues. The Whitefriars business was
profitable, but it has become unsafe ever since--pah!--what brought that
in my head just now? I can hardly hold my pen--if men should see me
in this way!--Willie," (calling aloud to the boy,) "a cup of distilled
waters--Soh!--now I could face the devil."

He spoke the last words aloud, and close by the door of the apartment,
which was suddenly opened by Richie Moniplies, followed by two
gentlemen, and attended by two porters bearing money-bags. "If ye can
face the devil, Maister Skurliewhitter," said Richie, "ye will be the
less likely to turn your back on a sack or twa o' siller, which I have
ta'en the freedom to bring you. Sathanas and Mammon are near akin." The
porters, at the same time, ranged their load on the floor.

"I--I,"--stammered the surprised scrivener--"I cannot guess what you
mean, sir."

"Only that I have brought you the redemption-money on the part of
Lord Glenvarloch, in discharge of a certain mortgage over his family
inheritance. And here, in good time, comes Master Reginald Lowestoffe,
and another honourable gentleman of the Temple, to be witnesses to the
transaction."

"I--I incline to think," said the scrivener, "that the term is expired."

"You will pardon us, Master Scrivener," said Lowestoffe. "You will not
baffle us--it wants three-quarters of noon by every clock in the city."

"I must have time, gentlemen," said Andrew, "to examine the gold by tale
and weight."

"Do so at your leisure, Master Scrivener," replied Lowestoffe again.
"We have already seen the contents of each sack told and weighed, and we
have put our seals on them. There they stand in a row, twenty in number,
each containing three hundred yellow-hammers--we are witnesses to the
lawful tender."

"Gentlemen," said the scrivener, "this security now belongs to a
mighty lord. I pray you, abate your haste, and let me send for Lord
Dalgarno,--or rather I will run for him myself."

So saying, he took up his hat; but Lowestoffe called out,--"Friend
Moniplies, keep the door fast, an thou be'st a man! he seeks but to put
off the time.--In plain terms, Andrew, you may send for the devil, if
you will, who is the mightiest lord of my acquaintance, but from hence
you stir not till you have answered our proposition, by rejecting or
accepting the redemption-money fairly tendered--there it lies--take it,
or leave it, as you will. I have skill enough to know that the law is
mightier than any lord in Britain--I have learned so much at the Temple,
if I have learned nothing else. And see that you trifle not with it,
lest it make your long ears an inch shorter, Master Skurliewhitter."

"Nay, gentlemen, if you threaten me," said the scrivener, "I cannot
resist compulsion."

"No threats--no threats at all, my little Andrew," said Lowestoffe; "a
little friendly advice only--forget not, honest Andrew, I have seen you
in Alsatia."

Without answering a single word, the scrivener sat down, and drew in
proper form a full receipt for the money proffered.

"I take it on your report, Master Lowestoffe," he said; "I hope you
will remember I have insisted neither upon weight nor tale--I have been
civil--if there is deficiency I shall come to loss."

"Fillip his nose with a gold-piece, Richie," quoth the Templar. "Take up
the papers, and now wend we merrily to dine thou wot'st where."

"If I might choose," said Richie, "it should not be at yonder roguish
ordinary; but as it is your pleasure, gentlemen, the treat shall be
given wheresoever you will have it."

"At the ordinary," said the one Templar.

"At Beaujeu's," said the other; "it is the only house in London for neat
wines, nimble drawers, choice dishes, and--"

"And high charges," quoth Richie Moniplies. "But, as I said before,
gentlemen, ye have a right to command me in this thing, having so
frankly rendered me your service in this small matter of business,
without other stipulation than that of a slight banquet."

The latter part of this discourse passed in the street, where,
immediately afterwards, they met Lord Dalgarno. He appeared in haste,
touched his hat slightly to Master Lowestoffe, who returned his
reverence with the same negligence, and walked slowly on with his
companion, while Lord Dalgarno stopped Richie Moniplies with a
commanding sign, which the instinct of education compelled Moniplies,
though indignant, to obey.

"Whom do you now follow, sirrah?" demanded the noble.

"Whomsoever goeth before me, my lord," answered Moniplies.

"No sauciness, you knave--I desire to know if you still serve Nigel
Olifaunt?" said Dalgarno.

"I am friend to the noble Lord Glenvarloch," answered Moniplies, with
dignity.

"True," replied Lord Dalgarno, "that noble lord has sunk to seek friends
among lackeys--Nevertheless,--hark thee hither,--nevertheless, if he
be of the same mind as when we last met, thou mayst show him, that, on
to-morrow, at four afternoon, I shall pass northward by Enfield Chase--I
will be slenderly attended, as I design to send my train through Barnet.
It is my purpose to ride an easy pace through the forest, and to linger
a while by Camlet Moat--he knows the place; and, if he be aught but an
Alsatian bully, will think it fitter for some purposes than the Park. He
is, I understand, at liberty, or shortly to be so. If he fail me at
the place nominated, he must seek me in Scotland, where he will find me
possessed of his father's estate and lands."

"Humph!" muttered Richie; "there go twa words to that bargain."

He even meditated a joke on the means which he was conscious he
possessed of baffling Lord Dalgarno's expectations; but there was
something of keen and dangerous excitement in the eyes of the young
nobleman, which prompted his discretion for once to rule his vit, and he
only answered--

"God grant your lordship may well brook your new conquest--when you
get it. I shall do your errand to my lord--whilk is to say," he added
internally, "he shall never hear a word of it from Richie. I am not the
lad to put him in such hazard."

Lord Dalgarno looked at him sharply for a moment, as if to penetrate
the meaning of the dry ironical tone, which, in spite of Richie's awe,
mingled with his answer, and then waved his hand, in signal he should
pass on. He himself walked slowly till the trio were out of sight, then
turned back with hasty steps to the door of the scrivener, which he had
passed in his progress, knocked, and was admitted.

Lord Dalgarno found the man of law with the money-bags still
standing before him; and it escaped not his penetrating glance, that
Skurliewhitter was disconcerted and alarmed at his approach.

"How now, man," he said; "what! hast thou not a word of oily compliment
to me on my happy marriage?--not a word of most philosophical
consolation on my disgrace at Court?--Or has my mien, as a wittol and
discarded favourite, the properties of the Gorgon's head, the _turbatae
Palladis arma_, as Majesty might say?"

"My lord, I am glad--my lord, I am sorry,"--answered the trembling
scrivener, who, aware of the vivacity of Lord Dalgarno's temper, dreaded
the consequence of the communication he had to make to him.

"Glad and sorry!" answered Lord Dalgarno. "That is blowing hot and cold,
with a witness. Hark ye, you picture of petty-larceny personified--if
you are sorry I am a cuckold, remember I am only mine own, you
knave--there is too little blood in her cheeks to have sent her astray
elsewhere. Well, I will bear mine antler'd honours as I may--gold
shall gild them; and for my disgrace, revenge shall sweeten it. Ay,
revenge--and there strikes the happy hour!"

The hour of noon was accordingly heard to peal from Saint Dunstan's.
"Well banged, brave hammers!" said Lord Dalgarno, in triumph.--"The
estate and lands of Glenvarloch are crushed beneath these clanging
blows. If my steel to-morrow prove but as true as your iron maces
to-day, the poor landless lord will little miss what your peal hath
cut him out from.--The papers--the papers, thou varlet! I am to-morrow
Northward, ho! At four, afternoon, I am bound to be at Camlet Moat,
in the Enfield Chase. To-night most of my retinue set forward. The
papers!--Come, dispatch."

"My lord, the--the papers of the Glenvarloch mortgage--I--I have them
not."

"Have them not!" echoed Lord Dalgarno,--"Hast thou sent them to my
lodgings, thou varlet? Did I not say I was coming hither?--What mean you
by pointing to that money? What villainy have you done for it? It is too
large to be come honestly by."

"Your lordship knows best," answered the scrivener, in great
perturbation. "The gold is your own. It is--it is--"

"Not the redemption-money of the Glenvarloch estate!" said Dalgarno.
"Dare not say it is, or I will, upon the spot, divorce your pettifogging
soul from your carrion carcass!" So saying, he seized the scrivener
by the collar, and shook him so vehemently, that he tore it from the
cassock.

"My lord, I must call for help," said the trembling caitiff, who felt
at that moment all the bitterness of the mortal agony--"It was the law's
act, not mine. What could I do?"

"Dost ask?--why, thou snivelling dribblet of damnation, were all thy
oaths, tricks, and lies spent? or do you hold yourself too good to utter
them in my service? Thou shouldst have lied, cozened, out-sworn truth
itself, rather than stood betwixt me and my revenge! But mark me," he
continued; "I know more of your pranks than would hang thee. A line from
me to the Attorney-General, and thou art sped."

"What would you have me to do, my lord?" said the scrivener. "All that
art and law can accomplish, I will try."

"Ah, are you converted? do so, or pity of your life!" said the lord;
"and remember I never fail my word.--Then keep that accursed gold,"
he continued. "Or, stay, I will not trust you--send me this gold home
presently to my lodging. I will still forward to Scotland, and it shall
go hard but that I hold out Glenvarloch Castle against the owner, by
means of the ammunition he has himself furnished. Thou art ready to
serve me?" The scrivener professed the most implicit obedience.

"Then remember, the hour was past ere payment was tendered--and see thou
hast witnesses of trusty memory to prove that point."

"Tush, my lord, I will do more," said Andrew, reviving--"I will prove
that Lord Glenvarloch's friends threatened, swaggered, and drew swords
on me.--Did your lordship think I was ungrateful enough to have suffered
them to prejudice your lordship, save that they had bare swords at my
throat?"

"Enough said," replied Dalgarno; "you are perfect--mind that you
continue so, as you would avoid my fury. I leave my page below--get
porters, and let them follow me instantly with the gold."

So saying, Lord Dalgarno left the scrivener's habitation.

Skurliewhitter, having dispatched his boy to get porters of trust for
transporting the money, remained alone and in dismay, meditating by
what means he could shake himself free of the vindictive and ferocious
nobleman, who possessed at once a dangerous knowledge of his character,
and the power of exposing him, where exposure would be ruin. He
had indeed acquiesced in the plan, rapidly sketched, for obtaining
possession of the ransomed estate, but his experience foresaw that this
would be impossible; while, on the other hand, he could not anticipate
the various consequences of Lord Dalgarno's resentment, without fears,
from which his sordid soul recoiled. To be in the power, and subject
both to the humours and the extortions of a spendthrift young lord, just
when his industry had shaped out the means of fortune,--it was the most
cruel trick which fate could have played the incipient usurer.

While the scrivener was in this fit of anxious anticipation, one knocked
at the door of the apartment; and, being desired to enter, appeared in
the coarse riding-cloak of uncut Wiltshire cloth, fastened by a broad
leather belt and brass buckle, which was then generally worn by graziers
and countrymen. Skurliewhitter, believing he saw in his visitor a
country client who might prove profitable, had opened his mouth to
request him to be seated, when the stranger, throwing back his frieze
hood which he had drawn over his face, showed the scrivener features
well imprinted in his recollection, but which he never saw without a
disposition to swoon.

"Is it you?" he said, faintly, as the stranger replaced the hood which
concealed his features.

"Who else should it be?" said his visitor.

"Thou son of parchment, got betwixt the inkhorn And the stuff'd
process-bag--that mayest call The pen thy father, and the ink thy mother,

 The wax thy brother, and the sand thy sister
 And the good pillory thy cousin allied--
 Rise, and do reverence unto me, thy better!"

"Not yet down to the country," said the scrivener, "after every warning?
Do not think your grazier's cloak will bear you out, captain--no, nor
your scraps of stage-plays."

"Why, what would you have me to do?" said the captain--"Would you have
me starve? If I am to fly, you must eke my wings with a few feathers.
You can spare them, I think."

"You had means already--you have had ten pieces--What is become of
them?"

"Gone," answered Captain Colepepper--"Gone, no matter where--I had a
mind to bite, and I was bitten, that's all--I think my hand shook at the
thought of t'other night's work, for I trowled the doctors like a very
baby."

"And you have lost all, then?--Well, take this and be gone," said the
scrivener.

"What, two poor smelts! Marry, plague of your bounty!--But remember, you
are as deep in as I."

"Not so, by Heaven!" answered the scrivener; "I only thought of easing
the old man of some papers and a trifle of his gold, and you took his
life."

"Were he living," answered Colepepper, "he would rather have lost
it than his money.--But that is not the question, Master
Skurliewhitter--you undid the private bolts of the window when you
visited him about some affairs on the day ere he died--so satisfy
yourself, that, if I am taken, I will not swing alone. Pity Jack
Hempsfield is dead, it spoils the old catch,

     'And three merry men, and three merry men,
      And three merry men are we,
      As ever did sing three parts in a string,
      All under the triple tree.'"

"For God's sake, speak lower," said the scrivener; "is this a place or
time to make your midnight catches heard?--But how much will serve your
turn? I tell you I am but ill provided."

"You tell me a lie, then," said the bully--"a most palpable and gross
lie.--How much, d'ye say, will serve my turn? Why, one of these bags
will do for the present."

"I swear to you that these bags of money are not at my disposal."

"Not honestly, perhaps," said the captain, "but that makes little
difference betwixt us."

"I swear to you," continued the scrivener "they are in no way at my
disposal--they have been delivered to me by tale--I am to pay them over
to Lord Dalgarno, whose boy waits for them, and I could not skelder one
piece out of them, without risk of hue and cry."

"Can you not put off the delivery?" said the bravo, his huge hand still
fumbling with one of the bags, as if his fingers longed to close on it.

"Impossible," said the scrivener, "he sets forward to Scotland
to-morrow."

"Ay!" said the bully, after a moment's thought--"Travels he the north
road with such a charge?"

"He is well accompanied," added the scrivener; "but yet--"

"But yet--but what?" said the bravo.

"Nay, I meant nothing," said the scrivener.

"Thou didst--thou hadst the wind of some good thing," replied
Colepepper; "I saw thee pause like a setting dog. Thou wilt say as
little, and make as sure a sign, as a well-bred spaniel."

"All I meant to say, captain, was, that his servants go by Barnet, and
he himself, with his page, pass through Enfield Chase; and he spoke to
me yesterday of riding a soft pace."

"Aha!--Comest thou to me there, my boy?"

"And of resting"--continued the scrivener,--"resting a space at Camlet
Moat."

"Why, this is better than cock-fighting!" said the captain.

"I see not how it can advantage you, captain," said the scrivener. "But,
however, they cannot ride fast, for his page rides the sumpter-horse,
which carries all that weight," pointing to the money on the table.
"Lord Dalgarno looks sharp to the world's gear."

"That horse will be obliged to those who may ease him of his burden,"
said the bravo; "and egad, he may be met with.--He hath still that
page--that same Lutin--that goblin? Well, the boy hath set game for
