  Draw near, but first his certain fortune know;
  Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
  Mash all his bones, and all his body pound:
  So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,
  To heave the batter'd carcase off the plain."

  The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
  The host beheld him, silent with amaze!
  'Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
  To meet his might, and emulate thy sire,
  The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore
  In Theban games the noblest trophy bore,
  (The games ordain'd dead OEdipus to grace,)
  And singly vanquish the Cadmean race.
  Him great Tydides urges to contend,
  Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend;
  Officious with the cincture girds him round;
  And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
  Amid the circle now each champion stands,
  And poises high in air his iron hands;
  With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close,
  Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows,
  And painful sweat from all their members flows.
  At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow
  Full on the cheek of his unwary foe;
  Beneath that ponderous arm's resistless sway
  Down dropp'd he, nerveless, and extended lay.
  As a large fish, when winds and waters roar,
  By some huge billow dash'd against the shore,
  Lies panting; not less batter'd with his wound,
  The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
  To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends,
  Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends;
  Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,
  And dragging his disabled legs along;
  Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o'er;
  His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;(292)
  Wrapp'd round in mists he lies, and lost to thought;
  His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.

  The third bold game Achilles next demands,
  And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:
  A massy tripod for the victor lies,
  Of twice six oxen its reputed price;
  And next, the loser's spirits to restore,
  A female captive, valued but at four.
  Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop
  When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
  Amid the ring each nervous rival stands,
  Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
  Close lock'd above, their heads and arms are mix'd:
  Below, their planted feet at distance fix'd;
  Like two strong rafters which the builder forms,
  Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms,
  Their tops connected, but at wider space
  Fix'd on the centre stands their solid base.
  Now to the grasp each manly body bends;
  The humid sweat from every pore descends;
  Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs
  Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.
  Nor could Ulysses, for his art renown'd,
  O'erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground;
  Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow
  The watchful caution of his artful foe.
  While the long strife even tired the lookers on,
  Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon:
  "Or let me lift thee, chief, or lift thou me:
  Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree."

  He said; and, straining, heaved him off the ground
  With matchless strength; that time Ulysses found
  The strength to evade, and where the nerves combine
  His ankle struck: the giant fell supine;
  Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies;
  Shouts of applause run rattling through the skies.
  Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays;
  He barely stirr'd him, but he could not raise:
  His knee lock'd fast, the foe's attempt denied;
  And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.
  Defiled with honourable dust they roll,
  Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul:
  Again they rage, again to combat rise;
  When great Achilles thus divides the prize:

  "Your noble vigour, O my friends, restrain;
  Nor weary out your generous strength in vain.
  Ye both have won: let others who excel,
  Now prove that prowess you have proved so well."

  The hero's words the willing chiefs obey,
  From their tired bodies wipe the dust away,
  And, clothed anew, the following games survey.

  And now succeed the gifts ordain'd to grace
  The youths contending in the rapid race:
  A silver urn that full six measures held,
  By none in weight or workmanship excell'd:
  Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine,
  Elaborate, with artifice divine;
  Whence Tyrian sailors did the prize transport,
  And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:
  From him descended, good Eunaeus heir'd
  The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
  To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward:
  Now, the same hero's funeral rites to grace,
  It stands the prize of swiftness in the race.
  A well-fed ox was for the second placed;
  And half a talent must content the last.
  Achilles rising then bespoke the train:
  "Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,
  Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain."

  The hero said, and starting from his place,
  Oilean Ajax rises to the race;
  Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass'd
  His youthful equals, Nestor's son, the last.
  Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;
  Pelides points the barrier with his hand;
  All start at once; Oileus led the race;
  The next Ulysses, measuring pace with pace;
  Behind him, diligently close, he sped,
  As closely following as the running thread
  The spindle follows, and displays the charms
  Of the fair spinster's breast and moving arms:
  Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies,
  And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;
  His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays:
  The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:
  To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,
  And send their souls before him as he flies.
  Now three times turn'd in prospect of the goal,
  The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul:
  "Assist, O goddess!" thus in thought he pray'd!
  And present at his thought descends the maid.
  Buoy'd by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
  All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain,
  Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain
  (O'erturn'd by Pallas), where the slippery shore
  Was clogg'd with slimy dung and mingled gore.
  (The self-same place beside Patroclus' pyre,
  Where late the slaughter'd victims fed the fire.)
  Besmear'd with filth, and blotted o'er with clay,
  Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay;
  The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,
  And left the urn Ulysses' rich reward.
  Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,
  The baffled hero thus the Greeks address'd:

  "Accursed fate! the conquest I forego;
  A mortal I, a goddess was my foe;
  She urged her favourite on the rapid way,
  And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day."

  Thus sourly wail'd he, sputtering dirt and gore;
  A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
  Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,
  Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest:

  "Why with our wiser elders should we strive?
  The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
  Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize:
  He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;
  (A green old age unconscious of decays,
  That proves the hero born in better days!)
  Behold his vigour in this active race!
  Achilles only boasts a swifter pace:
  For who can match Achilles? He who can,
  Must yet be more than hero, more than man."

  The effect succeeds the speech. Pelides cries,
  "Thy artful praise deserves a better prize.
  Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extoll'd;
  Receive a talent of the purest gold."
  The youth departs content. The host admire
  The son of Nestor, worthy of his sire.

  Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings;
  Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings:
  Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore,
  And great Patroclus in short triumph bore.
  "Stand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries)
  Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize,
  Now grace the lists before our army's sight,
  And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.
  Who first the jointed armour shall explore,
  And stain his rival's mail with issuing gore,
  The sword Asteropaeus possess'd of old,
  (A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of gold,)
  Shall pay the stroke, and grace the striker's side:
  These arms in common let the chiefs divide:
  For each brave champion, when the combat ends,
  A sumptuous banquet at our tents attends."

  Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeus' son,
  And the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.
  Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,
  The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;
  Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight;
  Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
  Opposed in arms not long they idly stood,
  But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renew'd.
  A furious pass the spear of Ajax made
  Through the broad shield, but at the corslet stay'd.
  Not thus the foe: his javelin aim'd above
  The buckler's margin, at the neck he drove.
  But Greece, now trembling for her hero's life,
  Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
  Yet still the victor's due Tydides gains,
  With him the sword and studded belt remains.

  Then hurl'd the hero, thundering on the ground,
  A mass of iron (an enormous round),
  Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire,
  Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
  This mighty quoit Aetion wont to rear,
  And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;
  The giant by Achilles slain, he stow'd
  Among his spoils this memorable load.
  For this, he bids those nervous artists vie,
  That teach the disk to sound along the sky.
  "Let him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise;
  Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;
  If he be one enrich'd with large domain
  Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain,
  Small stock of iron needs that man provide;
  His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied
  From hence; nor ask the neighbouring city's aid
  For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade."

  Stern Polypoetes stepp'd before the throng,
  And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
  Whose force with rival forces to oppose,
  Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.
  Each stood in order: first Epeus threw;
  High o'er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
  Leonteus next a little space surpass'd;
  And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
  O'er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung
  From Polypoetes' arm the discus sung:
  Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,
  That distant falls among the grazing cows,
  So past them all the rapid circle flies:
  His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies,
  With force conjoin'd heave off the weighty prize.

  Those, who in skilful archery contend,
  He next invites the twanging bow to bend;
  And twice ten axes casts amidst the round,
  Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound
  The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore,
  The hero fixes in the sandy shore;
  To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie,
  The trembling mark at which their arrows fly.

  "Whose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear
  These two-edged axes, terrible in war;
  The single, he whose shaft divides the cord."
  He said: experienced Merion took the word;
  And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw
  Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
  Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies;
  But flies unbless'd! No grateful sacrifice,
  No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow
  To Phoebus, patron of the shaft and bow.
  For this, thy well-aim'd arrow turn'd aside,
  Err'd from the dove, yet cut the cord that tied:
  Adown the mainmast fell the parted string,
  And the free bird to heaven displays her wing:
  Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound,
  And Merion eager meditates the wound:
  He takes the bow, directs the shaft above,
  And following with his eye the soaring dove,
  Implores the god to speed it through the skies,
  With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrific
  The dove, in airy circles as she wheels,
  Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels;
  Quite through and through the point its passage found,
  And at his feet fell bloody to the ground.
  The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last,
  With flagging wings alighted on the mast,
  A moment hung, and spread her pinions there,
  Then sudden dropp'd, and left her life in air.
  From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder rise,
  And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.

  To close the funeral games, Achilles last
  A massy spear amid the circle placed,
  And ample charger of unsullied frame,
  With flowers high-wrought, not blacken'd yet by flame.
  For these he bids the heroes prove their art,
  Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
  Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize;
  Nor here disdain'd the king of men to rise.
  With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
  Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

  "Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
  O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
  In every martial game thy worth attest,
  And know thee both their greatest and their best.
  Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
  This beamy javelin in thy brother's war."

  Pleased from the hero's lips his praise to hear,
  The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
  But, set apart for sacred use, commands
  The glittering charger to Talthybius' hands.

                          [Illustration: CERES.]

                                  CERES.





BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.

THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.

The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector's body. Jupiter sends
Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to
Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old king,
notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for the
journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets forth
in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the charge of
Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young man, and
conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation on the way.
Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his feet, and begs for
the body of his son: Achilles, moved with compassion, grants his request,
detains him one night in his tent, and the next morning sends him home
with the body: the Trojans run out to meet him. The lamentations of
Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the solemnities of the funeral.

The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of Hector
lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the truce
allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achilles' camp, and
partly in Troy.

  Now from the finish'd games the Grecian band
  Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand,
  All stretch'd at ease the genial banquet share,
  And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.
  Not so Achilles: he, to grief resign'd,
  His friend's dear image present to his mind,
  Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep;
  Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.
  Restless he roll'd around his weary bed,
  And all his soul on his Patroclus fed:
  The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind,
  That youthful vigour, and that manly mind,
  What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought,
  What seas they measured, and what fields they fought;
  All pass'd before him in remembrance dear,
  Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.
  And now supine, now prone, the hero lay,
  Now shifts his side, impatient for the day:
  Then starting up, disconsolate he goes
  Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.
  There as the solitary mourner raves,
  The ruddy morning rises o'er the waves:
  Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he join'd!
  The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.
  And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument
  Was Hector dragg'd, then hurried to the tent.
  There sleep at last o'ercomes the hero's eyes;
  While foul in dust the unhonour'd carcase lies,
  But not deserted by the pitying skies:
  For Phoebus watch'd it with superior care,
  Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air;
  And, ignominious as it swept the field,
  Spread o'er the sacred corse his golden shield.
  All heaven was moved, and Hermes will'd to go
  By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe:
  But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,
  And th' unrelenting empress of the skies,
  E'er since that day implacable to Troy,
  What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy,
  Won by destructive lust (reward obscene),
  Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen.
  But when the tenth celestial morning broke,
  To heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke:

          [Illustration: HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.]

                  HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.


  "Unpitying powers! how oft each holy fane
  Has Hector tinged with blood of victims slain?
  And can ye still his cold remains pursue?
  Still grudge his body to the Trojans' view?
  Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire,
  The last sad honours of a funeral fire?
  Is then the dire Achilles all your care?
  That iron heart, inflexibly severe;
  A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide,
  In strength of rage, and impotence of pride;
  Who hastes to murder with a savage joy,
  Invades around, and breathes but to destroy!
  Shame is not of his soul; nor understood,
  The greatest evil and the greatest good.
  Still for one loss he rages unresign'd,
  Repugnant to the lot of all mankind;
  To lose a friend, a brother, or a son,
  Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done:
  Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care;
  Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.
  But this insatiate, the commission given
  By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven:
  Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along
  Hector's dead earth, insensible of wrong!
  Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed,
  He violates the laws of man and god."

                  [Illustration: THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.]

                          THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.


  "If equal honours by the partial skies
  Are doom'd both heroes, (Juno thus replies,)
  If Thetis' son must no distinction know,
  Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow.
  But Hector only boasts a mortal claim,
  His birth deriving from a mortal dame:
  Achilles, of your own ethereal race,
  Springs from a goddess by a man's embrace
  (A goddess by ourself to Peleus given,
  A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven)
  To grace those nuptials, from the bright abode
  Yourselves were present; where this minstrel-god,
  Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quire
  Stood proud to hymn, and tune his youthful lyre."

  Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial dame:
  "Let not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame;
  Their merits, nor their honours, are the same.
  But mine, and every god's peculiar grace
  Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race:
  Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay,
  (The only honours men to gods can pay,)
  Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased
  The pure libation, and the holy feast:
  Howe'er by stealth to snatch the corse away,
  We will not: Thetis guards it night and day.
  But haste, and summon to our courts above
  The azure queen; let her persuasion move
  Her furious son from Priam to receive
  The proffer'd ransom, and the corse to leave."

  He added not: and Iris from the skies,
  Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies,
  Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps,
  Refulgent gliding o'er the sable deeps.
  Between where Samos wide his forests spreads,
  And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,
  Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;)
  She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
  As bearing death in the fallacious bait,
  From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight;
  So pass'd the goddess through the closing wave,
  Where Thetis sorrow'd in her secret cave:
  There placed amidst her melancholy train
  (The blue-hair'd sisters of the sacred main)
  Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,
  And wept her godlike son's approaching doom.
  Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Arise, O Thetis! from thy seats below,
  'Tis Jove that calls."--"And why (the dame replies)
  Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?
  Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
  Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
  Howe'er, be heaven's almighty sire obey'd--"
  She spake, and veil'd her head in sable shade,
  Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
  And forth she paced, majestically sad.

  Then through the world of waters they repair
  (The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
  The deeps dividing, o'er the coast they rise,
  And touch with momentary flight the skies.
  There in the lightning's blaze the sire they found,
  And all the gods in shining synod round.
  Thetis approach'd with anguish in her face,
  (Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
  Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
  And offer'd from her hand the nectar-bowl:
  She tasted, and resign'd it: then began
  The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

  "Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o'ercast;
  Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
  Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
  But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares
  Nine days are past since all the court above
  In Hector's cause have moved the ear of Jove;
  'Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
  By stealth should bear him, but we will'd not so:
  We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
  And to his conquest add this glory more.
  Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:
  Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far;
  Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)
  Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead;
  But yield to ransom and the father's prayer;
  The mournful father, Iris shall prepare
  With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands
  Whate'er his honour asks, or heart demands."

  His word the silver-footed queen attends,
  And from Olympus' snowy tops descends.
  Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,
  And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:
  His friends prepare the victim, and dispose
  Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes;
  The goddess seats her by her pensive son,
  She press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "How long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow,
  And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:
  Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign
  Soothes weary life, and softens human pain?
  O snatch the moments yet within thy power;
  Not long to live, indulge the amorous hour!
  Lo! Jove himself (for Jove's command I bear)
  Forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far.
  No longer then (his fury if thou dread)
  Detain the relics of great Hector dead;
  Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain,
  But yield to ransom, and restore the slain."

  To whom Achilles: "Be the ransom given,
  And we submit, since such the will of heaven."

  While thus they communed, from the Olympian bowers
  Jove orders Iris to the Trojan towers:
  "Haste, winged goddess! to the sacred town,
  And urge her monarch to redeem his son.
  Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
  Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread,
  Safe through the foe by our protection led:
  Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey,
  Guard of his life, and partner of his way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
  His age, nor touch one venerable hair:
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

     [Illustration: IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.]

             IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.


  Then down her bow the winged Iris drives,
  And swift at Priam's mournful court arrives:
  Where the sad sons beside their father's throne
  Sat bathed in tears, and answer'd groan with groan.
  And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,
  (Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrapp'd attire
  Conceal'd from sight; with frantic hands he spread
  A shower of ashes o'er his neck and head.
  From room to room his pensive daughters roam;
  Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;
  Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy,
  Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
  Before the king Jove's messenger appears,
  And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:

  "Fear not, O father! no ill news I bear;
  From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care;
  For Hector's sake these walls he bids thee leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive;
  Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor shalt thou death, nor shall thou danger dread:
  Safe through the foe by his protection led:
  Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
  Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair;
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

  She spoke, and vanish'd. Priam bids prepare
  His gentle mules and harness to the car;
  There, for the gifts, a polish'd casket lay:
  His pious sons the king's command obey.
  Then pass'd the monarch to his bridal-room,
  Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume,
  And where the treasures of his empire lay;
  Then call'd his queen, and thus began to say:

  "Unhappy consort of a king distress'd!
  Partake the troubles of thy husband's breast:
  I saw descend the messenger of Jove,
  Who bids me try Achilles' mind to move;
  Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain
  The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain.
  Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to go
  Through hostile camps, and bears me to the foe."

  The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing cries
  Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies:
  "Ah! whither wanders thy distemper'd mind?
  And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
  Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known;
  Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
  Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face
  (O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!
  To view that deathful eye, and wander o'er
  Those hands yet red with Hector's noble gore!
  Alas! my lord! he knows not how to spare.
  And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare;
  So brave! so many fallen! To claim his rage
  Vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.
  No--pent in this sad palace, let us give
  To grief the wretched days we have to live.
  Still, still for Hector let our sorrows flow,
  Born to his own, and to his parents' woe!
  Doom'd from the hour his luckless life begun,
  To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleus' son!
  Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay
  My rage, and these barbarities repay!
  For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath
  Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
  He poured his latest blood in manly fight,
  And fell a hero in his country's right."

  "Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affright
  With words of omen, like a bird of night,
  (Replied unmoved the venerable man;)
  'Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
  Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
  Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey'd.
  A present goddess brought the high command,
  I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
  I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
  If in yon camp your powers have doom'd my fall,
  Content--By the same hand let me expire!
  Add to the slaughter'd son the wretched sire!
  One cold embrace at least may be allow'd,
  And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!"

  From forth his open'd stores, this said, he drew
  Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
  As many vests, as many mantles told,
  And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
  Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
  With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
  And last a large well-labour'd bowl had place,
  (The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
  Seem'd all too mean the stores he could employ,
  For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

  Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
  Around him furious drives his menial train:
  In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
  Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
  "What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries).
  Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
  Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
  Am I the only object of despair?
  Am I become my people's common show,
  Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
  No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
  The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
  Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
  Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
  I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,
  I see the ruins of your smoking town!
  O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,
  A willing ghost to Pluto's dreary dome!"

  He said, and feebly drives his friends away:
  The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
  Next on his sons his erring fury falls,
  Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;
  His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
  Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer,
  And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine
  Survived, sad relics of his numerous line.

  "Inglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
  Why did not all in Hector's cause expire?
  Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain.
  You, the disgrace of Priam's house, remain!
  Mestor the brave, renown'd in ranks of war,
  With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,(293)
  And last great Hector, more than man divine,
  For sure he seem'd not of terrestrial line!
  All those relentless Mars untimely slew,
  And left me these, a soft and servile crew,
  Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ,
  Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy!
  Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run,
  And speed my journey to redeem my son?"

  The sons their father's wretched age revere,
  Forgive his anger, and produce the car.
  High on the seat the cabinet they bind:
  The new-made car with solid beauty shined;
  Box was the yoke, emboss'd with costly pains,
  And hung with ringlets to receive the reins;
  Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground:
  These to the chariot's polish'd pole they bound.
  Then fix'd a ring the running reins to guide,
  And close beneath the gather'd ends were tied.
  Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain)
  The sad attendants load the groaning wain:
  Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring,
  (The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.)
  But the fair horses, long his darling care,
  Himself received, and harness'd to his car:
  Grieved as he was, he not this task denied;
  The hoary herald help'd him, at his side.
  While careful these the gentle coursers join'd,
  Sad Hecuba approach'd with anxious mind;
  A golden bowl that foam'd with fragrant wine,
  (Libation destined to the power divine,)
  Held in her right, before the steed she stands,
  And thus consigns it to the monarch's hands:

  "Take this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms
  His grace restore thee to our roof and arms.
  Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine,
  Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design;
  Pray to that god, who high on Ida's brow
  Surveys thy desolated realms below,
  His winged messenger to send from high,
  And lead thy way with heavenly augury:
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space.
  That sign beheld, and strengthen'd from above,
  Boldly pursue the journey mark'd by Jove:
  But if the god his augury denies,
  Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice."

  "'Tis just (said Priam) to the sire above
  To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?"
  He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring
  The purest water of the living spring:
  (Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:)
  Then took the golden cup his queen had fill'd;
  On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine,
  Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:

  "O first and greatest! heaven's imperial lord!
  On lofty Ida's holy hill adored!
  To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
  And teach him mercy when a father prays.
  If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky
  Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space;
  So shall thy suppliant, strengthen'd from above,
  Fearless pursue the journey mark'd by Jove."

  Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,
  Despatch'd his bird, celestial augury!
  The swift-wing'd chaser of the feather'd game,
  And known to gods by Percnos' lofty name.
  Wide as appears some palace-gate display'd.
  So broad, his pinions stretch'd their ample shade,
  As stooping dexter with resounding wings
  The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
  A dawn of joy in every face appears:
  The mourning matron dries her timorous tears:
  Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung;
  The brazen portal in his passage rung;
  The mules preceding draw the loaded wain,
  Charged with the gifts: Idaeus holds the rein:
  The king himself his gentle steeds controls,
  And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.
  On his slow wheels the following people wait,
  Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate;
  With hands uplifted eye him as he pass'd,
  And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
  Now forward fares the father on his way,
  Through the lone fields, and back to Ilion they.
  Great Jove beheld him as he cross'd the plain,
  And felt the woes of miserable man.
  Then thus to Hermes: "Thou whose constant cares
  Still succour mortals, and attend their prayers;
  Behold an object to thy charge consign'd:
  If ever pity touch'd thee for mankind,
  Go, guard the sire: the observing foe prevent,
  And safe conduct him to Achilles' tent."

  The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,(294)
  And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
  That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain,
  O'er the wide earth, and o'er the boundless main;
  Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
  Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye:
  Thus arm'd, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
  And stoops on Hellespont's resounding sea.
  A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
  He seem'd; fair offspring of some princely line!
  Now twilight veil'd the glaring face of day,
  And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
  What time the herald and the hoary king
  (Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
  That circling Ilus' ancient marble flows)
  Allow'd their mules and steeds a short repose,
  Through the dim shade the herald first espies
  A man's approach, and thus to Priam cries:
  "I mark some foe's advance: O king! beware;
  This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
  For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
  Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
  Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
  Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?"

  The afflicted monarch shiver'd with despair;
  Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair;
  Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;
  A sudden trembling shook his aged frame:
  When Hermes, greeting, touch'd his royal hand,
  And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:

  "Say whither, father! when each mortal sight
  Is seal'd in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
  Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along,
  Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
  What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;
  These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
  For what defence, alas! could'st thou provide;
  Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
  Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread;
  From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head;
  From Greece I'll guard thee too; for in those lines
  The living image of my father shines."

  "Thy words, that speak benevolence of mind,
  Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoin'd:)
  Great are my hazards; but the gods survey
  My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way.
  Hail, and be bless'd! For scarce of mortal kind
  Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind."

  "Nor true are all thy words, nor erring wide;
  (The sacred messenger of heaven replied;)
  But say, convey'st thou through the lonely plains
  What yet most precious of thy store remains,
  To lodge in safety with some friendly hand:
  Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?
  Or fliest thou now?--What hopes can Troy retain,
  Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?"

  The king, alarm'd: "Say what, and whence thou art
  Who search the sorrows of a parent's heart,
  And know so well how godlike Hector died?"
  Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied:

  "You tempt me, father, and with pity touch:
  On this sad subject you inquire too much.
  Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector view'd
  In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued:
  I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he toss'd
  On thousand ships, and wither'd half a host:
