feelings, had, in his devotion to the cause he espoused, more of the
head than of the heart, and was politic, cautious, and artful; while
the Protestant, acting under the strong impulse of more lately-adopted
conviction, and feeling, as he justly might, a more animated confidence
in his cause, was enthusiastic, eager, and precipitate in his desire to
advance it. The priest would have been contented to defend, the preacher
aspired to conquer; and, of course, the impulse by which the latter was
governed, was more active and more decisive. They could not part from
each other without a second pressure of hands, and each looked in the
face of his old companion, as he bade him adieu, with a countenance
strongly expressive of sorrow, affection, and pity.

Father Eustace then explained briefly to Dame Glendinning, that this
person was to be her guest for some days, forbidding her and her whole
household, under high spiritual censures, to hold any conversation with
him on religious subjects, but commanding her to attend to his wants in
all other particulars.

"May Our Lady forgive me, reverend father," said Dame Glendinning,
somewhat dismayed at this intelligence, "but I must needs say, that ower
mony guests have been the ruin of mony a house, and I trow they will
bring down Glendearg. First came the Lady of Avenel--(her soul be at
rest--she meant nae ill)--but she brought with her as mony bogles and
fairies, as hae kept the house in care ever since, sae that we have been
living as it were in a dream. And then came that English knight, if it
please you, and if he hasna killed my son outright, he has chased him
aff the gate, and it may be lang eneugh ere I see him again--forby the
damage done to outer door and inner door. And now your reverence has
given me the charge of a heretic, who, it is like, may bring the great
horned devil himself down upon us all; and they say that it is neither
door nor window will serve him, but he will take away the side of the
auld tower along with him. Nevertheless, reverend father, your pleasure
is doubtless to be done to our power."

"Go to, woman," said the Sub-Prior; "send for workmen from the clachan,
and let them charge the expense of their repairs to the Community, and I
will give the treasurer warrant to allow them. Moreover, in settling the
rental mails, and feu-duties, thou shalt have allowance for the trouble
and charges to which thou art now put, and I will cause strict search to
be made after thy son."

The dame curtsied deep and low at each favourable expression; and when
the Sub-Prior had done speaking, she added her farther hope that
the Sub-Prior would hold some communing with her gossip the Miller,
concerning the fate of his daughter, and expound to him that the chance
had by no means happened through any negligence on her part.

"I sair doubt me, father," she said, "whether Mysie finds her way back
to the Mill in a hurry; but it was all her father's own fault that let
her run lamping about the country, riding on bare-backed naigs, and
never settling to do a turn of wark within doors, unless it were to
dress dainties at dinner-time for his ain kyte."

"You remind me, dame, of another matter of urgency," said Father
Eustace; "and, God knows, too many of them press on me at this moment.
This English knight must be sought out, and explanation given to him of
these most strange chances. The giddy girl must also be recovered. If
she hath suffered in reputation by this unhappy mistake, I will not hold
myself innocent of the disgrace. Yet how to find them out I know not."

"So please you," said Christie of the Clinthill, "I am willing to take
the chase, and bring them back by fair means or foul; for though
you have always looked as black as night at me, whenever we have
forgathered, yet I have not forgotten that had it not been for you,
my neck would have kend the weight of my four quarters. If any man
can track the tread of them, I will say in the face of both Merse and
Teviotdale, and take the Forest to boot, I am that man. But first I have
matters to treat of on my master's score, if you will permit me to ride
down the glen with you."

"Nay, but my friend," said the Sub-Prior, "thou shouldst remember I
have but slender cause to trust thee for a companion through a place so
solitary."

"Tush! tush!" said the Jackman, "fear me not; I had the worst too surely
to begin that sport again. Besides, have I not said a dozen of times,
I owe you a life? and when I owe a man either a good turn or a bad, I
never fail to pay it sooner or later. Moreover, beshrew me if I care to
go alone down the glen, or even with my troopers, who are, every loon
of them, as much devil's bairns as myself; whereas, if your reverence,
since that is the word, take beads and psalter, and I come along with
jack and spear, you will make the devils take the air, and I will make
all human enemies take the earth."

Edward here entered, and told his reverence that his horse was prepared.
At this instant his eye caught his mother's, and the resolution which he
had so strongly formed was staggered when he recollected the necessity
of bidding her farewell. The Sub-Prior saw his embarrassment, and came
to his relief.

"Dame," said he, "I forgot to mention that your son Edward goes with me
to Saint Mary's, and will not return for two or three days."

"You'll be wishing to help him to recover his brother? May the saints
reward your kindness!"

The Sub-Prior returned the benediction which, in this instance, he had
not very well deserved, and he and Edward set forth on their route. They
were presently followed by Christie, who came up with his followers at
such a speedy pace, as intimated sufficiently that his wish to obtain
spiritual convoy through the glen, was extremely sincere. He had,
however, other matters to stimulate his speed, for he was desirous to
communicate to the Sub-Prior a message from his master Julian, connected
with the delivery of the prisoner Warden; and having requested the
Sub-Prior to ride with him a few yards before Edward, and the troopers
of his own party, he thus addressed him, sometimes interrupting his
discourse in a manner testifying that his fear of supernatural beings
was not altogether lulled to rest by his confidence in the sanctity of
his fellow-traveller.

"My master," said the rider, "deemed he had sent you an acceptable gift
in that old heretic preacher; but it seems, from the slight care you
have taken of him, that you make small account of the boon."

"Nay," said the Sub-Prior, "do not thus judge of it. The Community
must account highly of the service, and will reward it to thy master in
goodly fashion. But this man and I are old friends, and I trust to bring
him back from the paths of perdition."

"Nay," said the moss-trooper, "when I saw you shake hands at the
beginning I counted that you would fight it all out in love and honour,
and that there would be no extreme dealings betwixt ye--however it is
all one to my master--Saint Mary! what call you yon, Sir Monk?"

"The branch of a willow streaming across the path betwixt us and the
sky."

"Beshrew me," said Christie, "if it looked not like a man's hand holding
a sword.--But touching my master, he, like a prudent man, hath kept
himself aloof in these broken times, until he could see with precision
what footing he was to stand upon. Right tempting offers he hath had
from the Lords of Congregation, whom you call heretics; and at one time
he was minded, to be plain with you, to have taken their way--for he was
assured that the Lord James [Footnote: Lord James Stewart, afterwards
the Regent Murray.] was coming this road at the head of a round body of
cavalry. And accordingly Lord James did so far reckon upon him, that
he sent this man Warden, or whatsoever be his name, to my master's
protection, as an assured friend; and, moreover, with tidings that he
himself was marching hitherward at the head of a strong body of horse."

"Now, Our Lady forfend!" said the Sub-Prior.

"Amen!" answered Christie, in some trepidation, "did your reverence see
aught?"

"Nothing whatever," replied the monk; "it was thy tale which wrested
from me that exclamation."

"And it was some cause," replied he of the Clinthill, "for if Lord James
should come hither, your Halidome would smoke for it. But be of good
cheer--that expedition is ended before it was begun. The Baron of Avenel
had sure news that Lord James has been fain to march westward with his
merry-men, to protect Lord Semple against Cassilis and the Kennedies.
By my faith, it will cost him a brush; for wot ye what they say of that
name,--

  "Twixt Wigton and the town of Ayr,
    Portpatrick and the cruives of Cree,
  No man need think for to bide there,
    Unless he court Saint Kennedie.'"

"Then," said the Sub-Prior, "the Lord James's purpose of coming
southwards being broken, cost this person, Henry Warden, a cold
reception at Avenel Castle."

"It would not have been altogether so rough a one," said the
mosstrooper; "for my master was in heavy thought what to do in these
unsettled times, and would scarce have hazarded misusing a man sent to
him by so terrible a leader as the Lord James. But, to speak the truth,
some busy devil tempted the old man to meddle with my master's Christian
liberty of hand-fasting with Catherine of Newport. So that broke the
wand of peace between them, and now ye may have my master, and all the
force he can make, at your devotion, for Lord James never forgave wrong
done to him; and if he come by the upper hand, he will have Julian's
head if there were never another of the name, as it is like there is
not, excepting the bit slip of a lassie yonder. And now I have told you
more of my master's affairs than he would thank me for; but you have
done me a frank turn once, and I may need one at your hands again."

"Thy frankness," said the Sub-Prior, "shall surely advantage thee; for
much it concerns the Church in these broken times to know the purposes
and motives of those around us. But what is it that thy master expects
from us in reward of good service? for I esteem him one of those who are
not willing to work without their hire."

"Nay, that I can tell you flatly; for Lord James had promised him, in
case he would be of his faction in these parts, an easy tack of the
teindsheaves of his own Barony of Avenel, together with the lands of
Cranberry-moor, which lie intersected with his own. And he will look for
no less at your hand."

"But there is old Gilbert of Cranberry-moor," said the Sub-Prior; "what
are we to make of him? The heretic Lord James may take on him to dispone
upon the goods and lands of the Halidome at his pleasure, because,
doubtless, but for the protection of God, and the baronage which yet
remain faithful to their creed, he may despoil us of them by force; but
while they are the property of the Community, we may not take steadings
from ancient and faithful vassals, to gratify the covetousness of those
who serve God only from the lucre of gain."

"By the mass," said Christie, "it is well talking, Sir Priest; but when
ye consider that Gilbert has but two half-starved cowardly peasants to
follow him, and only an auld jaded aver to ride upon, fitter for the
plough than for manly service; and that the Baron of Avenel never rides
with fewer than ten jackmen at his back, and oftener with fifty, bodin
in all that effeirs to war as if they were to do battle for a kingdom,
and mounted on nags that nicker at the clash of the sword as if it were
the clank of the lid of a corn-chest--I say, when ye have computed all
this, ye may guess what course will best serve your Monastery."

"Friend," said the monk, "I would willingly purchase thy master's
assistance on his own terms, since times leave us no better means of
defence against sacrilegious spoliation of heresy; but to take from a
poor man his patrimony--"

"For that matter," said the rider, "his seat would scarce be a soft one,
if my master thought that Gilbert's interest stood betwixt him and what
he wishes. The Halidome has land enough, and Gilbert may be quartered
elsewhere."

"We will consider the possibility of so disposing the matter," said
the monk, "and will expect in consequence your master's most active
assistance, with all the followers he can make, to join in the defence
of the Halidome, against any force by which it may be threatened."

"A man's hand and a mailed glove on that," said the jackman. "They

[Footnote: As some atonement for their laxity of morals on most
occasions, the Borderers were severe observers of the faith which they
had pledged, even to an enemy. If any person broke his word so plighted,
the individual to whom faith had not been observed, used to bring to the
next Border-meeting a glove hung on the point of a spear, and proclaim
to Scots and English the name of the defaulter. This was accounted
so great a disgrace to all connected with him, that his own clansmen
sometimes destroyed him, to escape the infamy he had brought on them.

Constable, a spy engaged by Sir Ralph Sadler, talks of two Border
thieves, whom he used as his guides:--"That they would not care to
steal, and yet that they would not betray any man that trusts in them,
for all the gold in Scotland or in France. They are my guides and
outlaws. If they would betray me they might get their pardons, and cause
me to be hanged; but I have tried them ere this."--_Sadler's letters
during the Northern Insurrection._]

call us marauders, thieves, and what not; but the side we take we hold
by.--And I will be blithe when my Baron comes to a point which side he
will take, for the castle is a kind of hell, (Our Lady forgive me for
naming such a word in this place!) while he is in his mood, studying how
he may best advantage himself. And now, Heaven be praised, we are in
the open valley, and I may swear a round oath, should aught happen to
provoke it."

"My friend," said the Sub-Prior, "thou hast little merit in abstaining
from oaths or blasphemy, if it be only out of fear of evil spirits."

"Nay, I am not quite a Church vassal yet," said the jackman, "and if
you link the curb too tight on a young horse, I promise you he will
rear--Why, it is much for me to forbear old customs on any account
whatever."

The night being fine, they forded the river at the spot where the
Sacristan met with his unhappy encounter with the spirit. As soon as
they arrived at the gate of the Monastery, the porter in waiting eagerly
exclaimed, "Reverend father, the Lord Abbot is most anxious for your
presence."

"Let these strangers be carried to the great hall," said the Sub-Prior,
"and be treated with the best by the cellarer; reminding them, however,
of that modesty and decency of conduct which becometh guests in a house
like this."

"But the Lord Abbot demands you instantly, my venerable brother,"
said Father Philip, arriving in great haste. "I have not seen him more
discouraged or desolate of counsel since the field of Pinkie-cleugh was
stricken."

"I come, my good brother, I come," said Father Eustace. "I pray thee,
good brother, let this youth, Edward Glendinning, be conveyed to the
Chamber of the Novices, and placed under their instructor. God hath
touched his heart, and he proposeth laying aside the vanities of the
world, to become a brother of our holy order; which, if his good parts
be matched with fitting docility and humility, he may one day live to
adorn."

"My very venerable brother," exclaimed old Father Nicholas, who came
hobbling with a third summons to the Sub-Prior, "I pray thee to hasten
to our worshipful Lord Abbot. The holy patroness be with us! never saw
I Abbot of the House of St. Mary's in such consternation; and yet I
remember me well when Father Ingelram had the news of Flodden-field."

"I come, I come, venerable brother," said Father Eustace--And having
repeatedly ejaculated "I come!" he at last went to the Abbot in good
earnest.




Chapter the Thirty-Fourth.


  It is not texts will do it--Church artillery
  Are silenced soon by real ordnance,
  And canons are but vain opposed to cannon.
  Go, coin your crosier, melt your church plate down
  Bid the starved soldier banquet in your halls,
  And quaff your long-saved hogsheads--Turn them out
  Thus primed with your good cheer, to guard your wall,
  And they will venture for't.--
                                 OLD PLAY.

The Abbot received his counsellor with a tremulous eagerness of welcome,
which announced to the Sub-Prior an extreme agitation of spirits,
and the utmost need of good counsel. There was neither mazer-dish nor
standing-cup upon the little table, at the elbow of his huge chair
of state; his beads alone lay there, and it seemed as if he had been
telling them in his extremity of distress. Beside the beads was placed
the mitre of the Abbot, of an antique form, and blazing with precious
stones, and the rich and highly-embossed crosier rested against the same
table.

The Sacristan and old Father Nicholas had followed the Sub-Prior into
the Abbot's apartment, perhaps with the hope of learning something
of the important matter which seemed to be in hand.--They were not
mistaken; for, after having ushered in the Sub-Prior, and being
themselves in the act of retiring, the Abbot made them a signal to
remain.

"My brethren," he said, "it is well known to you with what painful zeal
we have overseen the weighty affairs of this house committed to our
unworthy hand--your bread hath been given to you, and your water
hath been sure--I have not wasted the revenues of the Convent on vain
pleasures, as hunting or hawking, or in change of rich cope or alb, or
in feasting idle bards and jesters, saving those who, according to old
wont, were received in time of Christmas and Easter. Neither have I
enriched either mine own relations nor strange women, at the expense of
the Patrimony."

"There hath not been such a Lord Abbot," said Father Nicholas, "to my
knowledge, since the days of Abbot Ingelram, who----"

At that portentous word, which always preluded a long story, the Abbot
broke in.

"May God have mercy on his soul!--we talk not of him now.--What I would
know of ye, my brethren, is, whether I have, in your mind, faithfully
discharged the duties of mine office?"

"There has never been subject of complaint," answered the Sub-Prior.

The Sacristan, more diffuse, enumerated the various acts of indulgence
and kindness which the mild government of Abbot Boniface had
conferred on the brotherhood of Saint Mary's--the _indulgentiae_--the
_gratias_--the _biberes_-the weekly mess of boiled almonds--the
enlarged accommodation of the refectory--the better arrangement of
the cellarage--the improvement of the revenue of the Monastery--the
diminution of the privations of the brethren.

"You might have added, my brother," said the Abbot, listening with
melancholy acquiescence to the detail of his own merits, "that I caused
to be built that curious screen, which secureth the cloisters from the
north-east wind.--But all these things avail nothing--As we read in holy
Maccabee, _Capta est civitas per voluntatem Dei_. It hath cost me no
little thought, no common toil, to keep these weighty matters in such
order as you have seen them--there was both barn and binn to be kept
full--Infirmary, dormitory, guest-hall, and refectory, to be looked
to--processions to be made, confessions to be heard, strangers to be
entertained, _veniae_ to be granted or refused; and I warrant me, when
every one of you was asleep in your cell, the Abbot hath lain awake for
a full hour by the bell, thinking how these matters might be ordered
seemly and suitably."

"May we ask, reverend my lord," said the Sub-Prior, "what additional
care has now been thrown upon you, since your discourse seems to point
that way?"

"Marry, this it is," said the Abbot. "The talk is not now of _biberes_,

[Footnote: The _biberes, caritas_, and boiled almonds, of which Abbot
Boniface speaks, were special occasions for enjoying luxuries, afforded
to the monks by grants from different sovereigns, or from other
benefactors to the convent. There is one of these charters called _De
Pitancia Centum Librarum_ By this charter, which is very curious, our
Robert Bruce, on the 10th January, and in the twelfth year of his reign,
assigns, out of the customs of Berwick, and failing them, out of the
customs of Edinburgh or Haddington, the sum of one hundred pounds, at
the half-yearly terms of Pentecost and Saint Martin's in winter, to the
abbot and community of the monks of Melrose. The precise purpose of this
annuity is to furnish to each of the monks of the said monastery, while
placed at food in the refectory, an extra mess of rice boiled with
milk, or of almonds, or peas, or other pulse of that kind which could
be procured in the country. This addition to their commons is to be
entitled the King's Mess. And it is declared, that although any monk
should, from some honest apology, want appetite or inclination to eat of
the king's mess, his share should, nevertheless, be placed on the table
with those of his brethren, and afterwards carried to the gate and
given to the poor. "Neither is it our pleasure," continues the bountiful
sovereign, "that the dinner, which is or ought to be served up to the
said monks according to their ancient rule, should be diminished in
quantity, or rendered inferior in quality, on account of this our mess,
so furnished as aforesaid." It is, moreover, provided, that the abbot,
with the consent of the most sage of his brethren, shall name a prudent
and decent monk for receiving, directing, and expending, all matters
concerning this annuity for the benefit of the community, agreeably to
the royal desire and intention, rendering a faithful account thereof
to the abbot and superiors of the same convent. And the same charter
declares the king's farther pleasure, that the said men of religion
should be bound yearly and for ever, in acknowledgment of the above
donation, to clothe fifteen poor men at the feast of Saint Martin in
winter, and to feed them on the same day, delivering to each of them
four ells of large or broad, or six ells of narrow cloth, and to each
also a new pair of shoes or sandals, according to their order; and if
the said monks shall fail in their engagements or any of them, it is the
king's will that the fault shall be redeemed by a double performance of
what has been omitted, to be executed at the sight of the chief forester
of Ettrick for the time being, and before the return of Saint Martin's
day succeeding that on which the omission has taken place.

Of this charter, respecting the pittance of 100_l_ assigned to furnish
the monks of Melrose with a daily mess of boiled rice, almonds, or other
pulse, to mend their commons, the antiquarian reader will be pleased,
doubtless, to see the original.

CARTA REGIS ROBERTI I. ABBATI ET CONVENTUI DE MELROSS.

_Carta de Pitancia Centum Librarum._

Robertus Dei gracia Rex Scottorum omnibus probis hominibus tocius terre
sue Salutem. Sciatis nos pro salute anime nostre et pro salute animarum
antecessorum et suocessorum nostrorum Regum Scocie Dedisse Concessisse
et hac presenti Carta nostra confirmasse Deo et Beate Marie virgini et
Religiosis viris Abbati et Conventui de Melross et eorum successoribus
in perpetuum Centum Libras Sterlingorum Annui Redditus singulis annis
percipiendas de firmis nostris Burgi Berwici super. Twedam ad terminos
Pentecostis et Sancti Martini in hyeme pro equali portione vel de nova
Custuma nostra Burgi predicti si firme nostre predicte ad dictam summam
pecunie sufficere non poterunt vel de nova Custuma nostra Burgorum
nostrorum de Edenburg et de Hadington Si firme nostre et Custuma nostra
ville Berwici aliquo casu contingente ad hoc forte non sufficiant. Ita
quod dicta summa pecunie Centum Librarum eis annuatim integre et
absque contradictione aliqua plenarie persolvatur pre cunctis aliis
quibuscunque assignacionibus per nos factis seu faciendis ad inveniendum
in perpetunm singulis diebus cuilibet monacho monasterii predicti
comedenti in Refectorio unum sufficiens ferculum risarum factarum
cum lacte, amigdalarum vel pisarum sive aliorum ciborum consimilis
condicionis inventornm in patria et illud ferculum ferculum Regis
vocabitur in eternum. Et si aliquis monachus ex aliqua causa honesta de
dicto ferculo comedere noluerit vel refici non poterit non minus
attamen sibi de dicto ferculo ministretur et ad portam pro pauperibus
deportetur. Nec volumus quod occasione ferculi nostri predicti prandium
dicti Conventus de quo antiquitus communiter eis deserviri sive
ministrari solebat in aliquo pejoretur seu diminuatur. Volum us insuper
et ordinamus quod Abbas ejusdem monasterii qui pro tempore fuerit de
cousensu saniorum de Conventu specialiter constituat unum monachum
providum et discretum ad recipiendum ordinandum et expendendum totam
summam pecunie memorate pro utilitate conventus secundum votum et
intencionem mentis nostre superius annotatum et ad reddendum fidele
compotum coram Abbate et Maioribus de Conventu singulis annis de pecunia
sic recepta. Et volumus quod dicti religiosi teneantur annuatim in
perpetuum pro predicta donacione nostra ad perpetuam nostri memoriam
vestire quindecim pauperes ad festum Sancti Martini in hieme et eosdem
cibare eodem die liberando eorum cuilibet quatuor ulnas panni grossi
et lati vel sex ulnas panni stricti et eorum cuilibet unum novum par
sotularium de ordine suo. Et si dicti religiosi in premissis vel
aliquo premissorum aliquo anno defecerint volumus quod illud quod
minus perimpletum fuerit dupplicetur diebus magis necessariis per visum
capitalis forestarii nostri de Selkirk, qui pro tempore fuerit. Et quod
dicta dupplicatio fiat ante natale domini proximo sequens festum Sancti
Martini predictum. In cujus rei testimonium presenti Carte nostre
sigillum nostrum precipimus apponi. Testibus venerabilibus in Christo
patribus Willielmo, Johanne, Willielmo et David Sancti Andree,
Glasguensis, Dunkeldensis et Moraviensis ecclesiarum dei gracia
episcopis Bernardo Abbate de Abirbrothock Cancellario, Duncano, Malisio,
et Hugone de Fyf de Strathin et de Ross, Comitibus Waltero Senescallo
Scocie, Jacobo domini de Duglas et Alexandro Fraser Camerario nostro
Socie militibus. Apud Abirbrothock, decimo die Januarij. Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo.]

or of _caritas_, or of boiled almonds, but of an English band coming
against us from Hexham, commanded by Sir John Foster; nor is it of the
screening us from the east wind, but how to escape Lord James Stewart,
who cometh to lay waste and destroy with his heretic soldiers."

"I thought that purpose had been broken by the feud between Semple and
the Kennedies," said the Sub-Prior, hastily.

"They have accorded that matter at the expense of the church as usual,"
said the Abbot; "the Earl of Cassilis is to have the teind-sheaves of
his lands, which were given to the house of Crossraguel, and he has
stricken hands with Stewart, who is now called Murray.--_Principes
convenerunt unum adversus Dominum._--There are the letters."

The Sub-Prior took the letters, which had come by an express messenger
from the Primate of Scotland, who still laboured to uphold the tottering
fabric of the system under which he was at length buried, and,
stepping towards the lamp, read them with an air of deep and settled
attention--the Sacristan and Father Nicholas looked as helplessly at
each other, as the denizens of the poultry-yard when the hawk soars
over it. The Abbot seemed bowed down with the extremity of sorrowful
apprehension, but kept his eye timorously fixed on the Sub-Prior, as if
striving to catch some comfort from the expression of his countenance.
When at length he beheld that, after a second intent perusal of the
letters, he remained still silent and full of thought, he asked him in
an anxious tone, "What is to be done?"

"Our duty must be done," answered the Sub-Prior, "and the rest is in the
hands of God."

"Our duty--our duty?" answered the Abbot, impatiently; "doubtless we are
to do our duty; but what is that duty? or how will it serve us?--Will
bell, book, and candle, drive back the English heretics? or will Murray
care for psalms and antiphonars? or can I fight for the Halidome, like
Judas Maccabeus, against those profane Nicanors? or send the Sacristan
against this new Holofernes, to bring back his head in a basket?"

"True, my Lord Abbot," said the Sub-Prior, "we cannot fight with carnal
weapons, it is alike contrary to our habit and vow; but we can die for
our Convent and for our Order. Besides, we can arm those who will and
can fight. The English are but few in number, trusting, as it would
seem, that they will be joined by Murray, whose march has been
interrupted. If Foster, with his Cumberland and Hexham bandits, ventures
to march into Scotland, to pillage and despoil our House, we will levy
our vassals, and, I trust, shall be found strong enough to give him
battle."

"In the blessed name of Our Lady," said the Abbot, "think you that I am
Petrus Eremita, to go forth the leader of an host?"

"Nay," said the Sub-Prior, "let some man skilled in war lead our
people--there is Julian Avenel, an approved soldier."

"But a scoffer, a debauched person, and, in brief, a man of Belial,"
quoth the Abbot.

"Still," said the monk, "we must use his ministry in that to which he
has been brought up. We can guerdon him richly, and indeed I already
know the price of his service. The English, it is expected, will
presently set forth, hoping here to seize upon Piercie Shafton, whose
refuge being taken with us, they make the pretext of this unheard-of
inroad."

"Is it even so?" said the Abbot; "I never judged that his body of satin
and his brain of feathers boded us much good."

"Yet we must have his assistance, if possible," said the Sub-Prior; "he
may interest in our behalf the great Piercie, of whose friendship he
boasts, and that good and faithful Lord may break Foster's purpose. I
will despatch the jackman after him with all speed.--Chiefly, however, I
trust to the military spirit of the land, which will not suffer peace to
be easily broken on the frontier. Credit me, my lord, it will bring
to our side the hands of many, whose hearts may have gone astray after
strange doctrines. The great chiefs and barons will be ashamed to let
the vassals of peaceful monks fight unaided against the old enemies of
Scotland."

"It may be," said the Abbot, "that Foster will wait for Murray, whose
purpose hitherward is but delayed for a short space."

"By the rood, he will not," said the Sub-Prior; "we know this Sir John
Foster--a pestilent heretic, he will long to destroy the church--born a
Borderer, he will thirst to plunder her of her wealth--a Border-warden,
he will be eager to ride in Scotland. There are too many causes to urge
him on. If he joins with Murray, he will have at best but an auxiliary's
share of the spoil--if he comes hither before him, he will reckon on the
whole harvest of depredation as his own. Julian Avenel also has, as I
have heard, some spite against Sir John Foster; they will fight,
when they meet, with double determination.--Sacristan, send for our
bailiff.--Where is the roll of fencible men liable to do suit and
service to the Halidome?--Send off to the Baron of Meigallot; he
can raise threescore horse and better--Say to him the Monastery will
compound with him for the customs of his bridge, which have been in
controversy, if he will show himself a friend at such a point.--And now,
my lord, let us compute our possible numbers, and those of the enemy,
that human blood be not spilled in vain--Let us therefore calculate----"

"My brain is dizzied with the emergency," said the poor Abbot--"I am
not, I think, more a coward than others, so far as my own person is
concerned; but speak to me of marching and collecting soldiers, and
calculating forces, and you may as well tell of it to the youngest
novice of a nunnery. But my resolution is taken.--Brethren," he said,
rising up, and coming forward with that dignity which his comely person
enabled him to assume, "hear for the last time the voice of your Abbot
Boniface. I have done for you the best that I could; in quieter times
I had perhaps done better, for it was for quiet that I sought the
cloister, which has been to me a place of turmoil, as much as if I had
sate in the receipt of custom, or ridden forth as leader of an armed
host. But now matters turn worse and worse, and I, as I grow old, am
less able to struggle with them. Also, it becomes me not to hold a
place, whereof the duties, through my default or misfortune, may be but
imperfectly filled by me. Wherefore I have resolved to demit this mine
high office, so that the order of these matters may presently devolve
upon Father Eustatius here present, our well-beloved Sub-Prior; and
I now rejoice that he hath not been provided according to his merits
elsewhere, seeing that I well hope he will succeed to the mitre and
staff which it is my present purpose to lay down."

"In the name of Our Lady, do nothing hastily, my lord!" said Father
Nicholas--"I do remember that when the worthy Abbot Ingelram, being in
his ninetieth year--for I warrant you he could remember when Benedict
the Thirteenth was deposed--and being ill at ease and bed-rid, the
brethren rounded in his ear that he were better resign his office. And
what said he, being a pleasant man? marry, that while he could crook his
little finger he would keep hold of the crosier with it."

The Sacristan also strongly remonstrated against the resolution of
his Superior, and set down the insufficiency he pleaded to the native
modesty of his disposition. The Abbot listened in downcast silence; even
flattery could not win his ear.

Father Eustace took a nobler tone with his disconcerted and dejected
Superior. "My Lord Abbot," he said, "if I have been silent concerning
the virtues with which you have governed this house, do not think that I
am unaware of them. I know that no man ever brought to your high office
a more sincere wish to do well to all mankind; and if your rule has
not been marked with the bold lines which sometimes distinguished your
spiritual predecessors, their faults have equally been strangers to your
character."

"I did not believe," said the Abbot, turning his looks to Father Eustace
with some surprise, "that you, father, of all men, would have done me
