Groningen, the capital of Friesland, were now, indeed, the only
important places in the republic that remained in possession of
the Spaniards. Hohenlohe with a portion of the army established
himself to the east of the city, Maurice with its main body to the
west.

Two bridges constructed across the river Douge afforded a means of
communication between two armies, and plank roads were laid across
the swamps for the passage of baggage wagons. Three thousand soldiers
laboured incessantly at the works, which were intended not only to
isolate the city, but to defend the besiegers from any attack that
might be made upon them by a relieving army. The better to protect
themselves, miles of country were laid under water, and palisade
work erected to render the country impregnable by cavalry.

Ernest Mansfeldt did his best to relieve the town. His son, Count
Charles, with five thousand troops, had been sent into France, but
by sweeping up all the garrisons, he moved with a considerable army
towards Gertruydenberg and challenged Maurice to issue out from
his lines to fight him. But the prince had no idea of risking a
certain success upon the issue of a battle.

A hundred pieces of artillery on the batteries played incessantly
on the town, while a blockading squadron of Zeeland ships assisted
in the bombardment, and so terrible was the fire, that when the
town was finally taken only four houses were found to have escaped
injury.

Two commandants of the place were killed one after the other, and
the garrison of a thousand veterans, besides the burgher militia,
was greatly reduced in strength. At last, after ninety days' siege,
the town suddenly fell. Upon the 24th of June three Dutch captains
were relieving guard in the trenches near the great north bastion
of the town, when it occurred to them to scale the wall of the fort
and see what was going on inside. They threw some planks across the
ditch, and taking half a company of soldiers, climbed cautiously
up. They obtained a foothold before the alarm was given. There was
a fierce hand to hand struggle, and sixteen of the party fell, and
nine of the garrison. The rest fled into the city. The Governor
Gysant, rushing to the rescue without staying to put on his armour,
was killed.

Count Solms came from the besieging camp to investigate the sudden
uproar, and to his profound astonishment was met by a deputation
from the city asking for terms of surrender. Prince Maurice soon
afterwards came up, and the terms of capitulation were agreed upon.
The garrison were allowed to retire with side arms and baggage,
and fifty wagons were lent to them to carry off their wounded.

In the following spring Coevorden, which had been invested by
Verdugo, was relieved, and Groningen, the last great city of the
Netherlands in the hands of the Spaniards, was besieged. Mines were
driven under its principal bastion, and when these were sprung,
after sixty-five days' siege, the city was forced to surrender.
Thus for the first time, after years of warfare, Holland, Zeeland,
and Friesland became truly united, and free from the grasp of the
hated invader.

Throughout the last three years of warfare Sir Francis Vere had
proved an able assistant to the prince, and the English troops had
fought bravely side by side with the Dutch; but their contingent
had been but a small one, for the majority of Vere's force had,
like that of the Spaniards, been withdrawn for service in France.
The struggle in that country was nearly at an end. The conversion
of Henry of Navarre for the second time to the Catholic religion
had ranged many Catholics, who had hitherto been opposed to him,
under his banner, while many had fallen away from the ranks of the
League in disgust, when Philip of Spain at last threw off the mask
of disinterestedness, and proposed his nephew the Archduke Ernest
as king of France.

In July, 1595, a serious misfortune befell the allied army. They
had laid siege to Crolle, and had made considerable progress with
the siege, when the Spanish army, under command of Mondragon, the
aged governor of Antwerp, marched to its relief. As the army of
Maurice was inferior in numbers, the States would not consent to
a general action. The siege was consequently raised; and Mondragon
having attained his object, fell back to a position on the Rhine
at Orsoy, above Rheinberg, whence he could watch the movements of
the allied army encamped on the opposite bank at Bislich, a few
miles below Wesel.

The Spanish army occupied both sides of the river, the wing on the
right bank being protected from attack by the river Lippe, which
falls into the Rhine at Wesel, and by a range of moorland hills
called the Testerburg. The Dutch cavalry saw that the slopes of
this hill were occupied by the Spaniards, but believed that their
force consisted only of a few troops of horse. Young Count Philip
of Nassau proposed that a body of cavalry should swim the Lippe,
and attack and cut them off. Prince Maurice and Sir Francis Vere
gave a very reluctant consent to the enterprise, but finally allowed
him to take a force of five hundred men.

With him were his brothers Ernest and Louis, his nephew Ernest de
Solms, and many other nobles of Holland. Sir Marcellus Bacx was
in command of them. The English contingent was commanded by Sir
Nicholas Parker and Robert Vere. On August 22d they swam the Lippe
and galloped in the direction where they expected to find two
or three troops of Spanish horse; but Mondragon had received news
of their intentions, and they suddenly saw before them half the
Spanish army. Without hesitation the five hundred English and Dutch
horsemen charged desperately into the enemy's ranks, and fought
with extraordinary valour, until, altogether overpowered by numbers,
Philip of Nassau and his nephew Ernest were both mortally wounded
and taken prisoners.

Robert Vere was slain by a lance thrust in the face, and many
other nobles and gentlemen fell. Thus died one of the three brave
brothers, for the youngest, Horace, had also joined the army in 1590.
The survivors of the band under Sir Nicholas Parker and Marcellus
Bacx managed to effect their retreat, covered by a reserve Prince
Maurice had posted on the opposite side of the river.



CHAPTER XX

CADIZ


In March, 1596, Sir Francis Vere returned to Holland. He had during
his absence in England been largely taken into the counsels of Queen
Elizabeth, and it had been decided that the war should be carried
into the enemy's country, and a heavy blow struck at the power
of Spain. Vere had been appointed to an important command in the
proposed expedition, and had now come out charged with the mission
of persuading the States General to cooperate heartily with England,
and to contribute both money and men. There was much discussion
in the States; but they finally agreed to comply with the queen's
wishes, considering that there was no surer way of bringing the
war to a termination than to transport it nearer to the heart of
the enemy.

As soon as the matter was arranged, Sir Francis Vere left the
Hague and went to Middleburg, where the preparations for the Dutch
portion of the expedition were carried out. It consisted of twenty-two
Dutch ships, under Count William of Nassau, and a thousand of
the English troops in the pay of the States. The company commanded
by Lionel Vickars was one of those chosen to accompany the expedition;
and on the 22d of April it started from Flushing and joined the
British fleet assembled at Dover. This was under the command of Lord
Howard as lord admiral, the Earl of Essex as general, Lord Thomas
Howard as vice admiral, and Sir Walter Raleigh as rear admiral.

Sir Francis Vere was lieutenant general and lord marshal. He
was to be the chief adviser of the Earl of Essex, and to have the
command of operations on shore. The ships of war consisted of the
Ark Royal, the Repulse, Mere Honour, War Sprite, Rainbow, Mary Rose,
Dreadnought, Vanguard, Nonpareil, Lion, Swiftsure, Quittance, and
Tremontaine. There were also twelve ships belonging to London, and
the twenty-two Dutch vessels. The fleet, which was largely fitted
out at the private expense of Lord Howard and the Earl of Essex,
sailed from Dover to Plymouth. Sir Francis Vere went by land, and
set to work at the organization of the army.

A month was thus spent, and on the 1st of June the fleet set sail.
It carried 6860 soldiers and 1000 volunteers, and was manned by
nearly 7000 sailors. There had been some dispute as to the relative
ranks of Sir Francis Vere and Sir Walter Raleigh, and it was settled
that Sir Francis should have precedence on shore, and Sir Walter
Raleigh at sea.

All on board the fleet were full of enthusiasm at the enterprise
upon which they were embarked. It was eight years since the
Spanish Armada had sailed to invade England; now an English fleet
was sailing to attack Spain on her own ground. Things had changed
indeed in that time. Spain, which had been deemed invincible, had
suffered many reverses; while England had made great strides in
power, and was now mistress of the seas, on which Spain had formerly
considered herself to be supreme.

A favourable wind from the northeast carried the fleet rapidly
across the Bay of Biscay, and it proceeded on its way, keeping well
out of sight of the coast of Portugal. The three fastest sailers
of the fleet were sent on ahead as soon as they rounded Cape St.
Vincent, with orders to capture all small vessels which might carry
to Cadiz the tidings of the approach of the fleet.

Early on the morning of the 20th June the fleet anchored off the
spit of San Sebastian on the southern side of the city.

Cadiz was defended by the fort of San Sebastian on one side and
that of San Felipe on the other; while the fort of Puntales, on the
long spit of sand connecting the city with the mainland, defended
the channel leading up to Puerto Real, and covered by its guns
the Spanish galleys and ships of war anchored there. Lying off the
town when the English fleet came in sight were forty richly laden
merchant ships about to sail for Mexico, under the convoy of four
great men of war, two Lisbon galleons, two argosies, and three
frigates.

As soon as the English were seen, the merchant ships were ordered
up the channel to Puerto Real, and the men of war and the fleet of
seventeen war galleys were ranged under the guns of Fort Puntales
to prevent the English passing up. It had first been decided to
attempt a landing in the harbour of Galeta, on the south side of
the city; but a heavy sea was setting in, and although the troops
had been got into the boats they were re-embarked, and the fleet
sailed round and anchored at the mouth of the channel leading up
the bay. A council of war was held that night, and it was decided
that the fleet should move up the bay with the tide next morning,
and attack the Spanish fleet.

The next morning at daybreak the ships got up their anchors and
sailed up the channel, each commander vying with the rest in his
eagerness to be first in the fray. They were soon hotly engaged
with the enemy; the fort, men of war, and galleys opening a heavy
fire upon them, to which, anchoring as close as they could get to
the foe, the English ships hotly responded. The galleys were driven
closer in under the shelter of the fire of the fort, and the fire
was kept up without intermission from six o'clock in the morning
until four in the afternoon.

By that time the Spaniards had had enough of it. The galleys slipped
their cables and made sail for a narrow channel across the spit,
covered by the guns of the fort. Three of them were captured by
Sir John Wingfield in the vanguard, but the rest got through the
channel and escaped. The men of war endeavoured to run ashore, but
boarding parties in boats from the Ark Royal and Repulse captured
two of them. The Spaniards set fire to the other two. The argosies
and galleons were also captured. Sir Francis Vere at once took the
command of the land operations. The boats were all lowered, and the
regiments of Essex, Vere, Blount, Gerard, and Clifford told off as
a landing party. They were formed in line. The Earl of Essex and
Sir Francis Vere took their place in a boat in advance of the line,
and were followed by smaller boats crowded with gentlemen volunteers.

They landed between the fort of Puntales and the town. The regiments
of Blount, Gerard, and Clifford were sent to the narrowest part
of the spit to prevent reinforcements being thrown into the place;
while those of Essex and Vere and the gentlemen volunteers turned
towards Cadiz. Each of these parties consisted of about a thousand
men.

The walls of Cadiz were so strong that it had been intended to
land guns from the fleet, raise batteries, and make a breach in the
walls. Vere, however, perceiving some Spanish cavalry and infantry
drawn up outside the walls, suggested to Essex that an attempt should
be made to take the place by surprise. The earl at once agreed to
the plan.

Vere marched the force across to the west side of the spit, his
movements being concealed by the sand hills from the Spanish. Sir
John Wingfield with two hundred men was ordered to march rapidly on
against the enemy, driving in their skirmishers, and then to retreat
hastily when the main body advanced against him. Three hundred men
under Sir Matthew Morgan were posted as supports to Wingfield, and
as soon as the latter's flying force joined them the whole were to
fall upon the Spaniards and in turn chase them back to the walls,
against which the main body under Essex and Vere were to advance.

The orders were ably carried out. The Spaniards in hot chase of
Wingfield found themselves suddenly confronted by Morgan's force,
who fell upon them so furiously that they fled back to the town
closely followed by the English. Some of the fugitives made their
way in at the gates, which were hurriedly closed, while others
climbed up at the bastions, which sloped sufficiently to afford
foothold. Vere's troops from the Netherlands, led by Essex, also
scaled the bastions and then an inner wall behind it. As soon as
they had captured this they rushed through the streets, shooting
and cutting down any who opposed them.

Sir Francis Vere, who had also scaled the ramparts, knew that cities
captured by assaults had often been lost again by the soldiers
scattering. He therefore directed the rest of the troops to burst
open the gate. This was with some difficulty effected, and he then
marched them in good order to the marketplace, where the Spaniards
had rallied and were hotly engaged with Essex. The opposition was
soon beaten down, and those defending the town hall were forced to
surrender. The troops were then marched through the town, and the
garrison driven either into the convent of San Francisco or into
the castle of Felipe. The convent surrendered on the same evening
and the castle on the following day. The loss upon the part of
the assailants was very small, but Sir John Wingfield was mortally
wounded.

The English behaved with the greatest courtesy to their captives,
their conduct presenting an extraordinary contrast to that of
the Spaniards under similar circumstance in the Netherlands. The
women were treated with the greatest courtesy, and five thousand
inhabitants, including women and priests, were allowed to leave
the town with their clothes. The terms were that the city should
pay a ransom of 520,000 ducats, and that some of the chief citizens
should remain as hostages for payment. As soon as the fighting
ceased, Lionel Vickars accompanied Sir Francis Vere through the
streets to set guards, and see that no insult was offered to any
of the inhabitants. As they passed along, the door of one of the
mansions was thrown open. A gentleman hurried out; he paused for a
moment, exclaiming, "Sir Francis Vere!" and then looking at Lionel
rushed forward towards him with a cry of delight. Sir Francis Vere
and Lionel stared in astonishment as the former's name was called;
but at the sound of his own name Lionel fell back a step as if
stupefied, and then with a cry of "Geoffrey!" fell into his brother's
arms.

"It is indeed Geoffrey Vickars!" Sir Francis Vere exclaimed. "Why,
Geoffrey, what miracle is this? We have thought you dead these six
years, and now we find you transmuted into a Spanish don."

"I may look like one, Sir Francis," Geoffrey said as he shook his
old commander's hand, "but I am English to the backbone still. But
my story is too long to tell now. You will be doubtless too busy
tonight to spare time to listen to it, but I pray you to breakfast
with me in the morning, when I will briefly relate to you the outline
of my adventures. Can you spare my brother for tonight, Sir Francis?"

"I would do so were there ten times the work to be got through," Sir
Francis replied. "Assuredly I would not keep asunder for a minute
two brothers who have so long been separated. I will breakfast
with you in the morning and hear this strange story of yours; for
strange it must assuredly be, since it has changed my young page
of the Netherlands into a Spanish hidalgo."

"I am no hidalgo, Sir Francis, but a trader of Cadiz, and I own
that although I have been in some way a prisoner, seeing that I
could not effect my escape, I have not fared badly. Now, Lionel,
come in. I have another surprise for you." Lionel, still confused
and wonder stricken at this apparent resurrection of his brother
from the dead, followed him upstairs. Geoffrey led the way into a
handsomely furnished apartment, where a young lady was sitting with
a boy two years old in her lap.

"Dolores, this is my brother Lionel, of whom you have so often
heard me speak. Lionel, this is my wife and my eldest boy, who is
named after you."

It was some time before Lionel could completely realize the position,
and it was not until Dolores in somewhat broken English bade him
welcome that he found his tongue.

"But I cannot understand it all!" he exclaimed, after responding
to the words of Dolores. "I saw my brother in the middle of the
battle with the Armada. We came into collision with a great galleon,
we lost one of our masts, and I never saw Geoffrey afterwards; and
we all thought that he had either been shot by the musketeers on
the galleon, or had been knocked overboard and killed by the falling
mast."

"I had hoped that long before this you would have heard of my
safety, Lionel, for a sailor friend of mine promised if he reached
England to go down at once to Hedingham to tell them there. He left
the ship he was in out in the West Indies, and I hoped had reached
home safely."

"We have heard nothing, Geoffrey. The man has never come with your
message. But now tell me how you were saved."

"I was knocked over by the mast, Lionel, but as you see I was not
killed. I climbed up into a passing Spanish ship, and concealed
myself in the chains until she was sunk, when I was, with many of
the crew, picked up by the boats of other ships. I pretended to
have lost my senses and my speech, and none suspected that I was
English. The ship I was on board was one of those which succeeded
after terrible hardships in returning to Spain. An Irish gentleman
on board her, to whom I confided my secret, took me as a servant.
After many adventures I sailed with him for Italy, where we hoped
to get a ship for England. On the way we were attacked by Barbary
pirates. We beat them off, but I was taken prisoner. I remained
a captive among them for nearly two years, and then with a fellow
prisoner escaped, together with Dolores and her father, who had
also been captured by the pirates. We reached Spain in safety,
and I have since passed as one of the many exiles from England and
Ireland who have taken refuge here; and Senor Mendez, my wife's
father, was good enough to bestow her hand upon me, partly in
gratitude for the services I had rendered him in his escape, partly
because he saw she would break her heart if he refused."

"You know that is not true, Geoffrey," Dolores interrupted.

"Never mind, Dolores, it is near enough. And with his daughter,"
he continued, "he gave me a share in his business. I have been a
fortunate man indeed, Lionel; but I have always longed for a chance
to return home; until now none has ever offered itself, and I have
grieved continually at the thought that my father and mother and
you were mourning for me as dead. Now you have the outline of my
story; tell me about all at home."

"Our father and mother are both well, Geoffrey, though your
supposed loss was a great blow for them. But is it still home for
you, Geoffrey? Do you really mean to return with us?"

"Of course I do, Lionel. At the time I married I arranged with
Senor Mendez that whenever an opportunity occurred I was to return
home, taking, of course, Dolores with me. She has been learning
English ever since, and although naturally she would rather that
we remained here she is quite prepared to make her home in England.
We have two boys, this youngster, and a baby three months old, so,
you see, you have all at once acquired nephews as well as a brother
and sister. Here is Senor Mendez. This is my brother, senor, the
Lionel after whom I named my boy, though I never dreamed that our
next meeting would take place within the walls of Cadiz."

"You have astounded us, senor," the merchant said courteously.
"We thought that Cadiz was safe from an attack; and though we were
aware you had defeated our fleet we were astonished indeed when
two hours since we heard by the din and firing in the streets that
you had captured the city. Truly you English do not suffer the grass
to grow under your feet. When we woke this morning no one dreamed
of danger, and now in the course of one day you have destroyed our
fleet, captured our town, and have our lives and properties at your
disposal."

"Your lives are in no danger, senor, and all who choose are free
to depart without harm or hindrance. But as to your property--I
don't mean yours, of course, because as Geoffrey's father in law
I am sure that Sir Francis Vere will inflict no fine upon you--but
the city generally will have to pay, I hear, some half million
ducats as ransom.

"That is as nothing," the Spaniard said, "to the loss the city
will suffer in the loss of the forty merchant ships which you will
doubtless capture or burn. Right glad am I that no cargo of mine
is on board any of them, for I do not trade with Mexico; but I am
sure the value of the ships with their cargoes cannot be less than
twenty millions of ducats. This will fall upon the traders of
this town and of Seville. Still, I own that the ransom of half a
million for a city like Cadiz seems to me to be very moderate, and
the tranquillity that already prevails in the town is beyond all
praise. Would that such had been the behaviour of my countrymen in
the Netherlands!"

Don Mendez spoke in a tone of deep depression. Geoffrey made a sign
to his brother to come out on to the balcony, while the merchant
took a seat beside his daughter.

"'Tis best to leave them alone," he said as they looked down into
the street, where the English and their Dutch allies, many of whom
had now landed, were wandering about examining the public buildings
and churches, while the inhabitants looked with timid curiosity
from their windows and balconies at the men who had, as if by magic,
suddenly become their masters. "I can see that the old gentleman is
terribly cut up. Of course, nothing has been said between us yet,
for it was not until we heard the sound of firing in the streets
