in a straight line to the edge of the woods. They were those of a man
elegantly shod, wearing spurs on his heels, for the spurs had left their
marks upon the snow.

Jacques had not hesitated to follow these marks. The track of his heavy
shoes could be seen near the prints of the delicate boot--the large foot
of the peasant near the slender foot of the city man.

It was now five o'clock. Day was breaking, and Michel resolved to go no
further. Jacques was on the trail, and the young poacher was worth as
much as the old one. Michel circled the open as if he were returning
from Ceyzeriat, resolving to enter the inn and wait for Jacques' return;
certain that his son would know he had followed him and had stopped
short at this isolated house.

Michel knocked on the window-shutter and was soon admitted. He knew the
landlord, who was well accustomed to his nocturnal habits, asked for a
bottle, complaining bitterly of his poor luck, and asked permission to
wait for his son, who was in the woods on the other side, and who, he
hoped, had been more successful in tracking the game. It goes without
saying that this permission was readily accorded. Michel opened the
window-shutters, in order to look out on the road.

It was not long before some one knocked on the glass. It was Jacques.
His father called him.

Jacques had been as unfortunate as his father. No game; and he was
frozen. An armful of wood was thrown on the fire and a second bottle of
wine was brought. Jacques warmed himself and drank.

Then, as it was necessary that the two poachers should be back at the
chateau before daylight, that their absence might not be noticed, Michel
paid for the wine and the wood, and the pair departed.

Neither had said one word before the landlord of the subject that filled
their minds. He was not to suspect that they were on other trail than
that of game. But no sooner were they outside of the house than Michel
drew close to his son. Jacques recounted how he had followed the tracks
until they had reached a crossroad in the forest. There a man, armed
with a gun, had suddenly appeared and asked him what he was doing in
the forest at that hour. Jacques replied that he was watching for game.
"Then go further," said the man; "don't you see that this place is
taken?"

Jacques admitted the justice of this claim, and went on about a hundred
rods further, but, just as he was slanting to the left to return to the
crossroad, another man, armed like the first, had suddenly started up
with the same inopportune question. Jacques gave him the same answer:
"Watching for game." The man had then pointed to the edge of the woods,
saying in a threatening manner: "If I have any advice to give you, my
young friend, it is to go over there. It will be safer for you than
here."

Jacques had taken this advice, or at least had pretended to take it, for
as soon as he had reached the edge of the woods he had crept along in
the ditch, until, convinced that it would be impossible to recover M. de
Valensolle's track, he had struck into the open, and returned by fields
and the highroad to the tavern, where he hoped to, and in fact did, find
his father.

They reached the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines, as we have seen, just as
day was breaking.

All that we have related was repeated to Roland with a multiplicity of
detail which we must omit, and convinced the young officer that the two
armed men, who had warned off Jacques, were not poachers as they seemed,
but Companions of Jehu. But where was their haunt located?

There was no deserted convent, no ruin, in that direction.

Suddenly Roland clapped his hand to his head. "Idiot that I am!" he
cried, "why did I never think of that?"

A smile of triumph crossed his lips, and addressing the two men, who
were mortified at having brought him no more definite news, he cried:
"My lads, I know all I want to know. Go to bed and sleep sound; my word,
you deserve to!" He himself, setting the example, slept like a man
whose brain has solved a problem of the utmost importance which has long
harassed it.

The thought had just flashed through his mind that the Companions
of Jehu had abandoned the Chartreuse of Seillon for the grottoes of
Ceyzeriat; and at the same time he recalled the subterranean passage
leading from these grottoes to the church of Brou.




CHAPTER XLVII. A RECONNOISSANCE

That same day, Sir John, making use of the permission accorded him the
night before, presented himself at the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines
between twelve and one o'clock.

Everything occurred as Morgan had advised. Sir John was received as the
friend of the family, Lord Tanlay as a suitor whose attentions were most
flattering. Amelie made no opposition to the wishes of her mother and
brother, and to the commands of the First Consul, further than to dwell
on the state of her health and to ask for delay on that account. Sir
John bowed and submitted; he had obtained more than he had hoped to
obtain. He was accepted.

He felt that his presence in Bourg, if prolonged, would be an
impropriety, Amelie being (still on the plea of ill-health) parted from
her mother and brother. He therefore announced that he would pay her a
second visit on the morrow, and leave Bourg that same evening. He would
delay further visits until Amelie came to Paris, or until Madame
de Montrevel returned to Bourg. The latter arrangement was the more
probable of the two, for Amelie assured him she needed the country air
and the spring-like weather to assist her in recovering her health.

Thanks to Sir John's considerate delicacy, the plan arranged between
Amelie and Morgan was thus carried out, and the two lovers had before
them a period of solitude and a respite in which to form their plans.

Michel learned these details from Charlotte and imparted them in turn
to Roland. The latter determined to await Sir John's departure before he
took any decisive steps against the Companions of Jehu. But this did not
prevent him from endeavoring to set at rest any remaining doubts.

When night came he put on a hunting-suit, and over it Michel's blouse,
concealed his face beneath a broad-brimmed hat, slipped a pair of
pistols in his knife-belt, hidden by the blouse, and boldly took the
road from Noires-Fontaines to Bourg. He stopped at the barracks of the
gendarmerie and asked to see the captain.

The captain was in his room. Roland went up and made himself known.
Then, as it was only eight o'clock, and some one passing might recognize
him, he blew out the light, and the two men talked in the dark. The
captain knew already what had happened on the Lyons road three days
earlier, and, certain that Roland was not killed, was expecting him. To
his great astonishment, Roland asked him for only one, or rather for two
things: the key of the church of Brou and a crowbar.

The captain gave him the required articles, and offered to accompany
him, but Roland refused. It was evident to his mind that he had been
betrayed by some one connected with the affair of the Maison-Blanche,
and he would not expose himself to a second defeat. He therefore begged
the captain to tell no one of his presence in Bourg, and to await his
return, even if it were delayed some hours. The captain agreed.

Roland, the key in his right hand, the crowbar in his left, reached
the side door of the church without making any noise. This he unlocked,
entered, relocked it behind him, and found himself facing a wall of hay.
He listened. The most profound silence reigned.

He remembered his boyish habits, took his bearings, put the key in his
pocket, and scrambled up the wall of hay, which was about fifteen feet
high and formed a sort of platform. When he reached the top he slid
down on the other side, as though he were descending the scarp of a
fortification, and reached the flooring of the church, which was almost
wholly composed of mortuary stones.

The choir was empty, thanks to a rood-screen which protected it on one
side, and also to the walls which inclosed it to right and left.
The door of the screen was open and Roland entered the choir without
difficulty. He came face to face with the monument of Philippe le Beau.
At the head of the tomb was a large square flagstone. It covered the
steps which led to the burial vaults.

Roland must have known the way, for as soon as he reached the stone he
knelt down and felt with his hand for the edge of it. When he found it
he stood up, inserted his lever and raised the slab. With one hand he
held it up while he went down the steps. Then he lowered it slowly.
It seemed as though this nocturnal visitor were voluntarily separating
himself from the land of the living, and descending into the world of
the dead. And strange indeed to him, who sees by night as by day, on
the earth and beneath it, must the impassibility of this young man have
seemed, who passed among the dead in search of the living, and who,
in spite of darkness and solitude, did not shudder at the touch of the
mortuary marbles.

He walked on, feeling his way among the tombs, until he came to the iron
gate leading to the subterranean passage. He looked for the lock. It was
only bolted. He inserted the end of his lever between the bolt and the
staple, and pushed it gently. The gate opened. He drew it close after
him, but did not lock it, so as to avoid delay on his return. The
crowbar he left at the corner of the gate.

Then, with straining ears, dilated pupils, every sense tense with this
effort to hear, the need to breathe, the impossibility of seeing, he
advanced slowly, a pistol in one hand, touching the wall with the other
to guide himself. He walked thus for fifteen minutes. A few drops of
ice-cold water fell through the roof on his hands and shoulders, and
told him he was passing under the river.

At the end of this time he found the door which opened from the passage
into the quarry. There he halted a moment. He could now breathe more
freely, and, moreover, he fancied that he heard distant sounds, and
could see flickering lights, like will-o'-the-wisps, on the pillars that
supported the roof. An observer might have thought, not distinguishing
the face of the silent listener, that he showed hesitation; but
the moment his countenance was seen, no one could have mistaken its
expression of hope.

He then resumed his way, heading toward the light he thought he had
seen. As he advanced, the lights and the noises grew more distinct. It
was evident that the quarry was inhabited. By whom? He did not yet know,
but he would know.

He was already within ten feet of that open clearing in the midst of
the granite walls which we described on our first visit to the grotto
of Ceyzeriat. Roland clung closely to the wall, and moved forward
almost imperceptibly. In the dim half-light he looked like a gliding
bass-relief.

At last his head passed beyond an angle of the wall, and his glance
rested upon what we may call the camp of the Companions of Jehu.

A dozen or more of the members sat there at supper. Roland was seized
with a wild desire to precipitate himself into their midst, attacking
them singly, and fighting until he died. But he repressed the insensate
thought, withdrew his head as slowly as he had advanced it, and, with
beaming eyes and heart full of joy, returned, unseen and unsuspected,
along the way he had come. Everything was now explained; the deserted
Chartreuse, M. de Valensolle's disappearance, and the counterfeit
poachers near the entrance to the grotto of Ceyzeriat.

This time he was sure of his vengeance, his deadly, terrible
vengeance--deadly, because, in like manner as he had been spared (he
suspected intentionally), he meant to spare others; with this difference
that, whereas he had been spared for life, he would order these men
spared for death, death on the scaffold.

Half-way back he thought he heard a noise behind him. He turned and was
certain he saw a gleam of light. He quickened his steps. The gate once
passed, there was no danger of losing his way. It was no longer a quarry
with a thousand windings; it was a straight and narrow vaulted passage
leading to the mortuary grating. At the end of ten minutes he again
passed under the river; a couple of minutes later, his outstretched hand
touched the iron gate.

He took the crowbar from the place where he had left it, entered the
vault, pulled the gate to, closed it gently and noiselessly, and,
guiding himself by the tombs, he regained the staircase, pushed up the
flagstone with his head, and stood once more in the land of the living.

There it was comparative daylight. He left the choir, closed the door of
the screen as he had found it, scaled the hay, crossed the platform, and
slid down the other side. The key was still in his pocket. He unlocked
the door and stepped out into the street.

The captain of gendarmerie was anxiously awaiting him. They conferred
together for a few moments, and then they returned to Bourg by the
outer road to avoid being seen. Here they entered the town through
the market-gate, and followed the Rue de la Revolution, the Rue de la
Liberte, and the Rue d'Espagne, since called the Rue Simonneau. There
Roland ensconced himself in a corner of the Rue du Greffe and waited.
The captain continued on his way alone. He went down the Rue des Ursules
(for the last seven years called the Rue des Casernes). This was where
the colonel of dragoons lived. He had just gone to bed when the captain
of the gendarmerie entered his room; in two words the latter told all,
and he rose at once and dressed in haste.

When the colonel of dragoons and the captain of gendarmerie appeared in
the square, a shadow detached itself from the opposite wall and came up
to them. That shadow was Roland. The three men stood talking for about
ten minutes, Roland giving his orders, the other two listening and
approving.

Then they separated. The colonel returned home. Roland and the captain
followed the Rue de l'Etoile, climbed the steps of the Jacobins, passed
down the Rue du Bourgneuf, and reached the outer road once more. Then
they struck diagonally across to the highroad of Pont-d'Ain. The captain
stopped at the barracks, which were on the way, and Roland continued
alone to the chateau.

Twenty minutes later--in order not to awaken Amelie--instead of ringing
the bell he knocked on Michel's window-blind. Michel opened, and with
one bound Roland, devoured by that fever which took possession of him
whenever he incurred, or merely dreamed of some danger, sprang into the
room.

He would not have awakened Amelie had he rung, for Amelie was not
asleep. Charlotte had been into town ostensibly to see her father, but
really to take a letter from her mistress to Morgan. She had seen Morgan
and brought back his answer.

Amelie was reading that answer, which was as follows:

  DEAR LOVE OF MINE--Yes, all goes well on your side, for you are
  an angel; but I greatly fear that all may go ill on mine, for I
  am the demon.

  I must see you, I must hold you in my arms and press you to my
  Heart. I know not what presentiment hangs over me; but I am sad,
  sad as death.

  Send Charlotte to-morrow to make sure that Sir John is gone, and
  then, if you are certain, make the accustomed signal. Do not be
  alarmed; do not talk to me of the snow, or tell me that my
  footsteps will be seen. This time it is not I who will go to you,
  but you who must come to me. Do you understand? You can safely
  walk in the park, and no one will notice your footsteps.

  Put on your warmest shawl and your thickest furs. Then we will
  spend an hour in the boat under the willows together, and change
  our roles for once. Usually I tell you of my hopes and you tell
  me of your fears; but to-morrow, you will tell me of your hopes
  and I will tell you of my fears, my darling Amelie.

  Only, be sure to come out as soon as you have made the signal. I
  will await it at Montagnac, and from Montagnac to the Reissouse
  it will not take a love like mine five minutes to reach you.

  Au revoir, my poor Amelie; had you never met me you would have
  been the happiest of the happy. Fatality placed me in your path,
  and I have made a martyr of you.

  Your CHARLES.

  P.S.--To-morrow without fail, unless some insurmountable obstacle
  prevents.




CHAPTER XLVIII. IN WHICH MORGAN'S PRESENTIMENTS ARE VERIFIED

It often happens that the skies are never so calm or so serene as before
a storm. The day was beautiful and still; one of those glorious days of
February when, in spite of the tingling cold of the atmosphere, in spite
of a winding-sheet of snow covering the earth, the sun smiles down upon
mankind with a promise of spring.

Sir John came at noon to make his farewell visit to Amelie. He had, or
thought he had, her promise, and that satisfied him. His impatience was
altogether personal; but Amelie, in accepting his suit, even though she
relegated the period of her marriage to the vaguest possible future,
had crowned his hopes. He trusted to the First Consul and to Roland's
friendship for the rest. He therefore returned to Paris to do much of
his courting with Madame de Montrevel, not being able to remain at Bourg
and carry it on with Amelie.

A quarter of an hour after he had left the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines,
Charlotte was also on her way to Bourg. At four o'clock she returned,
bringing word that she had seen Sir John with her own eyes getting into
his travelling carriage, and that he had taken the road to Macon.

Amelie could therefore feel perfectly at ease on that score. She
breathed freer. She had tried to inspire Morgan with a peace of mind
which she herself did not share. Since the day that Charlotte had
brought back the news of Roland's presence at Bourg, she had had a
presentiment, like that of Morgan himself, that they were approaching
some terrible crisis. She knew all that had happened at the Chartreuse
of Seillon. She foresaw the struggle between her brother and her
lover, and, with her mind at rest about her brother, thanks to Morgan's
protection, she, knowing Roland's character, trembled for her lover's
life.

Moreover, she had heard of the stoppage of the Chambery mail-coach and
the death of the colonel of Chasseurs. She also knew that her brother
had escaped, but that he had disappeared since that time. She had
received no letter from him herself. This disappearance and silence, to
her who knew her brother so well, was even worse than open and declared
war.

As for Morgan, she had not seen him since the scene we have narrated,
when she promised to send him arms wherever he might be, in case he were
condemned to death. Amelie therefore awaited this interview, for which
Morgan had asked, with as much impatience as he who had asked it. As
soon as she thought Michel and his son were in bed, she lighted the four
windows with the candles which were to summon Morgan to her.

Then, following her lover's injunctions, she wrapped herself in a
cashmere shawl, which Roland had brought her from the battlefield of the
Pyramids, and which he had unwound from the head of a chieftain whom he
had killed. Over this she flung a fur mantle, left Charlotte behind to
keep her informed in case of eventualities, which she trusted would not
be forthcoming, opened the park gate, and hastened toward the river.

During the day she had gone to the Reissouse and back several times to
trace a line of footsteps, among which the nocturnal ones would not be
noticed. She now descended, if not tranquilly at least boldly, the slope
leading to the river. Once there, she looked about her for the boat
beneath the willows. A man was waiting in it--Morgan. With two strokes
of the oar he reached a spot where Amelie could come to him. The young
girl sprang down and he caught her in his arms.

The first thing the young girl noticed was the joyous radiance which
illuminated, if we may say so, the face of her lover.

"Oh!" she cried, "you have something nice to tell me." "What makes you
think so, dearest?" asked Morgan with his tenderest smile.

"There is something in your face, my darling Charles, something more
than the mere happiness of seeing me."

"You are right," said Morgan, throwing the boat-chain around a willow
and letting the oars float idly beside the boat. Then, taking Amelie in
his arms, he said, "You were right, my Amelie. Oh! blind weak beings! It
is at the very moment that happiness knocks at our door that we despair
and doubt."

"Oh, speak, speak!" said Amelie, "tell me what has happened."

"Do you remember, my Amelie, how you answered me the last time we met,
when I asked you to fly and spoke to you of your probable repugnance to
the step?"

"Yes, I remember, Charles. I said that I was yours, and that, though I
felt that repugnance, I would conquer it for your sake."

"And I replied that I had engagements which would prevent my leaving the
country; that I was bound to others, and they to me; that our duty
was to one man to whom we owed absolute obedience--the future King of
France, Louis XVIII."

"Yes, you told me that."

"Well, we are now released from our pledges, Amelie, not only by the
King, but by our general, Georges Cadoudal."

"Oh! my friend, then you will be as other men, only above all others."

"I shall become a simple exile, Amelie. There is no hope of our being
included in the Breton or Vendean amnesty."

"Why not?"

"We are not soldiers, my darling child. We are not even rebels. We are
Companions of Jehu."

Amelie sighed.

"We are bandits, brigands, highwaymen," said Morgan, dwelling on the
words with evident intention.

"Hush!" said Amelie, laying her hand on her lover's lips. "Hush! don't
let us speak of that. Tell me how it is that your king has released you,
and your general also."

"The First Consul wished to see Cadoudal. In the first place, he sent
your brother to him with certain proposals. Cadoudal refused to come
to terms; but, like ourselves, he received orders from Louis XVIII. to
cease hostilities. Coincident with that order came another message
from the First Consul to Cadoudal. It was a safeguard for the Vendean
general, and an invitation to come to Paris; an overture from one power
to another power. Cadoudal accepted, and is now on his way to Paris. If
it is not peace, it is at least a truce."

"Oh, what joy, my Charles!"

"Don't rejoice too much, my love."

"Why not?"

"Do you know why they have issued this order to suspend hostilities?"

"No."

"Because M. Fouche is a long-headed man. He realized that, since
he could not defeat us, he must dishonor us. He has organized false
companies of Jehu, which he has set loose in Maine and Anjou, who don't
stop at the government money, but pillage and rob travellers, and invade
the chateaux and farms by night, and roast the feet of the owners to
make them tell where their treasure is hidden. Well, these men, these
bandits, these _roasters_, have taken our name, and claim to be fighting
for the same principles, so that M. Fouche and his police declare that
we are not only beyond the pale of the law, but beyond that of honor."

"Oh!"

"That is what I wished to tell you before I ask you to fly with me, my
Amelie. In the eyes of France, in the eyes of foreigners, even in the
eyes of the prince we have served, and for whom we have risked the
scaffold, we shall be hereafter, and probably are now, dishonored men
worthy of the scaffold."

"Yes; but to me you are my Charles, the man of devoted convictions, the
firm royalist, continuing to struggle for a cause when other men have
abandoned it. To me you are the loyal Baron de Sainte-Hermine, or, if
you like it better, you are to me the noble, courageous, invincible
Morgan."

"Ah! that is what I longed to hear, my darling. If you feel thus, you
will not hesitate, in spite of the cloud of infamy that hangs over our
honor, you will not hesitate--I will not say to give yourself to me, for
that you have already done--but to become my wife."

"Hesitate! No, not for an instant, not for a second! To do it is the joy
of my soul, the happiness of my life! Your wife? I am your wife in the
sight of God, and God will have granted my every prayer on the day that
he enables me to be your wife before men."

Morgan fell on his knees.

"Then," he said, "here at your feet, with clasped hands and my whole
heart supplicating, I say to you, Amelie, will you fly with me? Will you
leave France with me? Will you be my wife in other lands?"

Amelie sprang erect and clasped her head in her hands, as though her
brain were bursting with the force of the blood that rushed to it.
Morgan caught both her hands and looked at her anxiously.

"Do you hesitate?" he asked in a broken, trembling voice.

"No, not an instant!" she cried resolutely. "I am yours in the past, in
the present, in the future, here, everywhere. Only the thought convulses
me. It is so unexpected."

"Reflect well, Amelie. What I ask of you is to abandon country and
family, all that is dear to you, all that is sacred. If you follow me,
you leave the home where you were born, the mother who nurtured you, the
brother who loves you, and who, perhaps, when he hears that you are the
wife of a brigand, will hate you. He will certainly despise you."

As he spoke, Morgan's eyes were anxiously questioning Amelie's face.
Over that face a tender smile stole gradually, and then it turned from
heaven to earth, and bent upon Morgan, who was still on his knees before
her.

"Oh, Charles!" she murmured, in a voice as soft as the clear limpid
river flowing at her feet, "the love that comes direct from the Divine
is very powerful indeed, since, in spite of those dreadful words you
have just uttered, I say to you without hesitation, almost without
regret: Charles, I am here; Charles, I am yours. Where shall we go?"

"Amelie, our fate is not one to discuss. If we go, if you follow me, it
must be at once. To-morrow we must be beyond the frontier."

"How do we go?"

"I have two horses, ready saddled at Montagnac, one for you, Amelie, and
one for me. I have letters of credit for two hundred thousand francs on
London and Vienna. We will go wherever you prefer."

"Wherever you are, Charles. What difference does it make so long as you
are there?"

"Then come."

"Can I have five minutes, Charles; is that too much?"

"Where are you going?"

"To say good-by to many things, to fetch your precious letters and the
ivory chaplet used at my first communion. Oh! there are many sacred
cherished souvenirs of my childhood which will remind me over there of
my mother, of France. I will fetch them and return."

"Amelie!"

"What is it?"

"I cannot leave you. If I part with you an instant now I feel that I
shall lose you forever. Amelie, let me go with you."

"Yes, come. What matter if they see your footsteps now? We shall be far
enough away to-morrow. Come!" The young man sprang from the boat and
gave his hand to Amelie to help her out. Then he folded his arm about
her and they walked to the house.

On the portico Charles stopped.

"Go on alone," said he; "memory is a chaste thing. I know that, and I
will not embarrass you by my presence. I will wait here and watch for
you. So long as I know you are close by me I do not fear to lose you.
Go, dear, and come back quickly."

Amelie answered with a kiss. Then she ran hastily up to her room, took
the little coffer of carved oak clamped with iron, her treasury, which
contained her lover's letters from first to last, unfastened from the
mirror above her bed the white and virginal chaplet that hung there;
put into her belt a watch her father had given her, and passed into her
mother's bedchamber. There she stooped and kissed the pillow where her
mother's head had lain, knelt before the Christ at the foot of the bed,
began a thanksgiving she dared not finish, changed it to a prayer, and
then suddenly stopped--she fancied she heard Charles calling her.

She listened and heard her name a second time, uttered in a tone of
agony she could not understand. She quivered, sprang to her feet, and
ran rapidly down the stairs.

"What is it?" cried Amelie, seizing the young man's hand.

"Listen, listen!" said he.

Amelie strained her ears to catch the sound which seemed to her like
musketry. It came from the direction of Ceyzeriat.

"Oh!" cried Morgan, "I was right in doubting my happiness to the last.
My friends are attacked. Adieu, Amelie, adieu!"

"Adieu!" cried Amelie, turning pale. "What, will you leave me?"

The sound of the firing grew more distinct.

"Don't you hear them? They are fighting, and I am not there to fight
with them."

Daughter and sister of a soldier, Amelie understood him and she made no
resistance.

"Go!" she said, letting her hands drop beside her. "You were right, we
are lost."

The young man uttered a cry of rage, caught her to his breast, and
pressed her to him as though he would smother her. Then, bounding from
the portico, he rushed in the direction of the firing with the speed of
a deer pursued by hunters.

"I come! I come, my friends!" he cried. And he disappeared like a shadow
beneath the tall trees of the park.

Amelie fell upon her knees, her hands stretched toward him without the
strength to recall him, or, if she did so, it was in so faint a voice
that Morgan did not stop or even check his speed to answer her.




CHAPTER XLIX. ROLAND'S REVENGE

It is easy to guess what had happened. Roland had not wasted his time
with the captain of gendarmerie and the colonel of dragoons. They on
their side did not forget that they had their own revenge to take.

Roland had informed them of the subterranean passage that led from the
church of Brou to the grotto of Ceyzeriat. At nine in the evening the
captain and the eighteen men under his command were to go to the church,
descend into the burial vault of the Dukes of Savoy, and prevent with
their bayonets all communication between the subterranean passage and
the quarry.

Roland, at the head of twenty men, was to inclose the woods in a
semicircle, drawing in upon it until the two ends should meet at the
grotto of Ceyzeriat. The first movement of the party was to be made at
nine o'clock, in conjunction with the captain of the gendarmerie.

We have seen, from what Morgan told Amelie, the nature of the present
intentions of the Companions of Jehu. The news brought from Mittau and
from Brittany had put them at ease. Each man felt that he was free, and,
knowing that the struggle had been a hopeless one, he rejoiced in his
liberty.

There was therefore a full meeting at the grotto of Ceyzeriat, almost
a fete. At twelve o'clock the Companions of Jehu were to separate, and
each one, according to his facilities, was to cross the frontier and
leave France.

We know how their leader employed his last moments. The others, who had
not the same ties of the heart, were supping together in the broad open
space of the quarry, brilliantly illuminated--a feast of separation and
farewell; for, once out of France, the Vendee and Brittany pacificated,
Conde's army destroyed, who knew when and where they should meet again
in foreign lands.

Suddenly the report of a shot fell upon their ears.

Every man sprang to his feet as if moved by an electric shock. A second
shot, and then through the depths of the quarry rang the cry, quivering
on the wings of the bird of ill-omen, "To arms!"

To the Companions of Jehu, subjected to all the vicissitudes of life of
an outlaw, the occasional rest they snatched was never that of peace.
Pistols, daggers, carbines, were ever near at hand. At the cry, given
no doubt by the sentinel, each man sprang to his weapons and stood with
panting breast and strained ears, waiting.

In the midst of the silence a step as rapid as well could be in the
darkness was heard. Then, within the circle of light thrown by the
torches and candles, a man appeared.

"To arms!" he cried again, "we are attacked!"

The two shots the Companions of Jehu had heard were from the
double-barrelled gun of the sentry. It was he who now appeared, his
smoking gun in his hand.

"Where is Morgan?" cried twenty voices.

"Absent," replied Montbar; "consequently I command. Put out the lights
and retreat to the church. A fight is useless now. It would only be
waste of blood."

He was obeyed with an alacrity that showed that every one appreciated
the danger. The little company drew together in the darkness.

Montbar, who knew the windings of the subterranean passage almost as
well as Morgan, directed the troop, and, followed by his companions, he
plunged into the heart of the quarry. Suddenly, as he neared the gate of
the passage, he fancied he heard an order given in a low tone not fifty
feet away, then a sound like the cocking of guns. He stretched out both
arms and muttered in a low voice:

"Halt!" At the same instant came the command, this time perfectly
audible: "Fire!"

It was hardly given before the cavern was lighted with a glare, followed
by a frightful volley. Ten carbines had been discharged at once into the
narrow passage. By their light Montbar and his companions recognized the
uniform of the gendarmes.

"Fire!" cried Montbar in turn.

Seven or eight shots answered the command. Again the darkness was
illuminated. Two of the Companions of Jehu lay upon the ground, one
killed outright, the other mortally wounded.

"Our retreat is cut off, my friends," cried Montbar. "To the
right-about! If we have a chance, it is through the forest."

The movement was executed with the precision of a military manoeuvre.
Montbar, again at the head of his companions, retraced his steps. At
that moment the gendarmes fired again. But no one replied. Those who had
discharged their guns reloaded them. Those who had not, reserved their
fire for the real struggle which was to come. One or two sighs alone
told that the last volley of the gendarmes had not been without result.

At the end of five minutes Montbar stopped. The little party had reached
the open space of the quarry.

"Are your pistols and guns all loaded?" he asked.

"Yes," answered a dozen voices.

"Remember the order for those who fall into the hands of the police. We
belong to the army of M. de Teyssonnet, and we are here to recruit
men for the royalist cause. If they talk to us of mail-coaches and
diligences, we don't know what they mean."

"Agreed."

"In either case it will be death. We know that well enough; but the
death of a soldier is better than that of thieves--the volley of a
platoon rather than the guillotine."

"Yes, yes," cried a mocking voice, "we know what that is--Vive la
fusillade!"

"Forward, friends!" said Montbar, "and let us sell our lives for what
they are worth; that is to say, as dearly as possible."

"Forward!" they all cried.

Then, as rapidly as was possible in the profound darkness, the little
troop resumed its march, still under the guidance of Montbar. As they
advanced, the leader noticed a smell of smoke which alarmed him. At the
same time gleams of light began to flicker on the granite walls at the
angles of the path, showing that something strange was happening at the
opening of the grotto.

"I believe those scoundrels are smoking us out," exclaimed Montbar.

"I fear so," replied Adler.

"They think we are foxes."

"Oh!" replied the same voice, "they shall know by our claws that we are
lions."

The smoke became thicker and thicker, the light more and more vivid.

They turned the last corner. A pile of dried wood had been lighted in
the quarry about fifty feet from the entrance, not for the smoke, but
for the light it gave. By the blaze of that savage flame the weapons of
the dragoons could be seen gleaming at the entrance of the grotto.

Ten steps in advance of the men stood an officer, waiting. He was
leaning on his carbine, not only exposed to attack, but apparently
courting it. It was Roland. He was easily recognized. He had flung his
cap away, his head was bare, and the fitful light of the flames played
upon his features. But that which should have cost him his life saved
him. Montbar recognized him and stepped backward.

"Roland de Montrevel!" he said. "Remember Morgan's injunction."

"Yes," replied the other Companions, in muffled tones.

"And now," said Montbar, "let us die, but dearly!"

And he sprang forward into the space illuminated by the fire, and
discharged one barrel of his gun at the dragoons, who replied with a
volley.

It would be impossible to relate all that followed. The grotto was
filled with smoke, which the flame of each weapon pierced like a flash
of lightning. The two bands clinched and fought hand to hand, pistols
and daggers serving them in turn. At the noise of the struggle, the
gendarmes poured in from the rear--few more demons added to this fight
of devils--but the groups of friends and enemies were so confused they
dared not fire. They struggled in the red and lurid atmosphere, fell
down and rose again; a roar of rage was heard, then a cry of agony--the
death sigh of a man. The survivor sought another man, and the struggle
was renewed.

This work of death lasted fifteen minutes, perhaps twenty. At the end
of those twenty minutes twenty corpses could be counted in the grotto of
Ceyzeriat. Thirteen were those of the gendarmes and the dragoons,
nine belonged to the Companions of Jehu. Five of the latter were still
living; overwhelmed by numbers, crippled by wounds, they were taken
alive. The gendarmes and the dragoons, twenty-five in number, surrounded
them.

The captain of gendarmes had his arm shattered, the colonel of dragoons
was wounded in the thigh. Roland alone, covered with blood that was
not his own, had not a scratch. Two of the prisoners were so grievously
wounded that it was impossible for them to walk, and the soldiers were
obliged to carry them on an improvised litter. Torches were lighted, and
the whole troop, with the prisoners, took the road to the town.

As they were leaving the forest to branch into the high-road, the gallop
of a horse was heard. It came on rapidly. "Go on," said Roland; "I will
stay here and find out what this means."

It was a rider, who, as we have said, was advancing at full speed.

"Who goes there?" cried Roland, raising his carbine when the rider was
about twenty paces from him.

"One more prisoner, Monsieur de Montrevel," replied the rider, "I could
not be in at the fight, but I will at least go to the scaffold. Where
are my friends?"

"There, sir," replied Roland, who had recognized, not the face, but the
voice of the rider, a voice which he now heard for the third time. As he
spoke, he pointed to the little group in the centre of the soldiers who
were making their way along the road from Ceyzeriat to Bourg.

"I am glad to see that no harm has befallen you, M. de Montrevel,"
said the young man, with great courtesy; "I assure you it gives me
much happiness." And spurring his horse, he was beside the soldiers and
gendarmes in a few strides. "Pardon me, gentlemen," he said, springing
from his horse, "I claim a place among my three friends, the Vicomte de
Jayat, the Comte de Valensolle, and the Marquis de Ribier."

The three prisoners gave a cry of admiration and held out their hands to
their friend. The two wounded men lifted themselves up on their litters,
and murmured: "Well done, Sainte-Hermine, well done!"

"I do believe, God help me!" cried Roland, "that those brigands will
have the nobler side of the affair!"




CHAPTER L. CADOUDAL AT THE TUILERIES

The day but one after the events which we have just related took place,
two men were walking side by side up and down the grand salon of the
Tuileries. They were talking eagerly, accompanying their words with
hasty and animated gestures. These men were the First Consul, Bonaparte,
and Cadoudal.

Cadoudal, impelled by the misery that might be entailed by a prolonged
struggle in Brittany, had just signed a peace with Brune. It was after
this signing of the peace that he had released the Companions of Jehu
from their obligations. Unhappily, this release had reached them, as we
