Boats of this type quickly made their way over the American rivers and
before 1820 regular lines of steamboats were running between England and
Ireland. In 1817 James Watt, the inventor of the practical steam-engine,
crossed in a steamer from England to Belgium. But these short voyages
were far surpassed by an American enterprise, that of the first ocean
steamship, the Savannah, which crossed the Atlantic from Savannah to
Liverpool in 1819.

Twelve years passed before this enterprise was repeated, the next steam
voyage being in 1831, when the Royal William crossed from Quebec to
England. She used coal for fuel, having utilized her entire hold to
store enough for the voyage. The Savannah had burned pitch-pine under
her engines, for in America wood was long used as fuel for steam-making
purposes. As regards this matter, the problem of fuel was of leading
importance, and it was seriously questioned if a ship could be built to
cross the Atlantic depending solely upon steam power. Steam-engines in
those days were not very economical, needing four or five times as much
fuel for the same power as the engines of recent date.

It was not until 1838 that the problem was solved. On April 23d of that
year a most significant event took place. Two steamships dropped anchor
in the harbor of New York, the Sirius and the Great Western. Both of
these had made the entire voyage under steam, the Sirius, in eighteen
and a half and the Great Western in fourteen and a half days, measuring
from Queenstown. The Sirius had taken on board 450 tons of coal, but all
this was burned by the time Sandy Hook was reached, and she had to burn
her spare spars and forty-three barrels of rosin to make her way up the
bay. The Great Western, on the contrary, had coal to spare.

Two innovations in shipbuilding were soon introduced. These were the
building of iron instead of wooden ships and the replacing of the paddle
wheel by the screw propeller. The screw-propeller was first successfully
introduced by the famous Swede, John Ericsson, in 1835. His propeller
was tried in a small vessel, forty-five feet long and eight wide, which
was driven at the rate of ten miles an hour, and towed a large packet
ship at fair speed. Ericsson, not being appreciated in England, came
to America to experiment. Other inventors were also at work in the same
line.

Their experiments attracted the attention of Isambard Brunel, one of
the greatest engineers of the period, who was then engaged in building
a large paddle-wheel steamer, the Great Britain. Appreciating the new
idea, he had the engines of the new ship changed and a screw propeller
introduced. This ship, a great one for the time, 322 feet long and of
3443 tons, made her first voyage from Liverpool to New York in 1845, her
average speed being 12 1/4 knots an hour, the length of the voyage 14
days and 21 hours.

By the date named the crossing of the Atlantic by steamships had become
a common event. In 1840 the British and Royal Mail Steam Packet Company
was organized, its chief promoter being Samuel Cunard, of Halifax, Nova
Scotia, whose name has long been attached to this famous line.

The first fleet of the Cunard Line comprised four vessels, the
Britannia, Acadia, Caledonia and Columbia. The Unicorn, sent out by this
company as a pioneer, entered Boston harbor on June 2, 1840, being the
first steamship from Europe to reach that port. Regular trips began with
the Britannia, which left Liverpool on July 4, 1840. For a number of
years later this line enjoyed a practical monopoly of the steam carrying
trade between England and the United States. Then other companies came
into the field, chief among them being the Collins Line, started in
1849, and of short duration, and the Inman Line, instituted in 1850.

We should say something here of the comforts and conveniences provided
for the passengers on these early lines. They differed strikingly
from those on the leviathans of recent travel and were little, if any,
superior to those on the packet ships, the active rivals at that date
of the steamers. Then there were none of the comfortable smoking rooms,
well-filled libraries, drawing rooms, electric lights, and other modern
improvements. The saloons and staterooms were in the extreme after part
of the vessel, but the stateroom of that day was little more than a
closet, with two berths, one above the other, and very little standing
room between these and the wall. By paying nearly double fare a
passenger might secure a room for himself, but the room given him
did not compare well even with that of small and unpretentious modern
steamers.

Other ocean steamship companies gradually arose, some of which are still
in existence. But no especial change in ship-building was introduced
until 1870, when the Oceanic Company, now known as the White Star Line,
built the Britannic and Germanic. These were the largest of its early
ships. They were 468 feet long and 35 feet wide, constituting a new type
of extreme length as compared with their width. In the first White Star
ship, the Oceanic, the improvements above mentioned were introduced, the
saloons and staterooms being brought as near as possible to the center
of the ship. All the principal lines built since that date have followed
this example, thus adding much to the comfort of the first-class
passengers.

Speed and economy in power also became features of importance, the
tubular boiler and the compound engine being introduced. These have
developed into the cylindrical, multitubular boiler and the triple
expansion engine, in which a greater percentage of the power of the
steam is utilized and four or five times the work obtained from coal
over that of the old system. The side-wheel was continued in use in the
older ships until this period, but after 1870 it disappeared.

It has been said that the life of iron ships, barring disasters at sea,
is unlimited, that they cannot wear out. This statement has not been
tested, but the fact remains that the older passenger ships have gone
out of service and that steel has now taken the place of iron, as
lighter and more durable.

Something should also be said here of the steam turbine engine, recently
introduced in some of the greatest liners, and of proven value in
several particulars, an important one of these being the doing away with
the vibration, an inseparable accompaniment of the old style engines.
The Olympic and Titanic engines were a combination of the turbine and
reciprocating types. In regard to the driving power, one of the recent
introductions is that of the multiple propeller. The twin screw was
first applied in the City of New York, of the Inman line, and enabled
her to make in 1890 an average speed of a little over six days from New
York to Queenstown. The best record up to October, 1891, was that of the
Teutonic, of five days, sixteen hours, and thirty minutes. Triple-screw
propellers have since then been introduced in some of the greater ships,
and the record speed has been cut down to the four days and ten hours of
the Lusitania in 1908 and the four days, six hours and forty-one minutes
of the Mauretania in 1910.

The Titanic was not built especially for speed, but in every other way
she was the master product of the shipbuilders' art. Progress through
the centuries has been steady, and perhaps the twentieth century will
prepare a vessel that will be unsinkable as well as magnificent. Until
the fatal accident the Titanic and Olympic were considered the last
words on ship-building; but much may still remain to be spoken.



CHAPTER XXVII. SAFETY AND LIFE-SAVING DEVICES

WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY--WATER-TIGHT BULKHEADS--SUBMARINE
SIGNALS--LIFE-BOATS AND RAFTS--NIXON'S PONTOON--LIFE-PRESERVERS AND
BUOYS--ROCKETS

THE fact that there are any survivors of the Titanic left to tell the
story of the terrible catastrophe is only another of the hundreds of
instances on record of the value of wireless telegraphy in saving life
on shipboard. Without Marconi's invention it is altogether probable that
the world would never have known of the nature of the Titanic's fate,
for it is only barely within the realm of possibility that any of the
Titanic's passengers' poorly clad, without proper provisions of food and
water, and exposed in the open boats to the frigid weather, would have
survived long enough to have been picked up by a transatlantic liner in
ignorance of the accident to the Titanic.

Speaking (since the Titanic disaster) of the part which wireless
telegraphy has played in the salvation of distressed ships, Guglielmo
Marconi, the inventor of this wonderful science, has said:

"Fifteen years ago the curvature of the earth was looked upon as the
one great obstacle to wireless telegraphy. By various experiments in
the Isle of Wight and at St. John's I finally succeeded in sending the
letter S 2000 miles.

"We have since found that the fog and the dull skies in the vicinity of
England are exceptionally favorable for wireless telegraphy."

Then the inventor told of wireless messages being transmitted 2500
miles across the Abyssinian desert, and of preparation for similar
achievements.

"The one necessary requirement for continued success is that governments
keep from being enveloped in political red tape," said he.

"The fact that a message can be flashed across the wide expanse of ocean
in ten minutes has exceeded my fondest expectations. Some idea of the
progress made may be had by citing the fact that in eleven years the
range of wireless telegraphy has increased from 200 to 3000 miles.

"Not once has wireless telegraphy failed in calling and securing help
on the high seas. A recognition of this is shown in the attitude of the
United States Government in compelling all passenger-carrying vessels
entering our ports to be equipped with wireless apparatus."

Of the Titanic tragedy, Marconi said:

"I know you will all understand when I say that I entertain a deep
feeling of gratitude because of the fact that wireless telegraphy has
again contributed to the saving of life."


WATER-TIGHT BULKHEADS

One of the most essential factors in making ships safe is the
construction of proper bulkheads to divide a ship into water-tight
compartments in case of injury to her hull. Of the modern means of
forming such compartments, and of the complete and automatic devices for
operating the watertight doors which connect them, a full explanation
has already been given in the description of the Titanic's physical
features, to which the reader is referred. A wise precaution usually
taken in the case of twin and triple screw ships is to arrange the
bulkheads so that each engine is in a separate compartment, as is also
each boiler or bank of boilers and each coal bunker.


SUBMARINE SIGNALS

Then there are submarine signals to tell of near-by vessels or shores.
This signal arrangement includes a small tank on either side of the
vessel, just below the water line. Within each is a microphone with
wires leading to the bridge. If the vessel is near any other or
approaching shore, the sounds; conveyed through the water from the
distant object are heard through the receiver of the microphone. These
arrangements are called the ship's ears, and whether the sounds come
from one side of the vessel or the other, the officers can tell the
location of the shore or ship near by. If both ears record, the object
is ahead.


LIFEBOATS AND RAFTS

The construction of life-boats adapts them for very rough weather.
The chief essentials, of course, are ease in launching, strength in
withstanding rough water and bumping when beached; also strength to
withstand striking against wreckage or a ship's side; carrying capacity
and lightness. Those carried on board ship are lighter than those used
in life-saving service on shore. Safety is provided by air-tight tanks
which insure buoyancy in case the boat is filled with water. They
have also self-righting power in case of being overturned; likewise
self-emptying power. Life-boats are usually of the whaleboat type, with
copper air-tight tanks along the side beneath the thwarts, and in the
ends.

Life-boats range from twenty-four to thirty feet in length and carry
from thirty to sixty persons. The rafts carry from twenty to forty
persons. The old-fashioned round bar davits can be got for $100 to $150
a set. The new style davits, quick launchers in type, come as low as
$400 a set.

According to some naval constructors, an ocean steamship can carry in
davits enough boats to take care of all the passengers and crew, it
being simply a question as to whether the steamship owners are willing
to take up that much deck room which otherwise would be used for
lounging chairs or for a promenade.

Nowadays all life-boats are equipped with air tanks to prevent sinking,
with the result that metal boats are as unsinkable as wooden ones. The
metal boats are considered in the United States Navy as superior to
wooden ones, for several reasons: They do not break or collapse; they
do not, in consequence of long storage on deck, open at the seams and
thereby spring a leak; and they are not eaten by bugs, as is the case
with wooden boats.

Comparatively few of the transatlantic steamships have adopted metal
life-boats. Most of the boats are of wood, according to the official
United States Government record of inspection. The records show that a
considerable proportion of the entire number of so-called "life-boats"
carried by Atlantic Ocean liners are not actually life-boats at all,
but simply open boats, without air tanks or other special equipment or
construction.


{illust. caption = CHAMBERS COLLAPSIBLE LIFE RAFT}


Life-rafts are of several kinds. They are commonly used on large
passenger steamers where it is difficult to carry sufficient life-boats.
In most cases they consist of two or more hollow metal or inflated
rubber floats which support a wooden deck. The small rafts are supplied
with life-lines and oars, and the larger ones with life-lines only, or
with life-lines and sails.

The collapsible feature of the Chambers raft consists of canvas-covered
steel frames extending up twenty-five inches from the sides to prevent
passengers from being pitched off. When the rafts are not in use these
side frames are folded down on the raft.

The collapsible rafts are favored by the ship-owners because such boats
take up less room; they do not have to be carried in the davits, and
they can be stowed to any number required. Some of the German lines
stack their collapsible rafts one above another on deck.


NIXON'S PONTOON

Lewis Nixon, the well-known ship designer, suggests the construction of
a pontoon to be carried on the after end of the vessel and to be made of
sectional air-tight compartments. One compartment would accommodate
the wireless outfit. Another compartment would hold drinking water, and
still another would be filled with food.

The pontoon would follow the line of the ship and seem to be a part of
it. The means for releasing it before the sinking of the vessel present
no mechanical problem. It would be too large and too buoyant to be
sucked down with the wreck.

The pontoon would accommodate, not comfortably but safely, all those who
failed to find room in the life-boats.

It is Mr. Nixon's plan to instal a gas engine in one of the
compartments. With this engine the wireless instrument would remain in
commission and direct the rescuers after the ship itself had gone down.


LIFE PRESERVERS AND BUOYS

Life-preservers are chiefly of the belt or jacket type, made to fit
about the body and rendered buoyant by slabs of cork sewed into the
garment, or by rubber-lined air-bags. The use of cork is usually
considered preferable, as the inflated articles are liable to injury,
and jackets are preferable to belts as they can be put on more quickly.

Life-buoys are of several types, but those most common are of the ring
type, varying in size from the small one designed to be thrown by hand
to the large hollow metal buoy capable of supporting several people.
The latter are usually carried by sea-going vessels and are fitted with
lamps which are automatically lighted when the buoy is dropped into the
water.


ROCKETS

American ocean-going steamers are required to have some approved means
of firing lines to the shore. Cunningham rockets and the Hunt gun are
largely used. The inaccuracy of the rocket is of less importance when
fired from a ship than when fired from shore.



CHAPTER XXVIII. TIME FOR REFLECTION AND REFORMS

SPEED AND LUXURY OVEREMPHASIZED--SPACE NEEDED FOR LIFE-BOATS DEVOTED TO
SWIMMING POOLS AND SQUASH-COURTS--MANIA FOR SPEED RECORDS COMPELS USE OF
DANGEROUS ROUTES AND PREVENTS PROPER CAUTION IN FOGGY WEATHER--LIFE
MORE VALUABLE THAN LUXURY--SAFETY MORE IMPORTANT THAN SPEED--AN AROUSED
PUBLIC OPINION NECESSARY--INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE RECOMMENDED--ADEQUATE
LIFE-SAVING EQUIPMENT SHOULD BE COMPULSORY--SPEED REGULATIONS IN BAD
WEATHER--COOPERATION IN ARRANGING SCHEDULES TO KEEP VESSELS WITHIN REACH
OF EACH OTHER--LEGAL REGULATIONS

IT is a long time since any modern vessel of importance has gone down
under Nature's attack, and in general the floating city of steel laughs
