the journey. But, by the cross of Saint Andrew, I will move Crevecoeur
in thy behalf; and, as he truly fears that Duke Charles may be provoked
against the King to the extremity of falling foul, I think it likely he
may grant thy request, though, by my honour, it is a comical one!"

So saying, and shrugging up his shoulders, the old Lord left the
apartment, followed by Ludovic Lesly, who, forming his looks on those of
his principal, endeavoured, though knowing nothing of the cause of his
wonder, to look as mysterious and important as Crawford himself.

In a few minutes Crawford returned, but without his attendant, Le
Balafre. The old man seemed in singular humour, laughing and chuckling
to himself in a manner which strangely distorted his stern and rigid
features, and at the same time shaking his head, as at something which
he could not help condemning, while he found it irresistibly ludicrous.
"My certes, countryman," said he, "but you are not blate--you will never
lose fair lady for faint heart! Crevecoeur swallowed your proposal as
he would have done a cup of vinegar, and swore to me roundly, by all the
saints in Burgundy, that were less than the honour of princes and the
peace of kingdoms at stake, you should never see even so much as the
print of the Countess Isabelle's foot on the clay. Were it not that he
had a dame, and a fair one, I would have thought that he meant to break
a lance for the prize himself. Perhaps he thinks of his nephew, the
County Stephen. A Countess!--would no less serve you to be minting
at?--But come along--your interview with her must be brief.--But I fancy
you know how to make the most of little time--ho! ho! ho!--By my faith,
I can hardly chide thee for the presumption, I have such a good will to
laugh at it!"

With a brow like scarlet, at once offended and disconcerted by the blunt
inferences of the old soldier, and vexed at beholding in what an absurd
light his passion was viewed by every person of experience, Durward
followed Lord Crawford in silence to the Ursuline convent, in which the
Countess was lodged, and in the parlour of which he found the Count de
Crevecoeur.

"So, young gallant," said the latter sternly, "you must see the fair
companion of your romantic expedition once more, it seems."

"Yes, my Lord Count," answered Quentin firmly, "and what is more, I must
see her alone."

"That shall never be," said the Count de Crevecoeur.--"Lord Crawford,
I make you judge. This young lady, the daughter of my old friend and
companion in arms, the richest heiress in Burgundy, has confessed a sort
of a--what was I going to say?--in short, she is a fool, and your man
at arms here a presumptuous coxcomb.--In a word, they shall not meet
alone."

"Then will I not speak a single word to the Countess in your presence,"
said Quentin, much delighted. "You have told me much that I did not
dare, presumptuous as I may be, even to hope."

"Ay, truly said, my friend," said Crawford. "You have been imprudent
in your communications; and, since you refer to me, and there is a good
stout grating across the parlour, I would advise you to trust to it, and
let them do the worst with their tongues. What, man! the life of a King,
and many thousands besides, is not to be weighed with the chance of two
young things whilly whawing in ilk other's ears for a minute."

So saying, he dragged off Crevecoeur, who followed very reluctantly, and
cast many angry glances at the young Archer as he left the room.

In a moment after, the Countess Isabelle entered on the other side of
the grate, and no sooner saw Quentin alone in the parlour, than she
stopped short, and cast her eyes on the ground for the space of half a
minute. "Yet why should I be ungrateful," she said, "because others are
unjustly suspicious?--My friend--my preserver, I may almost say, so much
have I been beset by treachery, my only faithful and constant friend!"

As she spoke thus, she extended her hand to him through the grate,
nay, suffered him to retain it until he had covered it with kisses,
not unmingled with tears. She only said, "Durward, were we ever to meet
again, I would not permit this folly."

If it be considered that Quentin had guided her through so many
perils--that he had been, in truth, her only faithful and zealous
protector, perhaps my fair readers, even if countesses and heiresses
should be of the number, will pardon the derogation.

But the Countess extricated her hand at length, and stepping a pace back
from the grate, asked Durward, in a very embarrassed tone, what boon he
had to ask of her?--"For that you have a request to make, I have learned
from the old Scottish Lord, who came here but now with my cousin of
Crevecoeur. Let it be but reasonable," she said, "but such as poor
Isabelle can grant with duty and honour uninfringed, and you cannot
tax my slender powers too highly. But, oh! do not speak hastily--do not
say," she added, looking around with timidity, "aught that might, if
overheard, do prejudice to us both!"

"Fear not, noble lady," said Quentin sorrowfully; "it is not here that I
can forget the distance which fate has placed between us, or expose you
to the censures of your proud kindred, as the object of the most devoted
love to one, poorer and less powerful--not perhaps less noble--than
themselves. Let that pass like a dream of the night to all but one
bosom, where, dream as it is, it will fill up the room of all existing
realities."

"Hush! hush!" said Isabelle "for your own sake--for mine--be silent on
such a theme. Tell me rather what it is you have to ask of me."

"Forgiveness to one," replied Quentin, "who, for his own selfish views,
hath conducted himself as your enemy."

"I trust I forgive all my enemies," answered Isabelle; "but oh, Durward!
through what scenes have your courage and presence of mind protected
me!--Yonder bloody hall--the good Bishop--I knew not till yesterday half
the horrors I had unconsciously witnessed!"

"Do not think on them," said Quentin, who saw the transient colour which
had come to her cheek during their conference fast fading into the most
deadly paleness.--"Do not look back, but look steadily forward, as
they needs must who walk in a perilous road. Hearken to me. King
Louis deserves nothing better at your hand, of all others; than to be
proclaimed the wily and insidious politician which he really is. But to
tax him as the encourager of your flight--still more as the author of
a plan to throw you into the hands of De la Marck--will at this moment
produce perhaps the King's death or dethronement; and, at all events,
the most bloody war between France and Burgundy which the two countries
have ever been engaged in."

"These evils shall not arrive for my sake, if they can be prevented,"
said the Countess Isabelle; "and indeed your slightest request were
enough to make me forego my revenge, were that at any time a passion
which I deeply cherish. Is it possible I would rather remember King
Louis's injuries than your invaluable services?--Yet how is this to
be?--When I am called before my Sovereign, the Duke of Burgundy, I must
either stand silent or speak the truth. The former would be contumacy;
and to a false tale you will not desire me to train my tongue."

"Surely not," said Durward; "but let your evidence concerning Louis be
confined to what you yourself positively know to be truth; and when you
mention what others have reported, no matter how credibly, let it be as
reports only, and beware of pledging your own personal evidence to that,
which, though you may fully believe, you cannot personally know to be
true. The assembled Council of Burgundy cannot refuse to a monarch the
justice which in my country is rendered to the meanest person under
accusation. They must esteem him innocent, until direct and sufficient
proof shall demonstrate his guilt. Now, what does not consist with your
own certain knowledge, should be proved by other evidence than your
report from hearsay."

"I think I understand you," said the Countess Isabelle.

"I will make my meaning plainer," said Quentin; and was illustrating it
accordingly by more than one instance when the convent bell tolled.

"That," said the Countess, "is a signal that we must part--part for
ever!--But do not forget me, Durward; I will never forget you--your
faithful services--"

She could not speak more, but again extended her hand, which was again
pressed to his lips; and I know not how it was, that, in endeavouring
to withdraw her hand, the Countess came so close to the grating that
Quentin was encouraged to press the adieu on her lips. The young
lady did not chide him--perhaps there was no time; for Crevecoeur and
Crawford, who had been from some loophole eye witnesses if not ear
witnesses, also, of what was passing, rushed into the apartment, the
first in a towering passion, the latter laughing, and holding the Count
back.

"To your chamber, young mistress--to your chamber!" exclaimed the Count
to Isabelle, who, flinging down her veil, retired in all haste--"which
should be exchanged for a cell, and bread and water.--And you, gentle
sir, who are so malapert, the time will come when the interests of kings
and kingdoms may not be connected with such as you are; and you shall
then learn the penalty of your audacity in raising your beggarly eyes--"

"Hush! hush!--enough said--rein up--rein up," said the old Lord
"and you, Quentin, I command you to be silent, and begone to your
quarters.--There is no such room for so much scorn, neither, Sir Count
of Crevecoeur, that I must say now he is out of hearing.--Quentin
Durward is as much a gentleman as the King, only, as the Spaniard says,
not so rich. He is as noble as myself, and I am chief of my name. Tush,
tush! man, you must not speak to us of penalties."

"My lord, my lord," said Crevecoeur impatiently, "the insolence of these
foreign mercenaries is proverbial, and should receive rather rebuke than
encouragement from you, who are their leader."

"My Lord Count," answered Crawford, "I have ordered my command for these
fifty years without advice either from Frenchman or Burgundian; and I
intend to do so, under your favour, so long as I shall continue to hold
it."

"Well, well, my lord," said Crevecoeur, "I meant you no disrespect; your
nobleness, as well as your age, entitle you to be privileged in your
impatience; and for these young people. I am satisfied to overlook the
past, since I will take care that they never meet again."

"Do not take that upon your salvation, Crevecoeur," said the old Lord,
laughing; "mountains, it is said, may meet, and why not mortal creatures
that have legs, and life and love to put those legs in motion? Yon kiss,
Crevecoeur, came tenderly off--methinks it was ominous."

"You are striving again to disturb my patience," said Crevecoeur, "but I
will not give you that advantage over me.---Hark! they toll the summons
to the Castle--an awful meeting, of which God only can foretell the
issue."

"This issue I can foretell," said the old Scottish lord, "that if
violence is to be offered to the person of the King, few as his friends
are, and surrounded by his shall neither fall alone nor unavenged;
and grieved I am that his own positive orders have prevented my taking
measures to prepare for such an issue."

"My Lord of Crawford," said the Burgundian, "to anticipate such evil
is the sure way to give occasion to it. Obey the orders of your royal
master, and give no pretext for violence by taking hasty offence, and
you will find that the day will pass over more smoothly than you now
conjecture."



CHAPTER XXXII: THE INVESTIGATION

     Me rather had my heart might feel your love,
     Than my displeased eye see your courtesy.
     Up, cousin, up--your heart is up, I know,
     Thus high at least--although your knee--

     KING RICHARD II


At the first toll of the bell which was to summon the great nobles of
Burgundy together in council, with the very few French peers who could
be present on the occasion, Duke Charles, followed by a part of his
train, armed with partisans and battle axes, entered the Hall of
Herbert's Tower, in the Castle of Peronne. King Louis, who had expected
the visit, arose and made two steps towards the Duke, and then remained
standing with an air of dignity, which, in spite of the meanness of his
dress, and the familiarity of his ordinary manners, he knew very well
how to assume when he judged it necessary. Upon the present important
crisis, the composure of his demeanour had an evident effect upon his
rival, who changed the abrupt and hasty step with which he entered the
apartment into one more becoming a great vassal entering the presence
of his Lord Paramount. Apparently the Duke had formed the internal
resolution to treat Louis, in the outset at least, with the formalities
due to his high station; but at the same time it was evident, that, in
doing so, he put no small constraint upon the fiery impatience of
his own disposition, and was scarce able to control the feelings of
resentment and the thirst of revenge which boiled in his bosom. Hence,
though he compelled himself to use the outward acts, and in some degree
the language, of courtesy and reverence, his colour came and went
rapidly--his voice was abrupt, hoarse, and broken--his limbs shook, as
if impatient of the curb imposed on his motions--he frowned and bit his
lip until the blood came--and every look and movement showed that the
most passionate prince who ever lived was under the dominion of one of
his most violent paroxysms of fury.

The King marked this war of passion with a calm and untroubled eye, for,
though he gathered from the Duke's looks a foretaste of the bitterness
of death, which he dreaded alike as a mortal and a sinful man, yet he
was resolved, like a wary and skilful pilot, neither to suffer himself
to be disconcerted by his own fears, nor to abandon the helm, while
there was a chance of saving the vessel by adroit pilotage. Therefore,
when the Duke, in a hoarse and broken tone, said something of the
scarcity of his accommodations, he answered with a smile that he
could not complain, since he had as yet found Herbert's Tower a better
residence than it had proved to one of his ancestors.

"They told you the tradition then?" said Charles.

"Yes--here he was slain--but it was because he refused to take the cowl,
and finish his days in a monastery."

"The more fool he," said Louis, affecting unconcern, "since he gained
the torment of being a martyr, without the merit of being a saint."

"I come," said the Duke, "to pray your Majesty to attend a high council
at which tidings of weight are to be deliberated upon concerning the
welfare of France and Burgundy. You will presently meet them--that is,
if such be your pleasure."

"Nay, my fair cousin," said the King, "never strain courtesy so far as
to entreat what you may so boldly command.--To council, since such is
your Grace's pleasure. We are somewhat shorn of our train," he added,
looking upon the small suite that arranged themselves to attend him,
"but you, cousin, must shine out for us both."

Marshalled by Toison d'Or, chief of the heralds of Burgundy, the Princes
left the Earl Herbert's Tower, and entered the castle yard, which
Louis observed was filled with the Duke's bodyguard and men at arms,
splendidly accoutred, and drawn up in martial array. Crossing the court,
they entered the Council Hall, which was in a much more modern part of
the building than that of which Louis had been the tenant, and, though
in disrepair, had been hastily arranged for the solemnity of a public
council. Two chairs of state were erected under the same canopy, that
for the King being raised two steps higher than the one which the Duke
was to occupy; about twenty of the chief nobility sat, arranged in due
order, on either hand of the chair of state; and thus, when both the
Princes were seated, the person for whose trial, as it might be called,
the council was summoned, held the highest place, and appeared to
preside in it.

It was perhaps to get rid of this inconsistency, and the scruples which
might have been inspired by it, that Duke Charles, having bowed slightly
to the royal chair, bluntly opened the sitting with the following
words--

"My good vassals and councillors, it is not unknown to you what
disturbances have arisen in our territories, both in our father's time
and in our own, from the rebellion of vassals against superiors, and
subjects against their princes. And lately we have had the most dreadful
proof of the height to which these evils have arrived in our case, by
the scandalous flight of the Countess Isabelle of Croye, and her
aunt the Lady Hameline, to take refuge with a foreign power, thereby
renouncing their fealty to us, and inferring the forfeiture of their
fiefs; and in another more dreadful and deplorable instance, by the
sacrilegious and bloody murder of our beloved brother and ally, the
Bishop of Liege, and the rebellion of that treacherous city, which was
but too mildly punished for the last insurrection. We have been informed
that these sad events may be traced, not merely to the inconstancy and
folly of women, and the presumption of pampered citizens, but to the
agency of foreign power, and the interference of a mighty neighbour,
from whom, if good deeds could merit any return in kind, Burgundy could
have expected nothing but the most sincere and devoted friendship. If
this should prove truth," said the Duke, setting his teeth and pressing
his heel against the ground, "what consideration shall withhold
us--the means being in our power--from taking such measures as shall
effectually, and at the very source, close up the main spring from which
these evils have yearly flowed on us?"

The Duke had begun his speech with some calmness, but he elevated his
voice at the conclusion; and the last sentence was spoken in a tone
which made all the councillors tremble, and brought a transient fit of
paleness across the King's cheek. He instantly recalled his courage,
however, and addressed the council in his turn in a tone evincing so
much ease and composure that the Duke, though he seemed desirous to
interrupt or stop him, found no decent opportunity to do so.

"Nobles of France and of Burgundy," he said, "Knights of the Holy
Spirit and of the Golden Fleece! Since a King must plead his cause as
an accused person he cannot desire more distinguished judges than the
flower of nobleness and muster and pride of chivalry. Our fair cousin
of Burgundy hath but darkened the dispute between us, in so far as his
courtesy has declined to state it in precise terms. I, who have no cause
for observing such delicacy, nay, whose condition permits me not to do
so, crave leave to speak more precisely. It is to Us, my lords--to
Us, his liege lord, his kinsman, his ally, that unhappy circumstances,
perverting our cousins's clear judgment and better nature, have induced
him to apply the hateful charges of seducing his vassals from their
allegiance, stirring up the people of Liege to revolt, and stimulating
the outlawed William de la Marck to commit a most cruel and sacrilegious
murder. Nobles of France and Burgundy, I might truly appeal to the
circumstances in which I now stand, as being in themselves a complete
contradiction of such an accusation, for is it to be supposed that,
having the sense of a rational being left me, I should have thrown
myself unreservedly into the power of the Duke of Burgundy while I
was practising treachery against him such as could not fail to be
discovered, and which being discovered, must place me, as I now stand,
in the power of a justly exasperated prince? The folly of one who should
seat himself quietly down to repose on a mine, after he had lighted
the match which was to cause instant explosion, would have been wisdom
compared to mine. I have no doubt that, amongst the perpetrators of
those horrible treasons at Schonwaldt, villains have been busy with my
name--but am I to be answerable, who have given them no right to use
it?--If two silly women, disgusted on account of some romantic cause of
displeasure, sought refuge at my Court, does it follow that they did
so by my direction?--It will be found, when inquired into, that, since
honour and chivalry forbade my sending them back prisoners to the Court
of Burgundy--which, I think, gentlemen, no one who wears the collar of
these Orders would suggest--that I came as nearly as possible to the
same point by placing them in the hands of the venerable father in God,
who is now a saint in Heaven."

Here Louis seemed much affected and pressed his kerchief to his eyes.
"In the hands, I say, of a member of my own family, and still more
closely united with that of Burgundy, whose situation, exalted condition
in the church, and, alas! whose numerous virtues qualified him to be
the protector of these unhappy wanderers for a little while, and the
mediator betwixt them and their liege lord. I say, therefore, the only
circumstances which seem, in my brother of Burgundy's hasty view of this
subject, to argue unworthy suspicions against me, are such as can
be explained on the fairest and most honourable motives; and I say,
moreover, that no one particle of credible evidence can be brought to
support the injurious charges which have induced my brother to alter
his friendly looks towards one who came to him in full confidence of
friendship--have caused him to turn his festive hall into a court of
justice, and his hospitable apartments into a prison."

"My lord, my lord," said Charles, breaking in as soon as the King
paused, "for your being here at a time so unluckily coinciding with the
execution of your projects, I can only account by supposing that those
who make it their trade to impose on others do sometimes egregiously
delude themselves. The engineer is sometimes killed by the springing of
his own petard.--For what is to follow, let it depend on the event of
this solemn inquiry.--Bring hither the Countess Isabelle of Croye."

As the young lady was introduced, supported on the one side by the
Countess of Crevecoeur, who had her husband's commands to that effect,
and on the other by the Abbess of the Ursuline convent, Charles
exclaimed, with his usual harshness of voice and manner, "So! sweet
Princess--you, who could scarce find breath to answer us when we last
laid our just and reasonable commands on you, yet have had wind enough
to run as long a course as ever did hunted doe--what think you of
the fair work you have made between two great Princes, and two mighty
countries, that have been like to go to war for your baby face?"

The publicity of the scene and the violence of Charles's manner totally
overcame the resolution which Isabelle had formed of throwing herself at
the Duke's feet and imploring him to take possession of her estates,
and permit her to retire into a cloister. She stood motionless, like a
terrified female in a storm, who hears the thunder roll on every side of
her, and apprehends in every fresh peal the bolt which is to strike her
dead. The Countess of Crevecoeur, a woman of spirit equal to her birth
and to the beauty which she preserved even in her matronly years, judged
it necessary to interfere.

"My Lord Duke," she said, "my fair cousin is under my protection. I know
better than your Grace how women should be treated, and we will leave
this presence instantly, unless you use a tone and language more
suitable to our rank and sex."

The Duke burst out into a laugh. "Crevecoeur," he said, "thy tameness
hath made a lordly dame of thy Countess; but that is no affair of mine.
Give a seat to yonder simple girl, to whom, so far from feeling enmity,
I design the highest grace and honour.--Sit down, mistress, and tell
us at your leisure what fiend possessed you to fly from your native
country, and embrace the trade of a damsel adventurous."

With much pain, and not without several interruptions, Isabelle
confessed that, being absolutely determined against a match proposed
to her by the Duke of Burgundy, she had indulged the hope of obtaining
protection of the Court of France.

"And under protection of the French Monarch," said Charles. "Of that,
doubtless, you were well assured?"

"I did indeed so think myself assured," said the Countess Isabelle,
"otherwise I had not taken a step so decided."

Here Charles looked upon Louis with a smile of inexpressible bitterness,
which the King supported with the utmost firmness, except that his lip
grew something whiter than it was wont to be.

"But my information concerning King Louis's intentions towards us,"
continued the Countess, after a short pause, "was almost entirely
derived from my unhappy aunt, the Lady Hameline, and her opinions were
formed upon the assertions and insinuations of persons whom I have since
discovered to be the vilest traitors and most faithless wretches in the
world."

She then stated, in brief terms, what she had since come to learn of
the treachery of Marthon, and of Hayraddin Maugrabin, and added that
she "entertained no doubt that the elder Maugrabin, called Zamet,
the original adviser of their flight, was capable of every species of
treachery, as well as of assuming the character of an agent of Louis
without authority."

There was a pause while the Countess had continued her story, which she
prosecuted, though very briefly, from the time she left the territories
of Burgundy, in company with her aunt, until the storming of Schonwaldt,
and her final surrender to the Count of Crevecoeur. All remained mute
after she had finished her brief and broken narrative, and the Duke of
Burgundy bent his fierce dark eyes on the ground, like one who seeks for
a pretext to indulge his passion, but finds none sufficiently plausible
to justify himself in his own eyes.

"The mole," he said at length, looking upwards, "winds not his dark
subterranean path beneath our feet the less certainly that we, though
conscious of his motions, cannot absolutely trace them. Yet I would know
of King Louis wherefore he maintained these ladies at his Court, had
they not gone thither by his own invitation."

"I did not so entertain them, fair cousin," answered the King. "Out
of compassion, indeed, I received them in privacy, but took an early
opportunity of placing them under the protection of the late excellent
Bishop, your own ally, and who was (may God assoil him!) a better judge
than I, or any secular prince, how to reconcile the protection due
to fugitives with the duty which a king owes to his ally, from whose
dominions they have fled. I boldly ask this young lady whether my
reception of them was cordial, or whether it was not, on the contrary,
such as made them express regret that they had made my Court their place
of refuge?"

"So much was it otherwise than cordial," answered the Countess, "that it
induced me, at least, to doubt how far it was possible that your Majesty
should have actually given the invitation of which we had been assured,
by those who called themselves your agents, since, supposing them to
have proceeded only as they were duly authorized, it would have been
hard to reconcile your Majesty's conduct with that to be expected from a
king, a knight, and a gentleman."

The Countess turned her eyes to the King as she spoke, with a look which
was probably intended as a reproach, but the breast of Louis was armed
against all such artillery. On the contrary, waving slowly his expanded
hands, and looking around the circle, he seemed to make a triumphant
appeal to all present, upon the testimony borne to his innocence in the
Countess's reply.

Burgundy, meanwhile, cast on him a look which seemed to say, that if in
some degree silenced, he was as far as ever from being satisfied, and
then said abruptly to the Countess, "Methinks, fair mistress, in this
account of your wanderings, you have forgot all mention of certain love
passages.--So, ho, blushing already?--Certain knights of the forest,
by whom your quiet was for a time interrupted. Well--that incident hath
come to our ear, and something we may presently form out of it.--Tell
me, King Louis, were it not well, before this vagrant Helen of Troy [the
wife of Menelaus. She was carried to Troy by Paris, and thus was the
cause of the Trojan War], or of Croye, set more Kings by the ears, were
it not well to carve out a fitting match for her?"

King Louis, though conscious what ungrateful proposal was likely to be
made next, gave a calm and silent assent to what Charles said; but the
Countess herself was restored to courage by the very extremity of her
situation. She quitted the arm of the Countess of Crevecoeur, on which
she had hitherto leaned, came forward timidly, yet with an air of
dignity, and kneeling before the Duke's throne, thus addressed him
"Noble Duke of Burgundy, and my liege lord, I acknowledge my fault
in having withdrawn myself from your dominions without your gracious
permission, and will most humbly acquiesce in any penalty you are
pleased to impose. I place my lands and castles at your rightful
disposal, and pray you only of your own bounty, and for the sake of my
memory, to allow the last of the line of Croye, out of her large estate,
such a moderate maintenance as may find her admission into a convent for
the remainder of her life."

"What think you, Sire, of the young person's petition to us," said the
Duke, addressing Louis.

"As of a holy and humble motion," said the King, "which doubtless comes
from that grace which ought not to be resisted or withstood."

"The humble and lowly shall be exalted," said Charles. "Arise, Countess
Isabelle--we mean better for you than you have devised for yourself.
We mean neither to sequestrate your estates, nor to abase your honours,
but, on the contrary, will add largely to both."

"Alas! my lord," said the Countess, continuing on her knees, "it is
even that well meant goodness which I fear still more than your Grace's
displeasure, since it compels me--"

"Saint George of Burgundy!" said Duke Charles, "is our will to be
thwarted, and our commands disputed, at every turn? Up, I say, minion,
and withdraw for the present--when we have time to think of thee, we
will so order matters that, Teste Saint Gris! you shall either obey us,
or do worse."

Notwithstanding this stern answer, the Countess Isabelle remained at
his feet, and would probably, by her pertinacity, have driven him to
say upon the spot something yet more severe, had not the Countess of
Crevecoeur, who better knew that Prince's humour, interfered to raise
her young friend, and to conduct her from the hall.

Quentin Durward was now summoned to appear, and presented himself before
the King and Duke with that freedom, distant alike from bashful reserve
and intrusive boldness, which becomes a youth at once well born and
well nurtured, who gives honour where it is due but without permitting
himself to be dazzled or confused by the presence of those to whom it
is to be rendered. His uncle had furnished him with the means of again
equipping himself in the arms and dress of an Archer of the Scottish
Guard, and his complexion, mien, and air suited in an uncommon degree
his splendid appearance. His extreme youth, too, prepossessed the
councillors in his favour, the rather that no one could easily believe
that the sagacious Louis would have chosen so very young a person to
become the confidant of political intrigues; and thus the King enjoyed,
in this, as in other cases, considerable advantage from his singular
choice of agents, both as to age and rank, where such election seemed
least likely to be made. At the command of the Duke, sanctioned by that
of Louis, Quentin commenced an account of his journey with the Ladies
of Croye to the neighbourhood of Liege, premising a statement of King
Louis's instructions, which were that he should escort them safely to
the castle of the Bishop.

"And you obeyed my orders accordingly," said the King.

"I did, Sire," replied the Scot.

"You omit a circumstance," said the Duke. "You were set upon in the
forest by two wandering knights."

"It does not become me to remember or to proclaim such an incident,"
said the youth, blushing ingenuously.

"But it doth not become me to forget it," said the Duke of Orleans.
"This youth discharged his commission manfully, and maintained his trust
in a manner that I shall long remember.--Come to my apartment, Archer,
when this matter is over, and thou shalt find I have not forgot thy
brave bearing, while I am glad to see it is equalled by thy modesty."

"And come to mine," said Dunois. "I have a helmet for thee, since I
think I owe thee one."

Quentin bowed low to both, and the examination was resumed. At the
command of Duke Charles he produced the written instructions which he
had received for the direction of his journey.

"Did you follow these instructions literally, soldier?" said the Duke.

"No; if it please your Grace," replied Quentin. "They directed me, as
you may be pleased to observe, to cross the Maes near Namur; whereas
I kept the left bank, as being both the nigher and the safer road to
Liege."

"And wherefore that alteration?" said the Duke.

"Because I began to suspect the fidelity of my guide," answered Quentin.

"Now mark the questions I have next to ask thee," said the Duke. "Reply
truly to them, and fear nothing from the resentment of any one. But if
you palter or double in your answers I will have thee hung alive in an
iron chain from the steeple of the market house, where thou shalt wish
for death for many an hour ere he come to relieve you!"

There was a deep silence ensued. At length, having given the youth time,
as he thought, to consider the circumstances in which he was placed, the
Duke demanded to know of Durward who his guide was, by whom supplied,
and wherefore he had been led to entertain suspicion of him. To the
first of these questions Quentin Durward answered by naming Hayraddin
Maugrabin, the Bohemian; to the second, that the guide had been
recommended by Tristan l'Hermite; and in reply to the third point he
mentioned what had happened in the Franciscan convent near Namur, how
the Bohemian had been expelled from the holy house, and how, jealous of
his behaviour, he had dogged him to a rendezvous with one of William
de la Marck's lanzknechts, where he overheard them arrange a plan for
surprising the ladies who were under his protection.

"Now, hark," said the Duke, "and once more remember thy life depends
on thy veracity, did these villains mention their having this King's--I
mean this very King Louis of France's authority for their scheme of
surprising the escort and carrying away the ladies?"

"If such infamous fellows had said," replied Quentin, "I know not how I
should have believed them, having the word of the King himself to place
in opposition to theirs."

Louis, who had listened hitherto with most earnest attention, could not
help drawing his breath deeply when he heard Durward's answer, in the
manner of one from whose bosom a heavy weight has been at once removed.
The Duke again looked disconcerted and moody, and, returning to the
charge, questioned Quentin still more closely, whether he did not
understand, from these men's private conversation, that the plots which
they meditated had King Louis's sanction?

"I repeat that I heard nothing which could authorize me to say so,"
answered the young man, who, though internally convinced of the King's
accession to the treachery of Hayraddin, yet held it contrary to his
allegiance to bring forward his own suspicions on the subject; "and if I
had heard such men make such an assertion, I again say that I would not
have given their testimony weight against the instructions of the King
himself."

"Thou art a faithful messenger," said the Duke, with a sneer, "and
I venture to say that, in obeying the King's instructions, thou hast
disappointed his expectations in a manner that thou mightst have smarted
for, but that subsequent events have made thy bull headed fidelity seem
like good service."

"I understand you not, my lord," said Quentin Durward, "all I know is
that my master King Louis sent me to protect these ladies, and that I
did so accordingly, to the extent of my ability, both in the journey
to Schonwaldt, and through the subsequent scenes which took place. I
