

THE LIFE OF AGRICOLA, WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE SITUATION, CLIMATE, AND
PEOPLE OF BRITAIN.


Amongst the Ancients, it was common to transmit to posterity the
characters and exploits of memorable men: nor in truth in our own times
has the Age, however indifferent about what concerns itself, failed to
observe the like usage, whenever any spirit eminent for great and signal
virtue has vanquished and triumphed over the blindness of such as cannot
distinguish right from wrong, as well as over the spite of malignants;
for, spite and blindness are evils common to great States and to small.
But, as in those early times there was found greater propensity to feats
of renown, and more scope to perform them; so whoever excelled in a
happy genius was naturally led to display the merits and memory of the
virtuous dead, without all view to court favour, or to gain advantages,
but only by the motives and recompense flowing from a benevolent and
conscientious mind. Indeed there were several who, in recounting their
own lives, concluded, that they thence showed rather a confidence in
their own integrity and demeanour than any mark of arrogance. Neither
was the account which Rutilius and Scaurus gave of themselves, thence
the less credited or the more censured. So true it is, that the several
virtues are best understood and most prized, during the same times in
which they are most easily produced. But to myself, who am going to
relate the life of a person deceased, I find pardon necessary; which I
should not have asked, were I not about to revive and traverse times so
sanguinary, and baneful to all virtue.

We find it recorded, that for celebrating the praises of Paetus Thrasea,
Arulenus Rusticus suffered a deadly doom; as did Herennius Senesce, for
those of Helvidius Priscus. Nor upon the persons of the authors only was
this cruelty inflicted, but also upon the books themselves; since to the
Triumvirate of Justice orders were sent, that in the Forum and place of
popular elections, the works of men so illustrious for parts and genius
should be burned. Yes, in this very fire they imagined, that they should
abolish the voice and utterance of the Roman People, with the liberty of
the Senate, and all the ideas and remembrances of humankind. For, they
had besides expelled all the professors of philosophy, [Footnote:
When Vespasian's worthless son "cleared Rome of what most sham'd him:"
Domitian banished Epictetus, and the other philosophers.] and driven
every laudable science into exile, that nought which was worthy and
honest might anywhere be seen. Mighty surely was the testimony which
we gave of our patience; and as our forefathers had beheld the ultimate
consummation of liberty, so did we of bondage, since through dread
of informers and inquisitions of State, we were bereft of the common
intercourse of speech and attention. Nay, with our utterance we had
likewise lost our memory; had it been equally in our power to forget, as
to be silent.

Now indeed at length our spirit returns. Yet, though from the first dawn
of this very happy age begun by the reign of Nerva, he blended together
two things once found irreconcilable, public liberty and sovereign
power; and though Trajan his adopted successor be daily augmenting the
felicity of the State; insomuch that for the general security not only
hopes and vows are conceived, but even firm assurance follows these
vows, and their full accomplishment is seen; such however is the frailty
of man and its effects, that much more slow is the progress of the
remedies than of the evils; and as human bodies attain their growth by
tedious degrees, and are subject to be destroyed in an instant, so it is
much easier to suppress than to revive the efforts of genius and study.
For, upon the mind there steals a pleasure even in sloth and remissness,
and that very inactivity which was at first hated, is at last loved.
Will it not be found that during a course of fifteen years (a mighty
space in the age of mortal man) numbers perished through fortuitous
disasters, and all men noted for promptness and spirit were cut off by
the cruelty of the Emperor? Few we are, who have escaped; and if I may
so speak, we have survived not only others but even ourselves, when from
the middle of our life so many years were rent; whence from being young
we are arrived at old age, from being old we are nigh come to the utmost
verge of mortality, all in a long course of awful silence. I shall
however find no cause of regret from having framed an historical
deduction of our former bondage, as also a testimony of the public
blessings which at present we enjoy; though, in doing it, my style be
negligent and unpolished. To the honour of Agricola my wife's father,
this present book is in the meantime dedicated; and, as 'tis a
declaration of filial duty and affection, will thence be commended, at
least excused.

       *       *       *       *       *

A.D. 40. Cnaeus Julius Agricola was born in the ancient and illustrious
Colony of Forojulium, [Footnote: Frejus.] and both his grandfathers were
Procurators to the Emperors; a dignity peculiar to the Equestrian Order.
His father Julius Graecinus was a Senator, and noted for eloquence and
philosophy. By these his virtues, he earned the wrath of Caligula. For,
he was by him ordered to accuse Marcus Silanus, and put to death for
refusing. His mother was Julia Procilla, a lady of singular chastity.
Under her eye and tender care he was reared, and spent his childhood
and youth in the continual pursuit and cultivation of worthy
accomplishments. What guarded him from the allurements of the vicious
(besides his own virtuous disposition and natural innocence) was, that
for the seat and nursery of his studies, whilst yet very little, he had
the city of Marseilles; a place well tempered and framed, as in it
all the politeness of the Greeks and all the provincial parsimony are
blended together. I remember he was wont to declare, that in his early
youth he studied Philosophy and the Law with more avidity than was
allowable to a Roman and a Senator; till the discretion of his mother
checked his spirit, engaged with passion and ardour in the pursuit. In
truth, his superior and elevated genius thirsted, with more vehemence
than caution, after the loveliness and lustre of a name and renown so
mighty and sublime. Reason and age afterwards qualified his heat; and,
what is a task extremely hard, he satisfied himself with a limited
measure of philosophy.

A.D. 59-62. The first rudiments of war he learnt in Britain, under that
prudent and vigilant commander Suetonius Paulinus; by whom he was chosen
and distinguished, as his domestic companion. Neither did Agricola
behave licentiously, after the manner of young men, who turn warfare
into riot; nor assumed the title and office of a Tribune without the
sufficiency, in order to use it slothfully in feats of pleasure and
absence from duty, but to know the Province, to be known to the army,
to learn of such as had experience, to follow such as were worthy and
brave, to seek for no exploits for ostentation, to refuse none through
fear, and in all his pursuits was equally zealous and active. Indeed
at no time had Britain been under greater combustions, nor our affairs
there more precarious. Our veterans were slaughtered, our colonies
burned down, our armies surprised and taken. At that juncture the
struggle was for life; afterwards, for victory. Now though all these
affairs were transacted by the counsels and conduct of another than
Agricola, and though the stress of the whole, with the glory of
recovering the Province, accrued to the General; they all however proved
to the young man matters of skill, of experience and stimulation; and
there seized his soul a passion for military glory, a spirit disgustful
to the times, when of men signally eminent a malignant opinion was
entertained, and when as much peril arose from a great character as from
a bad.

A.D. 62-68. Departing from hence to Rome for the exercise of public
dignities, he there married Domitia Decidiana, a lady splendid in her
descent; and to him, who was aspiring to higher honours, this marriage
proved a great ornament and support. In marvellous unanimity they also
lived, in a course of mutual tenderness and mutual preference; a temper
commendable in both, only that the praise of a good wife rises in
proportion to the contumely of a bad. His lot as Quaestor fell upon
Asia, where he had Salvius Titianus for Proconsul. But neither the
Province nor the Proconsul corrupted his probity, though the country
was very rich, nay, prepared as a prey for men corruptly disposed;
and Titianus, a man bent upon all acts of rapine, was ready, upon
the smallest encouragement, to have purchased a mutual connivance in
iniquity. In Asia he was enriched by the birth of a daughter, tending at
once to his consolation and the support of his family; for the son born
to him before, he very soon lost. The interval between his bearing the
office of Quaestor and that of Tribune of the People, and even the year
of his Tribuneship, he passed in repose and inactivity; as well aware of
the spirit of the times under Nero, when sloth and heaviness served for
wisdom. With the like indolence he held the Praetorship, and in the same
quiet and silence. For upon him the jurisdiction of that dignity fell
not. The public pastimes and the empty gaieties of the office, he
exhibited according to the rules of good sense and to the measure of
his wealth, in a manner though remote from prodigality, yet deserving
popular applause. As he was next appointed by Galba to make research
into the gifts and oblations appertaining to the temples, he proceeded
with such diligence and an examination so strict, that the State
suffered from no sacrilege save that of Nero.

A.D. 69 and 70. In the year following he suffered a grievous blow in his
spirit and family. For, Otho's fleet, which continued roving upon
the coast and pursuing rapine, whilst they were ravaging Intemelium
[Footnote: Vinitimiglia.] (a part of Liguria) slew the mother of
Agricola upon her estate there, and plundered the estate itself with
a great part of her treasure, which had indeed proved the cause of the
murder. As he therefore went from Rome to solemnise her funeral, he had
tidings upon the road that Vespasian was pursuing the sovereignty, and
instantly espoused his party. In the beginning of this reign all the
exercise of power and the government of the city, were entirely in the
hands of Mucianus; for, Domitian was yet extremely young, and, of the
Imperial fortune of his father, assumed nothing further than a latitude
for debauchery. Mucianus, who had despatched Agricola to levy forces,
and found him to have acted in that trust with uprightness and
magnanimity, preferred him to the command of the twentieth legion; as
soon as he was informed, that he who commanded it before was engaged
in seditious practices. Indeed that legion had with great slowness and
reluctance been brought to swear allegiance to Vespasian, nay, was grown
over mighty and even formidable to the commanders-in-chief: so that
their own commander was found void of authority to control them; though
it is uncertain whether from the temper of the man or from that of
the soldiers. Thus Agricola was chosen, at once to succeed him, and to
punish delinquency in them; and exercising moderation altogether rare,
would rather have it thought, that he had found them unblamable than
made them so.

A.D. 72. Over Britain at that juncture Vettius Bolanus bore rule, but
with more complacency than suited a province so fierce and untamed.
Hence Agricola restrained his own heat, and held within bounds the
ardour of his spirit, as he was well skilled how to show his obedience,
and had thoroughly learned to blend what was honourable with what was
profitable: soon after this, Britain received for its Governor Petilius
Cerialis, one of Consular quality. The virtue and abilities of Agricola
had now ample space for producing suitable effects. But to him at first
Cerialis communicated only the dangers and fatigues: with him anon
he likewise shared the glory; frequently, for trial of his prowess,
committed to his conduct a part of the army; sometimes, according to the
measure of his success, set him at the head of forces still larger.
Nor did Agricola ever vaunt his exploits to blazon his own fame. To his
general, as to the Author of all, he, as his instrument and inferior,
still ascribed his good fortune. Thus from his bravery in the execution
of his orders, from his modesty in recounting his deeds of bravery, he
escaped envy, yet failed not to gain glory.

A.D. 73-78. Upon his return from commanding a legion, the deified
Vespasian raised him to the rank of a patrician, and afterwards invested
him with the government of the Province of Aquitaine; a government of
the foremost dignity, and given as previous to the Consulship, to
which that Prince had destined him. There are many who believe, that
to military men subtilty of spirit is wanting; for that in camps
the direction of process and authority, is rather rough and void of
formality; and that where hands and force are chiefly used, there the
address and refinements usual to Courts are not exercised. Yet Agricola,
assisted by his natural prudence, though he was then engaged only with
men of peace and the robe, acquitted himself with great facility and
great uprightness. He carefully distinguished the seasons of business
and the seasons of recess. Whenever he sat in Council or upon the
Tribunals of justice, he was grave, attentive, awful, generally addicted
to compassion. The moment he had fulfilled the duties of his office,
he personated no longer the man of power: he had then cast off all
sternness, all airs of State, and all rigour. Nay, what is very rarely
to be seen, his complaisance neither weakened his authority, nor did his
severity make him less amiable. It were an injury to the virtues of so
great a man, to particularise his just dealings, his temperance, and
the cleanness of his hands. [Footnote: "Integritatem atque abstinentiam
referre."] In truth glory itself was what he pursued, not by any
ostentation of bravery, nor by any strain of artifice or address; though
of that pursuit even the best men are often fond. Thus he was far from
maintaining any competition with his equals in station, far from any
contest with the Procurators of the Prince: since, to conquer in this
contention he judged to be no glory; and to be crushed by them were
disgrace. His administration here lasted hardly three years, ere he
was recalled to the present possession of the Consulship. With this
employment there accrued the public opinion, that for his province
Britain would be assigned him, from no words which had dropped from him
about it, but because he was deemed equal to the office. Common fame
does not always err; sometimes it even directs the public choice. To
myself yet very young, whilst he was Consul, he contracted his daughter,
a young lady even then of excellent hopes, and, at the end of his
Consulship, presented her in marriage. He was then forthwith promoted
to the government of Britain, as also invested with the honour of the
Pontificate.

The account which I shall here present of the situation and people of
Britain, a subject about which many authors have written, comes not from
any design of setting up my own exactness and genius against theirs, but
only because the country was then first thoroughly subdued. So that such
matters as former writers have, without knowing them, embellished with
eloquence, will by me be recounted according to the truth of evidence
and discoveries. Of all the islands which have reached the knowledge of
the Romans, Britain is the largest. It extends towards Germany to the
east, towards Spain to the west. To the south it looks towards Gaul. Its
northern shore, beyond which there is no land, is beaten by a sea vast
and boundless. [Footnote: "Belluosus, qui remotis Obstrepit Oceanus
Britannis."] Britain is by Livy and Fabius Rusticus, the former the most
eloquent of the ancient historians, the latter of the moderns, compared
in shape to an oblong shield, or a broad knife with two edges. And such
in effect is its figure on this side Caledonia, whence common opinion
has thus also fashioned the whole. But a tract of territory huge and
unmeasurable stretches forward to the uttermost shore, and straitening
by degrees, terminates like a wedge. Round the coast of this sea, which
beyond it has no land, the Roman fleet now first sailed, and thence
proved Britain to be an island, as also discovered and subdued the Isles
of Orkney till then unknown. Thule was likewise descried, hitherto
hid by winter under eternal snow. This sea they report to be slow and
stagnate, difficult to the rowers, and indeed hardly to be raised by
the force of winds. This I conjecture to be because land and mountains,
which are the cause and materials of tempests, very rarely occur in
proportion to the mighty mass of water, a mass so deep and uninterrupted
as not to be easily agitated. An inquiry into the nature of the ocean
and of the tide, is not the purpose of this work, and about it many have
written. One thing I would add, that nowhere is the power of the sea
more extensive than here, forcing back the waters of many rivers, or
carrying them away with its own; nor is its flux and ebbings confined to
the banks and shore; but it works and winds itself far into the country,
nay forms bays in rocks and mountains, as if the same were its native
bed.

For the rest; who were the first inhabitants of Britain, whether natives
of its own, or foreigners, can be little known amongst a people thus
barbarous. In their looks and persons they vary; from whence arguments
and inferences are formed. For, the red hair of the Caledonians and
their large limbs, testify their descent to be from Germany. The swarthy
complexion of the Silures, and their hair, which is generally curled,
with their situation opposite to the coast of Spain, furnish ground to
believe, that the ancient Iberians had arrived from thence here, and
taken possession of the territory. They who live next to Gaul are also
like the Gauls; whether it be that the spirit of the original stock
from which they sprang, still remains, or whether in countries
near adjoining, the genius of the climate confers the same form and
disposition upon the bodies of men. To one who considers the whole,
it seems however credible, that the Gauls at first occupied this their
neighbouring coast. That their sacred rites are the same, you may learn
from their being possessed with the same superstition of every sort.
Their speech does not much vary. In daring and dangers they are prompted
by the like boldness, and with the like affright avoid them when they
approach. In the Britons however superior ferocity and defiance is
found, as in a people not yet softened by a long peace. For we learn
from history, that the Gauls too flourished in warlike prowess and
renown: amongst them afterwards, together with peace and idleness, there
entered effeminacy; and thus with the loss of their liberty they lost
their spirit and magnanimity. The same happened to those of the Britons
who were conquered long ago. The rest still continue such as the Gauls
once were.

Their principal force consists in their foot. Some nations amongst them
make also war in chariots. The more honourable person always drives:
under his leading his followers fight. They were formerly subject to
Kings. They are now swayed by several chiefs, and rent into factions and
parties, according to the humour and passions of those their leaders.
Nor against nations thus powerful does aught so much avail us, as that
they consult not in a body for the security of the whole. It is rare
that two or three communities assemble and unite to repulse any public
danger threatening to all. So that whilst only a single community fought
at a time, they were every one vanquished. The sky from frequent clouds
and rain is dull and hazy. Excessive cold they feel not. Their days in
length surpass ours. Their nights are very clear, and at the extremity
of the country, very short; so that between the setting and return of
the day, you perceive but small interval. They affirm, that were it not
for the intervention of clouds, the rays of the sun would be seen in the
night, and that he doth not rise and fall, but only pass by: for that
the extremities of the earth, which are level, yielding but a low
shadow, prevent darkness from rising high and spreading; and thence
night is far short of reaching the stars and the sky. The soil is such,
that except the olive and the vine, and other vegetables, which are wont
to be raised in hotter climes, it readily bears all fruits and grain,
and is very fertile. It quickly produces, but its productions ripen
slowly; and of both these effects there is the same cause, the extreme
humidity of the earth and of the sky. Britain yields gold and silver,
with other metals, all which prove the prize and reward of the
Conquerors. The sea also breeds pearls, but of a dark and livid hue,
a defect by some ascribed to the unskilfulness of such as gather them.
For, in the Red Sea they are pulled from the rocks alive and vigorous.
In Britain they are gathered at random, such as the sea casts them
upon the shore. For myself; I am much apter to believe, that nature
