"Is that the maiden?" asked Rothsay, in a voice naturally sweet, and now
carefully modulated to a whispering tone. "Let her approach, Griselda,
and kiss our hand."

The supposed nurse led the trembling maiden forward to the side of the
couch, and signed to her to kneel. Catharine did so, and kissed with
much devotion and simplicity the gloved hand which the counterfeit
duchess extended to her.

"Be not afraid," said the same musical voice; "in me you only see a
melancholy example of the vanity of human greatness; happy those, my
child, whose rank places them beneath the storms of state."

While he spoke, he put his arms around her neck and drew her towards
him, as if to salute her in token of welcome. But the kiss was bestowed
with an earnestness which so much overacted the part of the fair
patroness, that Catharine, concluding the Duchess had lost her senses,
screamed aloud.

"Peace, fool! it is I--David of Rothsay."

Catharine looked around her; the nurse was gone, and the Duke tearing
off his veil, she saw herself in the power of a daring young libertine.

"Now be present with me, Heaven!" she said; "and Thou wilt, if I forsake
not myself."

As this resolution darted through her mind, she repressed her
disposition to scream, and, as far as she might, strove to conceal her
fear.

"The jest hath been played," she said, with as much firmness as she
could assume; "may I entreat that your Highness will now unhand me?" for
he still kept hold of her arm.

"Nay, my pretty captive, struggle not--why should you fear?"

"I do not struggle, my lord. As you are pleased to detain me, I will
not, by striving, provoke you to use me ill, and give pain to yourself,
when you have time to think."

"Why, thou traitress, thou hast held me captive for months," said the
Prince, "and wilt thou not let me hold thee for a moment?"

"This were gallantry, my lord, were it in the streets of Perth, where I
might listen or escape as I listed; it is tyranny here."

"And if I did let thee go, whither wouldst thou fly?" said Rothsay.
"The bridges are up, the portcullis down, and the men who follow me are
strangely deaf to a peevish maiden's squalls. Be kind, therefore, and
you shall know what it is to oblige a prince."

"Unloose me, then, my lord, and hear me appeal from thyself to thyself,
from Rothsay to the Prince of Scotland. I am the daughter of an humble
but honest citizen. I am, I may well nigh say, the spouse of a brave and
honest man. If I have given your Highness any encouragement for what you
have done, it has been unintentional. Thus forewarned, I entreat you to
forego your power over me, and suffer me to depart. Your Highness can
obtain nothing from me, save by means equally unworthy of knighthood or
manhood."

"You are bold, Catharine," said the Prince, "but neither as a knight
nor a man can I avoid accepting a defiance. I must teach you the risk of
such challenges."

While he spoke, he attempted to throw his arms again around her; but she
eluded his grasp, and proceeded in the same tone of firm decision.

"My strength, my lord, is as great to defend myself in an honourable
strife as yours can be to assail me with a most dishonourable purpose.
Do not shame yourself and me by putting it to the combat. You may stun
me with blows, or you may call aid to overpower me; but otherwise you
will fail of your purpose."

"What a brute you would make me!" said the Prince. "The force I would
use is no more than excuses women in yielding to their own weakness."

He sat down in some emotion.

"Then keep it," said Catharine, "for those women who desire such an
excuse. My resistance is that of the most determined mind which love
of honour and fear of shame ever inspired. Alas! my lord, could you
succeed, you would but break every bond between me and life, between
yourself and honour. I have been trained fraudulently here, by what
decoys I know not; but were I to go dishonoured hence, it would be to
denounce the destroyer of my happiness to every quarter of Europe.
I would take the palmer's staff in my hand, and wherever chivalry is
honoured, or the word Scotland has been heard, I would proclaim the heir
of a hundred kings, the son of the godly Robert Stuart, the heir of
the heroic Bruce, a truthless, faithless man, unworthy of the crown he
expects and of the spurs he wears. Every lady in wide Europe would hold
your name too foul for her lips; every worthy knight would hold you
a baffled, forsworn caitiff, false to the first vow of arms, the
protection of woman and the defence of the feeble."

Rothsay resumed his seat, and looked at her with a countenance in which
resentment was mingled with admiration. "You forget to whom you speak,
maiden. Know, the distinction I have offered you is one for which
hundreds whose trains you are born to bear would feel gratitude."

"Once more, my lord," resumed Catharine, "keep these favours for those
by whom they are prized; or rather reserve your time and your health
for other and nobler pursuits--for the defence of your country and
the happiness of your subjects. Alas, my lord, how willingly would an
exulting people receive you for their chief! How gladly would they close
around you, did you show desire to head them against the oppression of
the mighty, the violence of the lawless, the seduction of the vicious,
and the tyranny of the hypocrite!"

The Duke of Rothsay, whose virtuous feelings were as easily excited
as they were evanescent, was affected by the enthusiasm with which she
spoke. "Forgive me if I have alarmed you, maiden," he said "thou art
too noble minded to be the toy of passing pleasure, for which my mistake
destined thee; and I, even were thy birth worthy of thy noble spirit and
transcendent beauty, have no heart to give thee; for by the homage of
the heart only should such as thou be wooed. But my hopes have been
blighted, Catharine: the only woman I ever loved has been torn from me
in the very wantonness of policy, and a wife imposed on me whom I must
ever detest, even had she the loveliness and softness which alone can
render a woman amiable in my eyes. My health is fading even in early
youth; and all that is left for me is to snatch such flowers as the
short passage from life to the grave will now present. Look at my hectic
cheek; feel, if you will, my intermitting pulse; and pity me and excuse
me if I, whose rights as a prince and as a man have been trampled upon
and usurped, feel occasional indifference towards the rights of others,
and indulge a selfish desire to gratify the wish of the passing moment."

"Oh, my lord!" exclaimed Catharine, with the enthusiasm which belonged
to her character--"I will call you my dear lord, for dear must the heir
of Bruce be to every child of Scotland--let me not, I pray, hear you
speak thus! Your glorious ancestor endured exile, persecution, the night
of famine, and the day of unequal combat, to free his country; do you
practise the like self denial to free yourself. Tear yourself from those
who find their own way to greatness smoothed by feeding your follies.
Distrust yon dark Ramorny! You know it not, I am sure--you could not
know; but the wretch who could urge the daughter to courses of shame by
threatening the life of the aged father is capable of all that is vile,
all that is treacherous!"

"Did Ramorny do this?" said the Prince.

"He did indeed, my lord, and he dares not deny it."

"It shall be looked to," answered the Duke of Rothsay. "I have ceased
to love him; but he has suffered much for my sake, and I must see his
services honourably requited."

"His services! Oh, my lord, if chronicles speak true, such services
brought Troy to ruins and gave the infidels possession of Spain."

"Hush, maiden--speak within compass, I pray you," said the Prince,
rising up; "our conference ends here."

"Yet one word, my Lord Duke of Rothsay," said Catharine, with animation,
while her beautiful countenance resembled that of an admonitory angel.
"I cannot tell what impels me to speak thus boldly; but the fire burns
within me, and will break out. Leave this castle without an hour's
delay; the air is unwholesome for you. Dismiss this Ramorny before the
day is ten minutes older; his company is most dangerous."

"What reason have you for saying this?"

"None in especial," answered Catharine, abashed at her own
eagerness--"none, perhaps, excepting my fears for your safety."

"To vague fears the heir of Bruce must not listen. What, ho! who waits
without?"

Ramorny entered, and bowed low to the Duke and to the maiden, whom,
perhaps, he considered as likely to be preferred to the post of
favourite sultana, and therefore entitled to a courteous obeisance.

"Ramorny," said the Prince, "is there in the household any female of
reputation who is fit to wait on this young woman till we can send her
where she may desire to go?"

"I fear," replied Ramorny, "if it displease not your Highness to hear
the truth, your household is indifferently provided in that way; and
that, to speak the very verity, the glee maiden is the most decorous
amongst us."

"Let her wait upon this young person, then, since better may not be. And
take patience, maiden, for a few hours."

Catharine retired.

"So, my lord, part you so soon from the Fair Maid of Perth? This is,
indeed, the very wantonness of victory."

"There is neither victory nor defeat in the case," returned the Prince,
drily. "The girl loves me not; nor do I love her well enough to torment
myself concerning her scruples."

"The chaste Malcolm the Maiden revived in one of his descendants!" said
Ramorny.

"Favour me, sir, by a truce to your wit, or by choosing a different
subject for its career. It is noon, I believe, and you will oblige me by
commanding them to serve up dinner."

Ramorny left the room; but Rothsay thought he discovered a smile upon
his countenance, and to be the subject of this man's satire gave him no
ordinary degree of pain. He summoned, however, the knight to his table,
and even admitted Dwining to the same honour. The conversation was of
a lively and dissolute cast, a tone encouraged by the Prince, as if
designing to counterbalance the gravity of his morals in the morning,
which Ramorny, who was read in old chronicles, had the boldness to liken
to the continence of Scipio.

The banquet, nothwithstanding the Duke's indifferent health, was
protracted in idle wantonness far beyond the rules of temperance; and,
whether owing simply to the strength of the wine which he drank, or the
weakness of his constitution, or, as it is probable, because the last
wine which he quaffed had been adulterated by Dwining, it so happened
that the Prince, towards the end of the repast, fell into a lethargic
sleep, from which it seemed impossible to rouse him. Sir John Ramorny
and Dwining carried him to his chamber, accepting no other assistance
than that of another person, whom we will afterwards give name to.

Next morning, it was announced that the Prince was taken ill of
an infectious disorder; and, to prevent its spreading through the
household, no one was admitted to wait on him save his late master of
horse, the physician Dwining, and the domestic already mentioned; one of
whom seemed always to remain in the apartment, while the others observed
a degree of precaution respecting their intercourse with the rest of the
family, so strict as to maintain the belief that he was dangerously ill
of an infectious disorder.



CHAPTER XXXII.

     In winter's tedious nights, sit by the fire,
     With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales
     Of woeful ages, long ago betid:
     And, ere thou bid goodnight, to quit their grief,
     Tell thou the lamentable fall of me.

     King Richard II Act V. Scene I.


Far different had been the fate of the misguided heir of Scotland from
that which was publicly given out in the town of Falkland. His ambitious
uncle had determined on his death, as the means of removing the first
and most formidable barrier betwixt his own family and the throne.
James, the younger son of the King, was a mere boy, who might at more
leisure be easily set aside. Ramorny's views of aggrandisement, and the
resentment which he had latterly entertained against his masters made
him a willing agent in young Rothsay's destruction. Dwining's love of
gold, and his native malignity of disposition, rendered him equally
forward. It had been resolved, with the most calculating cruelty,
that all means which might leave behind marks of violence were to be
carefully avoided, and the extinction of life suffered to take place
of itself by privation of every kind acting upon a frail and impaired
constitution. The Prince of Scotland was not to be murdered, as Ramorny
had expressed himself on another occasion, he was only to cease to
exist. Rothsay's bedchamber in the Tower of Falkland was well adapted
for the execution of such a horrible project. A small, narrow staircase,
scarce known to exist, opened from thence by a trapdoor to the
subterranean dungeons of the castle, through a passage by which
the feudal lord was wont to visit, in private and in disguise, the
inhabitants of those miserable regions. By this staircase the villains
conveyed the insensible Prince to the lowest dungeon of the castle,
so deep in the bowels of the earth, that no cries or groans, it was
supposed, could possibly be heard, while the strength of its door and
fastenings must for a long time have defied force, even if the entrance
could have been discovered. Bonthron, who had been saved from the
gallows for the purpose, was the willing agent of Ramorny's unparalleled
cruelty to his misled and betrayed patron.

This wretch revisited the dungeon at the time when the Prince's lethargy
began to wear off, and when, awaking to sensation, he felt himself
deadly cold, unable to move, and oppressed with fetters, which scarce
permitted him to stir from the dank straw on which he was laid. His
first idea was that he was in a fearful dream, his next brought a
confused augury of the truth. He called, shouted, yelled at length in
frenzy but no assistance came, and he was only answered by the vaulted
roof of the dungeon. The agent of hell heard these agonizing screams,
and deliberately reckoned them against the taunts and reproaches with
which Rothsay had expressed his instinctive aversion to him. When,
exhausted and hopeless, the unhappy youth remained silent, the savage
resolved to present himself before the eyes of his prisoner. The locks
were drawn, the chain fell; the Prince raised himself as high as his
fetters permitted; a red glare, against which he was fain to shut his
eyes, streamed through the vault; and when he opened them again, it was
on the ghastly form of one whom he had reason to think dead. He sunk
back in horror.

"I am judged and condemned," he exclaimed, "and the most abhorred fiend
in the infernal regions is sent to torment me!"

"I live, my lord," said Bonthron; "and that you may live and enjoy life,
be pleased to sit up and eat your victuals."

"Free me from these irons," said the Prince, "release me from this
dungeon, and, dog as thou art, thou shalt be the richest man in
Scotland."

"If you would give me the weight of your shackles in gold," said
Bonthron, "I would rather see the iron on you than have the treasure
myself! But look up; you were wont to love delicate fare--behold how I
have catered for you."

The wretch, with fiendish glee, unfolded a piece of rawhide covering the
bundle which he bore under' his arm, and, passing the light to and fro
before it, showed the unhappy Prince a bull's head recently hewn from
the trunk, and known in Scotland as the certain signal of death. He
placed it at the foot of the bed, or rather lair, on which the Prince
lay.

"Be moderate in your food," he said; "it is like to be long ere thou
getst another meal."

"Tell me but one thing, wretch," said the Prince. "Does Ramorny know of
this practice?"

"How else hadst thou been decoyed hither? Poor woodcock, thou art
snared!" answered the murderer.

With these words, the door shut, the bolts resounded, and the unhappy
Prince was left to darkness, solitude, and misery. "Oh, my father!--my
prophetic father! The staff I leaned on has indeed proved a spear!"

We will not dwell on the subsequent hours, nay, days, of bodily agony
and mental despair.

But it was not the pleasure of Heaven that so great a crime should be
perpetrated with impunity.

Catharine Glover and the glee woman, neglected by the other inmates,
who seemed to be engaged with the tidings of the Prince's illness, were,
however, refused permission to leave the castle until it should be seen
how this alarming disease was to terminate, and whether it was actually
an infectious sickness. Forced on each other's society, the two desolate
women became companions, if not friends; and the union drew somewhat
closer when Catharine discovered that this was the same female minstrel
on whose account Henry Wynd had fallen under her displeasure. She now
heard his complete vindication, and listened with ardour to the praises
which Louise heaped on her gallant protector. On the other hand, the
minstrel, who felt the superiority of Catharine's station and character,
willingly dwelt upon a theme which seemed to please her, and recorded
her gratitude to the stout smith in the little song of "Bold and True,"
which was long a favourite in Scotland.

     Oh, bold and true,
     In bonnet blue,
     That fear or falsehood never knew,
     Whose heart was loyal to his word,
     Whose hand was faithful to his sword--
     Seek Europe wide from sea to sea,
     But bonny blue cap still for me!

     I've seen Almain's proud champions prance,
     Have seen the gallant knights of France,
     Unrivall'd with the sword and lance,
     Have seen the sons of England true,
     Wield the brown bill and bend the yew.
     Search France the fair, and England free,
     But bonny blue cap still for me!

In short, though Louise's disreputable occupation would have been in
other circumstances an objection to Catharine's voluntarily frequenting
her company, yet, forced together as they now were, she found her a
humble and accommodating companion.

They lived in this manner for four or five days, and, in order to avoid
as much as possible the gaze, and perhaps the incivility, of the menials
in the offices, they prepared their food in their own apartment. In the
absolutely necessary intercourse with domestics, Louise, more accustomed
to expedients, bolder by habit, and desirous to please Catharine,
willingly took on herself the trouble of getting from the pantler the
materials of their slender meal, and of arranging it with the dexterity
of her country.

The glee woman had been abroad for this purpose upon the sixth day, a
little before noon; and the desire of fresh air, or the hope to find
some sallad or pot herbs, or at least an early flower or two, with which
to deck their board, had carried her into the small garden appertaining
to the castle. She re-entered her apartment in the tower with a
countenance pale as ashes, and a frame which trembled like an aspen
leaf. Her terror instantly extended itself to Catharine, who could
hardly find words to ask what new misfortune had occurred.

"Is the Duke of Rothsay dead?"

"Worse! they are starving him alive."

"Madness, woman!"

"No--no--no--no!" said Louise, speaking under her breath, and huddling
her words so thick upon each other that Catharine could hardly catch
the sense. "I was seeking for flowers to dress your pottage, because
you said you loved them yesterday; my poor little dog, thrusting himself
into a thicket of yew and holly bushes that grow out of some old ruins
close to the castle wall, came back whining and howling. I crept forward
to see what might be the cause--and, oh! I heard a groaning as of one
in extreme pain, but so faint, that it seemed to arise out of the very
depth of the earth. At length, I found it proceeded from a small rent in
the wall, covered with ivy; and when I laid my ear close to the opening,
I could hear the Prince's voice distinctly say, 'It cannot now last
long'--and then it sunk away in something like a prayer."

"Gracious Heaven! did you speak to him?"

"I said, 'Is it you, my lord?' and the answer was, 'Who mocks me with
that title?' I asked him if I could help him, and he answered with a
voice I shall never forget, 'Food--food! I die of famine!' So I came
hither to tell you. What is to be done? Shall we alarm the house?"

"Alas! that were more likely to destroy than to aid," said Catharine.

"And what then shall we do?" said Louise.

"I know not yet," said Catharine, prompt and bold on occasions of
moment, though yielding to her companion in ingenuity of resource on
ordinary occasions: "I know not yet, but something we will do: the blood
of Bruce shall not die unaided."

So saying, she seized the small cruise which contained their soup, and
the meat of which it was made, wrapped some thin cakes which she had
baked into the fold of her plaid, and, beckoning her companion to follow
with a vessel of milk, also part of their provisions, she hastened
towards the garden.

"So, our fair vestal is stirring abroad?" said the only man she met, who
was one of the menials; but Catharine passed on without notice or reply,
and gained the little garden without farther interruption.

Louise indicated to her a heap of ruins, which, covered with underwood,
was close to the castle wall. It had probably been originally a
projection from the building; and the small fissure, which communicated
with the dungeon, contrived for air, had terminated within it. But the
aperture had been a little enlarged by decay, and admitted a dim ray of
light to its recesses, although it could not be observed by those who
visited the place with torchlight aids.

"Here is dead silence," said Catharine, after she had listened
attentively for a moment. "Heaven and earth, he is gone!"

"We must risk something," said her companion, and ran her fingers over
the strings of her guitar.

A sigh was the only answer from the depth of the dungeon. Catharine then
ventured to speak. "I am here, my lord--I am here, with food and drink."

"Ha! Ramorny! The jest comes too late; I am dying," was the answer.

"His brain is turned, and no wonder," thought Catharine; "but whilst
there is life, there may be hope."

"It is I, my lord, Catharine Glover. I have food, if I could pass it
safely to you."

"Heaven bless thee, maiden! I thought the pain was over, but it glows
again within me at the name of food."

"The food is here, but how--ah, how can I pass it to you? the chink
is so narrow, the wall is so thick! Yet there is a remedy--I have it.
Quick, Louise; cut me a willow bough, the tallest you can find."

The glee maiden obeyed, and, by means of a cleft in the top of the
wand, Catharine transmitted several morsels of the soft cakes, soaked in
broth, which served at once for food and for drink.

The unfortunate young man ate little, and with difficulty, but prayed
for a thousand blessings on the head of his comforter. "I had destined
thee to be the slave of my vices," he said, "and yet thou triest to
become the preserver of my life! But away, and save thyself."

"I will return with food as I shall see opportunity," said Catharine,
just as the glee maiden plucked her sleeve and desired her to be silent
and stand close.

Both crouched among the ruins, and they heard the voices of Ramorny and
the mediciner in close conversation.

"He is stronger than I thought," said the former, in a low, croaking
tone. "How long held out Dalwolsy, when the knight of Liddesdale
prisoned him in his castle of Hermitage?"

"For a fortnight," answered Dwining; "but he was a strong man, and had
some assistance by grain which fell from a granary above his prison
house."

"Were it not better end the matter more speedily? The Black Douglas
comes this way. He is not in Albany's secret. He will demand to see the
Prince, and all must be over ere he comes."

They passed on in their dark and fatal conversation.

"Now gain we the tower," said Catharine to her companion, when she saw
they had left the garden. "I had a plan of escape for myself; I will
turn it into one of rescue for the Prince. The dey woman enters the
castle about vesper time, and usually leaves her cloak in the passage as
she goes into the pantlers' office with the milk. Take thou the cloak,
muffle thyself close, and pass the warder boldly; he is usually drunken
at that hour, and thou wilt go as the dey woman unchallenged through
gate and along bridge, if thou bear thyself with confidence. Then away
to meet the Black Douglas; he is our nearest and only aid."

"But," said Louise, "is he not that terrible lord who threatened me with
shame and punishment?"

"Believe it," said Catharine, "such as thou or I never dwelt an hour in
the Douglas's memory, either for good or evil. Tell him that his son in
law, the Prince of Scotland dies--treacherously famished--in Falkland
Castle, and thou wilt merit not pardon only, but reward."

"I care not for reward," said Louise; "the deed will reward itself. But
methinks to stay is more dangerous than to go. Let me stay, then, and
nourish the unhappy Prince, and do you depart to bring help. If they
kill me before you return, I leave you my poor lute, and pray you to be
kind to my poor Charlot."

"No, Louise," replied Catharine, "you are a more privileged and
experienced wanderer than I--do you go; and if you find me dead on your
return, as may well chance, give my poor father this ring and a lock of
my hair, and say, Catharine died in endeavouring to save the blood of
Bruce. And give this other lock to Henry; say, Catharine thought of him
to the last, and that, if he has judged her too scrupulous touching the
blood of others, he will then know it was not because she valued her
own."

They sobbed in each other's arms, and the intervening hours till evening
were spent in endeavouring to devise some better mode of supplying the
captive with nourishment, and in the construction of a tube, composed
of hollow reeds, slipping into each other, by which liquids might be
conveyed to him. The bell of the village church of Falkland tolled to
vespers. The dey, or farm woman, entered with her pitchers to deliver
the milk for the family, and to hear and tell the news stirring. She had
scarcely entered the kitchen when the female minstrel, again throwing
herself in Catharine's arms, and assuring her of her unalterable
fidelity, crept in silence downstairs, the little dog under her arm. A
moment after, she was seen by the breathless Catharine, wrapt in the dey
woman's cloak, and walking composedly across the drawbridge.

"So," said the warder, "you return early tonight, May Bridget? Small
mirth towards in the hall--ha, wench! Sick times are sad times!"

"I have forgotten my tallies," said the ready witted French woman, "and
will return in the skimming of a bowie."

She went onward, avoiding the village of Falkland, and took a footpath
which led through the park. Catharine breathed freely, and blessed God
when she saw her lost in the distance. It was another anxious hour
for Catharine which occurred before the escape of the fugitive was
discovered. This happened so soon as the dey girl, having taken an hour
to perform a task which ten minutes might have accomplished, was about
to return, and discovered that some one had taken away her grey frieze
cloak. A strict search was set on foot; at length the women of the
house remembered the glee maiden, and ventured to suggest her as one not
unlikely to exchange an old cloak for a new one. The warder, strictly
questioned, averred he saw the dey woman depart immediately after
vespers; and on this being contradicted by the party herself, he could
suggest, as the only alternative, that it must needs have been the
devil.

As, however, the glee woman could not be found, the real circumstances
of the case were easily guessed at; and the steward went to inform Sir
John Ramorny and Dwining, who were now scarcely ever separate, of
the escape of one of their female captives. Everything awakens the
suspicions of the guilty. They looked on each other with faces of
dismay, and then went together to the humble apartment of Catharine,
that they might take her as much as possible by surprise while they
inquired into the facts attending Louise's disappearance.

"Where is your companion, young woman?" said Ramorny, in a tone of
austere gravity.

"I have no companion here," answered Catharine.

"Trifle not," replied the knight; "I mean the glee maiden, who lately
dwelt in this chamber with you."

"She is gone, they tell me," said Catharine--"gone about an hour since."

"And whither?" said Dwining.

"How," answered Catharine, "should I know which way a professed wanderer
may choose to travel? She was tired no doubt of a solitary life, so
different from the scenes of feasting and dancing which her trade leads
her to frequent. She is gone, and the only wonder is that she should
have stayed so long."

"This, then," said Ramorny, "is all you have to tell us?"

"All that I have to tell you, Sir John," answered Catharine, firmly;
"and if the Prince himself inquire, I can tell him no more."

"There is little danger of his again doing you the honour to speak to
you in person," said Ramorny, "even if Scotland should escape being
rendered miserable by the sad event of his decease."

"Is the Duke of Rothsay so very ill?" asked Catharine.

"No help, save in Heaven," answered Ramorny, looking upward.

"Then may there yet be help there," said Catharine, "if human aid prove
unavailing!"

"Amen!" said Ramorny, with the most determined gravity; while Dwining
adopted a face fit to echo the feeling, though it seemed to cost him
a painful struggle to suppress his sneering yet soft laugh of triumph,
which was peculiarly excited by anything having a religious tendency.

"And it is men--earthly men, and not incarnate devils, who thus appeal
to Heaven, while they are devouring by inches the life blood of their
hapless master!" muttered Catharine, as her two baffled inquisitors left
the apartment. "Why sleeps the thunder? But it will roll ere long, and
oh! may it be to preserve as well as to punish!"

The hour of dinner alone afforded a space when, all in the castle being
occupied with that meal, Catharine thought she had the best opportunity
of venturing to the breach in the wall, with the least chance of being
observed. In waiting for the hour, she observed some stir in the castle,
which had been silent as the grave ever since the seclusion of the Duke
of Rothsay. The portcullis was lowered and raised, and the creaking of
the machinery was intermingled with the tramp of horse, as men at arms
went out and returned with steeds hard ridden and covered with foam. She
observed, too, that such domestics as she casually saw from her window
were in arms. All this made her heart throb high, for it augured the
approach of rescue; and besides, the bustle left the little garden more
lonely than ever. At length the hour of noon arrived; she had taken care
to provide, under pretence of her own wishes, which the pantler seemed
disposed to indulge, such articles of food as could be the most easily
conveyed to the unhappy captive. She whispered to intimate her presence;
there was no answer; she spoke louder, still there was silence.

"He sleeps," she muttered these words half aloud, and with a shuddering
which was succeeded by a start and a scream, when a voice replied behind
her:

"Yes, he sleeps; but it is for ever."

She looked round. Sir John Ramorny stood behind her in complete armour,
but the visor of his helmet was up, and displayed a countenance more
resembling one about to die than to fight. He spoke with a grave tone,
something between that of a calm observer of an interesting event and of
one who is an agent and partaker in it.

"Catharine," he said, "all is true which I tell you. He is dead. You
have done your best for him; you can do no more."

"I will not--I cannot believe it," said Catharine. "Heaven be merciful
to me! it would make one doubt of Providence, to think so great a crime
has been accomplished."

"Doubt not of Providence, Catharine, though it has suffered the
profligate to fall by his own devices. Follow me; I have that to say
which concerns you. I say follow (for she hesitated), unless you prefer
being left to the mercies of the brute Bonthron and the mediciner
