completing my studies for the Bar, and qualifying myself for employment
at home, or in our own or any other colony. My good Mrs. Mountain
answered this letter, by desire of Madam Esmond, she said, who thought
that for the sake of peace my communications had best be conducted
that way. I found my relatives in a fury which was perfectly amusing
to witness. The butler's face, as he said, "Not at home," at my uncle's
house in Hill Street, was a blank tragedy that might have been studied
by Garrick when he sees Banque. My poor little wife was on my arm, and
we were tripping away, laughing at the fellow's accueil, when we came
upon my lady in a street stoppage in her chair. I took off my hat and
made her the lowest possible bow. I affectionately asked after my dear
cousins. "I--I wonder you dare look me in the face!" Lady Warrington
gasped out. "Nay, don't deprive me of that precious privilege!" says I.
"Move on, Peter," she screams to her chairman. "Your ladyship would not
impale your own husband's flesh and blood!" says I. She rattles up
the glass of her chair in a fury. I kiss my hand, take off my hat, and
perform another of my very finest bows.

Walking shortly afterwards in Hyde Park with my dearest companion, I
met my little cousin exercising on horseback with a groom behind him. As
soon as he sees us, he gallops up to us, the groom powdering afterwards
and bawling out, "Stop, Master Miles, stop!"

"I am not to speak to my cousin," says Miles, "but telling you to send
my love to Harry is not speaking to you, is it? Is that my new
cousin? I'm not told not to speak to her. I'm Miles, cousin, Sir Miles
Warrington Baronet's son, and you are very pretty!" "Now, duee now,
Master Miles," says the groom, touching his hat to us; and the boy
trots away laughing and looking at us over his shoulder. "You see how
my relations have determined to treat me," I say to my partner. "As if
I married you for your relations!" says Theo, her eyes beaming joy
and love into mine. Ah, how happy we were! how brisk and pleasant the
winter! How snug the kettle by the fire (where the abashed Sampson
sometimes came and made the punch); how delightful the night at the
theatre, for which our friends brought us tickets of admission, and
where we daily expected our new play of Pocahontas would rival the
successes of all former tragedies.

The fickle old aunt of Clarges Street, who received me, on my first
coming to London with my wife, with a burst of scorn, mollified
presently, and as soon as she came to know Theo (who she had pronounced
to be an insignificant little country-faced chit), fell utterly in love
with her, and would have her to tea and supper every day when there was
no other company. "As for company, my dears," she would say, "I don't
ask you. You are no longer du monde. Your marriage has put that entirely
out of the question." So she would have had us come to amuse her, and go
in and out by the back-stairs. My wife was fine lady enough to feel only
amused at this reception; and, I must do the Baroness's domestics the
justice to say that, had we been duke and duchess, we could not have
been received with more respect. Madame de Bernstein was very much
tickled and amused with my story of Lady Warrington and the chair. I
acted it for her, and gave her anecdotes of the pious Baronet's lady and
her daughters, which pleased the mischievous, lively old woman.

The Dowager Countess of Castlewood, now established in her house at
Kensington, gave us that kind of welcome which genteel ladies extend to
their poorer relatives. We went once or twice to her ladyship's drums at
Kensington; but, losing more money at cards, and spending more money
in coach-hire than I liked to afford, we speedily gave up those
entertainments, and, I dare say, were no more missed or regretted than
other people in the fashionable world, who are carried by death, debt,
or other accident out of the polite sphere. My Theo did not in the
least regret this exclusion. She had made her appearance at one of these
drums, attired in some little ornaments which her mother left behind
her, and by which the good lady set some store; but I thought her own
white neck was a great deal prettier than these poor twinkling stones;
and there were dowagers, whose wrinkled old bones blazed with rubies
and diamonds, which, I am sure, they would gladly have exchanged for her
modest parure of beauty and freshness. Not a soul spoke to her--except,
to be sure, Beau Lothair, a friend of Mr. Will's, who prowled about
Bloomsbury afterwards, and even sent my wife a billet. I met him in
Covent Garden shortly after, and promised to break his ugly face if
ever I saw it in the neighbourhood of my lodgings, and Madam Theo was
molested no further.

The only one of our relatives who came to see us (Madame de Bernstein
never came; she sent her coach for us sometimes, or made inquiries
regarding us by her woman or her major-domo) was our poor Maria, who,
with her husband, Mr. Hagan, often took a share of our homely dinner.
Then we had friend Spencer from the Temple, who admired our Arcadian
felicity, and gently asked our sympathy for his less fortunate loves;
and twice or thrice the famous Doctor Johnson came in for a dish of
Theo's tea. A dish? a pailful! "And a pail the best thing to feed him,
sar!" says Mr. Gumbo, indignantly: for the Doctor's appearance was not
pleasant, nor his linen particularly white. He snorted, he grew red,
and sputtered in feeding; he flung his meat about, and bawled out in
contradicting people: and annoyed my Theo, whom he professed to admire
greatly, by saying, every time he saw her, "Madam, you do not love me;
I see by your manner you do not love me; though I admire you, and come
here for your sake. Here is my friend Mr. Reynolds that shall paint
you: he has no ceruse in his paint-box that is as brilliant as
your complexion." And so Mr. Reynolds, a most perfect and agreeable
gentleman, would have painted my wife; but I knew what his price was,
and did not choose to incur that expense. I wish I had now, for the
sake of the children, that they might see what yonder face was like some
five-and-thirty years ago. To me, madam, 'tis the same now as ever; and
your ladyship is always young!

What annoyed Mrs. Warrington with Dr. Johnson more than his
contradictions, his sputterings, and his dirty nails, was, I think,
an unfavourable opinion which he formed of my new tragedy. Hagan once
proposed that he should read some scenes from it after tea.

"Nay, sir, conversation is better," says the Doctor. "I can read for
myself, or hear you at the theatre. I had rather hear Mrs. Warrington's
artless prattle than your declamation of Mr. Warrington's decasyllables.
Tell us about your household affairs, madam, and whether his Excellency
your father is well, and whether you made the pudden and the butter
sauce. The butter sauce was delicious!" (He loved it so well that he had
kept a large quantity in the bosom of a very dingy shirt.) "You made it
as though you loved me. You helped me as though you loved me, though you
don't."

"Faith, sir, you are taking some of the present away with you in your
waistcoat," says Hagan, with much spirit.

"Sir, you are rude!" bawls the Doctor. "You are unacquainted with the
first principles of politeness, which is courtesy before ladies. Having
received an university education, I am surprised that you have not
learned the rudiments of politeness. I respect Mrs. Warrington. I should
never think of making personal remarks about her guests before her!"

"Then, sir," says Hagan, fiercely, "why did you speak of my theatre?"

"Sir, you are saucy!" roars the Doctor.

"De te fabula," says the actor. "I think it is your waistcoat that is
saucy. Madam, shall I make some punch in the way we make it in Ireland?"

The Doctor, puffing, and purple in the face, was wiping the dingy shirt
with a still more dubious pocket-handkerchief, which he then applied to
his forehead. After this exercise, he blew a hyperborean whistle, as
if to blow his wrath away. "It is de me, sir--though, as a young man,
perhaps you need not have told me so."

"I drop my point, sir! If you have been wrong, I am sure I am bound to
ask your pardon for setting you so!" says Mr. Hagan, with a fine bow.

"Doesn't he look like a god?" says Maria, clutching my wife's hand: and
indeed Mr. Hagan did look like a handsome young gentleman. His colour
had risen; he had put his hand to his breast with a noble air: Chamont
or Castalio could not present himself better.

"Let me make you some lemonade, sir; my papa has sent us a box of fresh
limes. May we send you some to the Temple?"

"Madam, if they stay in your house, they will lose their quality and
turn sweet," says the Doctor. "Mr. Hagan, you are a young sauce-box,
that's what you are! Ho! ho! It is I have been wrong."

"Oh, my lord, my Polidore!" bleats Lady Maria, when she was alone in my
wife's drawing-room:

    "'Oh, I could hear thee talk for ever thus,
      Eternally admiring,--fix and gaze
      On those dear eyes, for every glance they send
      Darts through my soul, and fills my heart with rapture!'

"Thou knowest not, my Theo, what a pearl and paragon of a man my
Castalio is; my Chamont, my--oh, dear me, child, what a pity it is that
in your husband's tragedy he should have to take the horrid name of
Captain Smith!"

Upon this tragedy not only my literary hopes, but much of my financial
prospects were founded. My brother's debts discharged, my mother's
drafts from home duly honoured, my own expenses paid, which, though
moderate, were not inconsiderable,--pretty nearly the whole of my
patrimony had been spent, and this auspicious moment I must choose
for my marriage! I could raise money on my inheritance: that was not
impossible, though certainly costly. My mother could not leave her
eldest son without a maintenance, whatever our quarrels might be. I had
health, strength, good wits, some friends, and reputation--above all, my
famous tragedy, which the manager had promised to perform, and upon the
proceeds of this I counted for my present support. What becomes of the
arithmetic of youth? How do we then calculate that a hundred pounds is
a maintenance, and a thousand a fortune? How did I dare play against
Fortune with such odds? I succeeded, I remember, in convincing my dear
General, and he left home convinced that his son-in-law had for the
present necessity at least a score of hundred pounds at his command. He
and his dear Molly had begun life with less, and the ravens had somehow
always fed them. As for the women, the question of poverty was one of
pleasure to those sentimental souls, and Aunt Lambert, for her part,
declared it would be wicked and irreligious to doubt of a provision
being made for her children. Was the righteous ever forsaken? Did the
just man ever have to beg his bread? She knew better than that! "No, no,
my dears! I am not going to be afraid on that account, I warrant you!
Look at me and my General!"

Theo believed all I said and wished to believe myself. So we actually
began life upon a capital of Five Acts, and about three hundred pounds
of ready money in hand!

Well, the time of the appearance of the famous tragedy drew near, and my
friends canvassed the town to get a body of supporters for the opening
night. I am ill at asking favours from the great; but when my Lord
Wrotham came to London, I went, with Theo in my hand, to wait on his
lordship, who received us kindly, out of regard for his old friend,
her father--though he good-naturedly shook a finger at me (at which my
little wife hung down her head), for having stole a march on the good
General. However, he would do his best for her father's daughter; hoped
for a success; said he had heard great things of the piece; and engaged
a number of places for himself and his friends. But this patron secured,
I had no other. "Mon cher, at my age," says the Baroness, "I should
bore myself to death at a tragedy: but I will do my best; and I will
certainly send my people to the boxes. Yes! Case in his best black looks
like a nobleman; and Brett in one of my gowns has a faux air de moi
which is quite distinguished. Put down my name for two in the front
boxes. Good-bye, my dear. Bonne chance!" The Dowager Countess presented
compliments (on the back of the nine of clubs), had a card-party that
night, and was quite sorry she and Fanny could not go to my tragedy. As
for my uncle and Lady Warrington, they were out of the question. After
the affair of the sedan-chair I might as well have asked Queen
Elizabeth to go to Drury Lane. These were all my friends--that host of
aristocratic connexions about whom poor Sampson had bragged; and on
the strength of whom, the manager, as he said, had given Mr. Hagan his
engagement! "Where was my Lord Bute? Had I not promised his lordship
should come?" he asks, snappishly, taking snuff (how different from
the brisk, and engaging, and obsequious little manager of six months
ago!)--"I promised Lord Bute should come?"

"Yes," says Mr. Garrick, "and her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales,
and his Majesty too."

Poor Sampson owned that he, buoyed up by vain hopes, had promised the
appearance of these august personages.

The next day, at rehearsal, matters were worse still, and the manager in
a fury.

"Great heavens, sir!" says he, "into what a pretty guet-a-pens have you
led me! Look at that letter, sir!--read that letter!" And he hands me
one:


"MY DEAR SIR" (said the letter)--"I have seen his lordship, and conveyed
to him Mr. Warrington's request that he would honour the tragedy of
Pocahontas by his presence. His lordship is a patron of the drama, and
a magnificent friend of all the liberal arts; but he desires me to
say that he cannot think of attending himself, much less of asking his
Gracious Master to witness the performance of a play, a principal part
in which is given to an actor who has made a clandestine marriage with
a daughter of one of his Majesty's nobility.--Your well-wisher, SAUNDERS
MCDUFF."

"Mr. D. Garrick, at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane."


My poor Theo had a nice dinner waiting for me after the rehearsal. I
pleaded fatigue as the reason for looking so pale: I did not dare to
convey to her this dreadful news.




CHAPTER LXXX. Pocahontas


The English public not being so well acquainted with the history of
Pocahontas as we of Virginia, who still love the memory of that simple
and kindly creature, Mr. Warrington, at the suggestion of his friends,
made a little ballad about this Indian princess, which was printed in
the magazines a few days before the appearance of the tragedy. This
proceeding Sampson and I considered to be very artful and ingenious. "It
is like ground-bait, sir," says the enthusiastic parson, "and you will
see the fish rise in multitudes, on the great day!" He and Spencer
declared that the poem was discussed and admired at several
coffee-houses in their hearing, and that it had been attributed to Mr.
Mason, Mr. Cowper of the Temple, and even to the famous Mr. Gray.
I believe poor Sam had himself set abroad these reports; and, if
Shakspeare had been named as the author of the tragedy, would have
declared Pocahontas to be one of the poet's best performances. I made
acquaintance with brave Captain Smith, as a boy in my grandfather's
library at home, where I remember how I would sit at the good old man's
knees, with my favourite volume on my own, spelling out the exploits
of our Virginian hero. I loved to read of Smith's travels, sufferings,
captivities, escapes, not only in America but Europe. I become a child
again almost as I take from the shelf before me in England the familiar
volume, and all sorts of recollections of my early home come crowding
over my mind. The old grandfather would make pictures for me of Smith
doing battle with the Turks on the Danube, or led out by our Indian
savages to death. Ah, what a terrific fight was that in which he was
engaged with the three Turkish champions, and how I used to delight over
the story of his combat with Bonny Molgro, the last and most dreadful
of the three! What a name Bonny Molgro was, and with what a prodigious
turban, scimitar, and whiskers we represented him! Having slain and
taken off the heads of his first two enemies, Smith and Bonny Molgro
met, falling to (says my favourite old book) "with their battle-axes,
whose piercing bills made sometimes the one, sometimes the other,
to have scarce sense to keep their saddles: especially the Christian
received such a wound that he lost his battle-axe, whereat the supposed
conquering Turke had a great shout from the rampires. Yet, by the
readinesse of his horse, and his great judgment and dexteritie, he
not only avoided the Turke's blows, but, having drawn his falchion, so
pierced the Turke under the cutlets, through back and body, that though
hee alighted from his horse, he stood not long ere hee lost his head as
the rest had done. In reward for which deed, Duke Segismundus gave him
3 Turke's head in a shield for armes and 300 Duckats yeerely for a
pension." Disdaining time and place (with that daring which is the
privilege of poets) in my tragedy, Smith is made to perform
similar exploits on the banks of our Potomac and James's river. Our
"ground-bait" verses, ran thus:--

             "POCAHONTAS

    "Wearied arm and broken sword
       Wage in vain the desperate fight
     Round him press the countless horde,
       He is but a single knight.
     Hark! a cry of triumph shrill
       Through the wilderness resounds,
       As, with twenty bleeding wounds,
     Sinks the warrior, fighting still.

    "Now they heap the fatal pyre,
       And the torch of death they light
     Ah! 'tis hard to die of fire!
       Who will shield the captive knight?
     Round the stake with fiendish cry
       Wheel and dance the savage crowd,
       Cold the victim's mien and proud,
     And his breast is bared to die.

    "Who will shield the fearless heart?
       Who avert the murderous blade?
     From the throng, with sudden start,
       See, there springs an Indian maid.
     Quick she stands before the knight,
      'Loose the chain, unbind the ring,
       I am daughter of the king,
     And I claim the Indian right!'

    "Dauntlessly aside she flings
       Lifted axe and thirsty knife;
     Fondly to his heart she clings,
       And her bosom guards his life!
     In the woods of Powhattan,
       Still 'tis told, by Indian fires,
       How a daughter of their sires
     Saved the captive Englishman."

I need not describe at length the plot of my tragedy, as my children can
take it down from the shelves any day and peruse it for themselves. Nor
shall I, let me add, be in a hurry to offer to read it again to my young
folks, since Captain Miles and the parson both chose to fall asleep last
Christmas, when, at mamma's request, I read aloud a couple of acts.
But any person having a moderate acquaintance with plays and novels
can soon, out of the above sketch, fill out a picture to his liking.
An Indian king; a loving princess, and her attendant, in love with the
British captain's servant; a traitor in the English fort; a brave Indian
warrior, himself entertaining an unhappy passion for Pocahontas; a
medicine-man and priest of the Indians (very well played by Palmer),
capable of every treason, stratagem, and crime, and bent upon the
torture and death of the English prisoner;--these, with the accidents
of the wilderness, the war-dances and cries (which Gumbo had learned to
mimic very accurately from the red people at home), and the arrival
of the English fleet, with allusions to the late glorious victories in
Canada, and the determination of Britons ever to rule and conquer in
America, some of us not unnaturally thought might contribute to the
success of our tragedy.

But I have mentioned the ill omens which preceded the day: the
difficulties which a peevish, and jealous, and timid management threw in
the way of the piece, and the violent prejudice which was felt against
it in certain high quarters. What wonder then, I ask, that Pocahontas
should have turned out not to be a victory? I laugh to scorn the
malignity of the critics who found fault with the performance. Pretty
critics, forsooth, who said that Carpezan was a masterpiece, whilst
a far superior and more elaborate work received only their sneers! I
insist on it that Hagan acted his part so admirably that a certain actor
and manager of the theatre might well be jealous of him; and that, but
for the cabal made outside, the piece would have succeeded. The order
had been given that the play should not succeed; so at least Sampson
declared to me. "The house swarmed with Macs, by George, and they should
have the galleries washed with brimstone," the honest fellow swore,
and always vowed that Mr. Garrick himself would not have had the piece
succeed for the world; and was never in such a rage as during that grand
scene in the second act, where Smith (poor Hagan) being bound to the
stake, Pocahontas comes and saves him, and when the whole house was
thrilling with applause and sympathy.

Anybody who has curiosity sufficient, may refer to the published tragedy
(in the octavo form, or in the subsequent splendid quarto edition of my
Collected Works, and Poems Original and Translated), and say whether the
scene is without merit, whether the verses are not elegant, the language
rich and noble? One of the causes of the failure was my actual fidelity
to history. I had copied myself at the Museum, and tinted neatly, a
figure of Sir Walter Raleigh in a frill and beard; and (my dear Theo
giving some of her mother's best lace for the ruff) we dressed Hagan
accurately after this drawing, and no man could look better. Miss
Pritchard as Pocahontas, I dressed too as a Red Indian, having seen
enough of that costume in my own experience at home. Will it be believed
the house tittered when she first appeared? They got used to her,
however, but just at the moment when she rushes into the prisoner's
arms, and a number of people were actually in tears, a fellow in the pit
bawls out, "Bedad! here's the Belle Savage kissing the Saracen's Head;"
on which an impertinent roar of laughter sprang up in the pit, breaking
out with fitful explosions during the remainder of the performance.
As the wag in Mr. Sheridan's amusing Critic admirably says about the
morning guns, the playwrights were not content with one of them, but
must fire two or three; so with this wretched pothouse joke of the Belle
Savage (the ignorant people not knowing that Pocahontas herself was the
very Belle Sauvage from whom the tavern took its name!). My friend of
the pit repeated it ad nauseam during the performance, and as each
new character appeared, saluted him by the name of some tavern--for
instance, the English governor (with a long beard) he called the Goat
and Boots; his lieutenant (Barker), whose face certainly was broad, the
Bull and Mouth, and so on! And the curtain descended amidst a shrill
storm of whistles and hisses, which especially assailed poor Hagan every
time he opened his lips. Sampson saw Master Will in the green boxes,
with some pretty acquaintances of his, and has no doubt that the
treacherous scoundrel was one of the ringleaders in the conspiracy. "I
would have flung him over into the pit," the faithful fellow said (and
Sampson was man enough to execute his threat), "but I saw a couple of
Mr. Nadab's followers prowling about the lobby, and was obliged to sheer
off." And so the eggs we had counted on selling at market were broken,
and our poor hopes lay shattered before us!

I looked in at the house from the stage before the curtain was lifted,
and saw it pretty well filled, especially remarking Mr. Johnson in the
front boxes, in a laced waistcoat, having his friend Mr. Reynolds by his
side; the latter could not hear, and the former could not see, and so
they came good-naturedly A deux to form an opinion of my poor tragedy.
I could see Lady Maria (I knew the hood she wore) in the lower gallery,
where she once more had the opportunity of sitting and looking at her
beloved actor performing a principal character in a piece. As for Theo,
she fairly owned that, unless I ordered her, she had rather not be
present, nor had I any such command to give, for, if things went wrong,
I knew that to see her suffer would be intolerable pain to myself, and
so acquiesced in her desire to keep away.

Being of a pretty equanimous disposition, and, as I flatter myself, able
to bear good or evil fortune without disturbance, I myself, after taking
a light dinner at the Bedford, went to the theatre a short while before
the commencement of the play, and proposed to remain there, until the
defeat or victory was decided. I own now, I could not help seeing which
way the fate of the day was likely to turn. There was something
gloomy and disastrous in the general aspect of all things around. Miss
Pritchard had the headache: the barber who brought home Hagan's wig
had powdered it like a wretch: amongst the gentlemen and ladies in
the greenroom, I saw none but doubtful faces: and the manager (a very
flippant, not to say impertinent gentleman, in my opinion, and who
himself on that night looked as dismal as a mute at a funeral) had the
insolence to say to me, "For Heaven's sake, Mr. Warrington, go and get
a glass of punch at the Bedford, and don't frighten us all here by your
dismal countenance!"

"Sir," says I, "I have a right, for five shillings, to comment upon your
face, but I never gave you any authority to make remarks upon mine."
"Sir," says he in a pet, "I most heartily wish I had never seen your
face at all!" "Yours, sir!" said I, "has often amused me greatly; and
when painted for Abel Drugger is exceedingly comic"--and indeed I
have always done Mr. G. the justice to think that in low comedy he was
unrivalled. I made him a bow, and walked off to the coffee-house,
and for five years after never spoke a word to the gentleman, when he
apologised to me, at a nobleman's house where we chanced to meet. I said
I had utterly forgotten the circumstance to which he alluded, and that,
on the first night of a play, no doubt author and manager were flurried
alike. And added, "After all, there is no shame in not being made for
the theatre. Mr. Garrick--you were." A compliment with which he appeared
to be as well pleased as I intended he should.

Fidus Achates ran over to me at the end of the first act to say that all
things were going pretty well; though he confessed to the titter in the
house upon Miss Pritchard's first appearance, dressed exactly like an
Indian princess.

"I cannot help it, Sampson," said I (filling him a bumper of good
punch), "if Indians are dressed so."

"Why," says he, "would you have had Caractacus painted blue like an
ancient Briton, or Bonduca with nothing but a cow-skin?" And indeed it
may be that the fidelity to history was the cause of the ridicule cast
on my tragedy, in which case I, for one, am not ashamed of its defeat.

After the second act, my aide-de-camp came from the field with dismal
news indeed. I don't know how it is that, nervous before action,
in disaster I become pretty cool and cheerful. [The writer seems to
contradict himself here, having just boasted of possessing a pretty
equanimous disposition. He was probably mistaken in his own estimate of
himself, as other folks have been besides.-ED.] "Are things going ill?"
says I. I call for my reckoning, put on my hat, and march to the theatre
as calmly as if I was going to dine at the Temple; fidus Achates walking
by my side, pressing my elbow, kicking the link-boys out of the way, and
crying, "By George, Mr. Warrington, you are a man of spirit--a Trojan,
sir!" So, there were men of spirit in Troy; but alas! fate was too
strong for them.

At any rate, no man can say that I did not bear my misfortune with
calmness: I could no more help the clamour and noise of the audience
than a captain can help the howling and hissing of the storm in which
his ship goes down. But I was determined that the rushing waves and
broken masts should impavidum ferient, and flatter myself that I bore my
calamity without flinching. "Not Regulus, my dear madam, could step into
his barrel more coolly," Sampson said to my wife. 'Tis unjust to say
of men of the parasitic nature that they are unfaithful in misfortune.
Whether I was prosperous or poor, the wild parson was equally true and
friendly, and shared our crust as eagerly as ever he had partaken of our
better fortune.

I took my place on the stage, whence I could see the actors of my poor
piece, and a portion of the audience who condemned me. I suppose the
performers gave me a wide berth out of pity for me. I must say that I
think I was as little moved as any spectator; and that no one would have
judged from my mien that I was the unlucky hero of the night.

But my dearest Theo, when I went home, looked so pale and white, that
I saw from the dear creature's countenance that the knowledge of my
disaster had preceded my return. Spencer, Sampson, cousin Hagan, and
Lady Maria were to come after the play, and congratulate the author, God
wot! (Poor Miss Pritchard was engaged to us likewise, but sent word
that I must understand that she was a great deal too unwell to sup that
night.) My friend the gardener of Bedford House had given my wife his
best flowers to decorate her little table. There they were; the poor
little painted standards--and the battle lost! I had borne the defeat
well enough, but as I looked at the sweet pale face of the wife across
the table, and those artless trophies of welcome which she had set up
for her hero, I confess my courage gave way, and my heart felt a pang
almost as keen as any that ever has smitten it.

Our meal, it may be imagined, was dismal enough, nor was it rendered
much gayer by the talk we strove to carry on. Old Mrs. Hagan was,
luckily, very ill at this time; and her disease, and the incidents
connected with it, a great blessing to us. Then we had his Majesty's
approaching marriage, about which there was a talk. (How well I remember
the most futile incidents of the day down to a tune which a carpenter
was whistling by my side at the playhouse, just before the dreary
curtain fell!) Then we talked about the death of good Mr. Richardson,
the author of Pamela and Clarissa, whose works we all admired
exceedingly. And as we talked about Clarissa, my wife took on herself to
wipe her eyes once or twice, and say, faintly, "You know, my love,
mamma and I could never help crying over that dear book. Oh, my dearest,
dearest mother" (she adds), "how I wish she could be with me now!" This
was an occasion for more open tears, for of course a young lady may
naturally weep for her absent mother. And then we mixed a gloomy bowl
with Jamaica limes, and drank to the health of his Excellency the
Governor: and then, for a second toast, I filled a bumper, and, with a
smiling face, drank to "our better fortune!"

This was too much. The two women flung themselves into each other's
arms, and irrigated each other's neck-handkerchiefs with tears. "Oh,
Maria! Is not--is not my George good and kind?" sobs Theo. "Look at my
Hagan--how great, how godlike he was in his part!" gasps Maria. "It was
a beastly cabal which threw him over--and I could plunge this knife into
Mr. Garrick's black heart--the odious little wretch!" and she grasps
a weapon at her side. But throwing it presently down, the enthusiastic
creature rushes up to her lord and master, flings her arms round him,
and embraces him in the presence of the little company.

I am not sure whether some one else did not do likewise. We were all
in a state of extreme excitement and enthusiasm. In the midst of grief,
Love the consoler appears amongst us, and soothes us with such fond
blandishments and tender caresses, that one scarce wishes the calamity
away. Two or three days afterwards, on our birthday, a letter was
brought me in my study, which contained the following lines:--


          "FROM POCAHONTAS

    "Returning from the cruel fight
     How pale and faint appears my knight!
     He sees me anxious at his side;
     'Why seek, my love, your wounds to hide?
     Or deem your English girl afraid
     To emulate the Indian maid?'

    "Be mine my husband's grief to cheer,
     In peril to be ever near;
     Whate'er of ill or woe betide,
     To bear it clinging at his side;
     The poisoned stroke of fate to ward,
     His bosom with my own to guard;
     Ah! could it spare a pang to his,
     It could not know a purer bliss!
     'Twould gladden as it felt the smart,
     And thank the hand that flung the dart!"

I do not say the verses are very good, but that I like them as well as
if they were--and that the face of the writer (whose sweet young voice I
fancy I can hear as I hum the lines), when I went into her drawing-room
after getting the letter, and when I saw her blushing and blessing
me--seemed to me more beautiful than any I can fancy out of Heaven.




CHAPTER LXXXI. Res Angusta Domi


I have already described my present feelings as an elderly gentleman,
regarding that rash jump into matrimony, which I persuaded my dear
partner to take with me when we were both scarce out of our teens. As a
man and a father--with a due sense of the necessity of mutton chops, and
the importance of paying the baker--with a pack of rash children round
about us who might be running off to Scotland to-morrow, and pleading
papa's and mamma's example for their impertinence,--I know that I ought
to be very cautious in narrating this early part of the married life
of George Warrington, Esquire, and Theodosia his wife--to call out
mea culpa, and put on a demure air, and, sitting in my comfortable
easy-chair here, profess to be in a white sheet and on the stool of
repentance, offering myself up as a warning to imprudent and hot-headed
youth.

But, truth to say, that married life, regarding which my dear relatives
prophesied so gloomily, has disappointed all those prudent and
respectable people. It has had its trials; but I can remember them
without bitterness--its passionate griefs, of which time, by God's kind
ordinance, has been the benign consoler--its days of poverty, which
we bore, who endured it, to the wonder of our sympathising relatives
looking on--its precious rewards and blessings, so great that I scarce
dare to whisper them to this page; to speak of them, save with awful
respect and to One Ear, to which are offered up the prayers and thanks
of all men. To marry without a competence is wrong and dangerous,
no doubt, and a crime against our social codes; but do not scores of
thousands of our fellow-beings commit the crime every year with no
other trust but in, Heaven, health, and their labour? Are young people
entering into the married life not to take hope into account, nor dare
to begin their housekeeping until the cottage is completely furnished,
the cellar and larder stocked, the cupboard full of plate, and the
strong-box of money? The increase and multiplication of the world would
stop, were the laws which regulate the genteel part of it to be made
universal. Our gentlefolks tremble at the brink in their silk stockings
and pumps, and wait for whole years, until they find a bridge or a gilt
barge to carry them across; our poor do not fear to wet their bare feet,
plant them in the brook, and trust to fate and strength to bear them
over. Who would like to consign his daughter to poverty? Who would
counsel his son to undergo the countless risks of poor married life, to
remove the beloved girl from comfort and competence, and subject her
to debt, misery, privation, friendlessness, sickness, and the hundred
gloomy consequences of the res angusta domi? I look at my own wife and
ask her pardon for having imposed a task so fraught with pain and danger
upon one so gentle. I think of the trials she endured, and am thankful
for them and for that unfailing love and constancy with which God
blessed her and strengthened her to bear them all. On this question of
marriage, I am not a fair judge: my own was so imprudent--and has been
so happy, that I must not dare to give young people counsel. I have
endured poverty, but scarcely ever found it otherwise than tolerable:
had I not undergone it, I never could have known the kindness of
friends, the delight of gratitude, the surprising joys and consolations
which sometimes accompany the scanty meal and narrow fire, and cheer the
long day's labour. This at least is certain, in respect of the lot of
the decent poor, that a great deal of superfluous pity is often thrown
away upon it. Good-natured fine folks, who sometimes stepped out of the
sunshine of their riches into a narrow obscurity, were blinded as it
were, whilst we could see quite cheerfully and clearly: they stumbled
over obstacles which were none to us: they were surprised at the
resignation with which we drank small beer, and that we could heartily
say grace over such very cold mutton.

The good General, my father-in-law, had married his Molly, when he was a
subaltern of a foot regiment, and had a purse scarce better filled than
my own. They had had their ups and downs of fortune. I think (though my
wife will never confess to this point) they had married, as people could
do in their young time, without previously asking papa's and mamma's
leave. [The Editor has looked through Burn's Registers of Fleet
Marriages without finding the names of Martin Lambert and Mary Benson.]
At all events, they were so well pleased with their own good luck in
matrimony, that they did not grudge their children's, and were by no
means frightened at the idea of any little hardships which we in the
course of our married life might be called upon to undergo. And I
suppose when I made my own pecuniary statements to Mr. Lambert, I was
anxious to deceive both of us. Believing me to be master of a couple
of thousand pounds, he went to Jamaica quite easy in his mind as to his
darling daughter's comfort and maintenance, at least for some years to
come. After paying the expenses of his family's outfit, the worthy man
went away not much richer than his son-in-law; and a few trinkets, and
some lace of Aunt Lambert's, with twenty new guineas in a purse which
her mother and sisters made for her, were my Theo's marriage portion.
But in valuing my stock, I chose to count as a good debt a sum which my
honoured mother never could be got to acknowledge up to the day when the
resolute old lady was called to pay the last debt of all. The sums I
had disbursed for her, she argued, were spent for the improvement and
maintenance of the estate which was to be mine at her decease. What
money she could spare was to be for my poor brother, who had nothing,
who would never have spent his own means had he not imagined himself to
be sole heir of the Virginian property, as he would have been--the good
lady took care to emphasise this point in many of her letters--but for a
half-hour's accident of birth. He was now distinguishing himself in
the service of his king and country. To purchase his promotion was his
mother's, she should suppose his brother's duty! When I had finished my
bar-studies and my dramatic amusements, Madam Esmond informed me that I
was welcome to return home and take that place in our colony to which my
birth entitled me. This statement she communicated to me more than once
through Mountain, and before the news of my marriage had reached her.

There is no need to recall her expressions of maternal indignation when
she was informed of the step I had taken. On the pacification of Canada,
my dear Harry asked for leave of absence, and dutifully paid a visit to
Virginia. He wrote, describing his reception at home, and the splendid
entertainments which my mother made in honour of her son. Castlewood,
which she had not inhabited since our departure for Europe, was thrown
open again to our friends of the colony; and the friend of Wolfe, and
the soldier of Quebec, was received by all our acquaintance with every
becoming honour. Some dismal quarrels, to be sure, ensued, because my
brother persisted in maintaining his friendship with Colonel Washington,
of Mount Vernon, whose praises Harry never was tired of singing.
Indeed I allow the gentleman every virtue; and in the struggles which
terminated so fatally for England a few years since, I can admire as
well as his warmest friends, General Washington's glorious constancy and
success.

If these battles between Harry and our mother were frequent, as, in his
letters, he described them to be, I wondered, for my part, why he should
continue at home? One reason naturally suggested itself to my mind,
which I scarcely liked to communicate to Mrs. Warrington; for we had
both talked over our dear little Hetty's romantic attachment for my
brother, and wondered that he had never discovered it. I need not say, I
suppose, that my gentleman had found some young lady at home more to his
taste than our dear Hester, and hence accounted for his prolonged stay
in Virginia.

Presently there came, in a letter from him, not a full confession but an
admission of this interesting fact. A person was described, not named--a
Being all beauty and perfection, like other young ladies under similar
circumstances. My wife asked to see the letter: I could not help showing
it, and handed it to her, with a very sad face. To my surprise she read
it, without exhibiting any corresponding sorrow of her own.

"I have thought of this before, my love," I said. "I feel with you for
your disappointment regarding poor Hetty."

"Ah! poor Hetty," says Theo, looking down at the carpet.

"It would never have done," says I.

"No--they would not have been happy," sighs Theo.

"How strange he never should have found out her secret!" I continued.

She looked me full in the face with an odd expression. "Pray, what does
that look mean?" I asked.

"Nothing, my dear--nothing! only I am not surprised!" says Theo,
blushing.

"What," I ask, "can there be another?"

"I am sure I never said so, George," says the lady, hurriedly. "But if
Hetty has overcome her childish folly, ought we not all to be glad? Do
you gentlemen suppose that you only are to fall in love and grow tired,
indeed?"

"What!" I say, with a strange commotion of my mind. "Do you mean to tell
me, Theo, that you ever cared for any one but me?"

"Oh, George," she whimpers, "when I was at school, there was--there was
one of the boys of Doctor Backhouse's school, who sate in the loft next
to us; and I thought he had lovely eyes, and I was so shocked when I
recognised him behind the counter at Mr. Grigg's the mercer's, when I
went to buy a cloak for baby, and I wanted to tell you, my dear, and I
didn't know how!"

I went to see this creature with the lovely eyes, having made my wife
describe the fellow's dress to me, and I saw a little bandy-legged
wretch in a blue camlet coat, with his red hair tied with a dirty
ribbon, about whom I forbore generously even to reproach my wife; nor
will she ever know that I have looked at the fellow, until she reads the
confession in this page. If our wives saw us as we are, I thought, would
they love us as they do? Are we as much mistaken in them, as they in us?
I look into one candid face at least, and think it never has deceived
me.

Lest I should encourage my young people to an imitation of my own
imprudence, I will not tell them with how small a capital Mrs. Theo and
I commenced life. The unfortunate tragedy brought us nothing; though the
reviewers, since its publication of late, have spoken not unfavourably
as to its merits, and Mr. Kemble himself has done me the honour to
commend it. Our kind friend Lord Wrotham was for having the piece
published by subscription, and sent me a bank-note, with a request that
I would let him have a hundred copies for his friends; but I was always
averse to that method of levying money, and, preferring my poverty sine
dote, locked up my manuscript, with my poor girl's verses inserted at
the first page. I know not why the piece should have given such offence
at court, except for the fact that an actor who had run off with an
earl's daughter, performed a principal part in the play; but I was told
that sentiments which I had put into the mouths of some of the Indian
characters (who were made to declaim against ambition, the British
desire of rule, and so forth), were pronounced dangerous and
unconstitutional; so that the little hope of royal favour, which I might
have had, was quite taken away from me.

What was to be done? A few months after the failure of the tragedy, as
I counted up the remains of my fortune (the calculation was not long or
difficult), I came to the conclusion that I must beat a retreat out
of my pretty apartments in Bloomsbury, and so gave warning to our good
landlady, informing her that my wife's health required that we should
have lodgings in the country. But we went no farther than Lambeth, our
faithful Gumbo and Molly following us; and here, though as poor as might
be, we were waited on by a maid and a lackey in livery, like any folks
of condition. You may be sure kind relatives cried out against our
extravagance; indeed, are they not the people who find our faults out
for us, and proclaim them to the rest of the world?

Returning home from London one day, whither I had been on a visit to
some booksellers, I recognised the family arms and livery on a grand
gilt chariot which stood before a public-house near to our lodgings. A
few loitering inhabitants were gathered round the splendid vehicle, and
looking with awe at the footmen, resplendent in the sun, and quaffing
blazing pots of beer. I found my Lady Castlewood seated opposite to
my wife in our little apartment (whence we had a very bright, pleasant
prospect of the river, covered with barges and wherries, and the ancient
towers and trees of the Archbishop's palace and gardens), and Mrs. Theo,
who has a very droll way of describing persons and scenes, narrated to
me all the particulars of her ladyship's conversation, when she took her
leave.

"I have been here this ever-so-long," says the Countess, "gossiping with
cousin Theo, while you have been away at the coffee-house, I dare say,
making merry with your friends, and drinking your punch and coffee.
Guess she must find it rather lonely here, with nothing to do but work
them little caps and hem them frocks. Never mind, dear; reckon you'll
soon have a companion who will amuse you when cousin George is away at
his coffee-house! What a nice lodging you have got here, I do declare!
Our new house which we have took is twenty times as big, and covered
with gold from top to bottom; but I like this quite as well. Bless you
being rich is no better than being poor. When we lived to Albany, and
I did most all the work myself, scoured the rooms, biled the kettle,
helped the wash, and all, I was just as happy as I am now. We only
had one old negro to keep the store. Why don't you sell Gumbo, cousin
George? He ain't no use here idling and dawdling about, and making love
to the servant-girl. Fogh! guess they ain't particular, these English
people!" So she talked, rattling on with perfect good-humour, until her
hour for departure came; when she produced a fine repeating watch, and
said it was time for her to pay a call upon her Majesty at Buckingham
House. "And mind you come to us, George," says her ladyship, waving a
little parting hand out of the gilt coach. "Theo and I have settled all
about it."

"Here, at least," said I, when the laced footmen had clambered up behind
the carriage, and our magnificent little patroness had left us;--"here
is one who is not afraid of our poverty, nor ashamed to remember her
own."

"Ashamed!" said Theo, resuming her lilliputian needlework. "To do her
justice, she would make herself at home in any kitchen or palace in the
world. She has given me and Molly twenty lessons in housekeeping. She
says, when she was at home to Albany, she roasted, baked, swept the
house, and milked the cow." (Madam Theo pronounced the word cow
archly in our American way, and imitated her ladyship's accent very
divertingly.)

"And she has no pride," I added. "It was good-natured of her to ask us
to dine with her and my lord. When will Uncle Warrington ever think of
offering us a crust again, or a glass of his famous beer?"

"Yes, it was not ill-natured to invite us," says Theo, slily. "But,
my dear, you don't know all the conditions!" And then my wife, still
imitating the Countess's manner, laughingly informed me what these
conditions were. "She took out her pocket-book, and told me," says Theo,
"what days she was engaged abroad and at home. On Monday she received a
Duke and a Duchess, with several other members of my lord's house,
and their ladies. On Tuesday came more earls, two bishops, and an
ambassador. 'Of course you won't come on them days?' says the Countess.
'Now you are so poor, you know, that fine company ain't no good for you.
Lord bless you! father never dines on our company days! he don't
like it; he takes a bit of cold meat anyways.' On which," says Theo,
laughing, "I told her that Mr. Warrington did not care for any but the
best of company, and proposed that she should ask us on some day when
the Archbishop of Canterbury dined with her, and his Grace must give
us a lift home in his coach to Lambeth. And she is an economical little
person, too," continues Theo. "'I thought of bringing with me some of
my baby's caps and things, which his lordship has outgrown 'em, but they
may be wanted again, you know, my dear.' And so we lose that addition
to our wardrobe," says Theo, smiling, "and Molly and I must do our best
without her ladyship's charity. 'When people are poor, they are poor,'
the Countess said, with her usual outspokenness, 'and must get on the
best they can. What we shall do for that poor Maria, goodness only
knows! we can't ask her to see us as we can you, though you are so
poor: but an earl's daughter to marry a play-actor! La, my dear, it's
dreadful: his Majesty and the Princess have both spoken of it! Every
other noble family in this kingdom as has ever heard of it pities us;
though I have a plan for helping those poor unhappy people, and have
sent down Simons, my groom of the chambers, to tell them on it.' This
plan was, that Hagan, who had kept almost all his terms at Dublin
College, should return thither and take his degree, and enter into holy
orders, 'when we will provide him with a chaplaincy at home, you know,'
Lady Castlewood added." And I may mention here, that this benevolent
plan was executed a score of months later; when I was enabled myself to
be of service to Mr. Hagan, who was one of the kindest and best of
our friends during our own time of want and distress. Castlewood
then executed his promise loyally enough, got orders and a colonial
appointment for Hagan, who distinguished himself both as soldier and
preacher, as we shall presently hear; but not a guinea did his lordship
spare to aid either his sister or his kinsman in their trouble. I never
asked him, thank Heaven, to assist me in my own; though, to do him
justice, no man could express himself more amiably, and with a joy which
I believe was quite genuine, when my days of poverty were ended.

As for my Uncle Warrington, and his virtuous wife and daughters, let
me do them justice likewise, and declare that throughout my period of
trial, their sorrow at my poverty was consistent and unvarying. I still
had a few acquaintances who saw them, and of course (as friends will)
brought me a report of their opinions and conversation; and I never
could hear that my relatives had uttered one single good word about me
or my wife. They spoke even of my tragedy as a crime--I was accustomed
to hear that sufficiently maligned--of the author as a miserable
reprobate, for ever reeling about Grub Street, in rags and squalor. They
held me out no hand of help. My poor wife might cry in her pain,
but they had no twopence to bestow upon her. They went to church a
half-dozen times in the week. They subscribed to many public charities.
Their tribe was known eighteen hundred years ago, and will flourish as
long as men endure. They will still thank Heaven that they are not as
other folks are; and leave the wounded and miserable to other succour.

I don't care to recall the dreadful doubts and anxieties which began to
beset me; the plan after plan which I tried, and in which I failed, for
procuring work and adding to our dwindling stock of money. I bethought
me of my friend Mr. Johnson, and when I think of the eager kindness with
which he received me, am ashamed of some pert speeches which I own
to have made regarding his manners and behaviour. I told my story and
difficulties to him, the circumstance of my marriage, and the prospects
before me. He would not for a moment admit they were gloomy, or, si male
nunc, that they would continue to be so. I had before me the chances,
certainly very slender, of a place in England; the inheritance which
must be mine in the course of nature, or at any rate would fall to the
heir I was expecting. I had a small stock of money for present actual
necessity--a possibility, "though, to be free with you, sir" (says
he), "after the performance of your tragedy, I doubt whether nature
has endowed you with those peculiar qualities which are necessary for
achieving a remarkable literary success"--and finally a submission to
the maternal rule, and a return to Virginia, where plenty and a home
were always ready for me. "Why, sir!" he cried, "such a sum as you
mention would have been a fortune to me when I began the world, and my
friend Mr. Goldsmith would set up a coach-and-six on it. With youth,
hope, to-day, and a couple of hundred pounds in cash--no young fellow
need despair. Think, sir, you have a year at least before you, and who
knows what may chance between now and then. Why, sir, your relatives
here may provide for you, or you may succeed to your Virginian property,
or you may come into a fortune!" I did not in the course of that year,
but he did. My Lord Bute gave Mr. Johnson a pension, which set all Grub
Street in a fury against the recipient, who, to be sure, had published
his own not very flattering opinion upon pensions and pensioners.

Nevertheless, he did not altogether discourage my literary projects,
promised to procure me work from the booksellers, and faithfully
performed that kind promise. "But," says he, "sir, you must not appear
amongst them in forma pauperis.--Have you never a friend's coach, in
which we can ride to see them? You must put on your best laced hat and
waistcoat; and we must appear, sir, as if we were doing them a favour."
This stratagem answered, and procured me respect enough at the first
visit or two; but when the booksellers knew that I wanted to be paid for
my work, their backs refused to bend any more, and they treated me with
a familiarity which I could ill stomach. I overheard one of them, who
had been a footman, say, "Oh, it's Pocahontas, is it? let him wait." And
he told his boy to say as much to me. "Wait, sir?" says I, fuming
with rage and putting my head into his parlour, "I'm not accustomed to
waiting, but I have heard you are." And I strode out of the shop into
Pall Mall in a mighty fluster.

And yet Mr. D. was in the right. I came to him, if not to ask a favour,
at any rate to propose a bargain, and surely it was my business to wait
his time and convenience. In more fortunate days I asked the gentleman's
pardon, and the kind author of the Muse in Livery was instantly
appeased.

I was more prudent, or Mr. Johnson more fortunate, in an application
elsewhere, and Mr. Johnson procured me a little work from the
booksellers in translating from foreign languages, of which I happen to
know two or three. By a hard day's labour I could earn a few shillings;
so few that a week's work would hardly bring me a guinea: and that was
flung to me with insolent patronage by the low hucksters who employed
me. I can put my finger upon two or three magazine articles written at
this period, and paid for with a few wretched shillings, which papers as
I read them awaken in me the keenest pangs of bitter remembrance.
[Mr. George Warrington, of the Upper Temple, says he remembers a book,
containing his grandfather's book-plate, in which were pasted various
extracts from reviews and newspapers in an old type, and lettered
outside Les Chains de l'Esclavage. These were no doubt the contributions
above mentioned; but the volume has not been found, either in the
town-house or in the library at Warrington Manor. The Editor, by
the way, is not answerable for a certain inconsistency, which may be
remarked in the narrative. The writer says earlier, that he speaks
without bitterness of past times, and presently falls into a fury with
them. The same manner of forgiving our enemies is not uncommon in the
present century.] I recall the doubts and fears which agitated me,
see the dear wife nursing her infant and looking up into my face with
hypocritical smiles that vainly try to mask her alarm: the struggles of
pride are fought over again: the wounds under which I smarted re-open.
There are some acts of injustice committed against me which I don't know
how to forgive; and which, whenever I think of them, awaken in me the
same feelings of revolt and indignation. The gloom and darkness gather
over me--till they are relieved by a reminiscence of that love and
tenderness which through all gloom and darkness have been my light and
consolation.




CHAPTER LXXXII. Miles's Moidore


Little Miles made his appearance in this world within a few days of the
gracious Prince who commands his regiment. Illuminations and cannonading
saluted the Royal George's birth, multitudes were admitted to see him
as he lay behind a gilt railing at the Palace with noble nurses watching
over him. Few nurses guarded the cradle of our little Prince; no
courtiers, no faithful retainers saluted it, except our trusty Gumbo
and kind Molly, who to be sure loved and admired the little heir of my
poverty as loyally as our hearts could desire. Why was our boy not named
George like the other paragon just mentioned, and like his father? I
gave him the name of a little scapegrace of my family, a name which
many generations of Warringtons had borne likewise; but my poor little
Miles's love and kindness touched me at a time when kindness and love
were rare from those of my own blood, and Theo and I agreed that our
child should be called after that single little friend of my paternal
race.

We wrote to acquaint our royal parents with the auspicious event, and
bravely inserted the child's birth in the Daily Advertiser, and the
place, Church Street, Lambeth, where he was born. "My dear," says Aunt
Bernstein, writing to me in reply to my announcement, "how could you
point out to all the world that you live in such a trou as that in
which you have buried yourself? I kiss the little mamma, and send a
remembrance for the child." This remembrance was a fine silk coverlid,
with a lace edging fit for a prince. It was not very useful: the price
of the lace would have served us much better, but Theo and Molly were
delighted with the present, and my eldest son's cradle had a cover as
fine as any nobleman's.

Good Dr. Heberden came over several times to visit my wife, and see that
all things went well. He knew and recommended to us a surgeon in the
vicinage, who took charge of her; luckily, my dear patient needed little
care, beyond that which our landlady and her own trusty attendant could
readily afford her. Again our humble precinct was adorned with the
gilded apparition of Lady Castlewood's chariot wheels; she brought a pot
of jelly, which she thought Theo might like, and which, no doubt, had
been served at one of her ladyship's banquets on a previous day. And
she told us of all the ceremonies at court, and of the splendour and
festivities attending the birth of the august heir to the crown; Our
good Mr. Johnson happened to pay me a visit on one of those days when
my lady countess's carriage flamed up to our little gate. He was not a
little struck by her magnificence, and made her some bows, which were
more respectful than graceful. She called me cousin very affably, and
helped to transfer the present of jelly from her silver dish into our
crockery pan with much benignity. The Doctor tasted the sweetmeat, and
pronounced it to be excellent. "The great, sir," says he, "are fortunate
in every way. They can engage the most skilful practitioners of the
culinary art, as they can assemble the most amiable wits round their
table. If, as you think, sir, and, from the appearance of the dish,
your suggestion at least is plausible, this sweetmeat may have appeared
already at his lordship's table, it has been there in good company. It
has quivered under the eyes of celebrated beauties, it has been tasted
by ruby lips, it has divided the attention of the distinguished company,
with fruits, tarts, and creams, which I make no doubt were like itself
delicious." And so saying, the good Doctor absorbed a considerable
portion of Lady Castlewood's benefaction; though as regards the epithet
delicious I am bound to say, that my poor wife, after tasting the jelly,
put it away from her as not to her liking; and Molly, flinging up her
head, declared it was mouldy.

My boy enjoyed at least the privilege of having an earl's daughter for
his godmother; for this office was performed by his cousin, our poor
Lady Maria, whose kindness and attention to the mother and the infant
were beyond all praise; and who, having lost her own solitary chance
for maternal happiness, yearned over our child in a manner not a little
touching to behold. Captain Miles is a mighty fine gentleman, and his
uniforms of the Prince's Hussars as splendid as any that ever bedizened
a soldier of fashion; but he hath too good a heart, and is too true a
gentleman, let us trust, not to be thankful when he remembers that his
own infant limbs were dressed in some of the little garments which had
been prepared for the poor player's child. Sampson christened him in
that very chapel in Southwark, where our marriage ceremony had been
performed. Never were the words of the Prayer-book more beautifully and
impressively read than by the celebrant of the service; except at
its end, when his voice failed him, and he and the rest of the little
congregation were fain to wipe their eyes. "Mr. Garrick himself, sir,"
says Hagan, "could not have read those words so nobly. I am sure little
innocent never entered the world accompanied by wishes and benedictions
more tender and sincere."

And now I have not told how it chanced that the Captain came by his name
of Miles. A couple of days before his christening, when as yet I believe
it was intended that our firstborn should bear his father's name, a
little patter of horse's hoofs comes galloping up to our gate; and
who should pull at the bell but young Miles, our cousin? I fear he had
disobeyed his parents when he galloped away on that undutiful journey.

"You know," says he, "cousin Harry gave me my little horse; and I can't
help liking you, because you are so like Harry, and because they're
always saying things of you at home, and it's a shame; and I have
brought my whistle and coral that my godmamma Lady Suckling gave me, for
your little boy; and if you're so poor, cousin George, here's my gold
moidore, and it's worth ever so much, and it's no use to me, because I
mayn't spend it, you know."

We took the boy up to Theo in her room (he mounted the stair in his
little tramping boots, of which he was very proud); and Theo kissed him,
and thanked him; and his moidore has been in her purse from that day.

My mother, writing through her ambassador as usual, informed me of
her royal surprise and displeasure on learning that my son had been
christened Miles--a name not known, at least in the Esmond family. I
did not care to tell the reason at the time; but when, in after years,
I told Madam Esmond how my boy came by his name, I saw a tear roll down
her wrinkled cheek, and I heard afterwards that she had asked Gumbo
many questions about the boy who gave his name to our Miles--our Miles
Gloriosus of Pall Mall, Valenciennes, Almack's, Brighton.




CHAPTER LXXXIII. Troubles and Consolations


In our early days at home, when Harry and I used to be so undutiful to
our tutor, who would have thought that Mr. Esmond Warrington of Virginia
would turn Bearleader himself? My mother (when we came together again)
never could be got to speak directly of this period of my life; but
would allude to it as "that terrible time, my love, which I can't bear
to think of," "those dreadful years when there was difference between
us," and so forth; and though my pupil, a worthy and grateful man, sent
me out to Jamestown several barrels of that liquor by which his great
fortune was made, Madam Esmond spoke of him as "your friend in England,"
"your wealthy Lambeth friend," etc., but never by his name; nor did she
ever taste a drop of his beer. We brew our own too at Warrington Manor,
but our good Mr. Foker never fails to ship to Ipswich every year a
couple of butts of his entire. His son is a young sprig of fashion, and
has married an earl's daughter; the father is a very worthy and kind
gentleman, and it is to the luck of making his acquaintance that I owe
the receipt of some of the most welcome guineas that ever I received in
my life.

It was not so much the sum, as the occupation and hope given me by the
office of Governor, which I took on myself, which were then so precious
to me. Mr. F.'s Brewery (the site has since been changed) then stood
near to Pedlar's Acre in Lambeth and the surgeon who attended my wife in
her confinement, likewise took care of the wealthy brewer's family.
He was a Bavarian, originally named Voelker. Mr. Lance, the surgeon, I
suppose, made him acquainted with my name and history. The worthy doctor
would smoke many a pipe of Virginia in my garden, and had conceived an
attachment for me and my family. He brought his patron to my house; and
when Mr. F. found that I had a smattering of his language, and could
sing "Prinz Eugen the noble Ritter" (a song that my grandfather had
brought home from the Marlborough wars), the German conceived a great
friendship for me: his lady put her chair and her chariot at Mrs.
Warrington's service: his little daughter took a prodigious fancy to our
baby (and to do him justice, the Captain, who is as ugly a fellow now
as ever wore a queue, was beautiful as an infant) [The very image of the
Squire at 30, everybody says so. M. W. (Note in the MS.)]: and his son
and heir, Master Foker, being much maltreated at Westminster School
because of his father's profession of brewer, the parents asked if
I would take charge of him; and paid me a not insufficient sum for
superintending his education.

Mr. F. was a shrewd man of business, and as he and his family really
interested themselves in me and mine, I laid all my pecuniary affairs
pretty unreservedly before him; and my statement, he was pleased to say,
augmented the respect and regard which he felt for me. He laughed at
our stories of the aid which my noble relatives had given me--my
aunt's coverlid, my Lady Castlewood's mouldy jelly, Lady Warrington's
contemptuous treatment of us. But he wept many tears over the story of
little Miles's moidore; and as for Sampson and Hagan, "I wow," says he,
"dey shall have so much beer als ever dey can drink." He sent his wife
to call upon Lady Maria, and treated her with the utmost respect and
obsequiousness, whenever she came to visit him. It was with Mr. Foker
that Lady Maria stayed when Hagan went to Dublin to complete his college
terms; and the good brewer's purse also ministered to our friend's wants
and supplied his outfit.

When Mr. Foker came fully to know my own affairs and position, he was
pleased to speak of me with terms of enthusiasm, and as if my conduct
showed some extraordinary virtue. I have said how my mother saved money
for Harry, and how the two were in my debt. But when Harry spent money,
he spent it fancying it to be his; Madam Esmond never could be made to
understand she was dealing hardly with me--the money was paid and gone,
and there was an end of it. Now, at the end of '62, I remember Harry
sent over a considerable remittance for the purchase of his promotion,
begging me at the same time to remember that he was in my debt, and to
draw on his agents if I had any need. He did not know how great the need
was, or how my little capital had been swallowed.

Well, to take my brother's money would delay his promotion, and I
naturally did not draw on him, though I own I was tempted; nor, knowing
my dear General Lambert's small means, did I care to impoverish him by
asking for supplies. These simple acts of forbearance my worthy brewer
must choose to consider as instances of exalted virtue. And what does
my gentleman do but write privately to my brother in America, lauding me
and my wife as the most admirable of human beings, and call upon
Madame de Bernstein, who never told me of his visit indeed, but who,
I perceived, about this time treated us with singular respect and
gentleness, that surprised me in one whom I could not but consider as
selfish and worldly. In after days I remember asking him how he had
gained admission to the Baroness? He laughed: "De Baroness!" says he.
"I knew de Baron when he was a walet at Munich, and I was a
brewer-apprentice." I think our family had best not be too curious about
our uncle the Baron.

