possessed, forced his way into the house among the foremost, and mounted
without pause to the chamber on the third floor where he had last parted
from Joanna.  It was a mere wreck; the furniture had been overthrown, the
cupboards broken open, and in one place a trailing corner of the arras
lay smouldering on the embers of the fire.

Dick, almost without thinking, trod out the incipient conflagration, and
then stood bewildered.  Sir Daniel, Sir Oliver, Joanna, all were gone;
but whether butchered in the rout or safe escaped from Shoreby, who
should say?

He caught a passing archer by the tabard.

"Fellow," he asked, "were ye here when this house was taken?"

"Let be," said the archer.  "A murrain! let be, or I strike."

"Hark ye," returned Richard, "two can play at that.  Stand and be plain."

But the man, flushed with drink and battle, struck Dick upon the shoulder
with one hand, while with the other he twitched away his garment.
Thereupon the full wrath of the young leader burst from his control.  He
seized the fellow in his strong embrace, and crushed him on the plates of
his mailed bosom like a child; then, holding him at arm's length, he bid
him speak as he valued life.

"I pray you mercy!" gasped the archer.  "An I had thought ye were so
angry I would 'a' been charier of crossing you.  I was here indeed."

"Know ye Sir Daniel?" pursued Dick.

"Well do I know him," returned the man.

"Was he in the mansion?"

"Ay, sir, he was," answered the archer; "but even as we entered by the
yard gate he rode forth by the garden."

"Alone?" cried Dick.

"He may 'a' had a score of lances with him," said the man.

"Lances!  No women, then?" asked Shelton.

"Troth, I saw not," said the archer.  "But there were none in the house,
if that be your quest."

"I thank you," said Dick.  "Here is a piece for your pains."  But groping
in his wallet, Dick found nothing.  "Inquire for me to-morrow," he
added--"Richard Shelt--Sir Richard Shelton," he corrected, "and I will
see you handsomely rewarded."

And then an idea struck Dick.  He hastily descended to the courtyard, ran
with all his might across the garden, and came to the great door of the
church.  It stood wide open; within, every corner of the pavement was
crowded with fugitive burghers, surrounded by their families and laden
with the most precious of their possessions, while, at the high altar,
priests in full canonicals were imploring the mercy of God.  Even as Dick
entered, the loud chorus began to thunder in the vaulted roofs.

He hurried through the groups of refugees, and came to the door of the
stair that led into the steeple.  And here a tall churchman stepped
before him and arrested his advance.

"Whither, my son?" he asked, severely.

"My father," answered Dick, "I am here upon an errand of expedition.
Stay me not.  I command here for my Lord of Gloucester."

"For my Lord of Gloucester?" repeated the priest.  "Hath, then, the
battle gone so sore?"

"The battle, father, is at an end, Lancaster clean sped, my Lord of
Risingham--Heaven rest him!--left upon the field.  And now, with your
good leave, I follow mine affairs."  And thrusting on one side the
priest, who seemed stupefied at the news, Dick pushed open the door and
rattled up the stairs four at a bound, and without pause or stumble, till
he stepped upon the open platform at the top.

Shoreby Church tower not only commanded the town, as in a map, but looked
far, on both sides, over sea and land.  It was now near upon noon; the
day exceeding bright, the snow dazzling.  And as Dick looked around him,
he could measure the consequences of the battle.

A confused, growling uproar reached him from the streets, and now and
then, but very rarely, the clash of steel.  Not a ship, not so much as a
skiff remained in harbour; but the sea was dotted with sails and
row-boats laden with fugitives.  On shore, too, the surface of the snowy
meadows was broken up with bands of horsemen, some cutting their way
towards the borders of the forest, others, who were doubtless of the
Yorkist side, stoutly interposing and beating them back upon the town.
Over all the open ground there lay a prodigious quantity of fallen men
and horses, clearly defined upon the snow.

To complete the picture, those of the foot soldiers as had not found
place upon a ship still kept up an archery combat on the borders of the
port, and from the cover of the shoreside taverns.  In that quarter,
also, one or two houses had been fired, and the smoke towered high in the
frosty sunlight, and blew off to sea in voluminous folds.

Already close upon the margin of the woods, and somewhat in the line of
Holywood, one particular clump of fleeing horsemen riveted the attention
of the young watcher on the tower.  It was fairly numerous; in no other
quarter of the field did so many Lancastrians still hold together; thus
they had left a wide, discoloured wake upon the snow, and Dick was able
to trace them step by step from where they had left the town.

While Dick stood watching them, they had gained, unopposed, the first
fringe of the leafless forest, and, turning a little from their
direction, the sun fell for a moment full on their array, as it was
relieved against the dusky wood.

"Murrey and blue!" cried Dick.  "I swear it--murrey and blue!"

The next moment he was descending the stairway.

It was now his business to seek out the Duke of Gloucester, who alone, in
the disorder of the forces, might be able to supply him with a
sufficiency of men.  The fighting in the main town was now practically at
an end; and as Dick ran hither and thither, seeking the commander, the
streets were thick with wandering soldiers, some laden with more booty
than they could well stagger under, others shouting drunk.  None of them,
when questioned, had the least notion of the duke's whereabouts; and, at
last, it was by sheer good fortune that Dick found him, where he sat in
the saddle directing operations to dislodge the archers from the harbour
side.

"Sir Richard Shelton, ye are well found," he said.  "I owe you one thing
that I value little, my life; and one that I can never pay you for, this
victory.  Catesby, if I had ten such captains as Sir Richard, I would
march forthright on London.  But now, sir, claim your reward."

"Freely, my lord," said Dick, "freely and loudly.  One hath escaped to
whom I owe some grudges, and taken with him one whom I owe love and
service.  Give me, then, fifty lances, that I may pursue; and for any
obligation that your graciousness is pleased to allow, it shall be clean
discharged."

"How call ye him?" inquired the duke.

"Sir Daniel Brackley," answered Richard.

"Out upon him, double-face!" cried Gloucester.  "Here is no reward, Sir
Richard; here is fresh service offered, and, if that ye bring his head to
me, a fresh debt upon my conscience.  Catesby, get him these lances; and
you, sir, bethink ye, in the meanwhile, what pleasure, honour, or profit
it shall be mine to give you."

Just then the Yorkist skirmishers carried one of the shoreside taverns,
swarming in upon it on three sides, and driving out or taking its
defenders.  Crookback Dick was pleased to cheer the exploit, and pushing
his horse a little nearer, called to see the prisoners.

There were four or five of them--two men of my Lord Shoreby's and one of
Lord Risingham's among the number, and last, but in Dick's eyes not
least, a tall, shambling, grizzled old shipman, between drunk and sober,
and with a dog whimpering and jumping at his heels.

The young duke passed them for a moment under a severe review.

"Good," he said.  "Hang them."

And he turned the other way to watch the progress of the fight.

"My lord," said Dick, "so please you, I have found my reward.  Grant me
the life and liberty of yon old shipman."

Gloucester turned and looked the speaker in the face.

"Sir Richard," he said, "I make not war with peacock's feathers, but
steel shafts.  Those that are mine enemies I slay, and that without
excuse or favour.  For, bethink ye, in this realm of England, that is so
torn in pieces, there is not a man of mine but hath a brother or a friend
upon the other party.  If, then, I did begin to grant these pardons, I
might sheathe my sword."

"It may be so, my lord; and yet I will be overbold, and at the risk of
your disfavour, recall your lordship's promise," replied Dick.

Richard of Gloucester flushed.

"Mark it right well," he said, harshly.  "I love not mercy, nor yet
mercymongers.  Ye have this day laid the foundations of high fortune.  If
ye oppose to me my word, which I have plighted, I will yield.  But, by
the glory of heaven, there your favour dies!

"Mine is the loss," said Dick.

"Give him his sailor," said the duke; and wheeling his horse, he turned
his back upon young Shelton.

Dick was nor glad nor sorry.  He had seen too much of the young duke to
set great store on his affection; and the origin and growth of his own
favour had been too flimsy and too rapid to inspire much confidence.  One
thing alone he feared--that the vindictive leader might revoke the offer
of the lances.  But here he did justice neither to Gloucester's honour
(such as it was) nor, above all, to his decision.  If he had once judged
Dick to be the right man to pursue Sir Daniel, he was not one to change;
and he soon proved it by shouting after Catesby to be speedy, for the
paladin was waiting.

In the meanwhile, Dick turned to the old shipman, who had seemed equally
indifferent to his condemnation and to his subsequent release.

"Arblaster," said Dick, "I have done you ill; but now, by the rood, I
think I have cleared the score."

But the old skipper only looked upon him dully and held his peace.

"Come," continued Dick, "a life is a life, old shrew, and it is more than
ships or liquor.  Say ye forgive me; for if your life be worth nothing to
you, it hath cost me the beginnings of my fortune.  Come, I have paid for
it dearly; be not so churlish."

"An I had had my ship," said Arblaster, "I would 'a' been forth and safe
on the high seas--I and my man Tom.  But ye took my ship, gossip, and I'm
a beggar; and for my man Tom, a knave fellow in russet shot him down.
'Murrain!' quoth he, and spake never again.  'Murrain' was the last of
his words, and the poor spirit of him passed.  'A will never sail no
more, will my Tom.'"

Dick was seized with unavailing penitence and pity; he sought to take the
skipper's hand, but Arblaster avoided his touch.

"Nay," said he, "let be.  Y' have played the devil with me, and let that
content you."

The words died in Richard's throat.  He saw, through tears, the poor old
man, bemused with liquor and sorrow, go shambling away, with bowed head,
across the snow, and the unnoticed dog whimpering at his heels, and for
the first time began to understand the desperate game that we play in
life; and how a thing once done is not to be changed or remedied, by any
penitence.

But there was no time left to him for vain regret.

Catesby had now collected the horsemen, and riding up to Dick he
dismounted, and offered him his own horse.

"This morning," he said, "I was somewhat jealous of your favour; it hath
not been of a long growth; and now, Sir Richard, it is with a very good
heart that I offer you this horse--to ride away with."

"Suffer me yet a moment," replied Dick.  "This favour of mine--whereupon
was it founded?"

"Upon your name," answered Catesby.  "It is my lord's chief superstition.
Were my name Richard, I should be an earl to-morrow."

"Well, sir, I thank you," returned Dick; "and since I am little likely to
follow these great fortunes, I will even say farewell.  I will not
pretend I was displeased to think myself upon the road to fortune; but I
will not pretend, neither, that I am over-sorry to be done with it.
Command and riches, they are brave things, to be sure; but a word in your
ear--yon duke of yours, he is a fearsome lad."

Catesby laughed.

"Nay," said he, "of a verity he that rides with Crooked Dick will ride
deep.  Well, God keep us all from evil!  Speed ye well."

Thereupon Dick put himself at the head of his men, and giving the word of
command, rode off.

He made straight across the town, following what he supposed to be the
route of Sir Daniel, and spying around for any signs that might decide if
he were right.

The streets were strewn with the dead and the wounded, whose fate, in the
bitter frost, was far the more pitiable.  Gangs of the victors went from
house to house, pillaging and stabbing, and sometimes singing together as
they went.

From different quarters, as he rode on, the sounds of violence and
outrage came to young Shelton's ears; now the blows of the sledge-hammer
on some barricaded door, and now the miserable shrieks of women.

Dick's heart had just been awakened.  He had just seen the cruel
consequences of his own behaviour; and the thought of the sum of misery
that was now acting in the whole of Shoreby filled him with despair.

At length he reached the outskirts, and there, sure enough, he saw
straight before him the same broad, beaten track across the snow that he
had marked from the summit of the church.  Here, then, he went the faster
on; but still, as he rode, he kept a bright eye upon the fallen men and
horses that lay beside the track.  Many of these, he was relieved to see,
wore Sir Daniel's colours, and the faces of some, who lay upon their
back, he even recognised.

About half-way between the town and the forest, those whom he was
following had plainly been assailed by archers; for the corpses lay
pretty closely scattered, each pierced by an arrow.  And here Dick spied
among the rest the body of a very young lad, whose face was somehow
hauntingly familiar to him.

He halted his troop, dismounted, and raised the lad's head.  As he did
so, the hood fell back, and a profusion of long brown hair unrolled
itself.  At the same time the eyes opened.

"Ah! lion driver!" said a feeble voice.  "She is farther on.  Ride--ride
fast!"

And then the poor young lady fainted once again.

One of Dick's men carried a flask of some strong cordial, and with this
Dick succeeded in reviving consciousness.  Then he took Joanna's friend
upon his saddlebow, and once more pushed toward the forest.

"Why do ye take me?" said the girl.  "Ye but delay your speed."

"Nay, Mistress Risingham," replied Dick.  "Shoreby is full of blood and
drunkenness and riot.  Here ye are safe; content ye."

"I will not be beholden to any of your faction," she cried; "set me
down."

