neighbourhood of the Long Serpent. In the wake of these two sailed the
earl's ten other viking ships and a similar number of King Olaf's
largest dragons, including the Short Serpent and the Crane.

The remaining portion of the king's fleet had already passed in
advance, bending their course due north. Sigvaldi had tried, by
delaying Olaf's departure out of the haven, to still further reduce the
number of the king's immediate followers. But he knew the extent of
Sweyn Fork Beard's forces, and he was content that Olaf should retain
such chances as were afforded by the support of eleven of his best
battleships.

Now Olaf was about to steer outward into the sea when Sigvaldi hailed
him.

"Follow me!" cried the earl. "Let me be your pilot, for I know all the
deepest channels between the isles, and I will lead you through them by
such ways that you will come out far in advance of your other ships!"

So King Olaf, over confident and never dreaming of treachery, followed
westward into the Sound, and went sailing onward to his doom.



CHAPTER XX: CAUGHT IN THE SNARE.


King Sweyn of Denmark and his allies lay with their war hosts in a
large sheltered vik, or bay, on the western side of the isle of Svold.
This position was well chosen, as the bay formed a part of the channel
through which--if Earl Sigvaldi fulfilled his treacherous mission--King
Olaf Triggvison was certain to pass into the clutches of his foes.
There were seventy war galleys in all, and each vessel was well manned
and fully prepared for battle. The larger number belonged to King
Sweyn; but the longships of Earl Erik were in all respects superior to
those of either Denmark or Sweden.

Earl Erik himself, too, was the most valiant warrior. Excepting only
Olaf Triggvison there was not a braver or more daring chief in all the
lands of Scandinavia. Trained from his earliest youth to a life of
storm and battle, Erik had never known the meaning of fear, and it
might almost be said that he had never known defeat. His own bravery
and skill had inspired every one of his viking followers with the same
qualities. As his men were, so were his ships--they were chosen with
the main view to their fitness for encountering the battle and the
breeze. His own dragonship, which had stood the brunt of many a fierce
fight, was named the Iron Ram. It was very large, and the hull timbers
at both bow and stern were plated with thick staves of iron from the
gunwales down to the waterline.

For many days had these ships lain at anchor in the bay, and as each
day passed the three chiefs grew more and more impatient for the coming
of their royal victim. Many times and again had they sat together in
King Sweyn's land tent, discussing their prospects and planning their
method of attack. Their purpose was not alone to wreak vengeance upon
King Olaf for the supposed wrongs that each of the three had suffered
at his hands. The idea of vengeance, indeed, stood only second to the
great hope of conquest and of personal gain, and they had made this
secret bargain among themselves, namely, that in the event of Olaf
Triggvison being slain, they should each have his own third share of
Norway. To Earl Erik were to be given all the shires along the western
coast from Finmark to Lindesness, with the exception of seven shires
allotted to Olaf the Swede King. All the shires from Lindesness,
including the rich district of Agder, to the Swedish boundary, were to
be taken by Sweyn Fork Beard; excepting only the realm of Ranarike (to
this day a part of Sweden), which was to be given to the Swedish king.

It was further agreed among the three chieftains, concerning the
expected battle, that he who first planted foot upon the Long Serpent
should have her for his own, with all the wealth that was found on
board of her; and each should take possession of the ships which he
himself captured and cleared of men.

Touching this same arrangement Olaf Sigridson was not well content, for
he knew that both Erik and Sweyn were better men than himself, and that
in contending for the prize he would have but a sorry chance if either
of his companions should enter the battle before him.

"It seems to me," said Sweyn, on a certain morning when they were
talking this matter over, "that the fairest way of all would be that we
should cast lots or throw the dice; and let it be that he who throws
the highest shall be first to attack King Olaf's own ship."

So they brought out the dice box and each cast his lot in turn. Earl
Erik threw a two and a five. Then the Swedish king took up the dice and
he threw two sixes.

"No need is there for a third to throw!" he cried. "Mine is the first
chance, and, by the hammer of Thor, the Long Serpent shall be mine
also!"

But King Sweyn had still to take his throw.

"There are yet two sixes on the dice," said he, "and it is easy for the
gods to let them turn up again."

He made his cast, and there were again two sixes. But one die had
broken asunder, showing a three as well as the two sixes. Thus Sweyn
was the victor, and it was agreed that his ships should take the centre
of battle and lead the attack upon the Long Serpent.

When this matter was decided the three chiefs went up upon the heights
of the island, as they had done every morning since their coming to
Svold, and stood there with a great company of men. They looked
eastward along the line of the Wendic coast, and as they watched they
saw a great number of ships upon the sea, bearing outward from Stetten
haven. The weather was very bright and clear, and the sunlight, shining
upon the gaily coloured sails and upon the gilded prows, made a very
fine sight.

Earl Erik noticed with some concern that the fleet was making due
north. But Sweyn said: "Wait, and you will see what our good Sigvaldi
will do when he comes into sight!" So they waited and watched.

In about an hour's time they saw many larger and finer vessels
appearing. But they were yet too far off to be clearly recognized.
Sweyn was very silent for a time, and he kept his eyes fixed upon the
ships, noting their every movement. At last he cried aloud:

"Now I can see that Sigvaldi is doing as we bade him. No longer do the
ships stand outward into the main. They are bearing westward for Svold!
Let us now go down to our ships and not be too slow in attack."

So they all went down to the lower land and Sweyn sent boats out to bid
the shipmen weigh anchor and prepare for battle as quietly as might be.

Now the channel through which Sigvaldi was to lead the Norsemen was
full wide, and deep, but it had many turns and twists, and before the
ships could enter the bay, where their enemies awaited them in ambush,
they had need to pass round an outstretching cape. On the ridge of this
cape, and hidden by trees, King Sweyn and his companions took their
stand, knowing that although they might wait to see the whole of King
Olaf's fleet pass by, they would still have ample time to board their
ships and be in readiness to meet their victim ere he entered the bay.

It was not very long before they saw a large and splendid dragon
sailing proudly into the channel. It was the ship of Eindrid of Gimsar.

"A great ship, and marvellous fair!" cried King Sweyn. "Surely it is
the Long Serpent herself!"

Earl Erik shook his head and answered: "Nay; though this ship is large
and fine it is not the Long Serpent."

Shortly afterwards they saw another dragon, larger than the first; but
the dragon's head had been taken down from the prow.

King Sweyn said: "Now is Olaf Triggvison afraid, for he dares not sail
with the head on his ship!"

"This is not the king's ship," returned Earl Erik with confident
denial; "for by the green and red striping of her sails I know that her
captain is Erling Skialgson. Let him pass on! If, as I believe, he is
himself on board, we shall be better served if he and his band are not
found among those with whom we are to fight this day."

One by one, in irregular order, the great ships of the Norse chieftains
sailed by, and with each that passed, King Sweyn or Olaf of Sweden
cried aloud: "Now surely this one is the Long Serpent!" But Earl Erik
the Norseman recognized every one, and told her captain's name.

Presently Earl Sigvaldi's viking ships went by, holding close inshore;
and at length the earl's own dragon, with a red banner at her prow, by
which token King Sweyn understood that all was going as had been
intended. Following close behind came the Crane.

"Now let us hasten on board!" cried King Sweyn, "for here comes the
Serpent at last!"

But Earl Erik did not move.

"Many other great and splendid ships has Olaf Triggvison besides the
Long Serpent," said he, "yet only nine have sailed past. Let us still
wait."

Then one of Sweyn's Danish warriors who stood near gave a hoarse
mocking laugh and said:

"We had heard that Earl Erik was a brave and adventurous man. But now
it is clear that he has but the heart of a chicken, for he is too
cowardly to fight against Olaf Triggvison and dares not avenge his own
father's death. Great shame is this, to be told of through all lands,
that we, with all our great host, stand here, while Norway's king sails
out to sea past our very eyes."

Erik became very angry at hearing these taunting words.

"Go, then, to your ships," said he; "but for all your doubts of my
courage you shall see before the sun goes down into the sea tonight
that both Danes and Swedes will be less at their ease than I and my
men!"

As they moved to go, yet another of King Olaf's ships hove in sight.

"Here now sails the Long Serpent!" cried the son of Queen Sigrid.
"Little wonder is it that Olaf Triggvison is so widely renowned when he
has such a splendid ship as this!"

All turned to watch the great vessel as she floated by. Her gilded
dragon glistened in the sunlight; her striped red and blue sail swelled
in the breeze; crowds of stalwart men were on her decks. No larger or
more magnificent battleship had ever before been seen on these waters.

King Sweyn Fork Beard cried aloud in his exultation:

"Loftily shall the Serpent carry me tonight when I steer her north into
Denmark!"

Then Earl Erik added with a sneer:

"Even if Olaf the Glorious had no larger ship than the Short Serpent,
which we now see, methinks Sweyn with all his army of Danes could never
win it from him without aid."

King Sweyn was about to give an angry retort when Earl Erik pointed
towards the headland from behind which all these ships had in their
turn appeared. And now did Sweyn at once understand how greatly he had
been mistaken in what he had expected of King Olaf's famous dragonship,
and how much his fancy had fallen short of the reality. He stood in
dumb amazement as the towering prow of the Long Serpent glided into
view, shooting long beams of golden light across the sea. First came
the glistening dragon head, and then a long stretch of gaily painted
hull; next, the tall mast with its swelling white sail, and, in the
midst of the snowy expanse, the blood red cross. The dense row of
polished shields along the bulwarks flashed in the sunlight. Sweyn
marvelled at the ship's great length, for the stern did not appear in
sight until long after he had seen the prow. His companion chieftains
murmured their astonished admiration; while fear and terror crept into
the breasts of many of the Swedes and Danes, who felt that for some of
them at least the great ship carried death.

"This glorious vessel is worthy and fitting for such a mighty king as
Olaf the Glorious," declared Earl Erik, "for it may in truth be said of
him that he is distinguished above all other kings as the Long Serpent
is above all other ships."

All unconscious of the guiles of Sigvaldi, King Olaf steered his ship
in the earl's wake. At the first he took the lead of his ten other
dragons, Sigvaldi sailing in advance. But as they neared the island a
thing happened which caused him to fall back to the rear. Young Einar
Eindridson, ever full of sport and play, had perched himself astride of
the yardarm, and there, with his longbow and arrows shot at the
seagulls as they flew by. Presently he espied a large bird flying over
from the westward. Its wings and body were perfectly black. Slowly it
came nearer and nearer, as though it would cross the Serpent's bows.
Einar worked his way along to the end of the yard, and, steadying
himself, fixed an arrow to the string. As the bird came within easy bow
shot the lad took aim.  But as he drew the string he saw the great
dusky bird open its stout beak. He heard a hoarse croak, and knew it to
be the croak of a raven. Now the croaking of a raven was held in those
times to be a sound of very ill omen; it was also considered that the
man who killed one of these birds was certainly doomed to meet with
speedy misfortune. Einar slackened his bow, and the arrow slipped from
his fingers. In trying to catch it, he dropped his famous bow, Thamb,
and it fell into the sea. Now Einar treasured that bow beyond all his
worldly possessions. Without an instant's hesitation he stood up upon
the yard and leapt into the sea.

King Olaf, standing at the tiller, had seen all this, and he quickly
put over the helm and, bringing the Serpent round head to wind, lay to
while a boat was launched. Einar and his bow were rescued. But
meanwhile the Long Serpent was overtaken by all her companion ships;
and so it was that she was the last to enter the straits.

Earl Sigvaldi still held on in advance. But it was noticed that when he
came abreast of the cape whereon the three chiefs had stood, he lowered
his sails and steered his ships nearer inshore. The Norsemen suspecting
nothing, followed his example, and very soon King Olaf's fleet gathered
closer together. But when Thorkel the Wheedler came up with the Crane
he shouted aloud to Sigvaldi, asking him why he did not sail. The earl
replied that he intended to lie to until King Olaf should rejoin him.
So Thorkel struck sail also. But the ships had still some way on them
and the current was with them. They drifted on until they came to a
curve in the channel which opened out into the bay where the host of
King Sweyn and his allies waited in ambush.

Now by this time the Short Serpent had come alongside of Sigvaldi, and
her captain, espying some of the enemy's fleet, questioned the earl
concerning them.

"Strangers they all are to me," answered Sigvaldi with an evil look in
his eyes. "But whoever they be, it seems that they are not altogether
friendly to us. I see their red war shields from where I stand, and it
looks very much as though a battle awaited us."

Then Thorkel Nefja had his oars brought out, and he steered the Short
Serpent round against the stream and went back with all speed to meet
the king.

"What do I see?" cried King Olaf. "Why have the ships struck sail? And
what is the meaning of your coming back?"

"It is because a great host of war galleys are lying in the farther
bay," answered Thorkel. "It is the host of King Sweyn of Denmark, for I
saw the banner on one of the longships, and it was like unto the
banners that Sweyn Fork Beard carried at the time when we were with him
in England. Turn back, I implore you, O king! Turn back by the way we
have come! For our fleet numbers but eleven keels, while our foes have
fully two score of dragons!"

The king stood on the lypting of the Long Serpent as he heard these
tidings. He turned to his mariners.

"Down with the sails! Out with the oars!" he cried with a loud voice
that could be clearly heard across the waters; and the men quickly
obeyed.

