Cornelius at these words stopped for a moment, biting his lips and
staring out before him; then, eagerly returning to an idea which seemed
to possess a strange fascination for him, he continued,--

"Well, and once having strangled him, why should I not take his keys
from him, why not go down the stairs as if I had done the most virtuous
action, why not go and fetch Rosa from her room, why not tell her all,
and jump from her window into the Waal? I am expert enough as a swimmer
to save both of us. Rosa,--but, oh Heaven, Gryphus is her father!
Whatever may be her affection for me, she will never approve of my
having strangled her father, brutal and malicious as he has been.

"I shall have to enter into an argument with her; and in the midst of my
speech some wretched turnkey who has found Gryphus with the death-rattle
in his throat, or perhaps actually dead, will come along and put his
hand on my shoulder. Then I shall see the Buytenhof again, and the gleam
of that infernal sword,--which will not stop half-way a second time, but
will make acquaintance with the nape of my neck.

"It will not do, Cornelius, my fine fellow,--it is a bad plan. But,
then, what is to become of me, and how shall I find Rosa again?"

Such were the cogitations of Cornelius three days after the sad scene
of separation from Rosa, at the moment when we find him standing at the
window.

And at that very moment Gryphus entered.

He held in his hand a huge stick, his eyes glistening with spiteful
thoughts, a malignant smile played round his lips, and the whole of
his carriage, and even all his movements, betokened bad and malicious
intentions.

Cornelius heard him enter, and guessed that it was he, but did not turn
round, as he knew well that Rosa was not coming after him.

There is nothing more galling to angry people than the coolness of those
on whom they wish to vent their spleen.

The expense being once incurred, one does not like to lose it; one's
passion is roused, and one's blood boiling, so it would be labour lost
not to have at least a nice little row.

Gryphus, therefore, on seeing that Cornelius did not stir, tried to
attract his attention by a loud--

"Umph, umph!"

Cornelius was humming between his teeth the "Hymn of Flowers,"--a sad
but very charming song,--


"We are the daughters of the secret fire Of the fire which runs through
the veins of the earth; We are the daughters of Aurora and of the dew;
We are the daughters of the air; We are the daughters of the water; But
we are, above all, the daughters of heaven."


This song, the placid melancholy of which was still heightened by its
calm and sweet melody, exasperated Gryphus.

He struck his stick on the stone pavement of the cell, and called out,--

"Halloa! my warbling gentleman, don't you hear me?"

Cornelius turned round, merely saying, "Good morning," and then began
his song again:--


"Men defile us and kill us while loving us, We hang to the earth by a
thread; This thread is our root, that is to say, our life, But we raise
on high our arms towards heaven."


"Ah, you accursed sorcerer! you are making game of me, I believe,"
roared Gryphus.

Cornelius continued:--


"For heaven is our home, Our true home, as from thence comes our soul,
As thither our soul returns,--Our soul, that is to say, our perfume."


Gryphus went up to the prisoner and said,--

"But you don't see that I have taken means to get you under, and to
force you to confess your crimes."

"Are you mad, my dear Master Gryphus?" asked Cornelius.

And, as he now for the first time observed the frenzied features, the
flashing eyes, and foaming mouth of the old jailer, he said,--

"Bless the man, he is more than mad, he is furious."

Gryphus flourished his stick above his head, but Van Baerle moved not,
and remained standing with his arms akimbo.

"It seems your intention to threaten me, Master Gryphus."

"Yes, indeed, I threaten you," cried the jailer.

"And with what?"

"First of all, look at what I have in my hand."

"I think that's a stick," said Cornelius calmly, "but I don't suppose
you will threaten me with that."

"Oh, you don't suppose! why not?"

"Because any jailer who strikes a prisoner is liable to two
penalties,--the first laid down in Article 9 of the regulations at
Loewestein:--

"'Any jailer, inspector, or turnkey who lays hands upon any prisoner of
State will be dismissed.'"

"Yes, who lays hands," said Gryphus, mad with rage, "but there is not a
word about a stick in the regulation."

"And the second," continued Cornelius, "which is not written in the
regulation, but which is to be found elsewhere:--

"'Whosoever takes up the stick will be thrashed by the stick.'"

Gryphus, growing more and more exasperated by the calm and sententious
tone of Cornelius, brandished his cudgel, but at the moment when he
raised it Cornelius rushed at him, snatched it from his hands, and put
it under his own arm.

Gryphus fairly bellowed with rage.

"Hush, hush, my good man," said Cornelius, "don't do anything to lose
your place."

"Ah, you sorcerer! I'll pinch you worse," roared Gryphus.

"I wish you may."

"Don't you see my hand is empty?"

"Yes, I see it, and I am glad of it."

"You know that it is not generally so when I come upstairs in the
morning."

"It's true, you generally bring me the worst soup, and the most
miserable rations one can imagine. But that's not a punishment to me; I
eat only bread, and the worse the bread is to your taste, the better it
is to mine."

"How so?"

"Oh, it's a very simple thing."

"Well, tell it me," said Gryphus.

"Very willingly. I know that in giving me bad bread you think you do me
harm."

"Certainly; I don't give it you to please you, you brigand."

"Well, then, I, who am a sorcerer, as you know, change your bad into
excellent bread, which I relish more than the best cake; and then I have
the double pleasure of eating something that gratifies my palate, and of
doing something that puts you in a rage."

Gryphus answered with a growl.

"Oh! you confess, then, that you are a sorcerer."

"Indeed, I am one. I don't say it before all the world, because they
might burn me for it, but as we are alone, I don't mind telling you."

"Well, well, well," answered Gryphus. "But if a sorcerer can change
black bread into white, won't he die of hunger if he has no bread at
all?"

"What's that?" said Cornelius.

"Consequently, I shall not bring you any bread at all, and we shall see
how it will be after eight days."

Cornelius grew pale.

"And," continued Gryphus, "we'll begin this very day. As you are such a
clever sorcerer, why, you had better change the furniture of your room
into bread; as to myself, I shall pocket the eighteen sous which are
paid to me for your board."

"But that's murder," cried Cornelius, carried away by the first impulse
of the very natural terror with which this horrible mode of death
inspired him.

"Well," Gryphus went on, in his jeering way, "as you are a sorcerer, you
will live, notwithstanding."

Cornelius put on a smiling face again, and said,--

"Have you not seen me make the pigeons come here from Dort?"

"Well?" said Gryphus.

"Well, a pigeon is a very dainty morsel, and a man who eats one every
day would not starve, I think."

"And how about the fire?" said Gryphus.

"Fire! but you know that I'm in league with the devil. Do you think the
devil will leave me without fire? Why, fire is his proper element."

"A man, however healthy his appetite may be, would not eat a pigeon
every day. Wagers have been laid to do so, and those who made them gave
them up."

"Well, but when I am tired of pigeons, I shall make the fish of the Waal
and of the Meuse come up to me."

Gryphus opened his large eyes, quite bewildered.

"I am rather fond of fish," continued Cornelius; "you never let me have
any. Well, I shall turn your starving me to advantage, and regale myself
with fish."

Gryphus nearly fainted with anger and with fright, but he soon rallied,
and said, putting his hand in his pocket,--

"Well, as you force me to it," and with these words he drew forth a
clasp-knife and opened it.

"Halloa! a knife?" said Cornelius, preparing to defend himself with his
stick.




Chapter 29. In which Van Baerle, before leaving Loewestein, settles
Accounts with Gryphus


The two remained silent for some minutes, Gryphus on the offensive, and
Van Baerle on the defensive.

Then, as the situation might be prolonged to an indefinite length,
Cornelius, anxious to know something more of the causes which had so
fiercely exasperated his jailer, spoke first by putting the question,--

"Well, what do you want, after all?"

"I'll tell you what I want," answered Gryphus; "I want you to restore to
me my daughter Rosa."

"Your daughter?" cried Van Baerle.

"Yes, my daughter Rosa, whom you have taken from me by your devilish
magic. Now, will you tell me where she is?"

And the attitude of Gryphus became more and more threatening.

"Rosa is not at Loewestein?" cried Cornelius.

"You know well she is not. Once more, will you restore her to me?"

"I see," said Cornelius, "this is a trap you are laying for me."

"Now, for the last time, will you tell me where my daughter is?"

"Guess it, you rogue, if you don't know it."

"Only wait, only wait," growled Gryphus, white with rage, and with
quivering lips, as his brain began to turn. "Ah, you will not tell me
anything? Well, I'll unlock your teeth!"

He advanced a step towards Cornelius, and said, showing him the weapon
which he held in his hands,--

"Do you see this knife? Well, I have killed more than fifty black cocks
with it, and I vow I'll kill their master, the devil, as well as them."

"But, you blockhead," said Cornelius, "will you really kill me?"

"I shall open your heart to see in it the place where you hide my
daughter."

Saying this, Gryphus in his frenzy rushed towards Cornelius, who had
barely time to retreat behind his table to avoid the first thrust; but
as Gryphus continued, with horrid threats, to brandish his huge knife,
and as, although out of the reach of his weapon, yet, as long as it
remained in the madman's hand, the ruffian might fling it at him,
Cornelius lost no time, and availing himself of the stick, which he held
tight under his arm, dealt the jailer a vigorous blow on the wrist of
that hand which held the knife.

The knife fell to the ground, and Cornelius put his foot on it.

Then, as Gryphus seemed bent upon engaging in a struggle which the pain
in his wrist, and shame for having allowed himself to be disarmed, would
have made desperate, Cornelius took a decisive step, belaboring his
jailer with the most heroic self-possession, and selecting the exact
spot for every blow of the terrible cudgel.

It was not long before Gryphus begged for mercy. But before begging for
mercy, he had lustily roared for help, and his cries had roused all the
functionaries of the prison. Two turnkeys, an inspector, and three or
four guards, made their appearance all at once, and found Cornelius
still using the stick, with the knife under his foot.

At the sight of these witnesses, who could not know all the
circumstances which had provoked and might justify his offence,
Cornelius felt that he was irretrievably lost.

In fact, appearances were sadly against him.

In one moment Cornelius was disarmed, and Gryphus raised and supported;
and, bellowing with rage and pain, he was able to count on his back
and shoulders the bruises which were beginning to swell like the hills
dotting the slopes of a mountain ridge.

A protocol of the violence practiced by the prisoner against his jailer
was immediately drawn up, and as it was made on the depositions of
Gryphus, it certainly could not be said to be too tame; the prisoner
being charged with neither more nor less than with an attempt to murder,
for a long time premeditated, with open rebellion.

Whilst the charge was made out against Cornelius, Gryphus, whose
presence was no longer necessary after having made his depositions,
was taken down by his turnkeys to his lodge, groaning and covered with
bruises.

During this time, the guards who had seized Cornelius busied themselves
in charitably informing their prisoner of the usages and customs of
Loewestein, which however he knew as well as they did. The regulations
had been read to him at the moment of his entering the prison, and
certain articles in them remained fixed in his memory.

Among other things they told him that this regulation had been carried
out to its full extent in the case of a prisoner named Mathias, who
in 1668, that is to say, five years before, had committed a much less
violent act of rebellion than that of which Cornelius was guilty. He had
found his soup too hot, and thrown it at the head of the chief turnkey,
who in consequence of this ablution had been put to the inconvenience of
having his skin come off as he wiped his face.

Mathias was taken within twelve hours from his cell, then led to the
jailer's lodge, where he was registered as leaving Loewestein, then
taken to the Esplanade, from which there is a very fine prospect over
a wide expanse of country. There they fettered his hands, bandaged his
