
The next morning the bugles were sounded by daybreak in the court of Lord
Boteler's mansion, to call the inhabitants from their slumbers, to assist
in a splendid chase, with which the baron had resolved to entertain his
neighbour Fitzallen and his noble visitor St. Clere. Peter Lanaret the
falconer was in attendance, with falcons for the knights, and tiercelets
for the ladies, if they should choose to vary their sport from hunting to
hawking. Five stout yeomen keepers, with their attendants, called Bagged
Robins, all meetly arrayed in Kendal green, with bugles and short hangers
by their sides, and quarterstaffs in their hands, led the slow-hounds, or
brackets, by which the deer were to be put up. Ten brace of gallant
greyhounds, each of which was fit to pluck down, singly, the tallest red
deer, were led in leashes by as many of Lord Boteler's foresters. The
pages, squires, and other attendants of feudal splendour, well attired in
their best hunting-gear, upon horseback or foot, according to their
rank,--with their boar-spears, long bows, and cross-bows, were in seemly
waiting.

A numerous train of yeomen, called in the language of the times
retainers, who yearly received a livery coat and a small pension for
their attendance on such solemn occasions, appeared in cassocks of blue,
bearing upon their arms the cognizance of the house of Boteler as a badge
of their adherence. They were the tallest men of their hands that the
neighbouring villages could supply, with every man his good buckler on
his shoulder, and a bright burnished broadsword dangling from his
leathern belt. On this occasion they acted as rangers for beating up the
thickets and rousing the game. These attendants filled up the court of
the castle, spacious as it was. On the green without, you might have seen
the motley assemblage of peasantry convened by report of the splendid
hunting, including most of our old acquaintances from Tewin, as well as
the jolly partakers of good cheer at Hob Filcher's. Gregory the jester,
it may well be guessed, had no great mind to exhibit himself in public
after his recent disaster; but Oswald the steward, a great formalist in
whatever concerned the public exhibition of his master's household state,
had positively enjoined his attendance. "What," quoth he, "shall the
house of the brave Lord Boteler, or such a brave day as this, be without
a fool? Certes, the good Lord St. Clere and his fair lady sister might
think our housekeeping as niggardly as that of their churlish kinsman at
Gay Bowers, who sent his father's jester to the hospital, sold the poor
sot's bells for hawk-jesses, and made a nightcap of his long-eared
bonnet. And, sirrah, let me see thee fool handsomely,--speak squibs and
crackers, instead of that dry, barren, musty gibing which thou hast used
of late; or, by the bones! the porter shall have thee to his lodge, and
cob thee with thine own wooden sword till thy skin is as motley as thy
doublet."

To this stern injunction, Gregory made no reply, any more than to the
courteous offer of old Albert Drawslot, the chief park-keeper, who
proposed to blow vinegar in his nose, to sharpen his wit, as he had done
that blessed morning to Bragger, the old hound, whose scent was failing.
There was, indeed, little time for reply, for the bugles, after a lively
flourish, were now silent, and Peretto, with his two attendant minstrels,
stepping beneath the windows of the strangers' apartments, joined in the
following roundelay, the deep voices of the rangers and falconers making
up a chorus that caused the very battlements to ring again.

               Waken, lords and ladies gay,
               On the mountain dawns the day;
               All the jolly chase is here,
               With hawk and horse and hunting-spear
               Hounds are in their couples yelling,
               Hawks are whistling, horns are knelling,
               Merrily, merrily, mingle they,
               "Waken, lords and ladies gay."

               Waken, lords and ladies gay,
               The mist has left the mountain gray;
               Springlets in the dawn are streaming,
               Diamonds on the brake are gleaming,
               And foresters have busy been,
               To track the buck in thicket green;
               Now we come to chant our lay:
               "Waken, lords and ladies gay."

               Waken, lords and ladies gay,
               To the green-wood haste away;
               We can show you where he lies,
               Fleet of foot, and tall of size;
               We can show the marks he made
               When 'gainst the oak his antlers frayed;
               You shall see him brought to bay,
               "Waken, lords and ladies gay."

               Louder, louder chant the lay,
               "Waken, lords and ladies gay;"
               Tell them, youth and mirth and glee
               Run a course as well as we.
               Time, stern huntsman, who can baulk,
               Staunch as hound, and fleet as hawk?
               Think of this, and rise with day,
               Gentle lords and ladies gay.


By the time this lay was finished, Lord Boteler, with his daughter and
kinsman, Fitzallen of Harden, and other noble guests had mounted their
palfreys, and the hunt set forward in due order. The huntsmen, having
carefully observed the traces of a large stag on the preceding evening,
were able, without loss of time, to conduct the company, by the marks
which they had made upon the trees, to the side of the thicket in which,
by the report of Drawslot, he had harboured all night. The horsemen
spreading themselves along the side of the cover, waited until the keeper
entered, leading his bandog, a large blood-hound tied in a leam or band,
from which he takes his name.

But it befell this. A hart of the second year, which was in the same
cover with the proper object of their pursuit, chanced to be unharboured
first, and broke cover very near where the Lady Emma and her brother were
stationed. An inexperienced varlet, who was nearer to them, instantly
unloosed two tall greyhounds, who sprung after the fugitive with all the
fleetness of the north wind. Gregory, restored a little to spirits by the
enlivening scene around him, followed, encouraging the hounds with a loud
tayout,--[Tailliers-hors; in modern phrase, Tally-ho]--for which he had
the hearty curses of the huntsman, as well as of the baron, who entered
into the spirit of the chase with all the juvenile ardour of twenty. "May
the foul fiend, booted and spurred, ride down his bawling throat, with a
scythe at his girdle," quoth Albert Drawslot; "here have I been telling
him that all the marks were those of a buck of the first head, and he has
hollowed the hounds upon a velvet-headed knobbler! By Saint Hubert, if I
break not his pate with my cross-bow, may I never cast off hound more!
But to it, my lords and masters! the noble beast is here yet, and, thank
the saints, we have enough of hounds."

The cover being now thoroughly beat by the attendants, the stag was
compelled to abandon it, and trust to his speed for his safety. Three
greyhounds were slipped upon him, whom he threw out, after running a
couple of miles, by entering an extensive furzy brake which extended
along the side of a hill. The horsemen soon came up, and casting off a
sufficient number of slowhounds, sent them, with the prickers, into the
cover, in order to chive the game from his strength. This object being
accomplished, afforded another severe chase of several miles, in a
direction almost circular, during which the poor animal tried every wile
to get rid of his persecutors. He crossed and traversed all such dusty
paths as were likely to retain the least scent of his footsteps; he laid
himself close to the ground, drawing his feet under his belly, and
clapping his nose close to the earth, lest he should be betrayed to the
hounds by his breath and hoofs.  When all was in vain, and he found the
hounds coming fast in upon him, his own strength failing, his mouth
embossed with foam, and the tears dropping from his eyes, he turned in
despair upon his pursuers, who then stood at gaze, making an hideous
clamour, and awaiting their two-footed auxiliaries. Of these, it chanced
that the Lady Eleanor, taking more pleasure in the sport than Matilda,
and being a less burden to her palfrey than the Lord Boteler, was the
first who arrived at the spot, and taking a cross-bow from an attendant,
discharged a bolt at the stag. When the infuriated animal felt himself
wounded, he pushed franticly towards her from whom he had received the
shaft, and Lady Eleanor might have had occasion to repent of her
enterprise had not young Fitzallen, who had kept near her during the
whole day, at that instant galloped briskly in, and ere the stag could
change his object of assault, despatched him with his short
hunting-sword.

Albert Drawslot, who had just come up in terror for the young lady's
safety, broke out into loud encomiums upon Fitzallen's strength and
gallantry.   "By 'r Lady," said he, taking off his cap, and wiping his
sun-burnt face with his sleeve, "well struck, and in good time! But now,
boys, doff your bonnets, and sound the mort."

The sportsmen then sounded a treble mort and set up a general whoop,
which, mingled with the yelping of the dogs, made the welkin ring again.
The huntsman then offered his knife to Lord Boteler, that he might take
the say of the deer; but the baron courteously insisted upon Fitzallen
going through that ceremony. The Lady Matilda was now come up, with most
of the attendants; and the interest of the chase being ended, it excited
some surprise that neither St. Clere nor his sister made their
appearance. The Lord Boteler commanded the horns again to sound the
recheat, in hopes to call in the stragglers, and said to Fitzallen:
"Methinks St. Clere, so distinguished for service in war, should have
been more forward in the chase."

"I trow," said Peter Lanaret, "I know the reason of the noble lord's
absence; for when that moon-calf, Gregory, hallooed the dogs upon the
knobbler, and galloped like a green hilding, as he is, after them, I saw
the Lady Emma's palfrey follow apace after that varlet, who should be
trashed for overrunning, and I think her noble brother has followed her,
lest she should come to harm. But here, by the rood, is Gregory to answer
for himself."

At this moment Gregory entered the circle which had been formed round the
deer, out of breath, and his face covered with blood. He kept for some
time uttering inarticulate cries of "Harrow!" and "Wellaway!" and other
exclamations of distress and terror, pointing all the while to a thicket
at some distance from the spot where the deer had been killed.

"By my honour," said the baron, "I would gladly know who has dared to
array the poor knave thus; and I trust he should dearly aby his
outrecuidance, were he the best, save one, in England."

Gregory, who had now found more breath, cried, "Help, an ye be men! Save
Lady Emma and her brother, whom they are murdering in Brockenhurst
thicket."

This put all in motion. Lord Boteler hastily commanded a small party of
his men to abide for the defence of the ladies, while he himself,
Fitzallen, and the rest made what speed they could towards the thicket,
guided by Gregory, who for that purpose was mounted behind Fabian.
Pushing through a narrow path, the first object they encountered was a
man of small stature lying on the ground, mastered and almost strangled
by two dogs, which were instantly recognized to be those that had
accompanied Gregory. A little farther was an open space, where lay three
bodies of dead or wounded men; beside these was Lady Emma, apparently
lifeless, her brother and a young forester bending over and endeavouring
to recover her. By employing the usual remedies, this was soon
accomplished; while Lord Boteler, astonished at such a scene, anxiously
inquired at St. Clere the meaning of what he saw, and whether more danger
was to be expected?

"For the present, I trust not," said the young warrior, who they now
observed was slightly wounded; "but I pray you, of your nobleness, let
the woods here be searched; for we were assaulted by four of these base
assassins, and I see three only on the sward."

The attendants now brought forward the person whom they had rescued from
the dogs, and Henry, with disgust, shame, and astonishment, recognized
his kinsman, Gaston St. Clere. This discovery he communicated in a
whisper to Lord Boteler, who commanded the prisoner to be conveyed to
Queen-Hoo Hall and closely guarded; meanwhile he anxiously inquired of
young St. Clere about his wound. "A scratch, a trifle!" cried Henry; "I
am in less haste to bind it than to introduce to you one without whose
aid that of the leech would have come too late. Where is he? Where is my
brave deliverer?"

"Here, most noble lord," said Gregory, sliding from his palfrey and
stepping forward, "ready to receive the guerdon which your bounty would
heap on him."

"Truly, friend Gregory," answered the young warrior, "thou shalt not be
forgotten; for thou didst run speedily and roar manfully for aid, without
which, I think verily, we had not received it. But the brave forester who
came to my rescue when these three ruffians had nigh overpowered me,
where is he?"

Every one looked around; but though all had seen him on entering the
thicket, he was not now to be found. They could only conjecture that he
had retired during the confusion occasioned by the detention of Gaston.

"Seek not for him," said the Lady Emma, who had now in some degree
recovered her composure; "he will not be found of mortal, unless at his
own season."

The baron, convinced from this answer that her terror had, for the time,
somewhat disturbed her reason, forebore to question her; and Matilda and
Eleanor, to whom a message had been despatched with the result of this
strange adventure, arriving, they took the Lady Emma between them, and
all in a body returned to the castle.

The distance was, however, considerable, and before reaching it they had
another alarm. The prickers, who rode foremost in the troop, halted, and
announced to the Lord Boteler, that they perceived advancing towards them
a body of armed men. The followers of the baron were numerous, but they
were arrayed for the chase, not for battle; and it was with great
pleasure that he discerned, on the pennon of the advancing body of
men-at-arms, instead of the cognizance of Gaston, as he had some reason
to expect, the friendly bearings of Fitzosborne of Diggswell, the same
young lord who was present at the May-games with Fitzallen of Marden. The
knight himself advanced, sheathed in armour, and, without raising his
visor, informed Lord Boteler, that having heard of a base attempt made
upon a part of his train by ruffianly assassins, he had mounted and armed
a small party of his retainers, to escort them to Queen-Hoo Hall. Having
received and accepted an invitation to attend them thither, they
prosecuted their journey in confidence and security, and arrived safe at
home without any further accident.





CHAPTER V.

INVESTIGATION OF THE ADVENTURE OF THE HUNTING.--A DISCOVERY.
--GREGORY'S MANHOOD.--FATE OF GASTON ST. CLERE.--CONCLUSION.

So soon as they arrived at the princely mansion of Boteler, the Lady Emma
craved permission to retire to her chamber, that she might compose her
spirits after the terror she had undergone. Henry St. Clere, in a few
words, proceeded to explain the adventure to the curious audience. "I had
no sooner seen my sister's palfrey, in spite of her endeavours to the
contrary, entering with spirit into the chase set on foot by the
worshipful Gregory than I rode after to give her assistance. So long was
the chase that when the greyhounds pulled down the knobbler, we were out
of hearing of your bugles; and having rewarded and coupled the dogs, I
gave them to be led by the jester, and we wandered in quest of our
company, whom, it would seem, the sport had led in a different direction.
At length, passing through the thicket where you found us, I was
surprised by a cross-bow bolt whizzing past mine head. I drew my sword
and rushed into the thicket, but was instantly assailed by two ruffians,
while other two made towards my sister and Gregory. The poor knave fled,
crying for help, pursued by my false kinsman, now your prisoner; and the
designs of the other on my poor Emma (murderous no doubt) were prevented
by the sudden apparition of a brave woodsman, who, after a short
encounter, stretched the miscreant at his feet and came to my assistance.
I was already slightly wounded, and nearly overlaid with odds. The combat
lasted some time, for the caitiffs were both well armed, strong, and
desperate; at length, however, we had each mastered our antagonist, when
your retinue, my Lord Boteler, arrived to my relief. So ends in my story;
but, on my knighthood, I would give an earl's ransom for an opportunity
of thanking the gallant forester by whose aid I live to tell it."

"Fear not," said Lord Boteler; "he shall be found if this or the four
adjacent counties hold him. And now Lord Fitzosborne will be pleased to
doff the armour he has so kindly assumed for our sakes, and we will all
bowne ourselves for the banquet."

When the hour of dinner approached, the Lady Matilda and her cousin
visited the chamber of the fair Darcy. They found her in a composed but
melancholy posture. She turned the discourse upon the misfortunes of her
life, and hinted that having recovered her brother, and seeing him look
forward to the society of one who would amply repay to him the loss of
hers, she had thoughts of dedicating her remaining life to Heaven, by
whose providential interference it had been so often preserved.

Matilda coloured deeply at something in this speech, and her cousin
inveighed loudly against Emma's resolution. "Ah, my dear Lady Eleanor,"
replied she, "I have to-day witnessed what I cannot but judge a
supernatural visitation, and to what end can it call me but to give
myself to the altar? That peasant who guided me, to Baddow through the
Park of Danbury, the same who appeared before me at different times and
in different forms during that eventful journey,--that youth, whose
features are imprinted on my memory, is the very individual forester who
this day rescued us in the forest. I cannot be mistaken; and connecting
these marvellous appearances with the spectre which I saw while at Gay
Bowers, I cannot resist the conviction that Heaven has permitted my
guardian angel to assume mortal shape for my relief and protection."

The fair cousins, after exchanging looks which implied a fear that her
mind was wandering, answered her in soothing terms, and finally prevailed
upon her to accompany them to the banqueting-hall. Here the first person
they encountered was the Baron Fitzosborne of Diggswell, now divested of
his armour; at the sight of whom the Lady Emma changed colour, and
exclaiming, "It is the same!" sunk senseless into the arms of Matilda.

"She is bewildered by the terrors of the day," said Eleanor; "and we have
done ill in obliging her to descend."

"And I," said Fitzosborne, "have done madly in presenting before her one
whose presence must recall moments the most alarming in her life."

While the ladies supported Emma from the hall, Lord Boteler and St. Clere
requested an explanation from Fitzosborne of the words he had used.

"Trust me, gentle lords," said the Baron of Diggswell, "ye shall have
what ye demand, when I learn that Lady Emma Darcy has not suffered from
my imprudence."

At this moment Lady Matilda, returning, said that her fair friend, on her
recovery, had calmly and deliberately insisted that she had seen
Fitzosborne before, in the most dangerous crisis of her life.

"I dread," said she, "her disordered mind connects all that her eye
beholds with the terrible passages that she has witnessed."

"Nay," said Fitzosborne, "if noble St. Clere can pardon the unauthorized
interest which, with the purest and most honourable intentions, I have
taken in his sister's fate, it is easy for me to explain this mysterious
impression."

He proceeded to say that, happening to be in the hostelry called the
Griffin, near Baddow, while upon a journey in that country, he had met
with the old nurse of the Lady Emma Darcy, who, being just expelled front
Gay Bowers, was in the height of her grief and indignation, and made loud
and public proclamation of Lady Emma's wrongs. From the description she
gave of the beauty of her foster-child, as well as from the spirit of
chivalry, Fitzosborne became interested in her fate. This interest was
deeply enhanced when, by a bribe to Old Gaunt the Reve, he procured a
view of the Lady Emma as she walked near the castle of Gay Bowers. The
aged churl refused to give him access to the castle, yet dropped some
hints, as if he thought the lady in danger, and wished she were well out
of it. His master, he said, had heard she had a brother in life, and
since that deprived him of all chance of gaining her domains by purchase,
he, in short, Gaunt wished they were safely separated. "If any injury,"
quoth he, "should happen to the damsel here, it were ill for us all. I
tried, by an innocent stratagem, to frighten her from the castle by
introducing a figure through a trap-door and warning her, as if by a
voice from the dead, to retreat from thence; but the giglet is wilful,
and is running upon her fate."

Finding Gaunt, although covetous and communicative, too faithful a
servant to his wicked master to take any active steps against his
commands, Fitzosborne applied himself to old Ursely, whom he found more
tractable. Through her he learned the dreadful plot Gaston had laid to
rid himself of his kinswoman, and resolved to effect her deliverance. But
aware of the delicacy of Emma's situation, he charged Ursely to conceal
from her the interest he took in her distress, resolving to watch over
her in disguise until he saw her in a place of safety. Hence the
appearance he made before her in various dresses during her journey, in
the course of which he was never far distant; and he had always four
stout yeomen within hearing of his bugle, had assistance been necessary.
When she was placed in safety at the lodge, it was Fitzosborne's
intention to have prevailed upon his sisters to visit, and take her under
their protection; but he found them absent from Diggswell, having gone to
attend an aged relation who lay dangerously ill in a distant county. They
did not return until the day before the May-games; and the other events
followed too rapidly to permit Fitzosborne to lay any plan for
introducing them to Lady Emma Darcy. On the day of the chase he resolved
to preserve his romantic disguise and attend the Lady Emma as a forester,
partly to have the pleasure of being near her, and partly to judge
whether, according to an idle report in the country, she favoured his
friend and comrade Fitzallen of Marden. This last motive, it may easily
be believed, he did not declare to the company. After the skirmish with
the ruffians, he waited till the baron and the hunters arrived, and then,
still doubting the further designs of Gaston, hastened to his castle to
arm the band which had escorted them to Queen-Hoo Hall.

Fitzosborne's story being finished, he received the thanks of all the
company, particularly of St. Clere, who felt deeply the respectful
delicacy with which he had conducted himself towards his sister. The lady
was carefully informed of her obligations to him; and it is left to the
well-judging reader whether even the raillery of Lady Eleanor made her
regret that Heaven had only employed natural means for her security, and
that the guardian angel was converted into a handsome, gallant, and
enamoured knight.

The joy of the company in the hall extended itself to the buttery, where
Gregory the jester narrated such feats of arms done by himself in the
fray of the morning as might have shamed Bevis and Guy of Warwick. He
was, according to his narrative, singled out for destruction by the
gigantic baron himself, while he abandoned to meaner hands the
destruction of St. Clere and Fitzosborne.

"But, certes," said he, "the foul paynim met his match; for, ever as he
foined at me with his brand, I parried his blows with my bauble, and
closing with him upon the third veny, threw him to the ground, and made
him cryrecreant to an unarmed man."

"Tush, man!" said Drawslot, "thou forgettest thy best auxiliaries, the
good greyhounds, Help and Holdfast! I warrant thee that when the
humpbacked baron caught thee by the cowl, which he hath almost torn off,
thou hadst been in a fair plight, had they not remembered an old friend
and come in to the rescue. Why, man, I found them fastened on him myself;
and there was odd staving and stickling to make them 'ware haunch!' Their
mouths were full of the flex, for I pulled a piece of the garment from
their jaws. I warrant thee that when they brought him to ground, thou
fledst like a frighted pricket."

"And as for Gregory's gigantic paynim," said Fabian, "why, he lies yonder
in the guard-room, the very size, shape, and colour of a spider in a
yewhedge."

"It is false!" said Gregory; "Colbrand the Dane was a dwarf to him."

"It is as true," returned Fabian, "as that the Tasker is to be married on
Tuesday to pretty Margery. Gregory, thy sheet hath brought them between a
pair of blankets."

"I care no more for such a gillflirt," said the Jester, "than I do for
thy leasings. Marry, thou hop-o'-my-thumb, happy wouldst thou be could
thy head reach the captive baron's girdle."

"By the Mass," said Peter Lanaret, "I will have one peep at this burly
gallant;" and leaving the buttery, he went to the guard-room where Gaston
St. Clere was confined. A man-at-arms, who kept sentinel on the strong
studded door of the apartment, said he believed he slept; for that after
raging, stamping, and uttering the most horrid imprecations, he had been
of late perfectly still. The falconer gently drew back a sliding board,
of a foot square, towards the top of the door, which covered a hole of
the same size, strongly latticed, through which the warder, without
opening the door, could look in upon his prisoner. From this aperture he
beheld the wretched Gaston suspended by the neck, by his own girdle, to
an iron ring in the side of his prison. He had clambered to it by means
of the table on which his food had been placed; and in the agonies of
shame and disappointed malice, had adopted this mode of ridding himself
of a wretched life. He was found yet warm, but totally lifeless. A proper
account of the manner of his death was drawn up and certified. He was
buried that evening in the chapel of the castle, out of respect to his
high birth; and the chaplain of Fitzallen of Marden, who said the service
upon the occasion, preached, the next Sunday, an excellent sermon upon
the text, "Radix malorum est cupiditas," which we have here transcribed.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[Here the manuscript from which we have painfully transcribed, and
frequently, as it were, translated this tale, for the reader's
edification, is so indistinct and defaced that, excepting certain
"howbeits," "nathlesses," "lo ye's!" etc. we can pick out little that is
intelligible, saving that avarice is defined "a likourishness of heart
after earthly things."]  A little farther there seems to have been a gay
account of Margery's wedding with Ralph the Tasker, the running at the
quintain, and other rural games practised on the occasion. There are also
fragments of a mock sermon preached by Gregory upon that occasion, as for
example:--

"Mv dear cursed caitiffs, there was once a king, and he wedded a young
old queen, and she had a child; and this child was sent to Solomon the
Sage, praying he would give it the same blessing which he got from the
witch of Endor when she bit him by the heel. Hereof speaks the worthy Dr.
Radigundus Potator. Why should not Mass be said for all the roasted shoe
souls served up in the king's dish on Saturday? For true it is that Saint
Peter asked father Adam, as they journeyed to Camelot, an high, great,
and doubtful question: 'Adam, Adam, why eated'st thou the apple without
paring?'"

[This tirade of gibberish is literally taken or selected from a mock
discourse pronounced by a professed jester, which occurs in an ancient
manuscript in the Advocates' Library, the same from which the late
ingenious Mr. Weber published the curious comic romance of the "Limiting
of the Hare." It was introduced in compliance with Mr. Strutt's plan of
rendering his tale an illustration of ancient manners. A similar
burlesque sermon is pronounced by the Fool in Sir David Lindesay's satire
of the "Three Estates." The nonsense and vulgar burlesque of that
composition illustrate the ground of Sir Andrew, Aguecheek's eulogy on
the exploits of the jester in "Twelfth Night," who, reserving his sharper
jests for Sir Toby, had doubtless enough of the jargon of his calling to
captivate the imbecility of his brother knight, who is made to exclaim:
"In sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last night when thou
spokest of Pigrogremitus, and of the vapours passing the equinoctials of
Quenbus; 't was very good, i' faith!" It is entertaining to find
commentators seeking to discover some meaning in the professional jargon
of such a passage as this.]

With much goodly gibberish to the same effect, which display of Gregory's
ready wit not only threw the whole company into convulsions of laughter,
but made such an impression on Rose, the Potter's daughter, that it was
thought it would be the jester's own fault if Jack was long without his
Jill. Much pithy matter concerning the bringing the bride to bed, the
loosing the bridegroom's points, the scramble which ensued for them, and
the casting of the stocking, is also omitted, from its obscurity.

The following song, which has been since borrowed by the worshipful
author of the famous "History of Fryar Bacon," has been with difficulty
deciphered. It seems to have been sung on occasion of carrying home the
bride.


BRIDAL SONG.

To the tune of "I have been a Fiddler," etc.
     And did you not hear of a mirth befell

          The morrow after a wedding-day,
          And carrying a bride at home to dwell?
          And away to Tewin, away, away!

          The quintain was set, and the garlands were made,--
          'T is pity old customs should ever decay;
          And woe be to him that was horsed on a jade,
          For he carried no credit away, away.

          We met a consort of fiddle-de-dees;
          We set them a cockhorse, and made them play
          The winning of Bullen, and Upsey-fires,
          And away to Tewin, away, away!

          There was ne'er a lad in all the parish
          That would go to the plough that day;
          But on his fore-horse his wench he carries,
          And away to Tewin, away, away!

          The butler was quick, and the ale he did tap,
          The maidens did make the chamber full gay;
          The servants did give me a fuddling cup,
          And I did carry 't away, away.

          The smith of the town his liquor so took
          That he was persuaded that the ground looked blue;
          And I dare boldly be sworn on a book
          Such smiths as he there 's but a few.

          A posset was made, and the women did sip,
          And simpering said they could eat no more;
          Full many a maiden was laid on the lip,--
          I'll say no more, but give o'er (give o'er).

But what our fair readers will chiefly regret is the loss of three
declarations of love: the first by St. Clore to Matilda, which, with the
lady's answer, occupies fifteen closely written pages of manuscript. That
of Fitzosborne to Emma is not much shorter; but the amours of Fitzallen
and Eleanor, being of a less romantic cast, are closed in three pages
only. The three noble couples were married in Queen-Hoo Hall upon the
same day, being the twentieth Sunday after Easter. There is a prolix
account of the marriage-feast, of which we can pick out the names of a
few dishes, such as peterel, crane, sturgeon, swan, etc., with a
profusion of wild-fowl and venison. We also see that a suitable song was
produced by Peretto on the occasion, and that the bishop, who blessed the
bridal beds which received the happy couples, was no niggard of his holy
water, bestowing half a gallon upon each of the couches. We regret we
cannot give these curiosities to the reader in detail, but we hope to
expose the manuscript to abler antiquaries, so soon as it shall be framed
and glazed by the ingenious artist who rendered that service to Mr.
Ireland's Shakspeare manuscripts. And so (being unable to lay aside the
style to which our pen is habituated), gentle reader, we bid thee
heartily farewell.




No. III.

ANECDOTE OF SCHOOL DAYS,

UPON WHICH MR. THOMAS SCOTT PROPOSED TO FOUND A TALE OF FICTION.

It is well known in the South that there is little or no boxing at the
Scottish schools. About forty or fifty years ago, however, a far more
dangerous mode of fighting, in parties or factions, was permitted in the
streets of Edinburgh, to the great disgrace of the police, and danger of
the parties concerned. These parties were generally formed from the
quarters of the town in which the combatants resided, those of a
particular square or district fighting against those of an adjoining one.
Hence it happened that the children of the higher classes were often
pitted against those of the lower, each taking their side according to
the residence of their friends. So far as I recollect, however, it was
unmingled either with feelings of democracy or aristocracy, or, indeed,
with malice or ill-will of any kind towards the opposite party. In fact,
it was only a rough mode of play. Such contests were, however, maintained
with great vigour with stones and sticks and fisticuffs, when one party
dared to charge, and the other stood their ground. Of course mischief
sometimes happened; boys are said to have been killed at these "bickers,"
as they were called, and serious accidents certainly took place, as many
contemporaries can bear witness.

The Author's father residing in George Square, in the southern side of
Edinburgh, the boys belonging to that family, with others in the square,
were arranged into a sort of company, to which a lady of distinction
presented a handsome set of colours. Now this company, or regiment, as a
matter of course, was engaged in weekly warfare with the boys inhabiting
the Crosscauseway, Bristo Street, the Potter Row,--in short, the
neighbouring suburbs. These last were chiefly of the lower rank, but
hardy loons, who threw stones to a hair's-breadth, and were very rugged
antagonists at close quarters. The skirmish sometimes lasted for a whole
evening, until one party or the other was victorious, when, if ours were
successful, we drove the enemy to their quarters, and were usually chased
back by the reinforcement of bigger lads who came to their assistance.
If, on the contrary, we were pursued, as was often the case, into the
precincts of our square, we were in our turn supported by our elder
brothers, domestic servants, and similar auxiliaries.

It followed, from our frequent opposition to each other, that though not
knowing the names of our enemies, we were yet well acquainted with their
appearance, and had nicknames for the most remarkable of them. One very
active and spirited boy might be considered as the principal leader in
the cohort of the suburbs. He was, I suppose, thirteen or fourteen years
old, finely made, tall, blue-eyed, with long fair hair, the very picture
of a youthful Goth. This lad was always first in the charge, and last in
the retreat,--the Achilles, at once, and Ajax of the Crosscauseway. He
was too formidable to us not to have a cognomen, and, like that of a
knight of old, it was taken from the most remarkable part of his dress,
being a pair of old green livery breeches, which was the principal part
of his clothing; for, like Pentapolin, according to Don Quixote's
account, Green-Breeks, as we called him, always entered the battle with
bare arms, legs, and feet.

It fell that once upon a time, when the combat was at the thickest, this
plebeian champion headed a sudden charge so rapid and furious that all
fled before him. He was several paces before his comrades, and had
actually laid his hands on the patrician standard, when one of our party,
whom some misjudging friend had intrusted with a couteau de chasse, or
hanger, inspired with a zeal for the honour of the corps worthy of Major
Sturgeon himself, struck poor Green-Breeks over the head with strength
sufficient to cut him down. When this was seen, the casualty was so far
beyond what had ever taken place before that both parties fled different
ways, leaving poor Green-Breeks, with his bright hair plentifully dabbled
in blood, to the care of the watchman, who (honest man) took care not to
know who had done the mischief. The bloody hanger was flung into one of
the Meadow ditches, and solemn secrecy was sworn on all hands; but the
remorse and terror of the actor were beyond all bounds, and his
apprehensions of the most dreadful character. The wounded hero was for a
few days in the Infirmary, the case being only a trifling one. But though
inquiry was strongly pressed on him, no argument could make him indicate
the person from whom he had received the wound, though he must have been
perfectly well known to him. When he recovered, and was dismissed, the
author and his brothers opened a communication with him, through the
medium of a popular gingerbread baker, of whom both parties were
customers, in order to tender a subsidy in name of smart-money. The sum
would excite ridicule were I to name it; but sure I am that the pockets
of the noted Green-Breeks never held as much money of his own. He
declined the remittance, saying that he would not sell his blood, but at
the same time reprobated the idea of being an informer, which, he said,
was "clam," i.e., base or mean. With much urgency, he accepted a pound of
snuff for the use of some old woman--aunt, grandmother, or the like--with
whom he lived. We did not become friends, for the bickers were more
agreeable to both parties than any more pacific amusement; but we
conducted them ever after under mutual assurances of the highest
consideration for each other.

Such was the hero whom Mr. Thomas Scott proposed to carry to Canada and
involve in adventures with the natives and colonists of that country.
Perhaps the youthful generosity of the lad will not seem so great in the
eyes of others as to those whom it was the means of screening from severe
rebuke and punishment. But it seemed, to those concerned, to argue a
nobleness of sentiment far beyond the pitch of most minds; and however
obscurely the lad, who showed such a frame of noble spirit, may have
lived or died, I cannot help being of opinion, that if fortune had placed
him in circumstances calling for gallantry or generosity, the man would
have fulfilled the promises of the boy. Long afterwards, when the story
was told to my father, he censured us severely for not telling the truth
at the time, that he might have attempted to be of use to the young man
in entering on life. But our alarms for the consequences of the drawn
sword, and the wound inflicted with such a weapon, were far too
predominant at the time for such a pitch of generosity.

Perhaps I ought not to have inserted this schoolboy tale; but besides the
strong impression made by the incident at the time, the whole
accompaniments of the story are matters to me of solemn and sad
recollection. Of all the little band who were concerned in those juvenile
sports or brawls, I can scarce recollect a single survivor. Some left the
ranks of mimic war to die in the active service of their country. Many
sought distant lands, to return no more. Others, dispersed in different
paths of life, "my dim eyes now seek for in vain." Of five brothers, all
healthy and promising in a degree far beyond one whose infancy was
visited by personal infirmity, and whose health after this period seemed
long very precarious, I am, nevertheless, the only survivor. The best
loved, and the best deserving to be loved, who had destined this incident
to be the foundation of literary composition, died "before his day," in a
distant and foreign land; and trifles assume an importance not their own,
when connected with those who have been loved and lost.




WAVERLEY;

OR,

'T IS SIXTY YEARS SINCE.



"Under which King, Bezonian? Speak, or die!"
Henry IV., Part II.




EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION TO WAVERLEY.

"What is the value of a reputation that probably will not last above one
or two generations?" Sir Walter Scott once asked Ballantyne. Two
generations, according to the usual reckoning, have passed; "'T is Sixty
Years since" the "wondrous Potentate" of Wordsworth's sonnet died, yet
the reputation on which he set so little store survives. A constant tide
of new editions of his novels flows from the press; his plots give
materials for operas and plays; he has been criticised, praised,
condemned: but his romances endure amid the changes of taste, remaining
the delight of mankind, while new schools and little masters of fiction
come and go.

Scott himself believed that even great works usually suffer periods of
temporary occultation. His own, no doubt, have not always been in their
primitive vogue. Even at first, English readers complained of the
difficulty caused by his Scotch, and now many make his I "dialect" an
excuse for not reading books which their taste, debauched by third-rate
fiction, is incapable of enjoying. But Scott has never disappeared in one
of those irregular changes of public opinion remarked on by his friend
Lady Louisa Stuart. In 1821 she informed him that she had tried the
experiment of reading Mackenzie's "Man of Feeling" aloud: "Nobody cried,
and at some of the touches I used to think so exquisite, they
laughed."--[Abbotsford Manuscripts.]--His correspondent requested Scott
to write something on such variations of taste, which actually seem to be
in the air and epidemic, for they affect, as she remarked, young people
who have not heard the criticisms of their elders.--[See Scott's reply,
with the anecdote about Mrs. Aphra Behn's novels, Lockhart, vi. 406
(edition of 1839).]--Thus Rousseau's "Nouvelle Heloise," once so
fascinating to girls, and reputed so dangerous, had become tedious to the
young, Lady Louisa says, even in 1821. But to the young, if they have any
fancy and intelligence, Scott is not tedious even now; and probably his
most devoted readers are boys, girls, and men of matured appreciation and
considerable knowledge of literature. The unformed and the cultivated
tastes are still at one about Scott. He holds us yet with his
unpremeditated art, his natural qualities of friendliness, of humour, of
sympathy. Even the carelessness with which his earliest and his kindest
critics--Ellis, Erskine, and Lady Louisa Stuart--reproached him has not
succeeded in killing his work and diminishing his renown.

It is style, as critics remind us, it is perfection of form, no doubt,
