Jesus which came to the trembling persecutor as he lay prostrate on the
ground, the blindness which came upon him--all point to the
supernatural; for he was no inquirer after truth like Luther and
Augustine, but bent on a persistent course of cruel persecution. At once
he is a changed man in his spirit, in his aims, in his entire attitude
toward the followers of the Nazarene. The proud man becomes as docile
and humble as a child; the intolerant zealot for the Law becomes broad
and charitable; and only one purpose animates his whole subsequent
life,--which is to spend his strength, amid perils and difficult labors,
in defence of the doctrines he had spurned. His leading idea now is to
preach salvation, not by pharisaical works by which no man can be
justified, but by faith in the crucified one who was sent into the world
to save it by new teachings and by his death upon the cross. He will go
anywhere in his sublime enthusiasm, among Jews or among Gentiles, to
plant the precious seeds of the new faith in every pagan city which he
can reach.

It is thought by Conybeare and Howson, Farrar and others that the new
convert spent three years in retirement in Arabia, in profound
meditation and communion with God, before the serious labors of his life
began as a preacher and missionary. After his conversion it would seem
that Saul preached the divinity of Christ with so much zeal that the
Jews in Damascus were filled with wrath, and sought to take his life,
and even guarded the gates of the city for fear that he might escape.
The conspiracy being detected, the friends of Saul put him into a basket
made of ropes, and let him down from a window in a house built upon the
city wall, so that he escaped, and thereupon proceeded to Jerusalem to
be indorsed as a Christian brother. He was especially desirous to see
Peter, as the foremost man among the Christians, though James had
greater dignity. Peter received him kindly, though not enthusiastically,
for the remembrance of his relentless persecutions was still fresh in
the minds of the Christians. It was impossible, however, that two such
warmhearted, honest, and enthusiastic men should not love each other,
when the common leading principle of their lives was mutually
understood.

Among the disciples, however, it was only Peter who took Saul cordially
by the hand. The other leaders held aloof; not one so much as spoke to
him. He was regarded with general mistrust; even James, the Lord's
brother, the first bishop of Jerusalem, would hold no communion with
him. At length Joseph, a Levite of Cyprus, afterward called Barnabas,--a
man of large heart, who sold his possessions to give to the
poor,--recognizing Saul's sincerity and superior talents, extended to
him the right hand of fellowship, and later became his companion in the
missionary journeys which he undertook. He used his great influence in
removing the prejudices of the brethren, and Saul henceforth was
admitted to their friendship and confidence.

Saul at first did not venture to preach in Hebrew synagogues, but sought
the synagogue of the Hellenists, in which the voice of Stephen had first
been heard. But his preaching was again cut short by a conspiracy to
murder him, so fierce was the animosity which his conversion had created
among the Jews, and he was compelled to flee. The brethren conducted him
to the little coast village of Caesarea, whence he sailed for his native
city Tarsus, in Cilicia.

How long Saul remained in Tarsus, and what he did there, we do not know.
Not long, probably, for he was sought out by Barnabas as his associate
for missionary work in Antioch. It would seem that on the persecution
which succeeded Stephen's death, many of the disciples fled to various
cities; and among others, to that great capital of the East,--the third
city of the Roman Empire.

Thither Barnabas had gone as their spiritual guide; but he soon found
out that among the Greeks of that luxurious and elegant city there were
demanded greater learning, wisdom, and culture than he himself
possessed. He turned his eyes upon Saul, then living quietly at Tarsus,
whose superior tact and trained skill in disputation, large and liberal
mind, and indefatigable zeal marked him out as the fittest man he could
find as a coadjutor in his laborious work. Thus Saul came to Antioch to
assist Barnabas.

No city could have been chosen more suitable for the peculiar talents of
Saul than this great Eastern emporium, containing a population of five
hundred thousand. I need not speak of its works of art,--its palaces,
its baths, its aqueducts, its bridges, its basilicas, its theatres,
which called out even the admiration of the citizens of the imperial
capital. These were nothing to Saul, who thought only of the souls he
could convert to the religion of Jesus; but they indicate the importance
and wealth of the population. In this pagan city were half a million
people steeped in all the vices of the Oriental world,--a great influx
of heterogeneous races, mostly debased by various superstitions and
degrading habits, whose religion, so far as they had any, was a crude
form of Nature-worship. And yet among them were wits, philosophers,
rhetoricians, poets, and satirists, as was to be expected in a city
where Greek was the prevailing language. But these were not the people
who listened to Saul and Barnabas. The apostles found hearers chiefly
among the poor and despised,--artisans, servants, soldiers,
sailors,--although occasionally persons of moderate independence became
converts, especially women of the middle ranks. Poor as they were, the
Christians at Antioch found means to send a large contribution in money
to their brethren at Jerusalem, who were suffering from a
grievous famine.

A year was spent by Barnabas and Saul at Antioch in founding a Christian
community, or congregation, or "church," as it was called. And it was in
this city that the new followers of Christ were first called
"Christians," mostly made up as they were of Gentiles. The missionaries
had not much success with the Jews, although it was their custom first
to preach in the Jewish synagogues on the Sabbath. It was only the
common people of Antioch who heard the word gladly, for it was to them
tidings of joy, which raised them above their degradation and misery.

With the contributions which the Christians of Antioch, and probably of
other cities, made to their poorer and afflicted brethren, Barnabas and
Saul set out for Jerusalem, soon returning however to Antioch, not to
resume their labors, but to make preparations for an extended missionary
tour. Saul was then thirty-seven years of age, and had been a Christian
seven years.

In spite of many disadvantages, such as ill-health, a mean personal
appearance, and a nervous temperament, without a ready utterance, Saul
had a tolerable mastery of Greek, familiarity with the habits of
different classes, and a profound knowledge of human nature. As a
widower and childless, he was unincumbered by domestic ties and duties;
and although physically weak, he had great endurance and patience. He
was courteous in his address, liberal in his views, charitable to
faults, abounding in love, adapting himself to people's weaknesses and
prejudices,--a man of infinite tact, the loftiest, most courageous, most
magnanimous of missionaries, setting an example to the Xaviers and
Judsons of modern times. He doubtless felt that to preach the gospel to
the heathen was his peculiar mission; so that his duty coincided with
his inclination, for he seems to have been very fond of travelling. He
made his journeys on foot, accompanied by a congenial companion, when he
could not go by water, which was attended with less discomfort, and was
freer from perils and dangers than a land journey.

The first missionary journey of Barnabas and Saul, accompanied by Mark,
was to the isle of Cyprus. They embarked at Seleucia, the port of
Antioch, and landed at Salamis, where they remained awhile, preaching
in the Jewish synagogue, and then traversed the whole island, which is
about one hundred miles in length. Whenever they made a lengthened stay,
Saul worked at his trade as a sail and tent maker, so as not to be
burdensome to any one. His life was very simple and inexpensive, thus
enabling him to maintain that independence so essential to self-respect.

No notable incident occurred to the three missionaries until they
reached the town of Nea-Paphos, celebrated for the worship of Venus, the
residence of the Roman proconsul, Sergius Paulus,--a man of illustrious
birth, who amused himself with the popular superstitions of the country.
He sought, probably from curiosity, to hear Barnabas and Saul preach;
but the missionaries were bitterly opposed by a Jewish sorcerer called
Elymas, who was stricken with blindness by Saul, the miracle producing
such an effect on the governor that he became a convert to the new
faith. There is no evidence that he was baptized, but he was respected
and beloved as a good man. From that time the apostle assumed the name
of Paul; and he also assumed the control of the mission, Barnabas
gracefully yielding the first rank, which till then he had himself
enjoyed. He had been the patron of Saul, but now became his subordinate;
for genius ever will work its way to ascendency. There are no outward
advantages which can long compete with intellectual supremacy.

From Cyprus the missionaries went to Perga, in Pamphylia, one of the
provinces of Asia Minor. In this city, famed for the worship of Diana,
their stay was short. Here Mark separated from his companions and
returned to Jerusalem, much to the mortification of his cousin Barnabas
and the grief of Paul, since we have a right to infer that this
brilliant young man was appalled by the dangers of the journey, or had
more sympathy with his brethren at Jerusalem than with the liberal yet
overbearing spirit of Paul.

From Perga the two travellers proceeded to Antioch in Pisidia, in the
heart of the high table-lands of the Peninsula, and, according to their
custom, went on Saturday to the Jewish synagogue. Paul, invited to
address the meeting, set forth the mystery of Jesus, his death, his
resurrection, and the salvation which he promised to believers. But the
address raised a storm, and Paul retired from the synagogue to preach to
the Gentile population, many of whom were favorably disposed, and became
converted. The same thing subsequently took place at Philippi, at
Alexandria, at Troas, and in general throughout the Roman colonies. But
the influence of the Jews was sufficient to secure the expulsion of Paul
and Barnabas from the city; and they departed, shaking off the dust
from their feet, and turning their steps to Iconium, a city of
Lycaonia, where a church was organized. Here the apostles tarried some
time, until forced to leave by the orthodox Jews, who stirred up the
heathen population against them. The little city of Lystra was the scene
of their next labors, and as there were but few Jews there the
missionaries not only had rest, but were very successful.

The sojourn at Lystra was marked by the miraculous cure of a cripple,
which so impressed the people that they took the missionaries for
divinities, calling Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercury; and a priest of
the city absolutely would have offered up sacrifices to the supposed
deities, had he not been severely rebuked by Paul for his superstition.

At Lystra a great addition was made to the Christian ranks by the
conversion of Timothy, a youth of fifteen, and of his excellent mother
Eunice; but the report of these conversions reached Iconium and Antioch
of Pisidia, which so enraged the Jews of these cities that they sent
emissaries to Lystra, zealous fanatics, who made such a disturbance that
Paul was stoned, and left for dead. His wounds, however, were not so
serious as were supposed, and the next day he departed with Barnabas for
Derbe, where he made a long stay. The two churches of Lystra and Derbe
were composed almost wholly of heathen.

From Derbe the apostles retraced their steps, A.D. 46, to Antioch, by
the way they had come,--a journey of one hundred and twenty miles, and
full of perils,--instead of crossing Mount Taurus through the famous
pass of the Cilician Gates, and then through Tarsus to Antioch, an
easier journey.

One of the noticeable things which marked this first missionary journey
of Paul, was the opposition of the Jews wherever he went. He was forced
to turn to the Gentiles, and it was among them that converts were
chiefly made. It is true that his custom was first to address the Jewish
synagogues on Saturday, but the Jews opposed and hated and persecuted
him the moment he announced the grand principle which animated his
life,--salvation through Jesus Christ, instead of through obedience to
the venerated Law of Moses.

On his return to Antioch with his beloved companion, Paul continued for
a time in the peaceful ministration of apostolic duties, until it became
necessary for him to go to Jerusalem to consult with the other apostles
in reference to a controversy which began seriously to threaten the
welfare of their common cause. This controversy was in reference to the
rite of circumcision,--a rite ever held in supreme importance by the
Jews. The Jewish converts to Christianity had all been previously
circumcised according to the Mosaic Law, and they insisted on the
circumcision of the Gentile converts also, as a mark of Christian
fraternity. Paul, emancipated from Jewish prejudices and customs,
regarded this rite as unessential; he believed that it was abrogated by
Christ, with other technical observances of the Law, and that it was not
consistent with the liberty of the Gospel to impose rites exclusively
Jewish on the Pagan converts. The elders at Jerusalem, good men as they
were, did not take this view; they could not bear to receive into
complete Christian fellowship men who offended their prejudices in
regard to matters which they regarded as sacred and obligatory as
baptism itself. They would measure Christianity by their traditions; and
the smaller the point of difference seemed to the enlightened Paul, the
bitterer were the contests,--even as many of the schisms which
subsequently divided the Church originated in questions that appear to
us to be absolutely frivolous. The question very early arose, whether
Christianity should be a formal and ritualistic religion,--a religion of
ablutions and purifications, of distinctions between ceremonially pure
and impure things,--or, rather, a religion of the spirit; whether it
should be a sect or a universal religion. Paul took the latter view;
declared circumcision to be useless, and freely admitted heathen
converts into the Church without it, in opposition to those who
virtually insisted on a Gentile becoming a Jew before he could become a
Christian.

So, to settle this miserable dispute, Paul went to Jerusalem, taking
with him Barnabas and Titus, who had never been circumcised,--eighteen
years after the death of Jesus, when the apostles were old men, and when
Peter, James, and John, having remained at Jerusalem, were the real
leaders of the Jewish Church. James in particular, called the Just, was
a strenuous observer of the law of circumcision,--a severe and ascetic
man, and very narrow in his prejudices, but held in great veneration for
his piety. Before the question was brought up in a general assembly of
the brethren for discussion, Paul separately visited Peter, James, and
John, and argued with them in his broad and catholic spirit, and won
them over to his cause; so that through their influence it was decided
that it was not essential for a Gentile to be circumcised on admission
to the Church, only that he must abstain from meats offered to idols,
and from eating the meat of any animal containing the blood (forbidden
by Moses),--a sort of compromise, a measure by which most quarrels are
finally settled; and the title of Paul as "Apostle to the Gentiles" was
officially confirmed.

The controversy being settled amicably by the leaders of the infant
Church, Paul and Barnabas returned to Antioch, and for a while longer
continued their labors there, as the most important centre of
missionary operations. But the ardent soul of Paul could not bear
repose. He set about forming new plans; and the result was his second
and more important missionary tour.

The relations between Paul and Barnabas had been thus far of the most
intimate and affectionate kind. But now the two apostles
disagreed,--Barnabas wishing to associate with them his cousin Mark, and
Paul determining that the young man, however estimable, should not
accompany them, because he had turned back on the former journey. It
must be confessed that Paul was not very amiable and conciliatory in
this matter; but his nature was earnest and stern, and he was resolved
not to have a companion under his trying circumstances who had once put
his hand to the plough and looked back. Neither apostle would yield, and
they were obliged to separate,--reluctantly, doubtless,--Paul choosing
Silas as his future companion, while Barnabas took Mark. Both were
probably in the right, and both in the wrong; for the best of men have
faults, and the strongest characters the most. Perhaps Paul thought that
as he was now recognized as the leading apostle to the Gentiles,
Barnabas should yield to him; and perhaps Barnabas felt aggrieved at the
haughty dictation of one who was once his inferior in standing.

The choice of Paul, however, was admirable. Silas was a broad and
liberal man, who had great influence at Jerusalem, and was entirely
devoted to his superior.

"The first object of Paul was to confirm the churches he had already
founded; and accordingly he began his mission by visiting the churches
of Syria and Cilicia," crossing the Taurus range by the famous Cilician
Gates,--one of the most frightful mountain passes in the
world,--penetrating thus into Lycaonia, and reaching Derbe, Lystra, and
Iconium. At Lystra he found Timothy, whom he greatly loved, modest and
timid, and made him his deacon and secretary, although he had never been
circumcised. To prevent giving offence to Jewish Christians, Paul
himself circumcised Timothy, in accordance with his custom of yielding
to prejudices when no vital principles were involved,--which concession
laid him open to the charge of inconsistency on the part of his enemies.
Expediency was not disdained by Paul when the means were
unobjectionable, but he did not use bad means to accomplish good ends.
He always had tenderness and charity for the weaknesses of his brethren,
especially intellectual weakness. What would have been intolerable to
some was patiently submitted to by him, if by any means he could win
even the feeble; so that he seemed to be all things to all men. No one
ever exceeded him in tact.

After Paul had finished his visit to the principal cities of Galatia,
he resolved to explore new lands. We next find him, after a long journey
through Mysia of three hundred miles, travelling to the south of Mount
Olympus, at Troas, near the ancient city of Troy. Here he fell in with
Luke, a physician, who had received a careful Hellenic and Jewish
education. Like Timothy, the future historian of the Acts of the
Apostles was admirably fitted to be the companion of Paul. He was
gentle, sympathetic, submissive, and devoted to his superior. Through
Luke's suggestion, Renan thinks, Paul determined to go to Macedonia.

So, without making a long stay at Troas, the four missionaries--Paul,
Silas, Luke, and Timothy--took ship and landed at Neapolis, the seaport
of Philippi on the borders of Thrace at the extreme northern shores of
the Aegean Sea. They were now on European ground,--the most healthy
region of the ancient world, where the people, largely of Celtic origin,
were honest, earnest, and primitive in their habits. The travellers
