hillock of earth.  Having arranged all to his satisfaction he returned,
clambering over the stockade, and dropping down upon the other side.

"I think that we are all ready for them now," said the seigneur.
"I would that the women and children were in a safe place, but we may
send them down the river to-night if all goes well.  Has anyone heard
anything of Du Lhut?"

"Jean has the best ears of any of us, your excellency," said one man
from beside the brass corner cannon.  "He thought that he heard shots a
few minutes ago."

"Then he has come into touch with them.  Etienne, take ten men and go to
the withered oak to cover them if they are retreating, but do not go
another yard on any pretext.  I am too short-handed already.  Perhaps,
De Catinat, you wish to sleep?"

"No, I could not sleep."

"We can do no more down here.  What do you say to a round or two of
piquet?  A little turn of the cards will help us to pass the time."

They ascended to the upper hall, where Adele came and sat by her
husband, while the swarthy Onega crouched by the window looking keenly
out into the forest.  De Catinat had little thought to spare upon the
cards, as his mind wandered to the danger which threatened them and to
the woman whose hand rested upon his own.  The old nobleman, on the
other hand, was engrossed by the play, and cursed under his breath, or
chuckled and grinned as the luck swayed one way or the other.  Suddenly
as they played there came two sharp raps from without.

"Some one is tapping," cried Adele.

"It is death that is tapping," said the Indian woman at the window.

"Ay, ay, it was the patter of two spent balls against the woodwork.
The wind is against our hearing the report.  The cards are shuffled.
It is my cut and your deal.  The capot, I think, was mine."

"Men are rushing from the woods," cried Onega.

"Tut!  It grows serious!" said the nobleman.  "We can finish the game
later.  Remember that the deal lies with you.  Let us see what it all
means."

De Catinat had already rushed to the window.  Du Lhut, young Achille de
la Noue, and eight of the covering party were running with their heads
bent towards the stockade, the door of which had been opened to admit
them.  Here and there from behind the trees came little blue puffs of
smoke, and one of the fugitives who wore white calico breeches began
suddenly to hop instead of running and a red splotch showed upon the
white cloth.  Two others threw their arms round him and the three rushed
in abreast while the gate swung into its place behind them.  An instant
later the brass cannon at the corner gave a flash and a roar while the
whole outline of the wood was traced in a rolling cloud, and the shower
of bullets rapped up against the wooden wall like sleet on a window.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


THE TAKING OF THE STOCKADE.

Having left Adele to the care of her Indian hostess, and warned her for
her life to keep from the windows, De Catinat seized his musket and
rushed downstairs.  As he passed a bullet came piping through one of the
narrow embrasures and starred itself in a little blotch of lead upon the
opposite wall.  The seigneur had already descended and was conversing
with Du Lhut beside the door.

"A thousand of them, you say?"

"Yes, we came on a fresh trail of a large war-party, three hundred at
the least.  They are all Mohawks and Cayugas with a sprinkling of
Oneidas.  We had a running fight for a few miles, and we have lost five
men."

"All dead, I trust."

"I hope so, but we were hard pressed to keep from being cut off.
Jean Mance is shot through the leg."

"I saw that he was hit."

"We had best have all ready to retire to the house if they carry the
stockade.  We can scarce hope to hold it when they are twenty to one."

"All is ready."

"And with our cannon we can keep their canoes from passing, so we might
send our women away to-night."

"I had intended to do so.  Will you take charge of the north side?
You might come across to me with ten of your men now, and I shall go
back to you if they change their attack."

The firing came in one continuous rattle now from the edges of the wood,
and the air was full of bullets.  The assailants were all trained shots,
men who lived by their guns, and to whom a shaking hand or a dim eye
meant poverty and hunger.  Every slit and crack and loop-hole was
marked, and a cap held above the stockade was blown in an instant from
the gun barrel which supported it.  On the other hand, the defenders
were also skilled in Indian fighting, and wise in every trick and lure
which could protect themselves or tempt their enemies to show.  They
kept well to the sides of the loop-holes, watching through little
crevices of the wood, and firing swiftly when a chance offered.  A red
leg sticking straight up into the air from behind a log showed where one
bullet at least had gone home, but there was little to aim at save a
puff and flash from among the leaves, or the shadowy figure of a warrior
seen for an instant as he darted from one tree-trunk to the other.
Seven of the Canadians had already been hit, but only three were
mortally wounded, and the other four still kept manfully to their
loop-holes, though one who had been struck through the jaw was spitting
his teeth with his bullets down into his gun-barrel.  The women sat in a
line upon the ground, beneath the level of the loop-holes, each with a
saucerful of bullets and a canister of powder, passing up the loaded
guns to the fighting men at the points where a quick fire was most
needful.

At first the attack had been all upon the south face, but as fresh
bodies of the Iroquois came up their line spread and lengthened until
the whole east face was girt with fire, which gradually enveloped the
north also.  The fort was ringed in by a great loop of smoke, save only
where the broad river flowed past them.  Over near the further bank the
canoes were lurking, and one, manned by ten warriors, attempted to pass
up the stream, but a good shot from the brass gun dashed in her side and
sank her, while a second of grape left only four of the swimmers whose
high scalp-locks stood out above the water like the back-fins of some
strange fish.  On the inland side, however, the seigneur had ordered the
cannon to be served no more, for the broad embrasures drew the enemy's
fire, and of the men who had been struck half were among those who
worked the guns.

The old nobleman strutted about with his white ruffles and his clouded
cane behind the line of parched smoke-grimed men, tapping his snuff-box,
shooting out his little jests, and looking very much less concerned than
he had done over his piquet.

"What do you think of it, Du Lhut?" he asked.

"I think very badly of it.  We are losing men much too fast."

"Well, my friend, what can you expect?  When a thousand muskets are all
turned upon a little place like this, some one must suffer for it.
Ah, my poor fellow, so you are done for too!"

The man nearest him had suddenly fallen with a crash, lying quite still
with his face in a platter of the sagamite which had been brought out by
the women.  Du Lhut glanced at him and then looked round.

"He is in a line with no loop-hole, and it took him in the shoulder,"
said he.  "Where did it come from then?  Ah, by Saint Anne, look there!"
He pointed upwards to a little mist of smoke which hung round the summit
of a high oak.

"The rascal overlooks the stockade.  But the trunk is hardly thick
enough to shield him at that height.  This poor fellow will not need his
musket again, and I see that it is ready primed."  De la Noue laid down
his cane, turned back his ruffles, picked up the dead man's gun, and
fired at the lurking warrior.  Two leaves fluttered out from the tree
and a grinning vermilion face appeared for an instant with a yell of
derision.  Quick as a flash Du Lhut brought his musket to his shoulder
and pulled the trigger.  The man gave a tremendous spring and crashed
down through the thick foliage.  Some seventy or eighty feet below him a
single stout branch shot out, and on to this he fell with the sound of a
great stone dropping into a bog, and hung there doubled over it,
swinging slowly from side to side like a red rag, his scalp-lock
streaming down between his feet.  A shout of exultation rose from the
Canadians at the sight, which was drowned in the murderous yell of the
savages.

"His limbs twitch.  He is not dead," cried De la Noue.

"Let him die there," said the old pioneer callously, ramming a fresh
charge into his gun.  "Ah, there is the gray hat again.  It comes ever
when I am unloaded."

"I saw a plumed hat among the brushwood."

"It is the Flemish Bastard.  I had rather have his scalp than those of
his hundred best warriors."

"Is he so brave then?"

"Yes, he is brave enough.  There is no denying it, for how else could he
be an Iroquois war-chief?  But he is clever and cunning, and cruel--
Ah, my God, if all the stories told are true, his cruelty is past
believing.  I should fear that my tongue would wither if I did but name
the things which this man has done.  Ah, he is there again."

The gray hat with the plume had shown itself once more in a rift of the
smoke.  De la Noue and Du Lhut both fired together, and the cap
fluttered up into the air.  At the same instant the bushes parted, and a
tall warrior sprang out into full view of the defenders.  His face was
that of an Indian, but a shade or two lighter, and a pointed black beard
hung down over his hunting tunic.  He threw out his hands with a gesture
of disdain, stood for an instant looking steadfastly at the fort, and
then sprang back into cover amid a shower of bullets which chipped away
the twigs all round him.

"Yes, he is brave enough," Du Lhut repeated with an oath.
"Your _censitaires_ have had their hoes in their hands more often than
their muskets, I should judge from their shooting.  But they seem to be
drawing closer upon the east face, and I think that they will make a
rush there before long."

The fire had indeed grown very much fiercer upon the side which was
defended by De Catinat, and it was plain that the main force of the
Iroquois were gathered at that point.  From every log, and trunk, and
cleft, and bush came the red flash with the gray halo, and the bullets
sang in a continuous stream through the loop-holes.  Amos had whittled a
little hole for himself about a foot above the ground, and lay upon his
face loading and firing in his own quiet methodical fashion.  Beside him
stood Ephraim Savage, his mouth set grimly, his eyes flashing from under
his down-drawn brows, and his whole soul absorbed in the smiting of the
Amalekites.  His hat was gone, his grizzled hair flying in the breeze,
great splotches of powder mottled his mahogany face, and a weal across
his right cheek showed where an Indian bullet had grazed him.
De Catinat was bearing himself like an experienced soldier, walking up
and down among his men with short words of praise or of precept, those
fire-words rough and blunt which bring a glow to the heart and a flush
to the cheek.  Seven of his men were down, but as the attack grew
fiercer upon his side it slackened upon the others, and the seigneur
with his son and Du Lhut brought ten men to reinforce them.  De la Noue
was holding out his snuff-box to De Catinat when a shrill scream from
behind them made them both look round.  Onega, the Indian wife, was
wringing her hands over the body of her son.  A glance showed that the
bullet had pierced his heart and that he was dead.

For an instant the old nobleman's thin face grew a shade paler, and the
hand which held out the little gold box shook like a branch in the wind.
Then he thrust it into his pocket again and mastered the spasm which had
convulsed his features.

"The De la Noues always die upon the field of honour," he remarked.
"I think that we should have some more men in the angle by the gun."

And now it became clear why it was that the Iroquois had chosen the
eastern face for their main attack.  It was there that the clump of
cover lay midway between the edge of the forest and the stockade.  A
storming party could creep as far as that and gather there for the final
rush.  First one crouching warrior, and then a second, and then a third
darted across the little belt of open space, and threw themselves down
among the bushes.  The fourth was hit, and lay with his back broken a
few paces out from the edge of the wood, but a stream of warriors
continued to venture the passage, until thirty-six had got across, and
the little patch of underwood was full of lurking savages.  Amos Green's
time had come.

From where he lay he could see the white patch where he had cut the bark
from the birch sapling, and he knew that immediately underneath it lay
the powder bag.  He sighted the mark, and then slowly lowered his barrel
until he had got to the base of the little trees as nearly as he could
guess it among the tangle of bushes.  The first shot produced no result,
however, and the second was aimed a foot lower.  The bullet penetrated
the bag, and there was an explosion which shook the manor-house and
swayed the whole line of stout stockades as though they were corn-stalks
in a breeze.  Up to the highest summits of the trees went the huge
column of blue smoke, and after the first roar there was a deathly
silence which was broken by the patter and thud of falling bodies.  Then
came a wild cheer from the defenders, and a furious answering whoop from
the Indians, while the fire from the woods burst out with greater fury
than ever.

But the blow had been a heavy one.  Of the thirty-six warriors, all
picked for their valour, only four regained the shelter of the woods,
and those so torn and shattered that they were spent men.  Already the
Indians had lost heavily, and this fresh disaster made them reconsider
their plan of attack, for the Iroquois were as wary as they were brave,
and he was esteemed the best war-chief who was most chary of the lives
of his followers.  Their fire gradually slackened, and at last, save for
a dropping shot here and there, it died away  altogether.

"Is it possible that they are going to abandon the attack?" cried De
Catinat joyously.  "Amos, I believe that you have saved us."

But the wily Du Lhut shook his head.  "A wolf would as soon leave a
half-gnawed bone as an Iroquois such a prize as this."

"But they have lost heavily."

"Ay, but not so heavily as ourselves in proportion to our numbers.
They have fifty out of a thousand, and we twenty out of threescore.  No,
no, they are holding a council, and we shall soon hear from them again.
But it may be some hours first, and if you will take my advice you will
have an hour's sleep, for you are not, as I can see by your eyes, as
used to doing without it as I am, and there may be little rest for any
of us this night."

De Catinat was indeed weary to the last pitch of human endurance.  Amos
Green and the seaman had already wrapped themselves in their blankets
and sunk to sleep under the shelter of the stockade.  The soldier rushed
upstairs to say a few words of comfort to the trembling Adele, and then
throwing himself down upon a couch he slept the dreamless sleep of an
exhausted man.  When at last he was roused by a fresh sputter of
musketry fire from the woods the sun was already low in the heavens, and
the mellow light of evening tinged the bare walls of the room.
He sprang from his couch, seized his musket, and rushed downstairs.
The defenders were gathered at their loop-holes once more, while Du
Lhut, the seigneur, and Amos Green were whispering eagerly together.
He noticed as he passed that Onega still sat crooning by the body of her
son, without having changed her position since morning.

"What is it, then?  Are they coming on?" he asked.

"They are up to some devilry," said Du Lhut, peering out at the corner
of the embrasure.  "They are gathering thickly at the east fringe, and
yet the firing comes from the south.  It is not the Indian way to attack
across the open, and yet if they think help is coming from the fort they
might venture it."

"The wood in front of us is alive with them," said Amos.  "They are as
busy as beavers among the underwood."

"Perhaps they are going to attack from this side, and cover the attack
by a fire from the flank."

"That is what I think," cried the seigneur.  "Bring the spare guns up
here and all the men except five for each side."

The words were hardly out of his mouth when a shrill yell burst from the
wood, and in an instant a cloud of warriors dashed out and charged
across the open, howling, springing, and waving their guns or tomahawks
in the air.  With their painted faces, smeared and striped with every
vivid colour, their streaming scalp-locks, their waving arms, their open
mouths, and their writhings and contortions, no more fiendish crew ever
burst into a sleeper's nightmare.  Some of those in front bore canoes
between them, and as they reached the stockade they planted them against
it and swarmed up them as if they had been scaling-ladders.  Others
fired through the embrasures and loop-holes, the muzzles of their
muskets touching those of the defenders, while others again sprang
unaided on to the tops of the palisades and jumped fearlessly down upon
the inner side.  The Canadians, however, made such a resistance as might
be expected from men who knew that no mercy awaited them.  They fired
whilst they had time to load, and then, clubbing their muskets, they
smashed furiously at every red head which showed above the rails.  The
din within the stockade was infernal, the shouts and cries of the
French, the whooping of the savages, and the terrified screaming of the
frightened women blending into one dreadful uproar, above which could be
heard the high shrill voice of the old seigneur imploring his
_censitaires_ to stand fast.  With his rapier in his hand, his hat lost,
his wig awry, and his dignity all thrown to the winds, the old nobleman
showed them that day how a soldier of Rocroy could carry himself, and
with Du Lhut, Amos, De Catinat and Ephraim Savage, was ever in the
forefront of the defence.  So desperately did they fight, the sword and
musket-butt outreaching the tomahawk, that though at one time fifty
Iroquois were over the palisades, they had slain or driven back nearly
all of them when a fresh wave burst suddenly over the south face which
had been stripped of its defenders.  Du Lhut saw in an instant that the
enclosure was lost and that only one thing could save the house.

"Hold them for an instant," he screamed, and rushing at the brass gun he
struck his flint and steel and fired it straight into the thick of the
savages.  Then as they recoiled for an instant he stuck a nail into the
touch-hole and drove it home with a blow from the butt of his gun.
Darting across the yard he spiked the gun at the other corner, and was
back at the door as the remnants of the garrison were hurled towards it
by the rush of the assailants.  The Canadians darted in, and swung the
ponderous mass of wood into position, breaking the leg of the foremost
warrior who had striven to follow them.  Then for an instant they had
time for breathing and for council.



CHAPTER XXXVII.


THE COMING OF THE FRIAR.

But their case was a very evil one.  Had the guns been lost so that they
might be turned upon the door, all further resistance would have been
vain, but Du Lhut's presence of mind had saved them from that danger.
The two guns upon the river face and the canoes were safe, for they were
commanded by the windows of the house.  But their numbers were terribly
reduced, and those who were left were weary and wounded and spent.
Nineteen had gained the house, but one had been shot through the body
and lay groaning in the hall, while a second had his shoulder cleft by a
tomahawk and could no longer raise his musket.  Du Lhut, De la Noue, and
De Catinat were uninjured, but Ephraim Savage had a bullet-hole in his
forearm, and Amos was bleeding from a cut upon the face.  Of the others
hardly one was without injury, and yet they had no time to think of
their hurts for the danger still pressed and they were lost unless they
acted.  A few shots from the barricaded windows sufficed to clear the
enclosure, for it was all exposed to their aim; but on the other hand
they had the shelter of the stockade now, and from the further side of
it they kept up a fierce fire upon the windows.  Half-a-dozen of the
_censitaires_ returned the fusillade, while the leaders consulted as to
what had best be done.

"We have twenty-five women and fourteen children," said the seigneur.
"I am sure that you will agree with me, gentlemen, that our first duty
is towards them.  Some of you, like myself, have lost sons or brothers
this day.  Let us at least save our wives and sisters."

"No Iroquois canoes have passed up the river," said one of the
Canadians.  "If the women start in the darkness they can get away to the
fort."

"By Saint Anne of Beaupre," exclaimed Du Lhut, "I think it would be well
if you could get your men out of this also, for I cannot see how it is
to be held until morning."

A murmur of assent broke from the other Canadians, but the old nobleman
shook his bewigged head with decision.

"Tut!  Tut!  What nonsense is this!" he cried.  "Are we to abandon the
manor-house of Sainte Marie to the first gang of savages who choose to
make an attack upon it?  No, no, gentlemen, there are still nearly a
score of us, and when the garrison learn that we are so pressed, which
will be by to-morrow morning at the latest, they will certainly send us
relief."

Du Lhut shook his head moodily.

"If you stand by the fort I will not desert you," said he, "and yet it
is a pity to sacrifice brave men for nothing."

"The canoes will hardly hold the women and children as it is," cried
Theuriet.  "There are but two large and four small.  There is not space
for a single man."

"Then that decides it," said De Catinat.  "But who are to row the
women?"

"It is but a few leagues with the current in their favour, and there are
none of our women who do not know how to handle a paddle."

The Iroquois were very quiet now, and an occasional dropping shot from
the trees or the stockade was the only sign of their presence.  Their
losses had been heavy, and they were either engaged in collecting their
dead, or in holding a council as to their next move.  The twilight was
gathering in, and the sun had already sunk beneath the tree-tops.
Leaving a watchman at each window, the leaders went round to the back of
the house where the canoes were lying upon the bank.  There were no
signs of the enemy upon the river to the north of them.

"We are in luck," said Amos.  "The clouds are gathering and there will
be little light."

"It is luck indeed, since the moon is only three days past the full,"
answered Du Lhut.  "I wonder that the Iroquois have not cut us off upon
the water, but it is likely that their canoes have gone south to bring
up another war-party.  They may be back soon, and we had best not lose a
moment."

"In an hour it might be dark enough to start."

"I think that there is rain in those clouds, and that will make it
darker still."

The women and children were assembled and their places in each boat were
assigned to them.  The wives of the censitaires, rough hardy women whose
lives had been spent under the shadow of a constant danger, were for the
most part quiet and collected, though a few of the younger ones
whimpered a little.  A woman is always braver when she has a child to
draw her thoughts from herself, and each married woman had one now
allotted to her as her own special charge until they should reach the
fort.  To Onega, the Indian wife of the seigneur, who was as wary and as
experienced as a war sachem of her people, the command of the women was
entrusted.

"It is not very far, Adele," said De Catinat, as his wife clung to his
arm.  "You remember how we heard the Angelus bells as we journeyed
through the woods.  That was Fort St. Louis, and it is but a league or
two."

"But I do not wish to leave you, Amory.  We have been together in all
our troubles.  Oh, Amory, why should we be divided now?"

"My dear love, you will tell them at the fort how things are with us,
and they will bring us help."

"Let the others do that, and I will stay.  I will not be useless, Amory.
Onega has taught me to load a gun.  I will not be afraid, indeed I will
not, if you will only let me stay."

"You must not ask it, Adele.  It is impossible, child I could not let
you stay."

"But I feel so sure that it would be best."

The coarser reason of man has not yet learned to value those subtle
instincts which guide a woman.  De Catinat argued and exhorted until he
had silenced if he had not convinced her.

