Now as I sat in our hall, listless and downcast, one day in July,
Cyneward came in to me.

"Here is news, master, that I know not what to make of."

"What is it?" I said. "Is the war to be here once more?"

"The war is no nearer than Ashdown Heath; but it seems that the
Wessex men have found a leader."

Then he told me of the long fighting round Reading, and how at last
Halfden had cut his way through Wessex and joined forces with
Guthrum after many victories. But that then Ethelred and Alfred the
Atheling had made a great effort, winning a mighty victory on
Ashdown Heath, slaying Bagsac the king and both the Sidracs, Harald
and Osbern the jarls, Frene, and many more with them. Nine battles
had they fought that year and last.

"How hear you of this?" I said.

"There has come a messenger from Guthrum with the news, and even
now the Danes march in all haste from the towns to fill up the gaps
in the ranks of the host, and he says that ships must go back to
Jutland to Ingvar for more men from overseas."

Now this news was nothing to us East Anglians for the most part,
and to me it was but a turn of the fight between Dane and Saxon for
the overlordship of all England. That was not a matter to be
settled by one or two victories on either side, nor might one see
how it would end. Yet I was glad, for of all things I feared that
Ingvar might be our master in the end, and this seemed to say that
it was none so certain.

More men came in after that, hastening the going to the front of
those who would, for not all the Danes among us would stir from
their new homes, saying that they had done their part, and knowing
that what they left others might take.

And in ten days' time Cyneward came to me saying that there were
two longships coming in from the open sea.

"Let the pilots go out to them," I said; for it was of no use
withholding this help from the Danish ships, little as we liked to
see them come. So I forgot the matter.

Then again Cyneward ran to me in haste, and with his eyes shining.

"Master, here is Halfden's ship. Come and see!"

Gladly I went out then, and when I saw those two ships my heart
leapt up with joy, for it was indeed my own ship that was leading,
and I thought that Halfden would be in her.

So soon as she was in the river she made for our wharf, and that
was not the wont of the Danes, who mostly went on past us up the
river to where the great towns were. And at once when she was
alongside I went on board, and at sight of me half her crew came
crowding round me, shouting and shaking my hand; for they were our
old crew, the same who had fought beside me and had backed me at
the Ve. There, too, was Thormod, grim as ever, but welcoming me
most gladly. But Halfden was not there.

"What is this, Thormod?" I said, when I had him up to the house,
and the men were eating in the great hall. "Why are you not with
Halfden?"

"Have you heard no news?" he asked.

"Only a few days ago I heard of the business at Ashdown."

"Well, I have come thence," he said. "Now must I sail home and
fetch more men in all haste."

"Why came you in here?"

"Because I came away in haste and need stores. And, moreover, I
wanted to see you."

"That is good of you, Thormod, and glad am I to have you here, even
if it is only for a day," I answered.

"Moreover, I have a message to you from Halfden," he went on.

Whereupon I asked him about the battle, and long we sat while he
told me all. And Halfden's deeds had been great, but could not turn
aside defeat. So he ended.

"Then because our ship lay in the Thames, where we had sent her
from the west when we broke through the Wessex country and joined
Guthrum, he sent me back for men. So I am here. Both sides must
needs rest awhile, as I think."

"What of Halfden's message?" I asked.

"Why, I know not how you will take it, but it is this. The night
before the battle he slept ill, and at last woke me, saying that he
would have me take a message if he was slain. So I said that I
hoped he was not fey. That he was not, he told me, but this was
going to be a heavy sword play, and one knew not how things would
go. Then he told me that ever as he began to sleep he saw Osritha
his sister, and she was pale and wrung her hands, saying: 'Now am I
alone, and there is none to help me, for Halfden and Wulfric are
far away, and I fear Ingvar and his moods'. Then said I, 'That is
true enough. It needs no dream to tell one of the maiden's
loneliness.' Yet he answered, 'Nevertheless, in some way I will
have Wulfric our comrade know that Osritha sits alone and will not
be comforted'. So when I must start on this voyage he bade me tell
you of this matter, and I have done so."

Now I was full of many thoughts about this, but as yet I would say
little. So I asked:

"What of Ingvar's moods? are they more fierce than his wont?"

"Well, between us twain," he answered, looking at Cyneward, who sat
apart from us across the king's chamber where we were, "Ingvar is
not all himself lately, and all men fear him, so that he is no loss
to the host."

I knew somewhat, I thought, of the reason for this, and so did
Cyneward, but passed that over. Now nothing seemed more plain to me
than that Halfden meant that I should seek Osritha.

"What is Halfden doing?" I asked. "Will he not go back to your own
land?"

"Why, no. For he takes Northumbria as his share of what we have
won. Hubba is there now. But we fight to gain more if we may, and
if not, to make sure of what we have. One way or another Ethelred's
power to attack us must be broken."

"So Halfden bides in England. What meant he by his message?"

"Why, Wulfric, if you cannot see I will not tell you."

"What of Ingvar?"

"Now, Wulfric," said Thormod, "if I did not know that you at least
were not afraid of him, I should say that he was best left alone.
But as neither you nor I fear him, let us go and see what may be
done."

"Let me think thereof," said I, not yet daring to make so sure of
what I most wished.

"Shall I tell Osritha that Wulfric thought twice of coming to see
her?"

"That you shall not," I cried; "I do but play with my happiness.
Surely I will go, and gladly. But will she welcome me?"

"Better come and see concerning that also," he answered, laughing a
little, so that one might know what he meant.

"Let us go at once on this tide," I said, starting up.

"Not so fast now, comrade," laughed Thormod. "Would you come again
half starved, as last time, into the lady's presence?"

Then I called Cyneward, but when he rose up and came to us, Thormod
stared at him, crying:

"You here, Raud! I thought you were with Ingvar."

"Aye, Thormod, I am here--at least Cyneward, who was Raud, is with
Wulfric."

"Ho! Then you have turned Christian?"

"Aye," answered Cyneward, flushing, though not with shame, for it
was the first time he had owned his faith to one of his former
comrades.

"Now I thought this likely to happen to some of us," said Thormod,
not showing much surprise, "if maybe it is sooner than one might
have looked for. However, that is your concern, not mine. Keep out
of Ingvar's way, though."

"I bide here with Wulfric," he answered, having paid no heed to our
low-voiced talk.

"Wulfric sails with me to find--Ingvar," said Thormod, and at that
Cyneward turned to me in surprise.

"Not Ingvar," said I, "but one in his house. Will you come with
me?"

Then he understood, and his face showed his gladness.

"This is well," he cried; "gladly will I go with you and return
with that other."

"That is to be seen," I answered, though I thought it surely would
be so. "Now go and see to the arms and all things needful, and send
the steward to me, for we have to victual the ship."

So I left Thormod with the steward and sought Ingild, telling him
what I would do. Whereat he, knowing my trouble, was very glad; and
then Egfrid would fain come with me also when he heard. That,
however, I would not suffer, seeing that there was Ingvar to be
dealt with. My mother wept, and would have me not go. But here my
sister helped me.

"Bring Osritha back if you can," she said. "Soon will our house be
built again, and we shall go, and you will be lonely."

For Egfrid's father had owned Guthrum, and his house and theirs
were nigh rebuilt.

In a day's time Thormod and I set sail, and once more I took the
helm as we went out over our bar. And the quiver of the tiller in
my hands and the long lift of the ship over the rollers seemed to
put fresh life in me, and my gloom passed away as if it had never
been.

The breeze was fresh, and the ship flew, yet not fast enough for
me, though so well sailed ours that when day broke the other was
hull down astern of us, and at night we had lost her altogether.
And the breeze held and the spray flew, and I walked the deck
impatiently, while Thormod from the helm smiled at me. Bright were
the skies over me, and bright the blue water that flashed below the
ship's keel, but my thoughts would even have brightened such leaden
skies as those that last saw me cross along this ocean path. And I
thought that I could deal with Ingvar now.



CHAPTER XVI. HOW WULFRIC BROUGHT OSRITHA HOME.


There was a haze far out at sea, and a fog was coming in with the
tide when we came to the mouth of Ingvar's haven; and rounded the
spit of land that shelters it from the southerly winds. Soon we
cleared it and then saw the town and hall above it at the head of
the haven, and what my longings were I need not write.

Now by the wharves lay two ships, and I thought little of that, but
on seeing them, Thormod, by whose side I was as he steered, seemed
to wonder.

"Ingvar has got another ship from somewhere," he said, "or has
built one this winter, for he sailed home with one only."

Then, too, the men began to say the like, for the second ship was
strange to them also, and, as seamen will, they puzzled over her
until we were close at hand. But I leaned on the gunwale and
dreamed dreams of my own, paying no heed to their talk.

Out of those dreams I was roused by Thormod's voice.

"Yon ship is no Dane," he said sharply. "Clear the decks and get to
arms, men. Here is somewhat amiss."

Then was a growl of wrath from our crew, yet no delay, and in a
moment every man was in his place. Down came the sail, and the mast
was lowered and hoisted on its stanchions overhead, and in five
minutes or less the oars were out, and the men who were arming
themselves ran to take them as they were ready, while those who had
rowed should get to arms also. Not for the first time saw I that
ship cleared for action, but never had I seen it done so swiftly,
though we had but half our fighting crew, sixty men instead of a
hundred and thirty or so.

I armed myself swiftly as any, and Thormod bade me take Halfden's
place on the fore deck, where the men were already looking to
bowstrings and bringing up sheaves of arrows and darts.

Then when I came they shouted, and one gray-headed warrior cried:

"Now you have a good fight on hand, axeman."

Then I asked:

"Who are the strangers?"

"It is a ship of the Jomsburg vikings," he said. "They know that
our men are all in England, and have come to see what we have left
behind--Thor's bolt light on them!"

Now, of all savage vikings these Jomsburgers are the worst.
Red-handed they are, sparing none, and it is said of them that they
will sacrifice men to the gods they worship before a great fight.
Nor are they all of one race, but are the fiercest men of all the
races of the Baltic gathered into that one nest of pirates,
Jomsburg.

Now a cold thrill of fear for Osritha ran through me, and then came
hot rage, and for a little I was beside myself, as it were, glaring
on that ship. Then I grew cool and desperate, longing only to be
hand to hand with them.

Swiftly we bore down on the ship, and now from her decks came the
hoarse call of uncouth war horns, and her crew came swarming back
from the streets with shouts and yells, crossing Ingvar's ship to
reach their own, for she lay alongside, stem to stern of the Dane,
and next to the open water.

Now I could see that men fought with the last of the Jomsburgers as
they came down the street to their ship, and there were no houses
burning, so that they could have been for no long time ashore. And
that was good to know.

We came into the channel abreast of her, and then Thormod roared to
me:

"Now I will ram her. Board her as we strike if we do not sink her!"

Then he called on the oarsmen, and they cheered and tugged at the
oars, the men in the waist helping them, and my fore deck warriors
gripping the bulwarks against the shock. Down we swooped like a
falcon on a wild duck, and as we came the Jomsburgers howled and
left their own ship, climbing into Ingvar's to fly the crash, while
some tried to cast off, but too late.

"Shoot!" I shouted to my men, and the arrows flew.

Through skin-clad backs and bare necks the arrows pierced, and the
smitten pirates fell back into their own ship, as they swarmed the
higher sides of Ingvar's, like leaves from a tree.

Then with a mighty crash and rending of cloven timbers our dragon
stem crushed the Jomsburg ship from gunwale to gunwale, splintering
the rail of the other ship as the wreck parted and sunk on either
side of our bows, while above the rending of planks and rush of
waters rose the howls of the drowning men.

I clung to the dragon's neck, and the shock felled me not. Yet my
men went headlong over the oarsmen as we struck, rising again with
a great shout of grim laughter, to follow me over the bows as I
leapt among the pirates who thronged on Ingvar's deck before me.

Then was the sternest fight I have ever seen, for we fought at
close quarters, they for dear life, and we for those even dearer
than life. There was no word of quarter, and at first, after our
cheer on boarding, there was little noise beyond the ringing of
weapon on helm and shield and mail, mixed with the snarls of the
