come in her poor head from that hour.

As for Sybrandt, all his cry was now for Gerard, He used to whine
to Margaret like a suffering hound, "Oh, sweet Margaret, oh, bonny
Margaret, for our Lady's sake find Gerard, and bid him take his curse
off me. Thou art gentle, thou art good; thou wilt entreat for me, and he
will refuse thee nought."

Catherine shared his belief that Gerard could cure him, and joined her
entreaties to his, Margaret hardly needed this. The burgomaster and his
agents having failed, she employed her own, and spent money like water.
And among these agents poor Luke enrolled himself. She met him one day
looking very thin, and spoke to him compassionately. On this he began
to blubber, and say he was more miserable than ever; he would like to be
good friends again upon almost any terms.

"Dear heart," said Margaret sorrowfully, "why can you not say to
yourself, now I am her little brother, and she is my old, married
sister, worn down with care? Say so, and I will indulge thee, and pet
thee, and make thee happier than a prince."

"Well, I will," said Luke savagely, "sooner than keep away from you
altogether. But above all give me something to do. Perchance I may have
better luck this time."

"Get me my marriage lines," said Margaret, turning sad and gloomy in a
moment.

"That is as much as to say, get me him! for where they are, he is."

"Not so. He may refuse to come nigh me; but certes he will not deny a
poor woman, who loved him once, her lines of betrothal. How can she go
without them into any honest man's house?"

"I'll get them you if they are in Holland," said Luke.

"They are as like to be in Rome," replied Margaret.

"Let us begin with Holland," observed Luke prudently.

The slave of love was furnished with money by his soft tyrant, and
wandered hither and thither, Coopering, and carpentering, and looking
for Gerard. "I can't be worse if I find the vagabone," said he, "and I
may be a hantle better."

The months rolled on, and Sybrandt improved in spirit, but not in body;
he was Margaret's pensioner for life; and a long-expected sorrow fell
upon poor Catherine, and left her still more bowed down; and she lost
her fine hearty bustling way, and never went about the house singing
now; and her nerves were shaken, and she lived in dread of some terrible
misfortune falling on Cornelis. The curse was laid on him as well as
Sybrandt. She prayed Eli, if she had been a faithful partner all these
years, to take Cornelis into his house again, and let her live awhile at
Rotterdam.

"I have good daughters here," said she; "but Margaret is so tender,
and thoughtful, and the little Gerard, he is my joy; he grows liker his
father every day, and his prattle cheers my heavy heart; and I do love
children."

And Eli, sturdy but kindly, consented sorrowfully.

And the people of Gouda petitioned the duke for a vicar, a real vicar.
"Ours cometh never nigh us," said they, "this six months past; our
children they die unchristened, and our folk unburied, except by some
chance comer." Giles' influence baffled this just complaint once; but a
second petition was prepared, and he gave Margaret little hope that the
present position could be maintained a single day.

So then Margaret went sorrowfully to the pretty manse to see it for the
last time, ere it should pass for ever into stranger's hands.

"I think he would have been happy here," she said, and turned heart-sick
away.

On their return, Reicht Heynes proposed to her to go and consult the
hermit.

"What," said Margaret, "Joan has been at you. She is the one for
hermits. I'll go, if 'tis but to show thee they know no more than we
do." And they went to the cave.

It was an excavation partly natural, partly artificial, in a bank of
rock overgrown by brambles. There was a rough stone door on hinges, and
a little window high up, and two apertures, through one of which the
people announced their gifts to the hermit, and put questions of all
sorts to him; and when he chose to answer, his voice came dissonant and
monstrous out at another small aperture.

On the face of the rock this line was cut--

Felix qui in Domino nixus ab orbe fugit.

Margaret observed to her companion that this was new since she was here
last.

"Ay," said Reicht, "like enough;" and looked up at it with awe. Writing
even on paper she thought no trifle; but on rock! She whispered, "Tis
a far holier hermit than the last; he used to come in the town now and
then, but this one ne'er shows his face to mortal man."

"And that is holiness?"

"Ay, sure."

"Then what a saint a dormouse must be?"

"Out, fie, mistress. Would ye even a beast to a man?"

"Come, Reicht," said Margaret, "my poor father taught me overmuch, So I
will e'en sit here, and look at the manse once more. Go thou forward and
question thy solitary, and tell me whether ye get nought or nonsense
out of him, for 'twill be one."

As Reicht drew near the cave a number of birds flew out of it., She gave
a little scream, and pointed to the cave to show Margaret they had come
thence, On this Margaret felt sure there was no human being in the cave,
and gave the matter no further attention, She fell into a deep reverie
while looking at the little manse.

She was startled from it by Reicht's hand upon her shoulder, and a faint
voice saying, "Let us go home."

"You got no answer at all, Reicht," said Margaret calmly.

"No, Margaret," said Reicht despondently. And they returned home.

Perhaps after all Margaret had nourished some faint secret hope in her
heart, though her reason had rejected it, for she certainly went home
more dejectedly.

Just as they entered Rotterdam, Reicht said, "Stay! Oh, Margaret, I am
ill at deceit; but 'tis death to utter ill news to thee; I love thee so
dear."

"Speak out, sweetheart," said Margaret. "I have gone through so much, I
am almost past feeling any fresh trouble."

"Margaret, the hermit did speak to me."

"What, a hermit there? among all those birds."

"Ay; and doth not that show him a holy man?"

"I' God's name, what said he to thee, Reicht?"

"Alas! Margaret, I told him thy story, and I prayed him for our Lady's
sake tell me where thy Gerard is, And I waited long for an answer, and
presently a voice came like a trumpet: 'Pray for the soul of Gerard the
son of Eli!"

"Ah!"

"Oh, woe is me that I have this to tell thee, sweet Margaret! bethink
thee thou hast thy boy to live for yet."

"Let me get home," said Margaret faintly.

Passing down the Brede Kirk Straet they saw Joan at the door. Reicht
said to her, "Eh, woman, she has been to your hermit, and heard no good
news."

"Come in," said Joan, eager for a gossip.

Margaret would not go in; but she sat down disconsolate on the lowest
step but one of the little external staircase that led into Joan's
house, and let the other two gossip their fill at the top of it.

"Oh," said Joan, "what yon hermit says is sure to be sooth, He is that
holy, I am told, that the very birds consort with him."

"What does that prove?" said Margaret deprecatingly. "I have seen my
Gerard tame the birds in winter till they would eat from his hand."

A look of pity at this parallel passed between the other two, but they
were both too fond of her to say what they thought.

Joan proceeded to relate all the marvellous tales she had heard of this
hermit's sanctity; how he never came out but at night, and prayed among
the wolves, and they never molested him; and now he bade the people not
bring him so much food to pamper his body, but to bring him candles.

"The candles are to burn before his saint," whispered Reicht solemnly.

"Ay, lass; and to read his holy books wi'. A neighbour o' mine saw his
hand come out, and the birds sat thereon and pecked crumbs. She went
for to kiss it, but the holy man whippit it away in a trice. They can't
abide a woman to touch 'en, or even look at 'em, saints can't."

"What like was his hand, wife? Did you ask her?"

"What is my tongue for, else? Why, dear heart, all one as yourn; by the
same token a had a thumb and four fingers."

"Look ye there now."

"But a deal whiter nor yourn and mine."

"Ay, ay."

"And main skinny."

"Alas."

"What could ye expect? Why, a live upon air, and prayer, and candles."

"Ah, well," continued Joan; "poor thing, I whiles think 'tis best for
her to know the worst. And now she hath gotten a voice from heaven, Or
almost as good, and behoves her pray for his soul. One thing, she is not
so poor now as she was; and never fell riches to a better hand; and she
is only come into her own for that matter, so she can pay the priest to
say masses for him, and that is a great comfort."

In the midst of their gossip, Margaret, in whose ears it was all
buzzing, though she seemed lost in thought, got softly up, and crept
away with her eyes on the ground, and her brows bent.

"She hath forgotten I am with her," said Reicht Heynes ruefully.

She had her gossip out with Joan, and then went home.

She found Margaret seated cutting out a pelisse of grey cloth, and a
cape to match. Little Gerard was standing at her side, inside her left
arm, eyeing the work, and making it more difficult by wriggling about,
and fingering the arm with which she held the cloth steady, to all which
she submitted with imperturbable patience and complacency, Fancy a male
workman so entangled, impeded, worried!

"Ot's that, mammy?"

"A pelisse, my pet."

"Ot's a p'lisse?"

"A great frock. And this is the cape to't."

"Ot's it for?"

"To keep his body from the cold; and the cape is for his shoulders, or
to go over his head like the country folk. 'Tis for a hermit."

"Ot's a 'ermit?"

"A holy man that lives in a cave all by himself."

"In de dark?"

"Ay, whiles."

"Oh."

In the morning Reicht was sent to the hermit with the pelisse, and a
pound of thick candles.

As she was going out of the door Margaret said to her, "Said you whose
son Gerard was?"

"Nay, not I."

"Think, girl! How could he call him Gerard, son of Eli, if you had not
told him?"

Reicht persisted she had never mentioned him but as plain Gerard. But
Margaret told her flatly she did not believe her; at which Reicht was
affronted, and went out with a little toss of the head. However, she
determined to question the hermit again, and did not doubt he would be
more liberal in his communication when he saw his nice new pelisse and
the candles.

She had not been gone long when Giles came in with ill news.

The living of Gouda would be kept vacant no longer.

Margaret was greatly distressed at this.

"Oh, Giles," said she, "ask for another month. They will give thee
another month, maybe."

He returned in an hour to tell her he could not get a month.

"They have given me a week," said he. "And what is a week?"

"Drowning bodies catch at strawen," was her reply. "A week? a little
week?"

Reicht came back from her errand out of spirits. Her oracle had declined
all further communication. So at least its obstinate silence might
fairly be interpreted.

The next day Margaret put Reicht in charge of the shop, and disappeared
all day. So the next day, and so the next. Nor would she tell any one
where she had been. Perhaps she was ashamed. The fact is, she spent all
those days on one little spot of ground. When they thought her dreaming,
she was applying to every word that fell from Joan and Reicht the whole
powers of a far acuter mind than either of them possessed.

She went to work on a scale that never occurred to either of them. She
was determined to see the hermit, and question him face to face, not
through a wall. She found that by making a circuit she could get above
the cave, and look down without being seen by the solitary. But when she
came to do it, she found an impenetrable mass of brambles. After tearing
her clothes, and her hands and feet, so that she was soon covered with
blood, the resolute, patient girl took out her scissors and steadily
snipped and cut till she made a narrow path through the enemy. But so
slow was the work that she had to leave it half done. The next day she
had her scissors fresh ground, and brought a sharp knife as well, and
gently, silently, cut her way to the roof of the cave. There she made an
ambush of some of the cut brambles, so that the passers-by might not see
her, and couched with watchful eye till the hermit should come out. She
heard him move underneath her. But he never left his cell. She began to
think it was true that he only came out at night.

The next day she came early and brought a jerkin she was making for
little Gerard, and there she sat all day, working, and watching with
dogged patience.

At four o'clock the birds began to feed; and a great many of the smaller
kinds came fluttering round the cave, and one or two went in. But most
of them, taking a preliminary seat on the bushes, suddenly discovered
Margaret, and went off with an agitated flirt of their little wings. And
although they sailed about in the air, they would not enter the cave.
Presently, to encourage them, the hermit, all unconscious of the cause
of their tremors, put out a thin white hand with a few crumbs in it,
Margaret laid down her work softly, and gliding her body forward like a
snake, looked down at it from above; it was but a few feet from her. It
was as the woman described it, a thin, white hand.

Presently the other hand came out with a piece of bread, and the two
hands together broke it and scattered the crumbs.

But that other hand had hardly been out two seconds ere the violet eyes
that were watching above dilated; and the gentle bosom heaved, and the
whole frame quivered like a leaf in the wind.

What her swift eye had seen I leave the reader to guess. She suppressed
the scream that rose to her lips, but the effort cost her dear. Soon the
left hand of the hermit began to swim indistinctly before her gloating
eyes; and with a deep sigh her head drooped, and she lay like a broken
lily.

She was in a deep swoon, to which perhaps her long fast to-day and the
agitation and sleeplessness of many preceding days contributed.

And there lay beauty, intelligence, and constancy, pale and silent, And
little that hermit guessed who was so near him. The little birds hopped
on her now, and one nearly entangled his little feet in her rich auburn
hair.

She came back to her troubles. The sun was set. She was very cold, She
cried a little, but I think it was partly from the remains of physical
weakness. And then she went home, praying God and the saints to
enlighten her and teach her what to do for the best.

When she got home she was pale and hysterical, and would say nothing in
answer to all their questions but her favourite word, "We are wading in
deep waters."

The night seemed to have done wonders for her.

She came to Catherine, who was sitting sighing by the fireside, and
kissed her, and said--

"Mother, what would you like best in the world?"

"Eh, dear," replied Catherine despondently, "I know nought that would
make me smile now; I have parted from too many that were dear to me.
Gerard lost again as soon as found; Kate in heaven; and Sybrandt down
for life."

"Poor mother! Mother dear, Gouda manse is to be furnished, and cleaned,
and made ready all in a hurry, See, here be ten gold angels. Make them
go far, good mother; for I have ta'en over many already from my boy for
a set of useless loons that were aye going to find him for me."

Catherine and Reicht stared at her a moment in silence, and then out
burst a flood of questions, to none of which would she give a reply.
"Nay," said she, "I have lain on my bed and thought, and thought, and
thought whiles you were all sleeping; and methinks I have got the clue
to all, I love you, dear mother; but I'll trust no woman's tongue. If I
fail this time, I'll have none to blame but Margaret Brandt."

A resolute woman is a very resolute thing. And there was a deep, dogged
determination in Margaret's voice and brow that at once convinced
Catherine it would be idle to put any more questions at that time,
She and Reicht lost themselves in conjectures; and Catherine whispered
Reicht, "Bide quiet; then 'twill leak out;" a shrewd piece of advice,
founded on general observation.

Within an hour Catherine was on the road to Gouda in a cart, with two
stout girls to help her, and quite a siege artillery of mops, and pails,
and brushes, She came back with heightened colour, and something of the
old sparkle in her eye, and kissed Margaret with a silent warmth that
spoke volumes, and at five in the morning was off again to Gouda.

That night as Reicht was in her first sleep a hand gently pressed
her shoulder, and she awoke, and was going to scream, "Whisht," said
Margaret, and put her finger to her lips.

She then whispered, "Rise softly, don thy habits, and come with me!"

When she came down, Margaret begged her to loose Dragon and bring him
along. Now Dragon was a great mastiff, who had guarded Margaret Van Eyck
and Reicht, two lone women, for some years, and was devotedly attached
to the latter.

Margaret and Reicht went out, with Dragon walking majestically behind
them. They came back long after midnight, and retired to rest.

Catherine never knew.

Margaret read her friends: she saw the sturdy, faithful Frisian could
hold her tongue, and Catherine could not. Yet I am not sure she would
have trusted even Reicht had her nerve equalled her spirit; but with
all her daring and resolution, she was a tender, timid woman, a little
afraid of the dark, very afraid of being alone in it, and desperately
afraid of wolves. Now Dragon could kill a wolf in a brace of shakes; but
then Dragon would not go with her, but only with Reicht; so altogether
she made one confidante.

The next night they made another moonlight reconnaissance, and as I
think, with some result. For not the next night (it rained that night
and extinguished their courage), but the next after they took with them
a companion, the last in the world Reicht Heynes would have thought of;
yet she gave her warm approval as soon as she was told he was to go with
them.

Imagine how these stealthy assailants trembled and panted when the
moment of action came; imagine, if you can, the tumult in Margaret's
breast, the thrilling hopes, chasing, and chased by sickening fears;
the strange and perhaps unparalleled mixture of tender familiarity and
distant awe with which a lovely and high-spirited, but tender, adoring
woman, wife in the eye of the Law, and no wife in the eye of the
Church, trembling, blushing, paling, glowing, shivering, stole at night,
noiseless as the dew, upon the hermit of Gouda.

And the stars above seemed never so bright and calm.



CHAPTER XCII

Yes, the hermit of Gouda was the vicar of Gouda, and knew it not, so
absolute was his seclusion.

My reader is aware that the moment the frenzy of his passion passed, he
was seized with remorse for having been betrayed into it. But perhaps
only those who have risen as high in religious spirit as he had, and
suddenly fallen, can realize the terror at himself that took possession
of him. He felt like one whom self-confidence had betrayed to the very
edge of a precipice.

"Ah, good Jerome," he cried, "how much better you knew me than I knew
myself! How bitter yet wholesome was your admonition!"

Accustomed to search his own heart, he saw at once that the true cause
of his fury was Margaret. "I love her then better than God," said he
despairingly; "better than the Church, From such a love what can spring
to me, or to her?" He shuddered at the thought. "Let the strong battle
temptation; 'tis for the weak to flee. And who is weaker than I have
shown myself? What is my penitence, my religion? A pack of cards built
by degrees into a fair-seeming structure; and lo! one breath of earthly
love, and it lies in the dust, I must begin again, and on a surer
foundation." He resolved to leave Holland at once, and spend years of
his life in some distant convent before returning to it. By that time
the temptations of earthly passion would be doubly baffled; and older
and a better monk, he should be more master of his earthly affections,
and Margaret, seeing herself abandoned, would marry, and love another,
The very anguish this last thought cost him showed the self-searcher and
self-denier that he was on the path of religious duty.

But in leaving her for his immortal good and hers, he was not to
neglect her temporal weal. Indeed, the sweet thought, he could make her
comfortable for life, and rich in this world's goods, which she was not
bound to despise, sustained him in the bitter struggle it cost him to
turn his back on her without one kind word or look, "Oh, what will she
think of me?" he groaned. "Shall I not seem to her of all creatures the
most heartless, inhuman? but so best; ay, better she should hate me,
miserable that I am, Heaven is merciful, and giveth my broken heart this
comfort; I can make that villain restore her own, and she shall never
lose another true lover by poverty. Another? Ah me! ah me! God and the
saints to mine aid!"

How he fared on this errand has been related. But first, as you may
perhaps remember, he went at night to shrive the hermit of Gouda. He
found him dying, and never left him till he had closed his eyes and
buried him beneath the floor of the little oratory attached to his cell.
It was the peaceful end of a stormy life. The hermit had been a soldier,
and even now carried a steel corselet next his skin, saying he was now
Christ's soldier as he had been Satan's. When Clement had shriven him
and prayed by him, he, in his turn, sought counsel of one who was dying
in so pious a frame, The hermit advised him to be his successor in this
peaceful retreat. "His had been a hard fight against the world, the
flesh, and the devil, and he had never thoroughly baffled them till he
retired into the citadel of Solitude."

These words and the hermit's pious and peaceful death, which speedily
followed, and set as it were the seal of immortal truth on them, made a
deep impression upon Clement. Nor in his case had they any prejudice to
combat; the solitary recluse was still profoundly revered in the Church,
whether immured as an anchorite or anchoress in some cave or cell
belonging to a monastery, or hidden in the more savage but laxer
seclusion of the independent hermitage. And Clement knew more about the
hermits of the Church than most divines at his time of life; he had read
much thereon at the monastery near Tergou, had devoured their lives
with wonder and delight in the manuscripts of the Vatican, and conversed
earnestly about them with the mendicant friars of several nations.
Before Printing these friars were the great circulators of those local
annals and biographies which accumulated in the convents of every land.
Then his teacher, Jerome, had been three years an anchorite on the
heights of Camaldoli, where for more than four centuries the Thebaid had
been revived; and Jerome, cold and curt on most religious themes, was
warm with enthusiasm on this one. He had pored over the annals of
St. John Baptist's abbey, round about which the hermit's caves were
scattered, and told him the names of many a noble, and many a famous
warrior who had ended his days there a hermit, and of many a bishop and
archbishop who had passed from the see to the hermitage, or from the
hermitage to the see. Among the former the Archbishop of Ravenna; among
the latter Pope Victor the Ninth. He told him too, with grim delight, of
their multifarious austerities, and how each hermit set himself to find
where he was weakest, and attacked himself without mercy or remission
till there, even there, he was strongest. And how seven times in the
twenty-four hours, in thunder, rain, or snow, by daylight, twilight,
moonlight, or torchlight, the solitaries flocked from distant points,
over rugged precipitous ways, to worship in the convent church; at
matins, at prime, tierce, sexte, nones, vespers, and compline. He
even, under eager questioning, described to him the persons of famous
anchorites he had sung the Psalter and prayed with there; the only
intercourse their vows allowed, except with special permission. Moncata,
Duke of Moncata and Cardova, and Hidalgo of Spain, who in the flower of
his youth had retired thither from the pomps, vanities, and pleasures of
the world; Father John Baptist of Novara, who had led armies to
battle, but was now a private soldier of Christ; Cornelius, Samuel,
and Sylvanus. This last, when the great Duchess de' Medici obtained the
Pope's leave, hitherto refused, to visit Camaldoli, went down and met
her at the first wooden cross, and there, surrounded as she was with
courtiers and flatterers, remonstrated with her, and persuaded her, and
warned her, not to profane that holy mountain, where no woman for so
many centuries had placed her foot; and she, awed by the place and the
man, retreated with all her captains, soldiers, courtiers, and pages
from that one hoary hermit. At Basle Clement found fresh materials,
especially with respect to German and English anchorites; and he had
even prepared a "Catena Eremitarum" from the year of our Lord 250, when
Paul of Thebes commenced his ninety years of solitude, down to the year
1470. He called them Angelorum amici et animalium, i.e.

FRIENDS OF ANGELS AND ANIMALS.

Thus, though in those days he never thought to be a recluse, the road
was paved, so to speak; and when the dying hermit of Gouda blessed the
citadel of Solitude, where he had fought the good fight and won it, and
invited him to take up the breast-plate of faith that now fell off his
own shrunken body, Clement said within himself: "Heaven itself led my
foot hither to this end." It struck him, too, as no small coincidence
that his patron, St. Bavon, was a hermit, and an austere one, a
cuirassier of the solitary cell.

As soon as he was reconciled to Ghysbrecht Van Swieten, he went eagerly
to his abode, praying Heaven it might not have been already occupied in
these three days. The fear was not vain; these famous dens never wanted
a human tenant long. He found the rude stone door ajar; then he made
sure he was too late; he opened the door and went softly in. No; the
cell was vacant, and there were the hermit's great ivory crucifix, his
pens, ink, seeds, and, memento mori, a skull; his cilice of hair, and
another of bristles; his well-worn sheepskin pelisse and hood; his
hammer, chisel, and psaltery, etc. Men and women had passed that
way, but none had ventured to intrude, far less to steal. Faith and
simplicity had guarded that keyless door more securely than the houses
of the laity were defended by their gates like a modern gaol, and think
iron bars at every window, and the gentry by moat, bastion, chevaux de
frise, and portcullis.

As soon as Clement was fairly in the cell there was a loud flap, and a
flutter, and down came a great brown owl from a corner, and whirled out
of the window, driving the air cold on Clement's face, He started and
shuddered.

Was this seeming owl something diabolical? trying to deter him from his
soul's good? On second thoughts, might it not be some good spirit
the hermit had employed to keep the cell for him, perhaps the hermit
himself? Finally he concluded that it was just an owl, and that he would
try and make friends with it.

He kneeled down and inaugurated his new life with prayer.

Clement had not only an earthly passion to quell, the power of which
made him tremble for his eternal weal, but he had a penance to do for
having given way to ire, his besetting sin, and cursed his own brothers.

He looked round this roomy cell furnished with so many comforts, and
compared it with the pictures in his mind of the hideous place, eremus
in eremo, a desert in a desert, where holy Jerome, hermit, and the
Plutarch of hermits, had wrestled with sickness, temptation, and despair
four mortal years; and with the inaccessible and thorny niche, a hole
in a precipice, where the boy hermit Benedict buried himself, and lived
three years on the pittance the good monk Romanus could spare him from
his scanty commons, and subdivided that mouthful with his friend, a
raven; and the hollow tree of his patron St. Bavon; and the earthly
purgatory at Fribourg, where lived a nameless saint in a horrid cavern,
his eyes chilled with perpetual gloom, and his ears stunned with an
eternal waterfall; and the pillar on which St. Simeon Stylita existed
forty-five years; and the destina, or stone box, of St. Dunstan, where,
like Hilarion in his bulrush hive, sepulchro potius quam domu, he could
scarce sit, stand, or lie; and the living tombs, sealed with lead, of
Thais, and Christina, and other recluses; and the damp dungeon of St.
Alred. These and scores more of the dismal dens in which true hermits
had worn out their wasted bodies on the rock, and the rock under their
sleeping bodies, and their praying knees, all came into his mind, and he
said to himself, "This sweet retreat is for safety of the soul; but what
for penance Jesu aid me against faults to come; and for the fault I rue,
face of man I will not see for a twelvemonth and a day." He had famous
precedents in his eye even for this last and unusual severity. In fact
the original hermit of this very cell was clearly under the same vow.
Hence the two apertures, through which he was spoken to, and replied.

Adopting, in other respects, the uniform rule of hermits and anchorites,
he divided his day into the seven offices, ignoring the petty
accidents of light and dark, creations both of Him to whom he prayed so
unceasingly. He learned the psalter by heart, and in all the intervals
of devotion, not occupied by broken slumbers, he worked hard with his
hands. No article of the hermit's rule was more strict or more ancient
than this. And here his self-imposed penance embarrassed him, for
what work could he do, without being seen, that should benefit his
neighbours? for the hermit was to labour for himself in those cases only
where his subsistence depended on it. Now Clement's modest needs were
amply supplied by the villagers.

On moonlight nights he would steal out like a thief, and dig some
poor man's garden on the outskirts of the village. He made baskets and
dropped them slily at humble doors.

And since he could do nothing for the bodies of those who passed by his
cell in daytime, he went out in the dead of the night with his hammer
and his chisel, and carved moral and religious sentences all down the
road upon the sandstone rocks. "Who knows?" said he, "often a chance
shaft strikes home."

Oh, sore heart, comfort thou the poor and bereaved with holy words of
solace in their native tongue; for he said "well, 'tis 'clavis ad corda
plebis.'" Also he remembered the learned Colonna had told him of
the written mountains in the east, where kings had inscribed their
victories, "What," said Clement, "are they so wise, those Eastern
monarchs, to engrave their war-like glory upon the rock, making a blood
bubble endure so long as earth; and shall I leave the rocks about me
silent on the King of Glory, at whose word they were, and at whose
breath they shall be dust? Nay, but these stones shall speak to weary
wayfarers of eternal peace, and of the Lamb, whose frail and afflicted
yet happy servant worketh them among."

Now at this time the inspired words that have consoled the poor and the
afflicted for so many ages were not yet printed in Dutch, so that these
sentences of gold from the holy evangelists came like fresh oracles
from heaven, or like the dew on parched flowers; and the poor hermit's
written rocks softened a heart Or two, and sent the heavy laden singing
on their way(1).

These holy oracles that seemed to spring up around him like magic; his
prudent answers through his window to such as sought ghostly counsel;
and above all, his invisibility, soon gained him a prodigious
reputation, This was not diminished by the medical advice they now and
then extorted from him sore against his will, by tears and entreaties;
for if the patients got well they gave the holy hermit the credit, and
if not they laid all the blame on the devil. "I think he killed nobody,
for his remedies were womanish and weak." Sage and wormwood, sion,
hyssop, borage, spikenard, dog's-tongue, our Lady's mantle, feverfew,
and Faith, and all in small quantities except the last.

Then his abstinence, sure sign of a saint. The eggs and milk they
brought him at first he refused with horror. Know ye not the hermit's
rule is bread, or herbs, and water? Eggs, they are birds in disguise;
for when the bird dieth, then the egg rotteth. As for milk, it is little
better than white blood. And when they brought him too much bread he
refused it. Then they used to press it on him. "Nay, holy father; give
the overplus to the poor."

"You who go among the poor can do that better. Is bread a thing to fling
haphazard from an hermit's window?" And to those who persisted after
this: "To live on charity, yet play Sir Bountiful, is to lie with the
right hand. Giving another's to the poor, I should beguile them of their
thanks, and cheat thee the true giver. Thus do thieves, whose boast it
is they bleed the rich into the lap of the poor. Occasio avaritiae nomen
pauperum."

When nothing else would convince the good souls, this piece of Latin
always brought them round. So would a line of Virgil's Aeneid.

This great reputation of sanctity was all external. Inside the cell was
a man who held the hermit of Gouda as cheap as dirt.

"Ah!" said he, "I cannot deceive myself; I cannot deceive God's animals.
See the little birds, how coy they be; I feed and feed them, and long
for their friendship, yet will they never come within, nor take my hand,
by lighting on't. For why? No Paul, no Benedict, no Hugh of Lincoln, no
Columba, no Guthlac bides in this cell. Hunted doe flieth not hither,
for here is no Fructuosus, nor Aventine, nor Albert of Suabia; nor e'en
a pretty squirrel cometh from the wood hard by for the acorns I have
hoarded; for here abideth no Columban. The very owl that was here hath
fled. They are not to be deceived; I have a Pope's word for that; Heaven
rest his soul."

Clement had one advantage over her whose image in his heart he was bent
on destroying.

He had suffered and survived the pang of bereavement, and the mind
cannot quite repeat such anguish. Then he had built up a habit of
looking on her as dead. After that strange scene in the church and
churchyard of St. Laurens, that habit might be compared to a structure
riven by a thunderbolt. It was shattered, but stones enough stood to
found a similar habit on; to look on her as dead to him.

And by severe subdivision of his time and thoughts, by unceasing prayers
and manual labour, he did in about three months succeed in benumbing the
earthly half of his heart.

But lo! within a day or two of this first symptom of mental peace
returning slowly, there descended upon his mind a horrible despondency.

Words cannot utter it, for words never yet painted a likeness of
despair. Voices seemed to whisper in his ear, "Kill thyself! kill! kill!
kill!"

And he longed to obey the voices, for life was intolerable.

He wrestled with his dark enemy with prayers and tears; he prayed God
but to vary his temptation. "Oh let mine enemy have power to scourge me
with red-hot whips, to tear me leagues and leagues over rugged places
by the hair of my head, as he has served many a holy hermit, that yet
baffled him at last; to fly on me like a raging lion; to gnaw me with
a serpent's fangs; any pain, any terror, but this horrible gloom of the
soul that shuts me from all light of Thee and of the saints."

And now a freezing thought crossed him. What if the triumphs of the
powers of darkness over Christian souls in desert places had been
suppressed, and only their defeats recorded, or at least in full; for
dark hints were scattered about antiquity that now first began to grin
at him with terrible meaning.

"THEY WANDERED IN THE DESERT AND PERISHED BY SERPENTS," said an ancient
father of hermits that went into solitude, "and were seen no more." And
another at a more recent epoch wrote: Vertuntur ad melancholiam: "they
turn to gloomy madness." These two statements, were they not one? for
the ancient fathers never spoke with regret of the death of the body.
No, the hermits so lost were perished souls, and the serpents were
diabolical (2) thoughts, the natural brood of solitude.

St. Jerome went into the desert with three companions; one fled in the
first year, two died; how? The single one that lasted was a gigantic
soul with an iron body.

The cotemporary who related this made no comment, expressed no wonder,
What, then, if here was a glimpse of the true proportion in every age,
and many souls had always been lost in solitude for one gigantic mind
and iron body that survived this terrible ordeal.

The darkened recluse now cast his despairing eyes over antiquity to see
what weapons the Christian arsenal contained that might befriend him.
The greatest of all was prayer. Alas! it was a part of his malady to
be unable to pray with true fervour. The very system of mechanical
supplication he had for months carried out so severely by rule had
rather checked than fostered his power of originating true prayer.

He prayed louder than ever, but the heart hung back cold and gloomy, and
let the words go up alone.

"Poor wingless prayers," he cried, "you will not get half-way to
heaven."

A fiend of this complexion had been driven out of King Saul by music.

Clement took up the hermit's psaltery, and with much trouble mended the
strings and tuned it.

No, he could not play it. His soul was so out of tune. The sounds jarred
on it, and made him almost mad.

"Ah, wretched me!" he cried; "Saul had a saint to play to him. He was
not alone with the spirits of darkness; but here is no sweet bard of
Israel to play to me; I, lonely, with crushed heart, on which a black
fiend sitteth mountain high, must make the music to uplift that heart
to heaven; it may not be." And he grovelled on the earth weeping and
tearing his hair.

VERTEBATUR AD MELANCHOLIAM.

     (1) It requires nowadays a strong effort of the imagination
     to realize the effect on poor people who had never seen them
     before of such sentences as this

     "Blessed are the poor" etc.

     (2) The primitive writer was so interpreted by others
     besides Clement; and in particular by Peter of Blois, a
     divine of the twelfth century, whose comment is noteworthy,
     as he himself was a forty-year hermit.



CHAPTER XCIII

One day as he lay there sighing and groaning, prayerless, tuneless,
hopeless, a thought flashed into his mind. What he had done for the
poor and the wayfarer, he would do for himself. He would fill his den of
despair with the name of God and the magic words of holy writ, and the
pious, prayerful consolations of the Church.

Then, like Christian at Apollyon's feet, he reached his hand suddenly
out and caught, not his sword, for he had none, but peaceful labour's
humbler weapon, his chisel, and worked with it as if his soul depended
on his arm.

They say that Michael Angelo in the next generation used to carve
statues, not like our timid sculptors, by modelling the work in clay,
and then setting a mechanic to chisel it, but would seize the block,
conceive the image, and at once, with mallet and steel, make the marble
chips fly like mad about him, and the mass sprout into form. Even so
Clement drew no lines to guide his hand. He went to his memory for the
gracious words, and then dashed at his work and eagerly graved them in
the soft stone, between working and fighting.

He begged his visitors for candle ends, and rancid oil.

"Anything is good enough for me," he said, "if 'twill but burn." So at
night the cave glowed afar off like a blacksmith's forge, through the
window and the gaping chinks of the rude stone door, and the rustics
beholding crossed themselves and suspected deviltries, and within the
holy talismans, one after another, came upon the walls, and the sparks
and the chips flew day and night, night and day, as the soldier of
Solitude and of the Church plied, with sighs and groans, his bloodless
weapon, between working and fighting.

Kyrie Eleison.

Christe Eleison.

{ton Satanan suntripson upo tous pothas ymwn}(1)

Sursum Corda.(2)

Deus Refugium nostrum et virtus.(3)

Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi miserere mihi.(4)

Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, miserere nobis.(5)

Ab infestationibus Daemonum, a ventura ira, a damnatione perpetua.
Libera nos Domine.(6)

Deus, qui miro ordine Angelorum ministeria, etc, (the whole collect).(7)

Quem quaerimus adjutorem nisi te Domine qui pro peccatis nostris juste
irascaris? (8)

Sancte Deus, Sancte fortis, Sancte et misericors Salvator, amarae morti
ne tradas nos.

And underneath the great crucifix, which was fastened to the wall, he
graved this from Augustine:

O anima Christiana, respice vulnera patientis, sanguinem morientis,
pretium redemptionis. Haec quanta sint cogitate, et in statera mentis
vestrae appendite, ut totus vobis figatur in corde, qui pro vobis totus
fixus est in cruce. Nam si passio Christi ad memoriam revocetur, nihil
est tam durum quod non aequo animo toleretur.

Which may be thus rendered: O Christian soul, look on the wounds of
the suffering One, the blood of the dying One, the price paid for our
redemption! These things, oh, think how great they be, and weigh them in
the balance of thy mind: that He may be wholly nailed to thy heart,
who for thee was all nailed unto the cross. For do but call to mind the
sufferings of Christ, and there is nought on earth too hard to endure
with composure.

Soothed a little, a very little, by the sweet and pious words he was
raising all round him, and weighed down with watching and working night
and day, Clement one morning sank prostrate with fatigue, and a deep
sleep overpowered him for many hours. Awaking quietly, he heard a little
cheep; he opened his eyes, and lo! upon his breviary, which was on a low
stool near his feet, ruffling all his feathers with a single pull, and
smoothing them as suddenly, and cocking his bill this way and that with
a vast display of cunning purely imaginary, perched a robin redbreast.

Clement held his breath.

He half closed his eyes lest they should frighten the airy guest.

Down came robin on the floor.

When there he went through his pantomime of astuteness; and then,
pim, pim, pim, with three stiff little hops, like a ball of worsted on
vertical wires, he was on the hermit's bare foot. On this eminence he
swelled and contracted again, with ebb and flow of feathers; but Clement
lost this, for he quite closed his eyes and scarce drew his breath in
fear of frightening and losing his visitor. He was content to feel the
minute claw on his foot. He could but just feel it, and that by help of
knowing it was there.

Presently a little flirt with two little wings, and the feathered
busybody was on the breviary again.

Then Clement determined to try and feed this pretty little fidget
without frightening it away. But it was very difficult.

He had a piece of bread within reach, but how get at it? I think he was
five minutes creeping his hand up to that bread, and when there he must
not move his arm.

He slily got a crumb between a finger and thumb and shot it as boys do
marbles, keeping the hand quite still.

Cockrobin saw it fall near him, and did sagacity, but moved not.

When another followed, and then another, he popped down and caught up
one of the crumbs, but not quite understanding this mystery fled with
it, for more security, to an eminence; to wit, the hermit's knee.

And so the game proceeded till a much larger fragment than usual rolled
along.

Here was a prize. Cockrobin pounced on it, bore it aloft, and fled so
swiftly into the world with it, the cave resounded with the buffeted
air.

"Now, bless thee, sweet bird," sighed the stricken solitary; "thy wings
are music, and thou a feathered ray camedst to light my darkened soul."

And from that to his orisons, and then to his tools with a little bit of
courage, and this was his day's work:

     Veni, Creator Spiritus,
     Mentes tuorem visita,
     Imple superna gratia
     Quae tu creasti pectora

     Accende lumen sensibus,
     Mentes tuorum visita,
     Infirma nostri corporis,
     Virtute firmans perpeti.

And so the days rolled on; and the weather got colder, and Clement's
heart got warmer, and despondency was rolling away; and by-and-by,
somehow or another, it was gone. He had outlived it.

It had come like a cloud, and it went like one.

And presently all was reversed; his cell seemed illuminated with joy.
His work pleased him; his prayers were full of unction; his psalms of
praise. Hosts of little birds followed their crimson leader, and flying
from snow, and a parish full of Cains, made friends one after another
with Abel; fast friends. And one keen frosty night as he sang the
praises of God to his tuneful psaltery, and his hollow cave rang forth
the holy psalmody upon the night, as if that cave itself was Tubal's
surrounding shell, or David's harp, he heard a clear whine, not
unmelodious; it became louder and less in tune. He peeped through
the chinks of his rude door, and there sat a great red wolf moaning
melodiously with his nose high in the air.

Clement was rejoiced. "My sins are going," he cried, "and the creatures
of God are owning me, one after another." And in a burst of enthusiasm
he struck up the laud:

"Praise Him all ye creatures of His!

"Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord."

And all the time he sang the wolf bayed at intervals.

But above all he seemed now to be drawing nearer to that celestial
intercourse which was the sign and the bliss of the true hermit; for he
had dreams about the saints and angels, so vivid, they were more like
visions. He saw bright figures clad in woven snow. They bent on him eyes
lovelier than those of the antelope's he had seen at Rome, and fanned
him with broad wings hued like the rainbow, and their gentle voices bade
him speed upon his course.

He had not long enjoyed this felicity when his dreams began to take
another and a strange complexion. He wandered with Fra Colonna over the
relics of antique nations, and the friar was lame and had a staff,
and this staff he waved over the mighty ruins, and were they Egyptian,
Greek, or Roman, straightway the temples and palaces, whose wrecks they
were, rose again like an exhalation, and were thronged with the famous
dead. Songsters that might have eclipsed both Apollo and his rival
poured forth their lays; women, god-like in form, and draped like
Minerva, swam round the marble courts in voluptuous but easy and
graceful dances. Here sculptors carved away amidst admiring pupils, and
forms of supernatural beauty grew out of Parian marble in a quarter of
an hour; and grave philosophers conversed on high and subtle matters,
with youth listening reverently; it was a long time ago. And still
beneath all this wonderful panorama a sort of suspicion or expectation
lurked in the dreamer's mind. "This is a prologue, a flourish, there is
something behind; something that means me no good, something mysterious,
awful."

And one night that the wizard Colonna had transcended himself, he
pointed with his stick, and there was a swallowing up of many great
ancient cities, and the pair stood on a vast sandy plain with a huge
crimson sun sinking to rest, There were great palm-trees; and there
were bulrush hives, scarce a man's height, dotted all about to the sandy
horizon, and the crimson sun.

"These are the anchorites of the Theban desert," said Colonna calmly;
"followers not of Christ and His apostles, and the great fathers, but
of the Greek pupils of the Egyptian pupils of the Brachmans and
Gymnosophists."

And Clement thought that he burned to go and embrace the holy men and
tell them his troubles, and seek their advice. But he was tied by the
feet somehow, and could not move, and the crimson sun sank, and it got
dusk, and the hives scarce visible, And Colonna's figure became shadowy
and shapeless, but his eyes glowed ten times brighter; and this thing
all eyes spoke and said: "Nay, let them be, a pack of fools I see how
dismal it all is." Then with a sudden sprightliness, "But I hear one of
them has a manuscript of Petronius, on papyrus; I go to buy it; farewell
for ever, for ever, for ever."

And it was pitch dark, and a light came at Clement's back like a gentle
stroke, a glorious roseate light. It warmed as well as brightened. It
loosened his feet from the ground; he turned round, and there, her face
irradiated with sunshine, and her hair glittering like the gloriola of a
saint, was Margaret Brandt.

She blushed and smiled and cast a look of ineffable tenderness on him,
"Gerard," she murmured, "be whose thou wilt by day, but at night be
mine!"

Even as she spoke, the agitation of seeing her so suddenly awakened him,
and he found himself lying trembling from head to foot.

That radiant figure and mellow voice seemed to have struck his nightly
keynote.

Awake he could pray, and praise, and worship God; he was master of his
thoughts. But if he closed his eyes in sleep, Margaret, or Satan in her
shape, beset him, a seeming angel of light. He might dream of a thousand
different things, wide as the poles asunder, ere he woke the imperial
figure was sure to come and extinguish all the rest in a moment, stellas
exortus uti aetherius sol; for she came glowing with two beauties never
before united, an angel's radiance and a woman's blushes.

Angels cannot blush. So he knew it was a fiend.

He was alarmed, but not so much surprised as at the demon's last
artifice. From Anthony to Nicholas of the Rock scarce hermit that had
not been thus beset; sometimes with gay voluptuous visions, sometimes
with lovely phantoms, warm, tangible, and womanly without, demons
within, nor always baffled even by the saints. Witness that "angel form
with a devil's heart" that came hanging its lovely head, like a bruised
flower, to St. Macarius, with a feigned tale, and wept, and wept, and
wept, and beguiled him first of his tears and then of half his virtue.

But with the examples of Satanic power and craft had come down copious
records of the hermits' triumphs and the weapons by which they had
conquered.

Domandum est Corpus; the body must be tamed; this had been their
watchword for twelve hundred years. It was a tremendous war-cry; for
they called the earthly affections, as well as appetites, body, and
crushed the whole heart through the suffering and mortified flesh.

Clement then said to himself that the great enemy of man had retired
but to spring with more effect, and had allowed him a few days of
true purity and joy only to put him off his guard against the soft
blandishments he was pouring over the soul that had survived the
buffeting of his black wings. He applied himself to tame the body, he
shortened his sleep, lengthened his prayers, and increased his severe
temperance to abstinence. Hitherto, following the ordinary rule, he had
eaten only at sunset. Now he ate but once in forty-eight hours, drinking
a little water every day.

On this the visions became more distinct.

Then he flew to a famous antidote, to "the grand febrifuge" of
anchorites--cold water.

He found the deepest part of the stream that ran by his cell; it rose
not far off at a holy well; and clearing the bottom of the large stones,
made a hole where he could stand in water to the chin, and fortified by
so many examples, he sprang from his rude bed upon the next diabolical
assault, and entered the icy water.

It made him gasp and almost shriek with the cold. It froze his marrow.
"I shall die," he cried, "I shall die; but better this than fire
eternal."

And the next day he was so stiff in all his joints he could not move,
and he seemed one great ache. And even in sleep he felt that his very
bones were like so many raging teeth, till the phantom he dreaded came
and gave one pitying smile, and all the pain was gone.

Then, feeling that to go into the icy water again, enfeebled by fasts
as he was, might perhaps carry the guilt of suicide, he scourged himself
till the blood ran, and so lay down smarting. And when exhaustion began
to blunt the smart down to a throb, that moment the present was away,
and the past came smiling back. He sat with Margaret at the duke's
feast, the minstrels played divinely, and the purple fountains gushed.
Youth and love reigned in each heart, and perfumed the very air.

Then the scene shifted, and they stood at the altar together man and
wife. And no interruption this time, and they wandered hand in hand, and
told each other their horrible dreams. As for him, "he had dreamed she
was dead, and he was a monk; and really the dream had been so vivid and
so full of particulars that only his eyesight could even now convince
him it was only a dream, and they were really one."

