get dirt on us. As we went forward we met one or two of the sailors from
the forecastle, who wanted to know about the dust that was falling on
the ship. Then we found that the grayish-looking ash was sifting all
over the ship, both forward and aft.


ASHES RAINED ON THE SHIP


"Every moment the ashes rained down all over the ship, and at the same
time grew thicker. A few moments later, the lookout called down that we
were running into a fog-bank dead ahead. Fog banks in that section are
unheard of at nine o'clock in the morning at this season, and we were
more than a hundred miles from land, and what could fog and sand be
doing there.

"Before we knew it, we went into the fog, which proved to be a big
dense bank of this same sand, and it rained down on us from every side.
Ventilators were quickly brought to their places, and later even the
hatches were battened down. The dust became suffocating, and the men at
times had all they could do to keep from choking. What the stuff was we
could not at first conjecture, or rather, we didn't have much time to
speculate on it, for we had to get our ship in shape to withstand we
hardly knew what.

"At first we thought that the sand must have been blown from shore. Then
we decided that if the Captain's figures were right we wouldn't be near
enough to shore to have sand blow on us, and as we had just cleared
Barbados, we knew that the Captain's figures had to be right.

"Just as the storm of sand was at its height, Fourth Engineer Wild was
nearly suffocated by it, but was easily revived. About this time it
became so dark that we found it necessary to start up the electric
lights, and it was not until after we got clear from the fog that
we turned the current off. In the meantime they had burned from nine
o'clock in the morning until after two in the afternoon.


THE ENGINE BECAME CHOKED


"Then there was another anxious moment shortly after nine o'clock. Third
Engineer Rennie had been running the donkey engine, when suddenly it
choked, and when he finally got it clear from the sand or ashes, he
found the valves were all cut out, and then it was we discovered that
it was not sand, but some sort of a composition that seemed to cut steel
like emery. Then came the danger that it would get into the valves of
the engine and cut them out, and for several moments all hands scurried
about and helped make the engine room tight, and even then the ash
drifted in and kept all the engine room force wiping the engines clear
of it.

"Toward three o'clock in the afternoon of Friday we were practically
clear of the sand, but at eleven o'clock that night we ran into a second
bank of it, though not as bad as the first. We made some experiments,
and found the stuff was superior to emery dust. It cut deeper and
quicker, and only about half as much was required to do the work. We
made up our minds we would keep what came on board, as it was better
than the emery dust and much cheaper, so we gathered it up.

"That night there were more of the same electric phenomena toward
Martinique, but it was not until we got into St. Lucia, where we saw the
Roddam, that we learned of the terrible disaster at St. Pierre, and then
we knew that our sand was lava dust."

The volcanic ash which fell on the decks of the Horace was ground as
fine as rifle powder, and was much finer than that which covered the
decks of the Etona.

Returning to the stories told by officers of the Roraima, of which a
number have been given, it seems desirable to add here the narrative of
Ellery S. Scott, the mate of the ruined ship, since it gives a vivid and
striking account of his personal experience of the frightful disaster,
with many details of interest not related by others.


MATE SCOTT'S GRAPHIC STORY


"We got to St. Pierre in the Roraima," began Mr. Scott, "at 6.30 o'clock
on Thursday morning. That's the morning the mountain and the town and
the ships were all sent to hell in a minute.

"All hands had had breakfast. I was standing on the fo'c's'l head trying
to make out the marks on the pipes of a ship 'way out and heading for
St. Lucia. I wasn't looking at the mountain at all. But I guess the
captain was, for he was on the bridge, and the last time I heard him
speak was when he shouted, 'Heave up, Mr. Scott; heave up.' I gave the
order to the men, and I think some of them did jump to get the anchor
up, but nobody knows what really happened for the next fifteen minutes.
I turned around toward the captain and then I saw the mountain.

"Did you ever see the tide come into the Bay of Fundy. It doesn't sneak
in a little at a time as it does 'round here. It rolls in in waves.
That's the way the cloud of fire and mud and white-hot stones rolled
down from that volcano over the town and over the ships. It was on us
in almost no time, but I saw it and in the same glance I saw our captain
bracing himself to meet it on the bridge. He was facing the fire cloud
with both hands gripped hard to the bridge rail, his legs apart and his
knees braced back stiff. I've seen him brace himself that same way many
a time in a tough sea with the spray going mast-head high and green
water pouring along the decks.

"I saw the captain, I say, at the same instant I saw that ruin coming
down on us. I don't know why, but that last glimpse of poor Muggah on
his bridge will stay with me just as long as I remember St. Pierre and
that will be long enough.

"In another instant it was all over for him. As I was looking at him he
was all ablaze. He reeled and fell on the bridge with his face toward
me. His mustache and eyebrows were gone in a jiffy. His hat had gone,
and his hair was aflame, and so were his clothes from head to foot.
I knew he was conscious when he fell, by the look in his eyes, but he
didn't make a sound.

"That all happened a long way inside of half a minute; then something
new happened. When the wave of fire was going over us, a tidal wave of
the sea came out from the shore and did the rest. That wall of rushing
water was so high and so solid that it seemed to rise up and join the
smoke and flame above. For an instant we could see nothing but the water
and the flame.

"That tidal wave picked the ship up like a canoe and then smashed her.
After one list to starboard the ship righted, but the masts, the bridge,
the funnel and all the upper works had gone overboard.

"I had saved myself from fire by jamming a metal ventilator cover over
my head and jumping from the fo'c's'l head. Two St. Kitts negroes saved
me from the water by grabbing me by the legs and pulling me down into
the fo'c's'l after them. Before I could get up three men tumbled in on
top of me. Two of them were dead.

"Captain Muggah went overboard, still clinging to the fragments of his
wrecked bridge. Daniel Taylor, the ship's cooper, and a Kitts native
jumped overboard to save him. Taylor managed to push the captain on to
a hatch that had floated off from us and then they swam back to the ship
for more assistance, but nothing could be done for the captain. Taylor
wasn't sure he was alive. The last we saw of him or his dead body it was
drifting shoreward on that hatch.

"Well, after staying in the fo'c's'l about twenty minutes I went out on
deck. There were just four of us left aboard who could do anything.
The four were Thompson, Dan Taylor, Quashee, and myself. It was still
raining fire and hot rocks and you could hardly see a ship's length for
dust and ashes, but we could stand that. There were burning men and some
women and two or three children lying around the deck. Not just burned,
but burning, then, when we got to them. More than half the ship's
company had been killed in that first rush of flame. Some had rolled
overboard when the tidal wave came and we never saw so much as their
bodies. The cook was burned to death in his galley. He had been paring
potatoes for dinner and what was left of his right hand held the shank
of his potato knife. The wooden handle was in ashes. All that happened
to a man in less than a minute. The donkey engineman was killed on deck
sitting in front of his boiler. We found parts of some bodies--a hand,
or an arm or a leg. Below decks there were some twenty alive.

"The ship was on fire, of course, what was left of it. The stumps of
both masts were blazing. Aft she was like a furnace, but forward the
flames had not got below deck, so we four carried those who were still
alive on deck into the fo'c's'l. All of them were burned and most of
them were half strangled.

"One boy, a passenger and just a little shaver [the four-year-old son of
the late Clement Stokes, above spoken of] was picked up naked. His hair
and all his clothing had been burned off, but he was alive. We rolled
him in a blanket and put him in a sailor's bunk. A few minutes later we
looked at him and he was dead.

"My own son's gone, too. It had been his trick at lookout ahead during
the dog watch that morning, when we were making for St. Pierre, so I
supposed at first when the fire struck us that he was asleep in his bunk
and safe. But he wasn't. Nobody could tell me where he was. I don't know
whether he was burned to death or rolled overboard and drowned. He was
a likely boy. He had been several voyages with me and would have been a
master some day. He used to say he'd make me mate.

"After getting all hands that had any life left in them below and
'tended to the best we could, the four of us that were left half way
ship-shape started in to fight the fire. We had case oil stowed forward.
Thanks to that tidal wave that cleared our decks there wasn't much left
to burn, so we got the fire down so's we could live on board with it for
several hours more and then the four turned to to knock a raft together
out of what timber and truck we could find below. Our boats had gone
overboard with the masts and funnel.


PREPARED TO TRUST TO LUCK


"We made that raft for something over thirty that were alive. We put
provisions on for two days and rigged up a make-shift mast and sail,
for we intended to go to sea. We were only three boats' length from the
shore, but the shore was hell itself. We intended to put straight out
and trust to luck that the Korona, that was about due at St. Pierre,
would pick us up. But we did not have to risk the raft, for about 3
o'clock in the afternoon, when we were almost ready to put the raft
overboard, the Suchet came along and took us all off. We thought for a
minute just after we were wrecked that we were to get help from a ship
that passed us. We burned blue lights, but she kept on. We learned
afterward that she was the Roddam."

Soundings made off Martinique after the explosion showed that earthquake
effects of much importance had taken place under the sea bottom, which
had been lifted in some places and had sunk in others. While deep
crevices had been formed on the land, a still greater effect had
seemingly been produced beneath the water. During the explosion the sea
withdrew several hundred feet from its shore line, and then came back
steaming with fury; this indicating a lift and fall of the ocean bed off
the isle. Soundings made subsequently near the island found in one place
a depth of 4,000 feet where before it had been only 600 feet deep. The
French Cable Company, which was at work trying to repair the cables
broken by the eruption, found the bottom of the Caribbean Sea so changed
as to render the old charts useless.

New charts will need to be made for future navigation. The changes
in sea levels were not confined to the immediate centre of volcanic
activity, but extended as far north as Porto Rico, and it was believed
that the seismic wave would be found to have altered the ocean bed round
Jamaica. Vessels plying between St. Thomas, Martinique, St. Lucia and
other islands found it necessary to heave the lead while many miles at
sea.

It is estimated that the sea had encroached from ten feet to two miles
along the coast of St. Vincent near Georgetown, and that a section on
the north of the island had dropped into the sea. Soundings showed
seven fathoms where before the eruption there were thirty-six fathoms of
water. Vessels that endeavored to approach St. Vincent toward the north
reported that it was impossible to get nearer than eight miles to
the scene of the catastrophe, and that at that distance the ocean was
seriously perturbed as from a submarine volcano, boiling and hissing
continually.

In this connection the remarkable experience reported by the officers
of the Danish steamship Nordby, on the day preceding the eruption, is of
much interest, as seeming to show great convulsions of the sea bottom
at a point several hundred miles from Martinique. The following is the
story told by Captain Eric Lillien-skjold:


THE STRANGE EXPERIENCE OF THE "NORDBY"


"On May 5th," the captain said, "we touched at St. Michael's for water.
We had had an easy voyage from Girgenti, in Sicily, and we wanted to
finish an easy run here. We left St. Michael's on the same day. Nothing
worth while talking about occurred until two days afterward--Wednesday,
May 7th.

"We were plodding along slowly that day. About noon I took the bridge
to make an observation. It seemed to be hotter than ordinary. I shed my
coat and vest and got into what little shade there was. As I worked it
grew hotter and hotter. I didn't know what to make of it. Along about
2 o'clock in the afternoon it was so hot that all hands got to talking
about it. We reckoned that something queer was coming off, but none of
us could explain what it was. You could almost see the pitch softening
in the seams.

"Then, as quick as you could toss a biscuit over its rail, the Nordby
dropped--regularly dropped--three or four feet down into the sea. No
sooner did it do this than big waves, that looked like they were coming
from all directions at once, began to smash against our sides. This was
queerer yet, because the water a minute before was as smooth as I ever
saw it. I had all hands piped on deck and we battened down everything
loose to make ready for a storm. And we got it all right--the strangest
storm you ever heard tell of.

"There was something wrong with the sun that afternoon. It grew red and
then dark red and then, about a quarter after 2, it went out of sight
altogether. The day got so dark that you couldn't see half a ship's
length ahead of you. We got our lamps going, and put on our oilskins,
ready for a hurricane. All of a sudden there came a sheet of lightning
that showed up the whole tumbling sea for miles and miles. We sort of
ducked, expecting an awful crash of thunder, but it didn't come. There
was no sound except the big waves pounding against our sides. There
wasn't a breath of wind.

"Well, sir, at that minute there began the most exciting time I've ever
been through, and I've been on every sea on the map for twenty-five
years. Every second there'd be waves 15 or 20 feet high, belting us
head-on, stern-on and broadside, all at once. We could see them coming,
for without any stop at all flash after flash of lightning was blazing
all about us.

"Something else we could see, too. Sharks! There were hundreds of them
on all sides, jumping up and down in the water. Some of them jumped
clear out of it. And sea birds! A flock of them, squawking and crying,
made for our rigging and perched there. They seemed like they were
scared to death. But the queerest part of it all was the water itself.
It was hot--not so hot that our feet could not stand it when it washed
over the deck, but hot enough to make us think that it had been heated
by some kind of a fire.

"Well that sort of thing went on hour after hour. The waves, the
lightning, the hot water and the sharks, and all the rest of the odd
things happening, frightened the crew out of their wits. Some of them
prayed out loud--I guess the first time they ever did in their lives.
Some Frenchmen aboard kept running around and yelling, 'Cest le dernier
jour!' (This is the last day.) We were all worried. Even the officers
began to think that the world was coming to an end. Mighty strange
things happen on the sea, but this topped them all.

"I kept to the bridge all night. When the first hour of morning came
the storm was still going on. We were all pretty much tired out by that
time, but there was no such thing as trying to sleep. The waves still
were batting us around and we didn't know whether we were one mile or
a thousand miles from shore. At 2 o'clock in the morning all the queer
goings on stopped just the way they began--all of a sudden. We lay to
until daylight; then we took our reckonings and started off again. We
were about 700 miles off Cape Henlopen.

"No, sir; you couldn't get me through a thing like that again for
$10,000. None of us was hurt, and the old Nordby herself pulled through
all right, but I'd sooner stay ashore than see waves without wind and
lightning without thunder."


FIERY STREAM CONTAINED POISONOUS GASES


Careful inspection showed that the fiery stream which so completely
destroyed St. Pierre must have been composed of poisonous gases, which
instantly suffocated every one who inhaled them, and of other gases
burning furiously, for nearly all the victims had their hands covering
their mouths, or were in some other attitude showing that they had
perished from suffocation.

It is believed that Mont Pelee threw off a great gasp of some
exceedingly heavy and noxious gas, something akin to firedamp, which
settled upon the city and rendered the inhabitants insensible. This was
followed by the sheet of flame that swept down the side of the mountain.
This theory is sustained by the experience of the survivors who were
taken from the ships in the harbor, as they say that their first
experience was one of faintness.

The dumb animals were wiser than man, and early took warning of the
storm of fire which Mont Pelee was storing up to hurl upon the island.
Even before the mountain began to rumble, late in April, live stock
became uneasy, and at times were almost uncontrollable. Cattle lowed in
the night. Dogs howled and sought the company of their masters, and when
driven forth they gave every evidence of fear.

Wild animals disappeared from the vicinity of Mont Pelee. Even the
snakes, which at ordinary times are found in great numbers near the
volcano, crawled away. Birds ceased singing and left the trees that
shaded the sides of Pelee. A great fear seemed to be upon the island,
and though it was shared by the human inhabitants, they alone neglected
to protect themselves.

Of the villages in the vicinity of St. Pierre only one escaped, the
others suffering the fate of the city. The fortunate one was Le Carbet,
on the south, which escaped uninjured, the flood of lava stopping when
within two hundred feet of the town. Morne Rouge, a beautiful summer
resort, frequented by the people of the island during the hot season as
a place of recreation, also escaped. In the height of the season several
thousand people gathered there, though at the time of the explosion
there were but a few hundred. Though located on an elevation between the
city and the crater, it was by great good fortune saved.

The Governor of Martinique, Mr. Mouttet, whose precautions to prevent
the people fleeing from the city aided to make the work of death
complete, was himself among the victims of the burning mountain. With
him in this fate was Colonel Dain, commander of the troops who formed a
cordon round the doomed city.



CHAPTER XXIX.

St. Vincent Island and Mont Soufriere in 1812.


Among all the islands of the Caribbees St. Vincent is unique in natural
wonders and beauties. Situated about ninety-five miles west of Barbados,
it has a length of eighteen and a width of eleven miles, the whole mass
being largely composed of a single peak which rises from the ocean's
bed. From north to south volcanic hills traverse its length, their
ridges intersected by fertile and beautiful valleys.

A ridge of mountains crosses the island, dividing it into eastern and
western parts. Kingstown, the capital, a town of 8,000 inhabitants, is
on the southward side and extends along the shores of a beautiful
bay, with mountains gradually rising behind it in the form of a vast
amphitheatre. Three streets, broad and lined with good houses, run
parallel to the water-front. There are many other intersecting highways,
some of which lead back to the foothills, from which good roads ascend
the mountains.

The majority of the houses have red tile roofing and a goodly number of
them are of stone, one story high, with thick walls after the Spanish
style--the same types of houses that were in St. Pierre and which
are not unlike the old Roman houses which in all stages of ruin and
semi-preservation are found in Pompeii to this day.

Behind the general group of the houses of the town loom the Governor's
residence and the buildings of the botanical gardens which overlook the
town.

Kingstown is the trading centre and the town of importance in the
island. It contains the churches and chapels of five Protestant
denominations and a number of excellent schools. Away from Kingstown,
and the smaller settlement of Georgetown, the population is almost
wholly rural, occupying scattered villages which consist of negro huts
clustering around a few substantial buildings or of cabins grouped about
old plantation buildings somewhat after the ante-bellum fashion in our
own Southern States.

One of the tragedies of the West Indies was the sinking of old Port
Royal, the resort of buccaneers, in 1692. The harbor of Kingstown is
commonly supposed to cover the site of the old settlement. There is
a tradition that a buoy for many years was attached to the spire of a
sunken church in order to warn mariners. Three thousand persons perished
in the disaster.


DESCENDANTS OF ORIGINAL INDIAN POPULATION


The northern portion of the island, that desolated by the recent
volcanic eruption, was inhabited by people living in the manner
just described, the great majority of them being negroes. The total
population of the island is about 45,000, of whom 30,000 are Africans
and about 3,000 Europeans, the remainder being nearly all Asiatics.
There are, or rather were, a number of Caribs, the descendants of the
original warlike Indian population of these islands. Many of these live
in St. Vincent, though there are others in Dominico. As their residence
was in the northern section of the island, the volcano seems to have
completed the work for the Caribs of this island which the Spaniard long
ago began. These Caribs were really half-breds, having amalgamated with
the negroes. Many of the blacks own land of their own, raising arrow
root, which, since the decay of the sugar industry, is the chief export.

In an island only eighteen miles long by eleven broad there is not room
for any distinctly marked mountain range. The whole of St. Vincent, in
fact, is a fantastic tumble of hills, culminating in the volcanic ridge
which runs lengthwise of the oval-shaped island. The culminating peak of
the great volcanic mass, for St. Vincent is nothing more, is Mont Garou,
of which La Soufriere is a sort of lofty excrescence in the northwest,
4,048 feet high, and flanking the main peak at some distance away.

It may be said that all the volcanic mountains in this part of the West
Indies have what the people call a "soufriere"--a "sulphur pit," or
"sulphur crater"--the name coming, as in the case of past disturbances
of Mont Pelee, from the strong stench of sulphuretted hydrogen which
issues from them when the volcano becomes agitated.

In 1812 it was La Soufriere adjacent to Mont Garou which broke loose on
the island of St. Vincent, and it is the same Soufriere which again has
devastated the island and has bombarded Kingstown with rocks, lava and
ashes.

