  But answer me with truth. How many days
  Wouldst thou assign to the funereal rites                      820
  Of noble Hector, for so long I mean
  Myself to rest, and keep the host at home?
    Then thus the ancient King godlike replied.
  If thou indeed be willing that we give
  Burial to noble Hector, by an act                              825
  So generous, O Achilles! me thou shalt
  Much gratify; for we are shut, thou know'st,
  In Ilium close, and fuel must procure
  From Ida's side remote; fear, too, hath seized
  On all our people. Therefore thus I say.                       830
  Nine days we wish to mourn him in the house;
  To his interment we would give the tenth,
  And to the public banquet; the eleventh
  Shall see us build his tomb; and on the twelfth
  (If war we must) we will to war again.                         835
    To whom Achilles, matchless in the race.
  So be it, ancient Priam! I will curb
  Twelve days the rage of war, at thy desire.[16]
    He spake, and at his wrist the right hand grasp'd
  Of the old sovereign, to dispel his fear.                      840
  Then in the vestibule the herald slept
  And Priam, prudent both, but Peleus' son
  In the interior tent, and at his side
  Briseis, with transcendent beauty adorn'd.
    Now all, all night, by gentle sleep subdued,                 845
  Both Gods and chariot-ruling warriors lay,
  But not the benefactor of mankind,
  Hermes; him sleep seized not, but deep he mused
  How likeliest from amid the Grecian fleet
  He might deliver by the guard unseen                           850
  The King of Ilium; at his head he stood
  In vision, and the senior thus bespake.
    Ah heedless and secure! hast thou no dread
  Of mischief, ancient King, that thus by foes
  Thou sleep'st surrounded, lull'd by the consent                855
  And sufferance of Achilles? Thou hast given
  Much for redemption of thy darling son,
  But thrice that sum thy sons who still survive
  Must give to Agamemnon and the Greeks
  For _thy_ redemption, should they know thee here.              860
    He ended; at the sound alarm'd upsprang
  The King, and roused his herald. Hermes yoked
  Himself both mules and steeds, and through the camp
  Drove them incontinent, by all unseen.
    Soon as the windings of the stream they reach'd,             865
  Deep-eddied Xanthus, progeny of Jove,
  Mercury the Olympian summit sought,
  And saffron-vested morn o'erspread the earth.
  They, loud lamenting, to the city drove
  Their steeds; the mules close follow'd with the dead.          870
  Nor warrior yet, nor cinctured matron knew
  Of all in Ilium aught of their approach,
  Cassandra sole except. She, beautiful
  As golden Venus, mounted on the height
  Of Pergamus, her father first discern'd,                       875
  Borne on his chariot-seat erect, and knew:
  The herald heard so oft in echoing Troy;
  Him also on his bier outstretch'd she mark'd,
  Whom the mules drew. Then, shrieking, through the streets
  She ran of Troy, and loud proclaim'd the sight.                880
  Ye sons of Ilium and ye daughters, haste,
  Haste all to look on Hector, if ye e'er
  With joy beheld him, while he yet survived,
  From fight returning; for all Ilium erst
  In him, and all her citizens rejoiced.                         885
    She spake. Then neither male nor female more
  In Troy remain'd, such sorrow seized on all.
  Issuing from the city-gate, they met
  Priam conducting, sad, the body home,
  And, foremost of them all, the mother flew                     890
  And wife of Hector to the bier, on which
  Their torn-off tresses with unsparing hands
  They shower'd, while all the people wept around.
  All day, and to the going down of day
  They thus had mourn'd the dead before the gates,               895
  Had not their Sovereign from his chariot-seat
  Thus spoken to the multitude around.
    Fall back on either side, and let the mules
  Pass on; the body in my palace once
  Deposited, ye then may weep your fill.                         900
    He said; they, opening, gave the litter way.
  Arrived within the royal house, they stretch'd
  The breathless Hector on a sumptuous bed,
  And singers placed beside him, who should chant
  The strain funereal; they with many a groan                    905
  The dirge began, and still, at every close,
  The female train with many a groan replied.
  Then, in the midst, Andromache white-arm'd
  Between her palms the dreadful Hector's head
  Pressing, her lamentation thus began.                          910
    [17]My hero! thou hast fallen in prime of life,
  Me leaving here desolate, and the fruit
  Of our ill-fated loves, a helpless child,
  Whom grown to manhood I despair to see.
  For ere that day arrive, down from her height                  915
  Precipitated shall this city fall,
  Since thou hast perish'd once her sure defence,
  Faithful protector of her spotless wives,
  And all their little ones. Those wives shall soon
  In Grecian barks capacious hence be borne,                     920
  And I among the rest. But thee, my child!
  Either thy fate shall with thy mother send
  Captive into a land where thou shalt serve
  In sordid drudgery some cruel lord,
  Or haply some Achaian here, thy hand                           925
  Seizing, shall hurl thee from a turret-top
  To a sad death, avenging brother, son,
  Or father by the hands of Hector slain;
  For he made many a Grecian bite the ground.
  Thy father, boy, bore never into fight                         930
  A milky mind, and for that self-same cause
  Is now bewail'd in every house of Troy.
  Sorrow unutterable thou hast caused
  Thy parents, Hector! but to me hast left
  Largest bequest of misery, to whom,                            935
  Dying, thou neither didst thy arms extend
  Forth from thy bed, nor gavest me precious word
  To be remember'd day and night with tears.
    So spake she weeping, whom her maidens all
  With sighs accompanied, and her complaint                      940
  Mingled with sobs Hecuba next began.
    Ah Hector! dearest to thy mother's heart
  Of all her sons, much must the Gods have loved
  Thee living, whom, though dead, they thus preserve.
  What son soever of our house beside                            945
  Achilles took, over the barren deep
  To Samos, Imbrus, or to Lemnos girt
  With rocks inhospitable, him he sold;
  But thee, by his dread spear of life deprived,
  He dragg'd and dragg'd around Patroclus' tomb,                 950
  As if to raise again his friend to life
  Whom thou hadst vanquish'd; yet he raised him not.
  But as for thee, thou liest here with dew
  Besprinkled, fresh as a young plant,[18] and more
  Resemblest some fair youth by gentle shafts                    955
  Of Phoebus pierced, than one in battle slain.
    So spake the Queen, exciting in all hearts
  Sorrow immeasurable, after whom
  Thus Helen, third, her lamentation pour'd.
    [19]Ah dearer far than all my brothers else                  960
  Of Priam's house! for being Paris' spouse,
  Who brought me (would I had first died!) to Troy,
  I call thy brothers mine; since forth I came
  From Sparta, it is now the twentieth year,
  Yet never heard I once hard speech from thee,                  965
  Or taunt morose, but if it ever chanced,
  That of thy father's house female or male
  Blamed me, and even if herself the Queen
  (For in the King, whate'er befell, I found
  Always a father) thou hast interposed                          970
  Thy gentle temper and thy gentle speech
  To soothe them; therefore, with the same sad drops
  Thy fate, oh Hector! and my own I weep;
  For other friend within the ample bounds
  Of Ilium have I none, nor hope to hear                         975
  Kind word again, with horror view'd by all.
    So Helen spake weeping, to whom with groans
  The countless multitude replied, and thus
  Their ancient sovereign next his people charged.
    Ye Trojans, now bring fuel home, nor fear                    980
  Close ambush of the Greeks; Achilles' self
  Gave me, at my dismission from his fleet,
  Assurance, that from hostile force secure
  We shall remain, till the twelfth dawn arise.
    All, then, their mules and oxen to the wains                 985
  Join'd speedily, and under Ilium's walls
  Assembled numerous; nine whole days they toil'd,
  Bringing much fuel home, and when the tenth
  Bright morn, with light for human kind, arose,
  Then bearing noble Hector forth, with tears                    990
  Shed copious, on the summit of the pile
  They placed him, and the fuel fired beneath.
    But when Aurora, daughter of the Dawn,
  Redden'd the east, then, thronging forth, all Troy
  Encompass'd noble Hector's pile around.                        995
  The whole vast multitude convened, with wine
  They quench'd the pile throughout, leaving no part
  Unvisited, on which the fire had seized.
  His brothers, next, collected, and his friends,
  His white bones, mourning, and with tears profuse             1000
  Watering their cheeks; then in a golden urn
  They placed them, which with mantles soft they veil'd
  Maeonian-hued, and, delving, buried it,
  And overspread with stones the spot adust.
  Lastly, short time allowing to the task,                      1005
  They heap'd his tomb, while, posted on all sides,
  Suspicious of assault, spies watch'd the Greeks.
  The tomb once heap'd, assembling all again
  Within the palace, they a banquet shared
  Magnificent, by godlike Priam given.                          1010

  Such burial the illustrious Hector found.[20]

                  *       *       *       *       *

[I cannot take my leave of this noble poem, without expressing how
much I am struck with this plain conclusion of it. It is like the exit
of a great man out of company whom he has entertained magnificently;
neither pompous nor familiar; not contemptuous, yet without much
ceremony. I recollect nothing, among the works of mere man, that
exemplifies so strongly the true style of great antiquity.]--TR.




                              FOOTNOTES


Footnotes for Book I:
1. "Latona's son and Jove's," was Apollo, the tutelary deity of the
   Dorians. The Dorians had not, however, at this early age, become
   the predominant race in Greece proper. They had spread along the
   eastern shores of the Archipelago into the islands, especially
   Crete, and had every where signalized themselves by the Temples of
   Apollo, of which there seems to have been many in and about Troy.
   These temples were schools of art, and prove the Dorians to have
   been both intellectual and powerful. Homer was an Ionian, and
   therefore not deeply acquainted with the nature of the Dorian god.
   But to a mind like his, the god of a people so cultivated, and
   associated with what was most grand in art, must have been an
   imposing being, and we find him so represented. Throughout the
   Iliad, he appears and acts with splendor and effect, but always
   against the Greeks from mere partiality to Hector. It would perhaps
   be too much to say, that in this partiality to Hector, we detect
   the spirit of the Dorian worship, the only Paganism of antiquity
   that tended to perfect the individual--Apollo being the expression
   of the moral harmony of the universe, and the great spirit of the
   Dorian culture being to make a perfect man, an incarnation of the
   {kosmos}. This Homer could only have known intuitively.

   In making Apollo author of the plague, he was confounded with
   Helios, which was frequent afterwards, but is not seen elsewhere in
   Homer. The arrows of Apollo were "silent as light," and their
   emblem the sun's rays. The analogies are multitudinous between the
   natural and intellectual sun; but Helios and Apollo were
   two.--E.P.P.

2. There is something exceedingly venerable in this appearance of the
   priest. He comes with the ensigns of the gods to whom he belongs,
   with the laurel wreath, to show that he was a suppliant, and a
   golden sceptre, which the ancients gave in particular to Apollo, as
   they did one of silver to Diana.

3. The art of this speech is remarkable. Chryses considers the army of
   Greeks, as made up of troops, partly from the kingdoms and partly
   from democracies, and therefore begins with a distinction that
   includes all. Then, as priest of Apollo, he prays that they may
   obtain the two blessings they most desire--the conquest of Troy and
   a safe return. As he names his petition, he offers an extraordinary
   ransom, and concludes with bidding them fear the god if they refuse
   it; like one who from his office seems to foretell their misery,
   and exhorts them to shun it. Thus he endeavors to work by the art
   of a general application, by religion, by interest, and the
   insinuation of danger.

4. Homer is frequently eloquent in his silence. Chryses says not a
   word in answer to the insults of Agamemnon, but walks pensively
   along the shore. The melancholy flowing of the verse admirably
   expresses the condition of the mournful and deserted father.

5. [So called on account of his having saved the people of Troas from
   a plague of mice, _sminthos_ in their language meaning a
   mouse.--TR.]

6. Apollo had temples at Chrysa, Tenedos, and Cilla, all of which lay
   round the bay of Troas. Mueller remarks, that "the temple actually
   stood in the situation referred to, and that the appellation of
   Smintheus was still preserved in the district. Thus far actual
   circumstances are embodied in the mythus. On the other hand, the
   action of the deity as such, is purely ideal, and can have no other
   foundation than the belief that Apollo sternly resents ill usage of
   his priests, and that too in the way here represented, viz., by
   sending plagues. This belief is in perfect harmony with the idea
   generally entertained of the power and agency of Apollo; and it is
   manifest that the idea placed in combination with certain events,
   gave birth to the story so far as relates to the god. We have not
   yet the means of ascertaining whether it is to be regarded as a
   historical tradition, or an invention, and must therefore leave
   that question for the present undecided."

7. The poet is careful to leave no prayer unanswered that has justice
   on its side. He who prays either kills his enemy, or has signs
   given him that he has been heard.

8. [For this singular line the Translator begs to apologize, by
   pleading the strong desire he felt to produce an English line, if
   possible, somewhat resembling in its effect the famous original
   one.

     {Deine de klange genet argyreoio bioio.}--TR.]

9. The plague in the Grecian camp was occasioned perhaps by immoderate
   heats and gross exhalations. Homer takes occasion from it, to open
   the scene with a beautiful allegory. He supposes that such
   afflictions are sent from Heaven for the punishment of evil
   actions; and because the sun was the principal agent, he says it
   was sent to punish Agamemnon for despising that god, and injuring
   his priest.

10. Hippocrates observes two things of plagues; that their cause is in
   the air, and that different animals are differently affected by
   them, according to their nature and nourishment. This philosophy is
   referred to the plagues here mentioned. First, the cause is in the
   air by means of the darts or beams of Apollo; second, the mules and
   dogs are said to die sooner than the men, partly from their natural
   quickness of smell, and partly from their feeding so near the earth
   whence the exhalations arise.

11: Juno, queen of Olympus, sides with the Grecians. Mr. Coleridge (in
   his disquisition upon the Prometheus of AEschylus, published in his
   Remains) shows very clearly by historical criticism, that Juno, in
   the Grecian religion, expressed the spirit of conservatism. Without
   going over his argument we assume it here, for Homer always
   attributes to Juno every thing that may be predicated of this
   principle. She is persistent, obstinate, acts from no idea, but
   often uses a superficial reasoning, and refers to Fate, with which
   she upbraids Jupiter. Jupiter is the intellectual power or Free
   Will, and by their union, or rather from their antagonism, the
   course of things proceeds with perpetual vicissitude, but with a
   great deal of life.--E.P.P.

12. Observe this Grecian priest. He has no political power, and
   commands little reverence. In Agamemnon's treatment of him, as well
   as Chryses, is seen the relation of the religion to the government.
   It was neither master nor slave.--E.P.P.

13. A district of Thessaly forming a part of the larger district of
   Phthiotis. Phthiotis, according to Strabo, included all the
   southern portion of that country as far as Mount OEta and the
   Maliac Gulf. To the west it bordered on Dolopia, and on the east
   reached the confines of Magnesia. Homer comprised within this
   extent of territory the districts of Phthia and Hellas properly so
   called, and, generally speaking, the dominions of Achilles,
   together with those of Protesilaus and Eurypylus.

14. {Kynopa}.

15. {meganaides}.

16 Agamemnon's anger is that of a lover, and Achilles' that of a
   warrior. Agamemnon speaks of Chryseis as a beauty whom he values
   too much to resign. Achilles treats Briseis as a slave, whom he is
   anxious to preserve in point of honor, and as a testimony of his
   glory. Hence he mentions her only as "his spoil," "the reward of
   war," etc.; accordingly he relinquishes her not in grief for a
   favorite whom he loses, but in sullenness for the injury done
   him.--DACIER.

17. Jupiter, in the disguise of an ant, deceived Eurymedusa, the
   daughter of Cleitos. Her son was for this reason called Myrmidon
   (from {myrmex}, an ant), and was regarded as the ancestor of the
   Myrmidons in Thessaly.--SMITH.

18. According to the belief of the ancients, the gods were supposed to
   have a peculiar light in their eyes. That Homer was not ignorant of
   this opinion appears from his use of it in other places.

19. Minerva is the goddess of the art of war rather than of war
   itself. And this fable of her descent is an allegory of Achilles
   restraining his wrath through his consideration of martial law and
   order. This law in that age, prescribed that a subordinate should
   not draw his sword upon the commander of all, but allowed a liberty
   of speech which appears to us moderns rather out of order.--E.P.P.

20. [The shield of Jupiter, made by Vulcan, and so called from its
   covering, which was the skin of the goat that suckled him.--TR.]

21. Homer magnifies the ambush as the boldest enterprise of war. They
   went upon those parties with a few only, and generally the most
   daring of the army, and on occasions of the greatest hazard, when
   the exposure was greater than in a regular battle. Idomeneus, in
   the 13th book, tells Meriones that the greatest courage appears in
   this way of service, each man being in a manner singled out to the
   proof of it.

22. In the earlier ages of the world, the sceptre of a king was
   nothing more than his walking-staff, and thence had the name of
   sceptre. Ovid, in speaking of Jupiter, describes him as resting on
   his sceptre.--SPENCE.

   From the description here given, it would appear to have been a
   young tree cut from the root and stripped of its branches. It was
   the custom of Kings to swear by their sceptres.

23. For an account of the contest between the Centaurs and Lapiths
   here referred to, see Grecian and Roman Mythology.

24. In _antiquity_, a sacrifice of a hundred oxen, or beasts of the
   same kind; hence sometimes _indefinitely_, any sacrifice of a large
   number of victims.

25. [The original is here abrupt, and expresses the precipitancy of
   the speaker by a most beautiful aposiopesis.--TR.]

26. The Iliad, in its connection, is, we all know, a glorification of
   Achilles by Zeus; for the Trojans only prevail because Zeus wishes
   to show that the reposing hero who sits in solitude, can alone
   conquer them. But to leave him this glorification entirely unmixed
   with sorrow, the Grecian sense of moderation forbids. The deepest
   anguish must mingle with his consciousness of fame, and punish his
   insolence. That glorification is the will of Zeus; and in the
   spirit of the ancient mythus, a motive for it is assigned in a
   divine legend. The sea-goddess Thetis, who was, according to the
   Phthiotic mythus, wedded to the mortal Peleus, saved Zeus, by
   calling up the giant Briareus or AEgaeon to his rescue. Why it was
   AEgaeon, is explained by the fact that this was a great sea-demon,
   who formed the subject of fables at Poseidonian Corinth, where even
   the sea-god himself was called AEgaeon; who, moreover, was worshipped
   at several places in Euboea, the seat of Poseidon AEgaeus; and whom
   the Theogony calls the son-in-law of Poseidon, and most of the
   genealogists, especially Eumelus in the Titanomachy, brought into
   relation with the sea. There is therefore good reason to be found
   in ancient belief, why Thetis called up AEgaeon of all others to
   Jove's assistance. The whole of the story, however, is not
   detailed--it is not much more than indicated--and therefore it
   would be difficult even now to interpret it in a perfectly
   satisfactory manner. It bears the same relation to the Iliad, that
   the northern fables of the gods, which serve as a back-ground to
   the legend of Nibelungen, bear to our German ballad, only that here
   the separation is much greater still--MULLER.

   Homer makes use of this fable, without reference to its meaning as
   an allegory. Briareus seems to symbolize a navy, and the fable
   refers to some event in remote history, when the reigning power was
   threatened in his autocracy, and strengthened by means of his
   association with the people against some intermediate
   class.--E.P.P.

27. {epaurontai}.

28. [A name by which we are frequently to understand the Nile in
   Homer.--TR.]

29. Around the sources of the Nile, and thence south-west into the
   very heart of Africa, stretching away indefinitely over its
   mountain plains, lies the country which the ancients called
   Ethiopia, rumors of whose wonderful people found their way early
   into Greece, and are scattered over the pages of her poets and
   historians.

   Homer wrote at least eight hundred years before Christ, and his
   poems are well ascertained to be a most faithful mirror of the
   manners of his times and the knowledge of his age.  *  *  *  *  *

   Homer never wastes an epithet. He often alludes to the Ethiopians
   elsewhere, and always in terms of admiration and praise, as being
   the most just of men, and the favorites of the gods. The same
   allusions glimmer through the Greek mythology, and appear in the
   verses of almost all the Greek poets, ere yet the countries of
   Italy and Sicily were even discovered. The Jewish Scriptures and
   Jewish literature abound in allusions to this distant and
   mysterious people, the annals of the Egyptian priests are full of
   them, and uniformly, the Ethiopians are there lauded as among the
   best, the most religious, and most civilized of men.--CHRISTIAN
   EXAMINER.

   The Ethiopians, says Diodorus, are said to be the inventors of
   pomps, sacrifices, solemn meetings, and other honors paid to the
   gods. From hence arose their character of piety, which is here
   celebrated by Homer. Among these there was an annual feast at
   Diospolis, which Eustathius mentions, when they carried about the
   statues of Jupiter and other gods, for twelve days, according to
   their number; to which, if we add the ancient custom of setting
   meat before statues, it will appear to be a rite from which this
   fable might easily have arisen.

30. [The original word ({polybentheos}) seems to express variety of
   soundings, an idea probably not to be conveyed in an English
   epithet.--TR.]

31: The following passage gives the most exact account of the ancient
   sacrifices that we have left us. There is first, the purification
   by the washing of hands; second, the offering up of prayers; third,
   the barley-cakes thrown upon the victim; fourth, the manner of
   killing it, with the head turned upwards; fifth, selecting the
   thighs and fat for their gods, as the best of the sacrifice, and
   disposing about them pieces cut from every part for a
   representation of the whole (hence the thighs are frequently spoken
   of in Homer and the Greek poets as the whole victim); sixth, the
   libation of wine; seventh, consuming the thighs in the fire of the
   altar; eighth, the sacrificers dressing and feasting on the rest,
   with joy and hymns to the gods.

32. The _Paean_ (originally sung in honor of Apollo) was a hymn to
   propitiate the god, and also a song of thanksgiving, when freed
   from danger. It was always of a joyous nature. Both tune and sound
   expressed hope and confidence. It was sung by several persons, one
   of whom probably led the others, and the singers either marched
   onward, or sat together at table.

33. It was the custom to draw the ships entirely upon the shore, and
   to secure them by long props.--FELTON

34. Suppliants threw themselves at the feet of the person to whom the
   supplication was addressed, and embraced his knees.--FELTON.

35. Ambrosia, the food of the gods, conferred upon them eternal youth
   and immortality, and was brought to Jupiter by pigeons. It was also
   used by the gods for anointing the body and hair. Hence the
   expression, ambrosial locks.

36 The original says, "the ox-eyed goddess," which furnishes Coleridge
   with one of the hints on which he proceeds in historically
   identifying the Argive Juno with Io and Isis, &c. There is real wit
   in Homer's making her say to Jupiter, "I never search thy
   thoughts," &c. The principle of conservatism asks nothing of the
   intellectual power, but blindly contends, reposing upon the
   instinct of a common sense, which leads her always to surmise that
   something is intended by the intellectual power that she shall not
   like.--E.P.P.

37. This refers to an old fable of Jupiter's hanging up Juno and
   whipping her. Homer introduces it without reference to its meaning,
   which was undoubtedly some physical truth connected with the ether
   and the atmosphere.--E.P.P.

38. [The reader, in order that he may partake with the gods in the
   drollery of this scene, should observe that the crippled and
   distorted Vulcan had thrust himself into an office at all other
   times administered either by Hebe or Ganymede.--TR.]

39. As Minerva or Wisdom was among the company, the poet's making
   Vulcan act the part of peace-maker, would appear to have been from
   choice, knowing that a mirthful person may often stop a quarrel, by
   making himself the subject of merriment.


Footnotes for Book II:
1. The poem now becomes more exciting; the language more animated; the
   descriptions more lively and figurative. Homer seems to kindle with
   his subject, and to press all the phenomena of nature into his
   service for the purpose of illustration and adornment. Jupiter
   prepares to keep his promise of avenging Achilles, by drawing
   Agamemnon into a deceitful expectation of taking the city. The
   forces are arranged for battle, which gives occasion for the
   celebrated catalogue.--FELTON.

2. The whole action of the Dream is natural. It takes the figure of
   one much beloved by Agamemnon, as the object that is most in our
   thoughts when awake, is the one that oftenest appears to us in our
   dreams, and just at the instant of its vanishing, leaves so strong
   an impression, that the voice seems still sounding in his ear.

   The Dream also repeats the words of Jupiter without variation,
   which is considered as a great propriety in delivering a message
   from the father of gods and men.

3. King of Pylus, an ancient city of Elis.

4. [Agamemnon seems to entertain some doubts lest the army should so
   resent his treatment of their favorite Achilles, as to be
   indisposed to serve him.--TR.]

5. [Mercury.]

6. [Argus.]

7. Homer, in a happy and poetical manner, acquaints us with the high
   descent of Agamemnon, and traces the origin of his power to the
   highest source, by saying, that the sceptre had descended to him
   from the hand of Jupiter.

8. The power of Agamemnon as a monarch refers to his being the leader
   of an army. According to the form of royalty in the heroic age, a
   king had only the power of a magistrate, except as he held the
   office of priest. Aristotle defines a king as a Leader of war, a
   Judge of controversies, and President of the ceremonies of the
   gods. That he had the principal care of religious rites, appears
   from many passages in Homer. His power was nowhere absolute but in
   war, for we find Agamemnon insulted in the council, but in the army
   threatening deserters with death. Agamemnon is sometimes styled
   king of kings, as the other princes had given him supreme authority
   over them in the siege.

9. [The extremest provocation is implied in this expression, which
   Thersites quotes exactly as he had heard it from the lips of
   Achilles.--TR.]

10. The character of Thersites is admirably sketched. There is nothing
   vague and indistinct, but all the traits are so lively, that he
   stands before us like the image of some absurd being whom we have
   ourselves seen. It has been justly remarked by critics, that the
   poet displays great skill in representing the opponents of
   Agamemnon in the character of so base a personage, since nothing
   could more effectually reconcile the Greeks to the continuance of
   the war, than the ridiculous turbulence of Thersites.--FELTON.

11. [Some for {ponos} here read {pothos}; which reading I have adopted
   for the sake both of perspicuity and connection.--TR.]

12. The principal signs by which the gods were thought to declare
   their will, were things connected with the offering of sacrifices,
   the flight and voice of birds, all kinds of natural phenomena,
   ordinary as well as extraordinary dreams.

13. An epithet supposed to have been derived from Gerenia, a Messenian
   town, where Nestor was educated.

   In the pictures which Homer draws of him, the most striking
   features are his wisdom, bravery, and knowledge of war, his
   eloquence, and his old age.

   For some general remarks upon the heroes of the time, see Grecian
   and Roman Mythology.

14. In allusion to the custom of pouring out a libation of pure wine,
   in the ceremony of forming a league, and joining right hands, as a
   pledge of mutual fidelity after the sacrifice.--FELTON.

15. [Nestor is supposed here to glance at Achilles.--TR.]

16. Homer here exalts wisdom over valor.

17. [Money stamped with the figure of an ox.]--TR.

18. The encouragement of a divine power, seemed all that was requisite
   to change the dispositions of the Grecians, and make them more
   ardent for combat than they had previously been to return. This
   conquers their inclinations in a manner at once poetical and in
   keeping with the moral which is every where spread through Homer,
   that nothing is accomplished without divine assistance.

19. Homer's rich invention gives us five beautiful similes on the
   march of the army. This profusion and variety can never be
   sufficiently admired.

20. The superior knowledge that the poet here attributes to the Muses
   as divine beings, and then his occasional invocations to them,
   gives an air of importance to his subject and has an imposing
   effect.

21. However fabulous the other parts of Homer's poems may be, this
   account of the princes, people, and countries, is by far the most
   valuable piece of history and geography left us in regard to the
   state of Greece in that early period. Greece was then divided into
   several dynasties, which Homer has enumerated under their
   respective princes; and his division was considered so correct,
   that many disputes respecting the boundaries of Grecian cities were
   decided upon his authority. Eustathius has collected together the
   following instances: The city of Calydon was adjudged to the
   AEtolians, notwithstanding the pretensions of AEolia, because it was
   ranked by Homer as belonging to the former. Sestos was given to
   those of Abydos, upon the plea that he had said the Abydonians were
   possessors of Sestos, Abydos, and Arisbe. When the Milesians and
   people of Priene disputed their claim to Mycale, a verse of Homer
   gave it to the Milesians. The Athenians were put in possession of
   Salamis by another which was cited by Solon, or (according to some)
   interpolated by him for that purpose; and Porphyry says, that the
   catalogue was so highly esteemed, that the youths of some nations
   were required to commit it to memory.

   Professor Felton remarks, "The student is advised to give
   particular attention to this important passage. He will find it the
   most interesting fragment of geography extant; interesting for the
   poetical beauty of the verse, the regular order which is followed,
   and the little characteristic touches which denote the
   peculiarities of the several provinces. The more he examines this
   catalogue with the subsidiary lights of geography, history and
   travels, the more cause will he find of wonder, that a description
   so ancient should combine so much accuracy, beauty, and interest.
   It is recommended to the student, to trace the provinces and cities
   on some good map of ancient Greece."

22. [Some say Thebes the less, others, the suburbs of Thebes the
   greater. It is certain that Thebes itself sent none.--TR.]

23. It was the custom of these people to shave the fore parts of their
   heads, that their enemies might not seize them by the hair; on the
   hinder part they allowed it to grow, as a valiant race that would
   never turn their backs. Their manner of fighting was hand to hand,
   without quitting their javelins.

24 Menelaus is occasionally distinguished by his activity, which shows
   his personal concern in the war.

25. The Arcadians, being an inland people, were unskilled in
   navigation, for which reason Agamemnon furnished them with
   shipping.

26. Nireus is nowhere mentioned as a leader but in these lines. As
   rank and beauty were his only qualifications, he is allowed to sink
   into oblivion.

27. The mud of the Peneus is of a light color, for which reason Homer
   gives it the epithet of silvery. The Titaresius, and other small
   streams which are rolled from Olympus and Ossa, are so extremely
   clear, that their waters are distinguished from those of the Peneus
   for a considerable distance from the point of their
   confluence.--DODWELL.

28. Dr. Clarke, in his travels, describes this tomb as a conical
   mound; and says that it is the spot of all others for viewing the
   plain of Troy, as it is visible in all parts of Troas. From its top
   may be traced the course of the Scamander, the whole chain of Ida,
   stretching towards Lectum, the snowy heights of Gargarus, and all
   the shores of Hellespont, near the mouth of the river Sigaeum and
   the other tumuli upon the coast.

29. A patronymic given to Achilles as descendant of AEacus, father of
   Peleus.

30. A river of Troas in Asia Minor, the same as the Scamander.

31. This expression is construed by critics as denoting an unpolished
   dialect, but not a foreign.


Footnotes for Book III:
1. The scenes described in this book are exceedingly lifesome. The
   figures are animating and beautiful, and the mind of the reader is
   borne along with breathless interest over the sonorous
   verse.--FELTON.

2. This is a striking simile, from its exactness in two points--the
   noise and the order. It has been supposed that the embattling of an
   army was first learned by observing the close order of the flight
   of these birds. The noise of the Trojans contrasts strongly with
   the silence of the Greeks. Plutarch remarks upon this distinction
   as a credit to the military discipline of the latter, and Homer
   would seem to have attached some importance to it, as he again
   alludes to the same thing. Book iv. 510.

3. [Paris, frequently named Alexander in the original.--TR.]

4. Not from cowardice, but from a sense of guilt towards Menelaus. At
   the head of an army he challenges the boldest of the enemy; and
   Hector, at the end of the Sixth Book, confesses that no man could
   reproach him as a coward. Homer has a fine moral;--A brave mind,
   however blinded with passion, is sensible of remorse whenever he
   meets the person whom he has injured; and Paris is never made to
   appear cowardly, but when overcome by the consciousness of his
   injustice.

5. [{Lainon esso chitona}.]

6. In allusion to the Oriental custom of stoning to death for the
   crime of adultery.--FELTON.

7. The sling was a very efficacious and important instrument in
   ancient warfare. Stones were also thrown with the hand. The Libyans
   carried no other arms than the spear and a bag of stones.

8. The Trojans were required to sacrifice two lambs; one male of a
   white color to the Sun, as the father of light, and one female and
   black to the Earth, the mother and nurse of men. That these were
   the powers to which they sacrificed appears from their being
   attested by name in the oath. III. 330.

9. Helen's weaving the events of the Trojan war in a veil is an
   agreeable fiction; and one might suppose that it was inherited by
   Homer, and explained in his Iliad.--DACIER.

10. [Not the grasshopper, but an insect well known in hot countries,
   and which in Italy is called Cicala. The grasshopper rests on the
   ground, but the favorite abode of the Cicala is in the trees and
   hedges.--TR.]

11. This episode is remarkable for its beauty. The effect of Helen's
   appearance upon the aged counsellors is striking and poetical. It
   must be borne in mind, that Helen was of divine parentage and
   unfading beauty, and this will explain the enthusiasm which her
   sight called forth from the old men. The poet's skill in taking
   this method of describing the Grecian chieftains is obvious, and
   the sketches themselves are living and characteristic to a high
   degree. The reminiscences of the aged Priam, as their names are
   announced, and the penitential sorrow of the erring Helen, which
   the sight of her countrymen, and the recollection of her home, her
   child, her companions, excite in her bosom, are among the most
   skilful touches of natural feeling.--FELTON.

12. The character of a benevolent old man is well preserved in Priam's
   behavior to Helen. Upon observing her confusion, he attributes the
   misfortunes of the war to the gods alone. This sentiment is also
   natural to old age. Those who have had the longest experience of
   life, are the most inclined to ascribe the disposal of all things
   to the will of Heaven.

13. This view of the Grecian leaders from the walls of Troy, is
   admired as an episode of great beauty, and considered a masterly
   manner of acquainting the reader with the figure and qualifications
   of each hero.

14. Helen sees no where in the plain her two brothers Castor and
