    Thy kinsmen's deeds. Remember, and be thou
What uncle Hector was, and what thy sire is now."

LVII. He spake, and swinging his tremendous spear,
    Swept through the gate; then Antheus, with his train,
    Rushed forth, and Mnestheus. With a general cheer
    Forth pours the host; a dust-cloud hides the plain;
    Earth, startled by their trampling, throbs in pain.
    Pale Turnus saw them from a distant height,
    The Ausonians saw, and terror chilled each vein.
    Juturna heard, and knew the noise of fight,
And from the van drew back, and shuddered with affright.

LVIII. On swept he, and the blackening host behind.
    As when from sea a storm-cloud sweeps to shore,
    The weather breaking, and the trembling hind
    Foresees afar the ruin and the roar,
    The shattered orchards, and the crops no more,
    While, landward borne, the muttering winds betray
    The coming storm; so down the Trojan bore
    Against the foemen, and in firm array
All knit their serried ranks, and gladden at the fray.

LIX. Thymbraeus smites Osiris, Mnestheus fells
    Archetius; by Achates smitten sheer,
    Falls Epulo, and Gyas Ufens quells.
    Falls, too, Tolumnius, the sacred seer,
    Who first against the foemen hurled his spear.
    Uprose a shout, and the Rutulians reeled
    And fled. AEneas, on the dusty rear
    Close-trampling, scorns to follow them afield,
Or fight with those that stand, or slaughter those that yield.

LX. Turnus alone, amid the blinding gloom,
    He tracks and traces, searching far and near,
    Turnus alone he summons to his doom.
    Juturna sees, and smit with sudden fear,
    Unseats Metiscus, Turnus' charioteer,
    And flings him down, and leaves him on the plain,
    Then takes his place, and, urging their career,
    Loose o'er the coursers shakes the waving rein;
Metiscus' voice and form, Metiscus' arms remain.

LXI. Like a black swallow, as she flies among
    A rich man's halls, or in the courts is found
    In quest of dainties for her twittering young.
    And now in empty cloisters, now around
    The fishpools circles, while the shrill notes sound.
    So now Juturna, through the midmost foes,
    Whirled in the rapid chariot, scours the ground;
    Now here, now there triumphant Turnus shows,
Now, flying, wheels aloof, nor suffers him to close.

LXII. So wheels in turn AEneas to and fro,
    And tracks his man, and through the war's wild tide
    Calls him aloud. Oft as he marks his foe,
    And, running, tries to match the coursers' stride,
    So oft Juturna wheels the team aside.
    What shall he do? While wavering thus in vain,
    As diverse thoughts his doubtful mind divide,
    A steel-tipt dart Messapus--one of twain--
Aims true, and hurls it forth, uprunning on the plain.

LXIII. AEneas paused, behind his buckler bent.
    On came the javelin, and the cone was shorn
    From off his helmet, and the plume was rent.
    Foiled by this treachery, as he marked with scorn
    The steeds and chariot from the combat borne,
    He blazed with ire, and, calling on again
    Jove and the altars of the truce forsworn,
    Rushed on, thrice terrible, and o'er the plain
Dealt indiscriminate death, and gave his wrath the rein.

LXIV. What heavenly muse can sing, what god can say
    The scenes of horror wrought on either side,
    The varied slaughter of that fatal day,
    What chiefs were chased along the field, and died,
    As Turnus now, and now the Trojan plied
    His murderous sword? Jove, could'st thou deem it right
    So dire a broil such peoples should divide,
    Two jarring nations met in deadly fight,
Whom leagues of lasting love were destined to unite?

LXV. AEneas first (that fight 'twas first that stayed
    The Teucrian rout) caught Suero on the side.
    Where death is quickest, 'twixt the ribs his blade,
    Deep in the framework of the breast, he plied.
    Then Turnus slew Diores; close beside,
    His brother Amycus from his steed he tore;
    One by the spear, one by the sword-cut died.
    Their severed heads the ruthless victor bore,
Fixt to his flying car, and dripping with the gore.

LXVI. Talus, and Tanais, and Cethegus there
    AEneas smote, and poor Onytes slew,
    Whom Peridia to Echion bare.
    Turnus two Lycian brethren next o'erthrew
    From Phoebus' fields, and young Menoetes too
    From Arcady, who loathed the war in vain.
    Poor was his home, nor rich men's doors he knew.
    By fishful Lerna he had earned his gain,
Hired was the scanty glebe his father sowed with grain.

LXVII. Lo, as fierce flames drive in from left and right
    Through woodlands parched and groves of crackling bay,
    As sweep impetuous from a mountain height
    Loud, foaming torrents, that withouten stay
    Cleave to the sea their devastating way:
    So, while in each full tides of anger flow,
    Rush Turnus and AEneas to the fray:
    Their tameless breasts with bursting valour glow,
On, on they speed amain, nor fear the opposing blow.

LXVIII. There stands Murranus, vaunting in vain joy
    His sires, and grandsires, he the princely son
    Of Latin monarchs. Him the chief of Troy
    Smites with the whirlwind of a monstrous stone,
    Huge as a rock. Down from his chariot thrown,
    'Twixt reins and yoke, he tumbles on the sward.
    The fierce wheels, thundering onward, beat him down;
    His starting steeds, to shun the victor's sword,
Tread on his trampled limbs, unmindful of their lord.

LXIX. Here, fronting Hyllus, as he rushed amain,
    Fierce Turnus stood; his levelled spear-head clave
    The golden casque, and quivered in his brain.
    Nor thee, poor Creteus, though of Greeks most brave,
    From Turnus had thy prowess power to save.
    Nor aught availed Cupencus' gods to aid
    Against the dread AEneas, as he drave.
    Squaring his breast, he met the glittering blade,
Nor long his brazen shield the mortal stroke delayed.

LXX. Thee, too, great AEolus, Laurentum's plain
    Saw trampled down by Turnus, as he flew,
    And stretched at length among the Trojan slain.
    Thou diest, whom ne'er could Argive bands subdue,
    Nor Peleus' son, who Priam's realm o'erthrew.
    Thy goal is here; beyond the distant wave,
    Beneath the mount where Ida's fir-trees grew,
    High house was thine; high house Lyrnessus gave,
Thy home; Laurentum's soil hath given thee a grave.

LXXI. So met the ranks, and mingled, man with man,
    Latins and Dardans in promiscuous throng,
    Mnestheus and fierce Serestus in the van,
    Messapus, tamer of the steed, and strong
    Asylas. There in tumult swept along
    Arcadian horsemen, and the Tuscan train.
    No rest is theirs, no respite; loud and long
    The conflict rages, as with might and main,
Each for his own dear life, the warriors strive and strain.

LXXII. Now lovely Venus doth her son persuade
    To seek the walls, and townward turn his train,
    And deal swift havoc on the foe dismayed.
    While here and there AEneas scans the plain,
    Still tracking Turnus through the ranks in vain,
    Far off the peaceful city he espies,
    Unscathed, unstirred, and in his restless brain
    The vision of a greater war doth rise;
Larger the War-God looms, and to his chiefs he cries.

LXXIII. Mnestheus, Sergestus and Serestus strong
    He calls, and on a hillock takes his stand.
    There, mustering round him, all the Teucrians throng,
    Each armed with buckler, and his spear in hand,
    And from the mound he thus exhorts the band:
    "Hear, sons of Teucer, and let none be slack.
    Jove fights for us, so hearken my command.
    Though strange the venture, sudden the attack,
Let none for that cause faint, none loiter and hang back.

LXXIV. "This town--unless they yield them and obey--
    This town, the centre of Latinus' reign,
    The cause of war, will I uproot this day,
    And raze her smoking roof-tops to the plain.
    What! shall I wait, and wait, till Turnus deign
    To take fresh heart, and tempt the war's rough game,
    And, conquered, face his conqueror again?
    See there the fount of all this blood! For shame;
Bring quick the torch; let fire the perjured pact reclaim!"

LXXV. So spake he, and one purpose nerves them all.
    They form a wedge, and forward with a cheer
    The close-knit column charges at the wall.
    Here scaling ladders in a trice they rear,
    And firebrands suddenly and flames appear.
    These seek the gates, and lay the foremost dead;
    Those flash the sword, or shake the shining spear.
    Darts cloud the skies. AEneas, at their head,
Stands by the lofty walls, and with his hands outspread,

LXXVI. Upbraids aloud Latinus, twice untrue,
    And bids heaven witness and his wrongs regard,
    Thus forced reluctant to the fight anew;
    How loth again with Latin foes he warred,
    How twice the truce the Latin crimes had marred.
    Upsprings wild discord in the town; some call
    To cede the city, and have the gates unbarred,
    And drag the aged monarch to the wall;
Some rush to arms, and strive their entrance to forestall.

LXXVII. As when within a crannied rock some hind,
    Returning home, a swarm of bees hath found,
    And all the nest with bitter smoke doth blind:
    They, in their waxen citadel fast bound,
    Post to and fro, the narrow cells around,
    And whet their stings in fury and despair:
    With stifled hum the caverned crags resound,
    The black fumes search the windings of their lair,
And the dark smoke rolls up, and mingles with the air.

LXXVIII. A new mischance now smote with further woe
    The Latin town, and fainting hearts dismayed.
    As queen Amata sees the coming foe,
    The ramparts stormed, their flames the roofs invade,
    And nowhere Turnus nor his troops to aid,
    Him dead she deems, herself the cause declares,
    Herself alone she spares not to upbraid.
    She wails,--she raves,--her purple robe she tears,
And from a lofty beam the hideous noose prepares.

LXXIX. The women heard; Lavinia first of all,
    Her golden locks, her rosy cheeks doth tear.
    All rave around, and wailings fill the hall.
    Fast flies the news, and shakes the town with fear.
    Then rends his robes Latinus in despair,
    His town in ruins and his consort dead,
    And, scattering dust upon his hoary hair,
    Himself he blames, that ne'er in Turnus' stead
The Dardan prince he chose, his dear-lov'd child to wed.

LXXX. Meanwhile, in chase of distant stragglers, speeds
    Fierce Turnus. Slacker is his car's career,
    And less he glories in his conquering steeds,
    When lo, the breezes from Laurentum bear
    The sound of shouting, and the shrieks of fear,
    And a dull murmur, as of men that groan,--
    The city's roar--strikes on his listening ear.
    "Ah me! what clamour on the winds is blown?
What noise of grief," he cries, "comes rolling from the town?"

LXXXI. He spake, and madly pulled the rein. Then she,
    His sister, like Metiscus changed in view,
    Who ruled the chariot, "Forward, Turnus! See
    The path that victory points thee to pursue.
    This way--this way to chase the Trojan crew!
    Others there are, who can the walls defend,
    See here AEneas, how he storms. We, too,
    Our foes, Troy's varlets, to their graves can send,
Nor thee less tale of slain, nor scantier praise attend."

LXXXII. Then quickly answered Turnus, glancing round,
    "Sister, long since I knew thee--knew thee plain,
    When first thy cunning did the league confound,
    And sent thee forth, fierce battle to darrain;
    And now thou think'st to cheat me, but in vain,
    Albeit a goddess. But what power on high
    Hath willed thee, sent from the Olympian reign,
    Such toils to suffer, and such tasks to try?
Cam'st thou, forsooth, to see thy wretched brother die?

LXXXIII. "What can I do? What pledge of safety more
    Doth Fortune give? what better hopes remain?
    Myself beheld, these very eyes before,
    Murranus die, the dearest of our train,
    Stretched by a huge wound hugely on the plain.
    I saw, how, backward as his comrades reeled,
    Poor Ufens, sooner than behold such stain,
    Sank low in death; himself, his sword and shield
The Teucrian victors hold, their trophies of the field.

LXXXIV. "What, shall I see our houses wrapt in flame,--
    Last wrong of all--and coward-like, stand by,
    Nor make this arm put Drances' taunts to shame?
    Shall Turnus run, and Latins see him fly?
    And is it then so terrible to die?
    Be kind, dread spirits of the world below!
    To you, since envious are the powers on high,
    Worthy my ancestors of long ago,
Free from the coward's blame, a sacred shade I go."

LXXXV. Scarce spake he; through the midmost foes apace
    Comes Saces, borne upon his foaming steed,
    A flying shaft had scored him in the face.
    "Turnus," he cries, "sole champion in our need,
    Help us, have pity on thy friends who bleed.
    See there, AEneas threatens in his ire
    To raze our towers, and with a storm-cloud's speed
    Thunders in arms, and roofward flies the fire,
To thee the Latins turn, thee Latin hopes require.

LXXXVI. "Himself, the king, is wavering, whom to call
    His new allies, and whom his kingdom's heir.
    Dead is the queen, thy faithfullest of all,
    Self-plunged from light, in terror and despair.
    Scarce fierce Atinas and Messapus there,
    Beside the town-gates standing, hold their own.
    Dense hosts surround them, and with falchions bare,
    War's harvest bristles, by the walls upgrown;
Thou on the empty sward art charioting alone."

LXXXVII. Stunned and bewildered by the changeful scene
    Stood Turnus, gazing speechless and oppressed.
    Shame, rage, and sorrow, and revengeful spleen,
    And frenzied love, and conscious worth confessed
    Boil from the depths of his tumultuous breast.
    Now, when the shadows from his mind withdrew,
    And light, returning, to his thoughts gave rest,
    Back from his chariot towards the walls he threw
His eyes, aflame with wrath, and grasped the town in view.

LXXXVIII. From floor to floor, behold, a tower upblazed,--
    The tower, with bridge above and wheels below,
    Himself with beams and mortised planks had raised.
    "Sister," he cries, "Fate conquers; let us go
    The way which Heaven and cruel fortune show.
    I stand to meet AEneas in the fray,
    And die; if death be bitter, be it so.
    No more dishonoured shalt thou see me, nay,
O sister, let me vent this fury, while I may."

LXXXIX. He spake, and quickly vaulting from his car,
    Through foes, through darts, his sister left to mourn,
    Rushed headlong forth, and broke the ranks of war.
    As when a boulder, from a hill-top borne,
    Which rains have washed, or blustering winds have torn,
    Or creeping years have loosened, down the steep,
    From crag to crag, leaps headlong, and in scorn
    Goes bounding on, and with resistless sweep
Lays waste the woods, and whelms the shepherd and his sheep;

XC. So Turnus through the broken ranks doth fly
    On to the town-walls, where the crimson plain
    Is soaked, and shrill with javelins shrieks the sky,
    Then shouts, with hand uplifted, to his train,
    "Rutulians, hold! Ye Latin men refrain!
    Mine are the risks of Fortune, mine of right,
    The truce thus torn, to expiate the stain,
    And let the sword give judgment." At the sight
The hostile ranks divide, and clear the lists of fight.

XCI. But when the Sire AEneas heard the name
    Of Turnus, and his foeman's form espied,
    Down from the ramparts and the towers he came,
    And scorned delay, and put all else aside,
    Thundering in arms, and glorying in his pride.
    As Athos huge, as Eryx huge he shows,
    Or huge as Father Apennine, whose side
    Roars with his nodding oaks, when drifted snows
Shine on his joyous crest, and lighten on his brows.

XCII. Rutulians, Trojans, Latins,--each and all
    Look wondering on, both they who man the height,
    And they who batter at the base. Down fall
    Their arms. Amazed Latinus views the sight,
    Two chiefs from distant countries, matched in might.
    The lists set wide, they dash into the fray.
    Each hurls a spear, then, hand to hand, they fight.
    Loud ring the shields, and quick the broadswords play.
Earth groans, and chance contends with courage for the day.

XCIII. As on Taburnus, or in Sila's shade
    Two bulls, with butting foreheads, mix in fray:
    Pale fly the hinds, mute stands the herd dismayed:
    The heifers low, unknowing who shall sway
    The grove, what lord and leader to obey;
    They, with horns locked, their mutual rage outpour,
    And thrust for thrust, and wound for wound repay,
    Fast from their necks and dewlaps streams the gore,
And all the neighbouring wood rebellows to the roar;

XCIV. So, when both champions on the listed field,
    The Trojan and the Daunian, eye to eye,
    Met in the deadly conflict, shield to shield
    Clanged, and a loud crash shattered through the sky.
    And now great Jove, the Sire of gods on high,
    Holds up the scales, and sets the long beam straight,
    And in the balance lays their fates, to try
    Each champion's fortune in the stern debate,
Whom battle's toil shall doom, where sinks the deathful weight.

XCV. Forth springs, in fancied safety, at his foe
    Fierce Turnus, rising to his utmost height,
    And planting all his body in the blow,
    Strikes. A loud shout, of terror and delight
    Goes up from Troy and Latium at the sight.
    When lo, the falchion, as the stroke he plies,
    Snaps short, and leaves him helpless. Naught but flight
    Can aid him; swifter than the wind he flies,
As in his hand disarmed an unknown hilt he spies.

XCVI. When first his steeds were harnessed for the war,
    In haste he snatched Metiscus' sword, 'tis said,
    His sire's forgotten, as he climbed the car,
    And well enough that weapon served his stead,
    To smite the stragglers, while the Trojans fled;
    But when it met, and countered in the fray
    The arms of Vulcan, then the mortal blade,
    Found faithless, like the brittle ice, gave way,
And in the yellow sand the sparkling fragments lay.

XCVII. So Turnus flies, and, doubling, but in vain,
    Now here, now there, weaves many an aimless round;
    For all about him, as he scours the plain,
    The swarming legions of the foe are found,
    And here the marsh, and there the bulwarks bound.
    Nor less AEneas, though his stiff knee feels
    The rankling arrow, and the hampering wound
    Retards his pace, pursues him, as he wheels,
And dogs the flying foe, and presses on his heels.

XCVIII. As when some stag, a river in his face,
    Or toils with scarlet feathers, set to scare,
    A huntsman with his braying hounds doth chase.
    Awed by the steep bank and the threatening snare,
    A thousand ways he doubles here and there;
    But the keen Umbrian, all agape, is by,
    Now grasps,--now holds him,--and now thinks to tear,
    And snaps his teeth on nothing; and a cry
Rings back from shore and stream, and rolls along the sky.

XCIX. Chiding by name his comrades, as he flies,
    Fierce Turnus for his trusty sword doth cry.
    Nor less AEneas with his threat defies,
    "Stand off," he shouts, "who ventures to draw nigh,
    His town shall perish, and himself shall die."
    Onward, though maimed, he presses to his prey.
    Twice five times circling round the field they fly;
    For no mean stake or sportive prize they play,
Lo, Turnus' life and blood are wagered in the fray.

C.  A wilding olive on the sward had stood,
    Sacred to Faunus. Mariners of yore
    In worship held the venerable bough,
    When to Laurentum's guardian, safe on shore
    Their votive raiment and their gifts they bore.
    That sacred tree, the lists of fight to clear,
    Troy's sons had lopped. There, in the trunk's deep core,
    The Dardan javelin, urged with impulse sheer,
Stuck fast; the stubborn root, retentive, grasped the spear.

CI. Stooping, AEneas with his hands essayed
    To pluck the steel, and follow with the spear
    The foe his feet o'ertook not. Sore dismayed
    Then Turnus cried, "O Faunus, heed and hear,
    And thou, kind Earth, hold fast the steel, if dear
    I held the plant, which Trojan hands profaned."
    He prayed, nor Heaven refused a kindly ear.
    Long while AEneas at the tough root strained;
Vain was his utmost strength; the biting shaft remained.

CII. While thus he stooped and struggled, prompt to aid,
    Juturna, to Metiscus changed anew,
    Ran forth, and to her brother reached his blade.
    Then Venus, wroth the daring Nymph to view,
    Came, and the javelin from the stem withdrew,
    Thus, armed afresh, each eager for his chance,
    The Daunian trusting to his falchion true,
    The Dardan towering with uplifted lance,
High-hearted, face to face, the breathless chiefs advance.

CIII. Then Jove, as from a saffron cloud above
    Looked Juno, pleased the doubtful strife to view,
    "When shall this end, sweet partner of my love?
    What more? Thou know'st it, and hast owned it too,
    Divine AEneas to the skies is due.
    What wilt thou, chill in cloudland? Was it right
    A god with mortal weapons to pursue?
    Or give--for thine was all Juturna's might--
Lost Turnus back his sword, and renovate the fight?

CIV. "Desist at length, and hearken to my prayer.
    Feed not in silence on a grief so sore,
    Nor spoil those sweet lips with unlovely care.
    The end is come; 'twas thine on sea and shore
    Troy's sons to vex, to wake the war's uproar,
    To cloud a home, a marriage-league untie,
    And mar with grief a bridal. Cease, and more
    Attempt not." Thus the ruler of the sky,
And thus, with down-cast look, Saturnia made reply.

CV. "E'en so, great Jove, because thy will was known,
    I left, reluctant, Turnus and his land.
    Else ne'er should'st thou behold me here alone,
    Thus shamed and suffering, but, torch in hand,
    To smite these hateful Teucrians would I stand.
    I made Juturna rescue from the foe
    Her hapless brother,--mine was the command,--
    Approved her daring for his sake, yet so
As not to wield the spear, or meddle with the bow.

CVI. "Nay, that I swear, and a dread oath will take
    (The only oath that doth the high gods bind),
    By that grim fount that feeds the Stygian lake.
    And now, great Jove, reluctant, but resigned,
    I yield, and leave the loathed fight behind.
    One boon I ask, nor that in Fate's despite,
    For Latium, for the honour of thy kind.
    When--be it so--blest Hymen's pact they plight,
And laws and lasting league the warring folks unite,

