gallant vessel had lain apparently at the Frenchman's mercy.  Now the
Frenchman was fastened inextricably, while the crowd upon deck stood
as much exposed as if the galley were a raft.

Down swept the grape-shot, tearing ghastly passages through them.
They were near enough to be scorched by the flame of it.  Down and
across it rent them, as they crouched and fought with each other to
get away and hide.  There was no hiding.  Before the breath of it
they went down in rows, strewing the deck horribly, mangled, riddled,
blown in miserable pieces.

In a trice, too, the English masts and rigging were swarming with
musketeers and sailors who poured hand-grenades among them like hail,
scattering wounds and death.  The Frenchmen no longer thought of
attacking.  Such was the panic among officers as well as common men
that they were incapable even of resistance.  Scores who were neither
killed nor wounded lay flat on their faces, counterfeiting death and
hoping to find safety.

This carnage lasted, perhaps, for less than five minutes.
_L'Heureuse's_ consort was still near upon a league behind, and the
other four galleys were still busily chasing the merchantmen.

Captain Barker looked and was well content.  But he had much work
still before him, and to do it properly he must husband his
ammunition.

He gave the order to board.  Forty or fifty men dropped over the
_Merry Maid's_ side, cutlass in mouth, and rushed along the galley's
deck, hewing down all who ventured to oppose them and sparing only
the slaves, who made no resistance.  At last, and merely by the
weight of numbers, they were driven back.  But this did the Frenchmen
no good.  Instantly the frigate opened fire again and murdered them
by scores.

It was in this extremity that M. de la Pailletine cast his eyes
around and found himself forced to do what Captain Barker from the
first had meant him to do.  The four galleys that had started after
the convoy were by this time sweeping along on the full tide of
success.  In another five minutes the pathway to the Thames would be
blocked and all the merchant vessels at their mercy.

M. de la Pailletine hoisted the flag of distress.  He called them to
his help.

A wild hurrah broke out from the crew of the frigate.  The order
meant their destruction: for how could the _Merry Maid_ contend
against six galleys?  Yet they cheered, for they had guessed what
their captain had in his mind.  And the little man's greenish eyes
sparkled as he heard.

"Good boys!" he said briefly, turning to his friend.  "The convoy is
saved, my lad: and O! but Jemmy, you did it prettily!"



_V.--The Galley (in the hold)._

Let us go back for a minute or two to Tristram.

The oar at which he tugged was one of the starboard tier; and when
_L'Heureuse_ missed her stroke, as we have told, it went like a
sugar-stick, flinging him and his companions back across the bench.
Farther than this they could not fly, because the stout chains which
fastened them were but ten feet long.  Tristram, indeed, was hurled
scarcely so far as the rest, for his seat was the inmost from the
gangway, and right against the galley's side; so that he got the
shortest swing of the oar.

They scrambled up just as the fire of grape-shot opened.  And then
Tristram made an appalling discovery.

The hole through which their oar was worked had been split wider by
the crash; and now, looking out, he saw that it lay just opposite the
mouth of an English cannon.  In this position they had been brought
up by the frigate's grappling-irons.

It took him but an instant to see also that the cannon, as it stared
him in the face, was loaded.

The two vessels, moreover, lay so close that by reaching up with his
hand he could have laid his hand on its muzzle.

It was a horrible moment.  There were four Frenchmen and a Turk
ranged along the bench beside him.  He looked into their faces.  They
were ashen grey to the lips.  No one could move to get out of the
way: the chains prevented that.  The Huguenot was praying wildly.
Only the Turk preserved his composure, and even he had turned pale
under his bronze skin.

Somebody cried: "Lie flat!"

In a second every one of Tristram's companions had flung himself flat
on the bench.  Tristram glanced again at the gun.  Even at that
moment he had enough presence of mind to note that it was pointed
downwards, and at such an angle that those who lay flat must
infallibly receive all its contents.  He noted this even while it
seemed that every one of his faculties was frozen up.  He felt that
he could move neither hand nor foot; and somehow he knew that since,
because of the chain, he could not leave the bench, he must sit
upright.  And so he stiffened his back, laid his hands on his lap,
and waited with his eyes on the gun.

Through the port-hole he could see the English gunner.  He saw the
fuse in his hand.  He counted the seconds; wondered, even, how the
fellow could be so deliberate.  He heard the explosions all around,
and speculated.  Would the next be his turn?  Or the next?  Would it
be painful?  What was the next world like?  And would his body be
badly mangled?

The gunner had the match ready, when the lad's lips moved and a cry
broke from them--a cry which astonished him as he uttered it, for he
had no notion that his brain was busy with such matters.

"O! my Father, have pity on my poor soul!  I have loved all men and
one woman.  Give comfort to her, and have mercy on my poor soul!"

As the last word dropped from his lips, a great calm fell upon him
and his eyes rested quietly on the gunner's hand as the man set the
lighted match to the touch-hole of the gun.


It was night when Tristram opened his eyes again.  A pale ray of
moonlight slanted across his face.  His head was pillowed on
something soft and warm.  He lay for awhile and stared at the
moonlight; and by degrees he made out that it was pouring through a
rent in the galley's side.  Then he turned his head and lifted
himself a little to see what it was on which his head rested.  It was
the dead body of one of the three overseers, who had been killed
almost by the first shot fired by the frigate.

He pulled himself up and crept towards the bench; then put a hand
down to his feet.  The ring was there, but no chain.  Next he felt
along the bench with a wish--quite stupid--to get back to his seat.
His comrades were still lying on their faces.  He imagined for a
moment that their foolish fears still held them there and he laughed
feebly.  He was weak, but felt no pain from any wound, nor suspected
that he was hurt.

Then he began to eye the fellows roguishly, taking a malicious
pleasure in the continuance of their terror.  He tittered again and
suddenly found himself out of patience with them.

"Come, get up--get up!  The danger's all over long ago."

He received no answer and put out his hand towards the nearest.
It was the Turk--a fellow who had been a janizary, and had the
reputation of not knowing what fear was.

"Hullo, Ysouf!  Get up, for shame--get up, man!  And you--that we
called so brave!"

Ysouf lay still.  Tristram bent forward and took his hand.

The hand came away from the body.  It was icy cold.

Still holding it, Tristram leant back and stared; and as he stared
a pettish anger took him.  He tossed the hand back on the body.
And now for the first time he began to hear; and as this lost sense
crept back to him he knew that the place was full of moaning, and
that somewhere close feet were trampling to and fro.  The noise
caused him agony, and he put his two hands to his ears.

He was sitting in this posture when he felt something warm and moist
trickle down his body, which was naked to the waist.  He took a hand
from his ear and put it to his breast.  It was all wet, but in the
darkness nothing could be distinguished.  Suspecting, however, that
it must be blood from some wound, and following the smear with his
fingers, he found that his shoulder, near the clavicle was pierced
right through.  There was no pain.

Then he began to feel himself all over, and found another gash in the
left leg, below the knee.  He searched no more, feeling that it was
useless, as he was bound to die in a little while.  The men before
him and behind him were dead.  Of eighteen men on the three benches
he--who had been blown the full length of the coursier--was the only
one left; and all owing to the explosion of one cannon only.
But such was the manner of grape-shot: after the cartouche of powder,
a long tin box of musket-balls rammed in; and as the box breaks,
destruction right and left.

As he sat, waiting listlessly for death, the sense of pain came
suddenly upon Tristram; and then he swooned away.



_VI--The Frigate._

As soon as the galleys saw M. de la Pailletine's signal and turned
reluctantly back from their chase, the capture of the _Merry Maid_
became but a question of time.  _La Merveille_ was the first to come
up, and, striking fairly at her stern, riddled her windows with a
gust of artillery and prepared to board: a feat that was thrice
prevented by Captain Runacles and a couple of dozen marines, English
and Dutch.  Then followed Captain Denoyre with the _Sanspareil_, who
approached from the starboard side and lost both his masts as he did
so.  In fact, the execution done upon his galley was only second to
that suffered by _L'Heureuse_.  But as _Le Paon_ followed from the
same quarter, with the _Nymphe_ and the _Belle Julie_ heading down as
fast as oars could take them, Captain Barker cast a look back and
touched his old friend's arm.

The first of the merchantmen was entering the Thames.

"Better get back to the fo'c's'le, Jemmy, and entrench yourself."

Captain Runacles nodded.  "And you?" he asked.

"Oh, I'm going down to the cabin--first of all." Captain Runacles
nodded again.  They looked straight into each other's eyes, shook
hands, and parted.

It was obvious that the men of the _Merry Maid_ could no longer keep
the deck.  She was hemmed in on every side and it only remained to
board her.

Twenty-five grenadiers from each galley were ordered upon this
service.  Those of _La Merveille_ were the first to start and they
swarmed over the stern without opposition.  But no sooner were they
crowded upon the frigate's deck than a volley of musketry mowed them
down.  Captain Runacles and his heroes then ran back and entrenched
themselves in the forecastle; and to advance to close the hatchway
was certain death.  Nor were they forced to surrender until long
after the English flag was hauled down: and, indeed, were only
silenced when M. de la Pailletine hit on the happy idea of setting
fifty men to work with axes to lay open the frigate's deck.  A score
and a half of men were lost over this piece of work.  However, the
forecastle was carried at last by means of it; and the prisoners were
brought on deck--among them Captain Runacles, with his right hand
disabled.

"Are you the gallant captain of this frigate?" asked M. de la
Pailletine, doffing his hat; for as yet he had received no sword in
token of the _Merry Maid's_ surrender.

"No, sir," Captain Runacles answered; "I have the honour to be his
lieutenant."

"He is killed, perhaps?"

"I fancy not."

"Then where is he?"

"Excuse me, monsieur, it strikes me he has yet to be taken."

"But the ship is ours!"

"Well, monsieur, you have hauled down our colours and I can't deny
it.  But as for the frigate, I doubt if you can call it yours just
yet."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"Why, simply that you have not yet taken Captain Barker; and excuse
me if, knowing Captain Barker better than you can possibly do, I warn
you that that part of the ship which he sees fit to occupy at this
moment will probably be dangerous for some time to come."

As if to corroborate his words, at this moment the hush which had
fallen upon the frigate's deck was broken by the report of a firearm,
and two French grenadiers rushed upon deck from below and came
forward hurriedly, one with a hand clapped to a wound in his
shoulder.

"That," said Captain Runacles, "is probably Captain Barker.  There is
a shutter to his cabin door."

"But this is trivial," exclaimed the French Commodore, frowning.

"If Monsieur will excuse me, it is scarcely so trivial as it
looks.  Captain Barker is within ten paces of the powder-magazine.
Moreover, between him and the powder-magazine there is a door."

M. de la Pailletine jumped in his shoes.  He rushed aft to the
companion leading to the captain's cabin and called on him to
surrender.

"Go away!" answered a very ill-tempered voice from below.

"But, sir, consider.  Your ship is in our hands--"

"Then come and take it."

"--Your gallant officers have surrendered.  You have behaved like a
hero and there is not one of your enemies but honours you.  Monsieur,
it is magnificent--but come out!"

"I shan't."

"Monsieur, even this noble obstinacy extorts my veneration; but
permit me to inquire: How can you help it?"

"Very simply, sir.  Time is of no concern to me.  I have plenty of
victuals and ammunition down here; and if any man comes to take my
sword I shall kill him."

"You cannot kill five or six hundred men."

"No; when I am bored, I shall fire the powder-magazine."

"Monsieur--"

