on the part of the Confederates, although a desperate dash now and then
gave a false impression to the world outside that the Confederacy still
had a vigorous vitality. While General Philip H. Sheridan, Chief of
Cavalry of the Army of the Potomac, was at Winchester, October 19,
General Jubal Early suddenly attacked Sheridan's forces at Cedar Creek,
nearly twenty miles from Winchester. The attack was made at dawn, and
proved a complete surprise. The National troops were defeated, and the
roads were thronged with fugitives, while camp, and cannon and a large
number of prisoners fell into the hands of the enemy. Sheridan was riding
leisurely out of Winchester, when he met his routed troops. At once he
dashed forward on his black charger, crying out to his men: "Face the
other way, boys! Face the other way!" and, as he learned the extent of
the disaster, he added: "We will have all the camps and cannon back
again!" With courage revived by their leader's example, the Union troops
rallied and turned upon the foe, recovering all the spoil, and virtually
destroying Early's army.

                        *          *          *

Disaster attended the Confederate cause on land and sea. The British
cruiser Alabama, flying the Confederate flag, was defeated and sunk by
the United States frigate Kearsarge, off the coast of France, in June,
1864. Admiral David Glasgow Farragut entered Mobile Bay, August 5, lashed
to the mast of his flagship, the Hartford, and fought the last naval
battle of the war. The monitor Tecumseh, which led the National vessels,
was struck by the explosion of a torpedo, and sank with Commander Craven
and nearly all her officers and men. Farragut, unshaken by this disaster,
ordered the Hartford to go ahead heedless of torpedoes, and the other
vessels to follow. He silenced the batteries with grapeshot, destroyed
the Confederate squadron, and on the following day captured the forts
with the assistance of a land force of 5000 men from New Orleans. The
impatience of the Richmond government, chafing under its own impotence,
hastened the catastrophe. General Joseph E. Johnston, who had succeeded
Bragg, and who husbanded as far as compatible with an efficient defence
the troops under his command, was removed to give way to General John B.
Hood, who was willing to waste his forces in hopeless conflict with
Sherman. On September 2 Sherman entered Atlanta.

The news of Lincoln's re-election by 212 electoral votes to 21 for
McClellan, put an end to Confederate reliance on Northern sympathy and
aid. Even the most sanguine now lost hope.

                        *          *          *

After sending a part of his army under Thomas to cope with Hood, who had
moved into middle Tennessee, Sherman started about the middle of November
with 60,000 men on his famous march through Georgia to the seacoast. He
destroyed the railroads, and devastated the country from which the
Confederacy was drawing its supplies. Although I have never seen it
mentioned in any publication regarding the war, I believe that previous
to Sherman's march it was the purpose of the Confederate Government to
retreat to North Carolina when too hardly pressed in Virginia. Otherwise
there seems to be no explanation for the vast accumulation of provisions
at Salisbury, which were certainly not intended or used for the Union
prisoners at that place, and for the large stores of food at Charlotte.
Sherman captured Savannah just before Christmas, and proceeded northward
through the Carolinas. Meantime General Thomas had completely defeated
Hood at the battle of Nashville, and dispersed his army, the remnant of
which gathered again under General Joseph E. Johnston to oppose the march
of Sherman. Fort Fisher, North Carolina, surrendered to General Alfred H.
Terry and Admiral Porter in January, 1865.

                        *          *          *

Lee, reduced to the last extremity at Richmond, and appointed in
February, 1865, general-in-chief of armies which no longer had a real
existence, decided to abandon the Confederate capital and effect a
junction with Johnston. Sheridan prevented this by defeating the
Confederates at Five Forks, April 1, and turning Lee's right and
threatening his rear. Five Forks was the beginning of the end.
Thirty-five thousand muskets were guarding thirty-seven miles of
intrenchments, and on these attenuated lines General Grant ordered an
immediate assault. The defences were found to be almost denuded of men.
Petersburg and Richmond fell, and Lee, driven westward, surrendered at
Appomattox, on April 9, the remains of the once proud Army of Northern
Virginia, now numbering 26,000 ragged and starving soldiers. On learning
that Lee's troops had been living for days on parched corn, General Grant
at once offered to send them rations, and the Union soldiers readily
shared their own provisions with the men with whom, a few hours before,
they had been engaged in mortal strife. Lee bade a touching farewell to
his troops, and rode through a weeping army to his home in Richmond. A
fortnight afterward Johnston surrendered to Sherman, and with the
surrender of the Confederate Trans-Mississippi Army, May 26, the war was
at an end. The Confederate Government had fled from Richmond when Lee
withdrew his army, and on May 10, Jefferson Davis was captured near
Irwinsville, Ga., and sent as a prisoner to Fortress Monroe.

                        *          *          *

We have read of the sieges of Numantia and of Haarlem, of Scotland's
struggle for liberty under Wallace and Bruce, and of the virtual
extinction of the men of Paraguay in the war against Brazil and
Argentina; but history records no resistance on the part of a
considerable population inhabiting an extensive region, under an
organized government, worthy to compare in resolution, endurance and
self-sacrifice, with that of the Southern Confederacy to the forces of
the Union. When the war closed the South was prostrate. When the Governor
of Alabama was asked to join in raising a force to attack the rear of
Sherman he answered, no doubt truthfully, that only cripples, old men and
children remained of the male population of the State. In their
desperation the Southern leaders even thought of enlisting negroes, thus
adding a grotesque epilogue to the mighty national tragedy. Of course
even the most ignorant negro could not have been expected to fight for
his own enslavement. I saw Richmond about a month before the surrender.
It was like a city of the dead. Two weeks later I was in New York. It
teemed with life and bustle and energy.

The blots on the Confederacy were the cruel persecution of Union men
living in the South, who were, in many instances, dragged from their
families and put to death as traitors, and the maltreatment of Union
prisoners. The North tolerated Southern sympathizers, when not actually
engaged in plotting against the government, and treated Southern
prisoners with all the kindness possible. It has been said for the South
that while Union prisoners were starving, the Confederate troops in the
field were almost starving too. This is a dishonest subterfuge. The
Southern troops were starving not because ordinary food was not plentiful
in the Confederacy, but because of lack of transportation to carry the
food from the interior to the front, while the Union prisoners perished
from hunger in the midst of abundance. Again, even assuming the plea of
scarcity to be true, that would not palliate the numerous murders of
helpless prisoners by volleys fired into the stockades at the pleasure of
the guards.[1] There was a vindictiveness in these crimes which no plea
can extenuate.

      [1] As one of the survivors of the massacre of November 25, 1864, at
      Salisbury, North Carolina, I know whereof I speak.

                        *          *          *

The murder of Abraham Lincoln by John Wilkes Booth removed the only man
who could have done justice to the South and controlled the passions of
the North. Lincoln was signally, providentially adapted to be the
nation's guide in the struggle which, under his leadership, was brought
to a successful conclusion. For the equally difficult task of
reconstruction he was likewise admirably qualified, and his death was
followed by a civil chaos almost as deplorable as armed disunion. From
that chaos the American people gradually emerged by force of their native
character and their fundamental sense of justice and of right. The South,
for some years subjected to the rule of camp-followers and freedmen,
gradually recovered from the devastation of war, and superior
intelligence came to the top, as it always will eventually. The Southern
people learned that they had other resources besides cotton, and they
began to emulate the North in the development of manufactures and mines.
The old slave-owning aristocracy in the South has disappeared, but the
"poor whites" have also almost disappeared, and the average of comfort in
that section is greater than at any period in American history. The
negroes complain, and with too much cause, of political oppression and
exclusion from the suffrage, but they seem to be on good terms with their
"oppressors," and on the principle of the old Spanish proverb that "he is
my friend who brings grist to my mill," the Southern black has no better
friend than the Southern white.




Thirty Years of Peace.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

Reconstruction in the South--The Congress and the President--Liberal
Republican Movement--Nomination, Defeat and Death of Greeley--Troops
Withdrawn by President Hayes--Foreign Policy of the Past Thirty Years--
French Ordered from Mexico--Last Days of Maximilian--Russian-America
Bought--The Geneva Arbitration--Alabama Claims Paid--The Northwest
Boundary--The Fisheries--Spain and the Virginius--The Custer Massacre
--United States of Brazil Established--President Harrison and Chile
--Venezuela--American Prestige in South America--Hawaii--Behring
Sea--Garfield, the Martyr of Civil Service Reform--Labor Troubles--
Railway Riots of 1877 and 1894--Great Calamities--The Chicago Fire,
Boston Fire, Charleston Earthquake, Johnstown Flood.


The Southern people cannot be justly blamed for their resolute resistance
to negro domination. It was too much to expect that former masters should
accept political inferiority to a race emancipated from slavery, but not
emancipated from deplorable ignorance and debasement, and easily misled
by unscrupulous whites. On the other hand, gratitude and prudence
demanded, on the part of the North, that the negro should not only be a
freeman, but also a citizen; that he should not only be liberated from
slavery, but also protected against oppression. The negro, however
ignorant, was true to the Union, and attached to the Republican party;
the black soldiers had fought in the Union armies, and Abraham Lincoln
himself had advised Governor Hahn, of Louisiana, in 1863, that "the very
intelligent colored people, and especially those who fought gallantly in
our ranks, should be admitted to the franchise," for "they would probably
help in some trying time to come to keep the jewel of liberty within the
family of freedom."

Andrew Johnson, succeeding to the chair of Lincoln, and with his heart
softened toward his native South, would have restored the whites to full
control, with the negroes at their mercy. The Congress, however,
intervened, and the ex-Confederate States were placed under military law,
and only admitted to recognition as States upon conditions which gave the
negro equal rights with his white fellow-citizens--and indeed superior
rights to many of them, the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of
the United States excluding from office all persons who, having taken an
oath as public officers to support the Constitution afterward joined the
Confederacy. For opposing these measures of Congress President Johnson
was impeached, and escaped conviction by one vote.

                        *          *          *

The Southern whites continued to struggle for white supremacy. The
conflict continued throughout Johnson's term as President, and even the
severe military measures adopted under power from Congress by General
Grant, only suppressed organized violence in its more rampant form. It
was impossible to imprison a commonwealth or to place bayonets at every
threshold, and while the negro might be upheld in his right of suffrage,
Federal protection could not supply him with work and bread. The
intellect and the property of the South were on the side of the whites,
and the blacks began to find that their choice was between submission or
extinction.

In the North, even among Republicans, a feeling grew that the
ex-Confederates had suffered enough, while it was impossible for an
honest man to have any other sentiment than contempt for the political
vultures who had descended on the wasted South. This feeling gave
strength to the Liberal Republican movement in 1872, and arrayed
Democrats--and not a few of the old anti-slavery leaders--in support of
Horace Greeley for President.

The insanity and death of Mr. Greeley cast a gloom over the election for
victors as well as vanquished. Mr. Greeley's mind was weakened by
domestic affliction, and by the desertion of _Tribune_ readers, and when
crushing defeat at the polls gave the _coup-de-grace_ to his political
prospects, his once vigorous intellect yielded under the strain. Like a
dying gladiator, mortally wounded, but with courage unquenched, he seized
once more the editorial blade with which he had dealt so many powerful
blows in the past for justice and for truth; but nature was not equal to
the task, and the weapon fell from his nerveless grasp. His last words
were: "The country is gone; the _Tribune_ is gone, and I am gone."
General Grant attended the funeral of his gifted and hapless competitor,
and the nation joined in honor and eulogy of the great editor whose heart
was always true to humanity, and whose very failings leaned to virtue's
side. Fortunately Mr. Greeley's irresponsible utterance was not prophetic
either as to the country or the _Tribune_. Mr. Whitelaw Reid succeeded to
the editorial chair, and has ably kept the _Tribune_ in the front rank of
American journals.

                        *          *          *

Mr. Greeley's last editorial expression pleaded with the victors in
behalf of justice and fair dealing for the South. General Grant himself
is said to have arrived at the conclusion before the close of his second
term, that the Federal troops should be withdrawn from the Southern
States, and sagacious Republicans discerned in the growth of Democratic
sentiment both North and South a warning that the people were becoming
tired of bayonet government ten years after Appomattox. The election of
1876, when the Democrats had a popular majority, and the decision between
Rutherford B. Hayes, Republican, and Samuel J. Tilden, Democrat, depended
on a single vote, emphasized the popular protest against military rule in
time of peace, and when the Electoral Commission gave a verdict in favor
of General Hayes, the new President speedily withdrew the National troops
from the reconstructed States.

                        *          *          *

While the country witnessed deep agitation and difference of opinion
regarding reconstruction in the South, there was no difference of public
sentiment regarding the vigorous, far-sighted and thoroughly American
policy of the government in dealing with foreign powers. One of the first
steps of Secretary Seward after the close of the war was to demand in
courteous language that the French should evacuate Mexico. Napoleon dared
not challenge the United States by answering no. General Philip H.
Sheridan was on the Rio Grande with fifty thousand men, anxious to cross
over and fight; a million veterans were ready to obey the summons to
battle, and Generals Grant and Sherman would willingly have followed in
the footsteps of Scott and Taylor. The French troops were withdrawn.
Maximilian, deceived as to the strength of his cause with the natives,
refused to accompany Bazaine across the ocean, and the month of May,
1867, saw the usurping emperor shut up with a small force in Queretaro,
surrounded by an army of forty thousand Mexican avengers.

In those final days of his life and reign the hapless Austrian prince
exhibited a courage and nobility of character which showed that the blood
of Maria Theresa was not degenerate in his veins. He faced death with
more than reckless daring; he shared in all the privations of his
faithful adherents, and he was preparing to cut his way out through the
host of besiegers, at the head of his men, when treachery betrayed him to
the enemy.

Miguel Lopez was the Benedict Arnold of Queretaro; personal immunity and
two thousand gold ounces the price. Lopez held the key of Queretaro--the
convent of La Cruz. Maximilian had been his generous patron and friend,
and had appointed him chief of the imperial guard. Lopez discerned the
approaching downfall of his sovereign, and resolved to save himself by
delivering up that sovereign to the enemy. On the night of May 14, the
Liberal troops were admitted to La Cruz, and Queretaro was at the mercy
of the besiegers.

Maximilian made a last stand on the "Hill of the Bells." Successful
resistance was impossible. The bullet he prayed for did not come, and the
emperor and his officers were prisoners. In vain the Princess Salm-Salm,
representing one of the proudest families of Europe, bent her knees
before the Indian President of Mexico, and pleaded for the life of
Maximilian. "I am grieved, madam," said Juarez, "to see you thus on your
knees before me; but if all the kings and queens of Europe were in your
place, I could not spare that life. It is not I who take it. It is the
people and the law, and if I should not do their will, the people would
take it, and mine also."

"Boys, aim well--aim at my heart"--was Maximilian's request to his
executioners. "Oh man!" was his last cry as he fell, the victim of his
own ambition, and of Louis Napoleon's perfidy. The volley which pierced
his breast was the knell of the Bonaparte dynasty. Gravelotte was but
little more than three years from Queretaro.

                        *          *          *

The acquisition of Russian America for the sum of $7,200,000 was a
splendid stroke of statesmanship, and secured to the United States the
control of the North Pacific coast of the continent, besides adding about
581,107 square miles to the territory of the Republic. Alaska has immense
resources, and is already looking forward to a proud and prosperous
future as the north star in the flag of our Union.

                        *          *          *

When the British Government proposed, in 1871, a joint commission to
settle the Canadian fisheries dispute, Secretary of State Hamilton Fish
replied that the settlement of the claims for depredations by
Anglo-Confederate cruisers would be "essential to the restoration of
cordial and amicable relations between the two governments." In the
following February five high commissioners from each country met in
Washington, and a treaty was agreed upon providing for arbitration upon
the issues between the American Republic and Great Britain. These issues
included the "Alabama Claims"--so-called because the Alabama was the most
notorious and destructive of the Anglo-Confederate sea rovers--the
question of the Northwest boundary, and the Canadian fisheries.

The Tribunal of Arbitration upon the "Alabama Claims" met at Geneva,
Switzerland, December 15, 1871. Charles Francis Adams, American Minister
to England during the war, was member of the Tribunal for the United
States, and Lord Chief Justice Cockburn acted for Great Britain. Baron
Itajuba, Brazilian Minister to France; Count Sclopis, an Italian
