seemed as much as possible restored to the state in which he had left
it when he assumed arms some months before. The pigeon-house was
replenished; the fountain played with its usual activity; and not
only the Bear who predominated over its basin, but all the other Bears
whatsoever, were replaced on their several stations, and renewed or
repaired with so much care, that they bore no tokens of the violence
which had so lately descended upon them. While these minutiae had been
so heedfully attended to, it is scarce necessary to add, that the house
itself had been thoroughly repaired, as well as the gardens, with the
strictest attention to maintain the original character of both, and
to remove, as far as possible, all appearance of the ravage they had
sustained. The Baron gazed in silent wonder; at length he addressed
Colonel Talbot:

'While I acknowledge my obligation to you, sir, for the restoration
of the badge of our family, I cannot but marvel that you have nowhere
established your own crest, whilk is, I believe, a mastiff, anciently
called a talbot; as the poet has it,

A talbot strong--a sturdy tyke.

At least such a dog is the crest of the martial and renowned Earls of
Shrewsbury, to whom your family are probably blood relations.'

'I believe,' said the Colonel, smiling, 'our dogs are whelps of the same
litter: for my part, if crests were to dispute precedence, I should be
apt to let them, as the proverb says, "fight dog, fight bear."'

As he made this speech, at which the Baron took another long pinch of
snuff, they had entered the house--that is, the Baron, Rose, and Lady
Emily, with young Stanley and the Bailie, for Edward and the rest of the
party remained on the terrace, to examine a new greenhouse stocked with
the finest plants. The Baron resumed his favourite topic: 'However it
may please you to derogate from the honour of your burgonet, Colonel
Talbot, which is doubtless your humour, as I have seen in other
gentlemen of birth and honour in your country, I must again repeat it
as a most ancient and distinguished bearing, as well as that of my young
friend Francis Stanley, which is the eagle and child.'

'The bird and bantling they call it in Derbyshire, sir,' said Stanley.

'Ye're a daft callant, sir,' said the Baron, who had a great liking to
this young man, perhaps because he sometimes teased him--'Ye're a daft
callant, and I must correct you some of these days,' shaking his great
brown fist at him. 'But what I meant to say, Colonel Talbot, is, that
yours is an ancient PROSAPIA, or descent, and since you have lawfully
and justly acquired the estate for you and yours, which I have lost for
me and mine, I wish it may remain in your name as many centuries as it
has done in that of the late proprietor's.'

'That,' answered the Colonel, 'is very handsome, Mr. Bradwardine,
indeed.'

'And yet, sir, I cannot but marvel that you, Colonel, whom I noted to
have so much of the AMOR PATRIAE, when we met in Edinburgh, as even to
vilipend other countries, should have chosen to establish your Lares, or
household gods, PROCUL A PATRIEA FINIBUS, and in a manner to expatriate
yourself.'

'Why really, Baron, I do not see why, to keep the secret of these
foolish boys, Waverley and Stanley, and of my wife, who is no wiser, one
old soldier should continue to impose upon another. You must know,
then, that I have so much of that same prejudice in favour of my native
country, that the sum of money which I advanced to the seller of this
extensive barony has only purchased for me a box in --shire, called
Brerewood Lodge, with about two hundred and fifty acres of land,
the chief merit of which is, that it is within a very few miles of
Waverley-Honour.'

'And who, then, in the name of Haven, has bought this property?'

'That,' said the Colonel,' it is this gentleman's profession to
explain.'

The Bailie, whom this reference regarded, and who had all this while
shifted from one foot to another with great impatience, 'like a hen,'
as he afterwards said, 'upon a het girdle'; and chuckling, he might have
added, like the said hen in all the glory of laying an egg--now pushed
forward: 'That I can, that I can, your Honour,' drawing from his pocket
a budget of papers, and untying the red tape with a hand trembling
with eagerness. 'Here is the disposition and assignation, by Malcolm
Bradwardine of Inch-Grabbit, regularly signed and tested in terms of
the statute, whereby, for a certain sum of sterling money presently
contented and paid to him, he has disponed, alienated, and conveyed the
whole estate and barony of Bradwardine, Tully-Veolan, and others, with
the fortalice and manor-place--'

'For God's sake, to the point, sir--I have all that by heart,' said the
Colonel.

'To Cosmo Comyne Bradwardine, Esq.' pursued the Bailie, 'his heirs and
assignees, simply and irredeemably--to be held either A ME VEL DE ME--'

'Pray read short, sir.'

'On the conscience of an honest man, Colonel, I read as short as is
consistent with style.--Under the burden and reservation always--

'Mr. Macwheeble, this would outlast a Russian winter--give me leave. In
short, Mr. Bradwardine, your family estate is your own once more in full
property, and at your absolute disposal, but only burdened with the sum
advanced to repurchase it, which I understand is utterly disproportioned
to its value.

'An auld sang--an auld sang, if it please your Honours,' cried the
Bailie, rubbing his hands; 'look at the rental book.'

'Which sum being advanced by Mr. Edward Waverley, chiefly from the price
of his father's property which I bought from him, is secured to his lady
your daughter, and her family by this marriage.'

'It is a catholic security,' shouted the Bailie, 'to Rose Comyne
Bradwardine, ALIAS Wauverley, in liferent, and the children of the
said marriage in fee; and I made up a wee bit minute of an ante-nuptial
contract, INTUITU MATRIMONII, so it cannot be subject to reduction
hereafter, as a donation INTER VIRUM ET UXOREM.'

It is difficult to say whether the worthy Baron was most delighted
with the restitution of his family property, or with the delicacy and
generosity that left him unfettered to pursue his purpose in disposing
of it after his death, and which avoided, as much as possible, even
the appearance of laying him under pecuniary obligation. When his first
pause of joy and astonishment was over, his thoughts turned to the
unworthy heir-male, who, he pronounced, 'had sold his birthright, like
Esau, for a mess o' pottage.'

'But wha cookit the parritch for him?' exclaimed the Bailie; 'I wad like
to ken that--wha but your Honour's to command, Duncan Macwheeble?
His Honour, young Mr. Wauverley, put it a' into my hand frae the
beginning--frae the first calling o' the summons, as I may say. I
circumvented them--I played at bogle about the bush wi' them--I cajoled
them; and if I havena gien Inch-Grabbit and Jamie Howie a bonnie begunk,
they ken themselves. Him a writer! I didna gea slapdash to them wi' our
young bra' bridegroom, to gar them haud up the market; na, na; I scared
them wi' our wild tenantry, and the Mac-Ivors, that are but ill settled
yet, till they durstna on ony errand whatsoever gang ower the
doorstane after gloaming, for fear John Heatherblutter, or some siccan
dare-the-deil, should tak a baff at them: then, on the other hand, I
beflumm'd them wi' Colonel Talbot--wad they offer to keep up the price
again' the Duke's friend? did they na ken wha was master? had they na
seen eneugh, by the sad example of mony a puir misguided unhappy body--'

'Who went to Derby, for example, Mr. Macwheeble?' said the Colonel to
him, aside.

'Oh' whisht, Colonel, for the love o' God! let that flee stick i'
the wa'. There were mony good folk at Derby; and it's ill speaking of
halters,'--with a sly cast of his eye toward the Baron, who was in a
deep reverie.

Starting out of it at once, he took Macwheeble by the button, and led
him into one of the deep window recesses, whence only fragments of their
conversation reached the rest of the party. It certainly related to
stamp-paper and parchment; for no other subject, even from the mouth of
his patron, and he, once more an efficient one, could have arrested so
deeply the Bailie's reverent and absorbed attention.

'I understand your Honour perfectly; it can be dune as easy as taking
out a decreet in absence.'

'To her and him, after my demise, and to their heirs-male,--but
preferring the second son, if God shall bless them with two, who is to
carry the name and arms of Bradwardine of that Ilk, without any other
name or armorial bearings whatsoever.'

'Tut, your Honour!' whispered the Bailie, 'I'll mak a slight jotting the
morn; it will cost but a charter of resignation IN FAVOREM; and I'll hae
it ready for the next term in Exchequer.

Their private conversation ended, the Baron was now summoned to do the
honours of Tully-Veolan to new guests. These were, Major Melville of
Cairnvreckan, and the Reverend Mr. Morton, followed by two or three
others of the Baron's acquaintances, who had been made privy to his
having again acquired the estate of his fathers. The shouts of the
villagers were also heard beneath in the courtyard; for Saunders
Saunderson, who had kept the secret for several days with laudable
prudence, had unloosed his tongue upon beholding the arrival of the
carriages.

But, while Edward received Major Melville with politeness, and the
clergyman with the most affectionate and grateful kindness, his
father-in-law looked a little awkward, as uncertain how he should answer
the necessary claims of hospitality to his guests, and forward the
festivity of his tenants. Lady Emily relieved him, by intimating, that,
though she must be an indifferent representative of Mrs. Edward Waverley
in many respects, she hoped the Baron would approve of the entertainment
she had ordered, in expectation of so many guests; and that they would
find such other accommodations provided, as might in some degree support
the ancient hospitality of Tully-Veolan. It is impossible to describe
the pleasure which this assurance gave the Baron, who, with an air of
gallantry half appertaining to the stiff Scottish laird, and half to the
officer in the French service, offered his arm to the fair speaker, and
led the way, in something between a stride and a minuet step, into the
large dining parlour, followed by all the rest of the good company.

By dint of Saunderson's directions and exertions, all here, as well as
in the other apartments, had been disposed as much as possible according
to the old arrangement; and where new movables had been necessary, they
had been selected in the same character with the old furniture, There
was one addition to this fine old apartment, however, which drew
tears into the Baron's eyes. It was a large and spirited painting,
representing Fergus Mac-Ivor and Waverley in their Highland dress; the
scene a wild, rocky, and mountainous pass, down which the clan were
descending in the background. It was taken from a spirited sketch, drawn
while they were in Edinburgh by a young man of high genius, and had
been painted on a full-length scale by an eminent London artist. Raeburn
himself (whose Highland chiefs do all but walk out of the canvas) could
not have done more justice to the subject; and the ardent, fiery, and
impetuous character of the unfortunate Chief of Glennaquoich was finely
contrasted with the contemplative, fanciful, and enthusiastic expression
of his happier friend. Beside this painting hung the arms which Waverley
had borne in the unfortunate civil war; The whole piece was beheld with
admiration, and deeper feelings.

Men must, however, eat, in spite both of sentiment and vertu; and the
Baron, while he assumed the lower end of the table, insisted that Lady
Emily should do the honours of the head, that they might, he said, set a
meet example to the YOUNG FOLK. After a pause of deliberation, employed
in adjusting in his own brain the precedence between the Presbyterian
kirk and Episcopal church of Scotland, he requested Mr. Morton, as the
stranger, would crave a blessing,--observing, that Mr. Rubrick, who was
at home, would return thanks for the distinguished mercies it had been
his lot to experience. The dinner was excellent. Saunderson attended
in full costume, with all the former domestics, who had been collected,
excepting one or two, that had not been heard of since the affair of
Culloden. The cellars were stocked with wine which was pronounced to be
superb, and it had been contrived that the Bear of the Fountain, in the
courtyard, should (for that night only) play excellent brandy punch for
the benefit of the lower orders.

When the dinner was over, the Baron, about to propose a toast, cast a
somewhat sorrowful look upon the sideboard,--which, however, exhibited
much of his plate, that had either been secreted or purchased by
neighbouring gentlemen from the soldiery, and by them gladly restored to
the original owner.

'In the late times,' he said, 'those must be thankful who have saved
life and land; yet, when I am about to pronounce this toast, I cannot
but regret an old heirloom, Lady Emily--A POCULUM POTATORIUM, Colonel
Talbot'--

Here the Baron's elbow was gently touched by his major-demo, and,
turning round, he beheld, in the hands of Alexander ab Alexandro, the
celebrated cup of Saint Duthac, the Blessed Bear of Bradwardine! I
question if the recovery of his estate afforded him more rapture. 'By
my honour,' he said, 'one might almost believe in brownies and fairies,
Lady Emily, when your ladyship is in presence!'

'I am truly happy,' said Colonel Talbot, 'that by the recovery of this
piece of family antiquity, it has fallen within my power to give you
some token of my deep interest in all that concerns my young friend
Edward. But that you may not suspect Lady Emily for a sorceress, or me
for a conjurer, which is no joke in Scotland, I must tell you that Frank
Stanley, your friend, who has been seized with a tartan fever ever since
he heard Edward's tales of old Scottish manners, happened to describe to
us at second hand this remarkable cup. My servant, Spontoon, who, like
a true old soldier, observes everything and says little, gave me
afterwards to understand that he thought he had seen the piece of plate
Mr. Stanley mentioned, in the possession of a certain Mrs. Nosebag,
who, having been originally the helpmate of a pawnbroker, had found
opportunity, during the late unpleasant scenes in Scotland, to trade
a little in her old line, and so became the depositary of the more
valuable part of the spoil of half the army. You may believe the cup was
speedily recovered; and it will give me very great pleasure if you allow
me to suppose that its value is not diminished by having been restored
through my means.'

A tear mingled with the wine which the Baron filled, as he proposed a
cup of gratitude to Colonel Talbot, and 'The Prosperity of the united
Houses of Waverley-Honour and Bradwardine!'--

It only remains for me to say, that as no wish was ever uttered with
more affectionate sincerity, there are few which, allowing for the
necessary mutability of human events, have been, upon the whole, more
happily fulfilled.



CHAPTER LXXII

A POSTSCRIPT, WHICH SHOULD HAVE BEEN A PREFACE

Our journey is now finished, gentle reader; and if your patience has
accompanied me through these sheets, the contract is, on your part,
strictly fulfilled. Yet, like the driver who has received his full hire,
I still linger near you, and make, with becoming diffidence, a trifling
additional claim upon your bounty and good nature. You are as free,
however, to shut the volume of the one petitioner, as to close your door
in the face of the other.

This should have been a prefatory chapter, but for two reasons:--First,
that most novel readers, as my own conscience reminds me, are apt to
be guilty of the sin of omission respecting that same matter of
prefaces;--secondly, that it is a general custom with that class of
students, to begin with the last chapter of a work; so that, after
all, these remarks, being introduced last in order, have still the best
chance to be read in their proper place.

There is no European nation, which, within the course of half a century,
or little more, has undergone so complete a change as this kingdom of
Scotland. The effects of the insurrection of 1745,--the destruction
of the patriarchal power of the Highland chiefs,--the abolition of the
heritable jurisdictions of the Lowland nobility and barons,--the total
eradication of the Jacobite party, which, averse to intermingle with the
English, or adopt their customs, long continued to pride themselves
upon maintaining ancient Scottish manners and customs,--commenced this
innovation. The gradual influx of wealth, and extension of commerce,
have since united to render the present people of Scotland a class of
beings as different from their grandfathers as the existing English
are from those of Queen Elizabeth's time, The political and economical
effects of these changes have been traced by Lord Selkirk with great
precision and accuracy. But the change, though steadily and rapidly
progressive, has, nevertheless, been gradual; and, like those who drift
down the stream of a deep and smooth river, we are not aware of the
progress we have made until we fix our eye on the now distant point
from which we have been drifted.--Such of the present generation as
can recollect the last twenty or twenty-five years of the
eighteenth century, will be fully sensible of the truth of this
statement;--especially if their acquaintance and connexions lay among
those, who, in my younger time, were facetiously called 'folks of
the old leaven,' who still cherished a lingering, though hopeless,
attachment, to the house of Stuart. This race has now almost entirely
vanished from the land, and with it, doubtless, much absurd political
prejudice--but also, many living examples of singular and disinterested
attachment to the principles of loyalty which they received from their
fathers, and of old Scottish faith, hospitality, worth, and honour.

It was my accidental lot, though not born a Highlander (which may be an
apology for much bad Gaelic), to reside, during my childhood and youth,
among persons of the above description;--and now, for the purpose of
preserving some idea of the ancient manners of which I have witnessed
the almost total extinction, I have embodied in imaginary scenes, and
ascribed to fictitious characters, a part of the incidents which I then
received from those who were actors in them. Indeed, the most romantic
parts of this narrative are precisely those which have a foundation in
fact. The exchange of mutual protection between a Highland gentleman
and an officer of rank in the king's service, together with the spirited
manner in which the latter asserted his right to return the favour he
had received, is literally true. The accident by a musket-shot, and
the heroic reply imputed to Flora, relate to a lady of rank not long
deceased. And scarce a gentleman who was 'in hiding' after the battle of
Culloden but could tell a tale of strange concealments, and of wild and
hair's-breadth 'scapes, as extraordinary as any which I have ascribed
to my heroes. Of this, the escape of Charles Edward himself, as the most
prominent, is the most striking example. The accounts of the battle
of Preston and skirmish at Clifton are taken from the narrative of
intelligent eye-witnesses, and corrected from the History of the
Rebellion by the late venerable author of DOUGLAS. The Lowland Scottish
gentlemen, and the subordinate characters, are not given as individual
portraits, but are drawn from the general habits of the period (of which
I have witnessed some remnants in my younger days), and partly gathered
from tradition.

It has been my object to describe these persons, not by a caricatured
and exaggerated use of the national dialect, but by their habits,
manners, and feelings; so as in some distant degree to emulate the
admirable Irish portraits drawn by Miss Edgeworth, so different from
the 'Teagues' and 'dear joys,' who so long, with the most perfect family
resemblance to each other, occupied the drama and the novel.

I feel no confidence, however, in the manner in which I have executed
my purpose. Indeed, so little was I satisfied with my production, that
I laid it aside in an unfinished state, and only found it again by mere
accident among other waste papers in an old cabinet, the drawers of
which I was rummaging, in order to accommodate a friend with some
fishing tackle, after it had been mislaid for several years. Two
works upon similar subjects, by female authors, whose genius is highly
creditable to their country, have appeared in the interval; I mean Mrs.
Hamilton's GLENBURNIE, and the late account of Highland Superstitions.
But the first is confined to the rural habits of Scotland, of which
it has given a picture with striking and impressive fidelity; and the
traditional records of the respectable and ingenious Mrs. Grant of
Laggan, are of a nature distinct from the fictitious narrative which I
have here attempted.

I would willingly persuade myself, that the preceding work will not be
found altogether uninteresting. To elder persons it will recall scenes
and characters familiar to their youth; and to the rising generation the
tale may present some idea of the manners of their forefathers.

Yet I heartily wish that the task of tracing the evanescent manners of
his own country had employed the pen of the only man in Scotland who
could have done it justice,--of him so eminently distinguished
in elegant literature,--and whose sketches of Colonel Caustic and
Umphraville are perfectly blended with the finer traits of national
character. I should in that case have had more pleasure as a reader
than I shall ever feel in the pride of a successful author, should these
sheets confer upon me that envied distinction. And as I have inverted
the usual arrangement, placing these remarks at the end of the work
to which they refer, I will venture on a second violation of form, by
closing the whole with a Dedication:--

THESE VOLUMES BEING RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED TO OUR SCOTTISH ADDISON,

HENRY MACKENZIE,

BY AN UNKNOWN ADMIRER OF HIS GENIUS.


*****



NOTES


NOTE 1.--THE BRADSHAIGH LEGEND

There is a family legend to this purpose, belonging to the knightly
family of Bradshaigh, the proprietors of Haighhall, in Lancashire,
where, I have been told, the event is recorded on a painted glass
window. The German ballad of the 'Noble Moringer' turns upon a similar
topic. But undoubtedly many such incidents may have taken place, where,
the distance being great, and the intercourse infrequent, false reports
concerning the fate of the absent Crusaders must have been commonly
circulated, and sometimes perhaps rather hastily credited at home.


NOTE 2.--TITUS LIVIUS

The attachment to this classic was, it is said, actually displayed, in
the manner mentioned in the text, by an unfortunate Jacobite in that
unhappy period. He escaped from the jail in which he was confined for
a hasty trial and certain condemnation, and was retaken as he hovered
around the place in which he had been imprisoned, for which he could
give no better reason than the hope of recovering his favourite Titus
Livius. I am sorry to add, that the simplicity of such a character
was found to form no apology for his guilt as a rebel, and that he was
condemned and executed.


NOTE 3.--NICHOLAS AMHURST

Nicholas Amhurst, a noted political writer, who conducted for many years
a paper called the Craftsman, under the assumed name of Caleb d'Anvers.
He was devoted to the Tory interest, and seconded with much ability the
attacks of Pulteney on Sir Robert Walpole. He died in 1742, neglected by
his great patrons, and in the most miserable circumstances.

Amhurst survived the downfall of Walpole's power, and had reason to
expect a reward for his labours. If we excuse Bolingbroke, who had only
saved the shipwreck of his fortunes, we shall be at a loss to justify
Pulteney, who could with ease have given this man a considerable income.
The utmost of his generosity to Amhurst, that I ever heard of, was a
hogshead of claret! He died, it is supposed, of a broken heart; and was
buried at the charge of his honest printer, Richard Franklin.'--LORD
CHESTERFIELD'S CHARACTERS REVIEWED, p. 42.


NOTE 4.--COLONEL GARDINER

I have now given in the text the full name of this gallant and excellent
man, and proceed to copy the account of his remarkable conversion, as
related by Dr. Doddridge.

'This memorable event,' says the pious writer, 'happened towards the
middle of July, 1719. The major had spent the evening (and, if I
mistake not, it was the Sabbath) in some gay company, and had an unhappy
assignation with a married woman, whom he was to attend exactly at
twelve. The company broke up about eleven; and not judging it convenient
to anticipate the time appointed, he went into his chamber to kill the
tedious hour, perhaps with some amusing book, or some other way. But it
very accidentally happened that he took up a religious book, which
his good mother or aunt had, without his knowledge, slipped into
his portmanteau. It was called, if I remember the title exactly, THE
CHRISTIAN SOLDIER, or HEAVEN TAKEN BY STORM; and it was written by
Mr. Thomas Watson. Guessing by the title of it that he would find some
phrases of his own profession spiritualized in a manner which he thought
might afford him some diversion, he resolved to dip into it; but he took
no serious notice of anything it had in it; and yet, while this book was
in his hand an impression was made upon his mind (perhaps God only
knows how) which drew after it a train of the most important and happy
consequences. He thought he saw an unusual blaze of light fall upon the
book which he was reading, which he at first imagined might happen by
some accident in the candle: but lifting up his eyes, he apprehended, to
his extreme amazement, that there was before him, as it were suspended
in the air, a visible representation of the Lord Jesus Christ upon the
cross, surrounded on all sides with a glory; and was impressed, as if
a voice, or something equivalent to a voice, had come to him, to this
effect (for he was not confident as to the words)--"Oh, sinner! did I
suffer this for thee? and are these thy returns?" Struck with so amazing
a phenomenon as this, there remained hardly any life in him, so that he
sunk down in the arm-chair in which he sat, and continued, he knew not
how long, insensible.'

'With regard to this vision,' says the ingenious Dr. Hibbert, 'the
appearance of our Saviour on the cross, and the awful words repeated,
can be considered in no other light than as so many recollected images
of the mind, which, probably, had their origin in the language of some
urgent appeal to repentance, that the colonel might have casually read
or heard delivered. From what cause, however, such ideas were rendered
as vivid as actual impressions, we have no information to be depended
upon. This vision was certainly attended with one of the most important
of consequences connected with the Christian dispensation--the
conversion of a sinner; and hence no single narrative has, perhaps, done
more to confirm the superstitious opinion that apparitions of this
awful kind cannot arise without a divine fiat.' Dr. Hibbert adds, in a
note--'A short time before the vision, Colonel Gardiner had received a
severe fall from his horse. Did the brain receive some slight degree
of injury from the accident, so as to predispose him to this spiritual
illusion?'--HIBBERT'S PHILOSOPHY OF APPARITIONS, Edinburgh, 1824, p.
190.


NOTE 5.--SCOTTISH INNS

The courtesy of an invitation to partake a traveller's meal, or at least
that of being invited to share whatever liquor the guest called for, was
expected by certain old landlords in Scotland, even in the youth of the
author. In requital, mine host was always furnished with the news of the
country, and was probably a little of a humorist to boot. The devolution
of the whole actual business and drudgery of the inn upon the poor
gudewife, was very common among the Scottish Bonifaces. There was in
ancient times, in the city of Edinburgh, a gentleman of good family,
who condescended, in order to gain a livelihood, to become the nominal
keeper of a coffee house, one of the first places of the kind which
had been opened in the Scottish metropolis. As usual, it was entirely
managed by the careful and industrious Mrs. B--; while her husband
amused himself with field sports, without troubling his head about the
matter. Once upon a time the premises having taken fire, the husband was
met, walking up the High Street loaded with his guns and fishing-rods,
and replied calmly to some one who inquired after his wife, 'that the
poor woman was trying to save a parcel of crockery, and some trumpery
books'; the last being those which served her to conduct the business of
the house.

There were many elderly gentlemen in the author's younger days, who
still held it part of the amusement of a journey 'to parley with mine
host,' who often resembled, in his quaint humour, mine Host of the
Garter in the MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR; or Blague of the George in the
MERRY DEVIL OF EDMONTON. Sometimes the landlady took her share of
entertaining the company. In either case, the omitting to pay them due
attention gave displeasure, and perhaps brought down a smart jest, as on
the following occasion:--

A jolly dame, who, not 'Sixty Years since,' kept the principal
caravansary at Greenlaw in Berwickshire, had the honour to receive
under her roof a very worthy clergyman, with three sons of the same
profession, each having a cure of souls: be it said in passing, none of
the reverend party were reckoned powerful in the pulpit. After dinner
was over, the worthy senior, in the pride of his heart, asked Mrs.
Buchan whether she ever had had such a party in her house before. 'Here
sit I,' he said, 'a placed minister of the Kirk of Scotland, and here
sit my three sons, each a placed minister of the same kirk.--confess,
Luckie Buchan, you never had such a party in your house before.' The
question was not premised by any invitation to sit down and take a glass
of wine or the like, so Mrs. B. answered dryly, 'Indeed, Sir, I cannot
just say that ever I had such a party in my house before, except once in
the forty-five, when I had a Highland piper here, with his three sons,
all Highland pipers; AND DEIL A SPRING THEY COULD PLAY AMANG THEM.'


NOTE 6.--THE CUSTOM OF KEEPING FOOLS

I am ignorant how long the ancient and established custom of keeping
fools has been disused in England. Swift writes an epitaph on the Earl
of Suffolk's fool,--

'Whose name was Dickie Pearce.'

In Scotland the custom subsisted till late in the last century. At
Glamis Castle, is preserved the dress of one of the jesters, very
handsome, and ornamented with many bells. It is not above thirty years
since such a character stood by the sideboard of a nobleman of the first
rank in Scotland, and occasionally mixed in the conversation, till he
carried the joke rather too far, in making proposals to one of the young
ladies of the family, and publishing the banns betwixt her and himself
in the public church.


NOTE 7.--PERSECUTION OF EPISCOPAL CLERGYMEN

After the Revolution of 1688, and on some occasions when the spirit of
the Presbyterians had been unusually animated against their opponents,
the Episcopal clergymen, who were chiefly non-jurors, were exposed to
be mobbed, as we should now say, or rabbled, as the phrase then went,
to expiate their political heresies. But notwithstanding that the
Presbyterians had the persecution in Charles II and his brother's time
to exasperate them, there was little mischief done beyond the kind of
petty violence mentioned in the text.


NOTE 8.--STIRRUP-CUP

I may here mention, that the fashion of compotation described in the
text, was still occasionally practised in Scotland in the author's
youth. A company, after having taken leave of their host, often went to
finish the evening at the clachan or village, in 'womb of tavern.' Their
entertainer always accompanied them to take the stirrup-cup, which often
occasioned a long and late revel.

The POCULUM POTATORIUM of the valiant Baron, his Blessed Bear, has a
prototype at the fine old Castle of Glamis, so rich in memorials of
ancient times; it is a massive beaker of silver, double gilt, moulded
into the shape of a lion, and holding about an English pint of wine. The
form alludes to the family name of Strathmore, which is Lyon, and, when
exhibited, the cup must necessarily be emptied to the Earl's health.
The author ought perhaps to be ashamed of recording that he has had the
honour of swallowing the contents of the Lion; and the recollection of
the feat served to suggest the story of the Bear of Bradwardine. In the
family of Scott of Thirlestane (not Thirlestane in the Forest, but the
place of the same name in Roxburghshire) was long preserved a cup of the
same kind, in the form of a jack-boot. Each guest was obliged to empty
this at his departure. If the guest's name was Scott, the necessity was
doubly imperative.

When the landlord of an inn presented his guests with DEOCH AN DORUIS,
that is, the drink at the door, or the stirrup-cup, the draught was not
charged in the reckoning. On this point a learned Bailie of the town of
Forfar pronounced a very sound judgement.

A., an ale-wife in Forfar, had brewed her 'peck of malt,' and set the
liquor out of doors to cool; the cow of B., a neighbour of A. chanced
to come by, and seeing the good beverage, was allured to taste it, and
finally to drink it up. When A. came to take in her liquor, she found
the tub empty, and from the cow's staggering and staring, so as to
betray her intemperance, she easily divined the mode in which her
'brewst' had disappeared. To take vengeance on Crummie's ribs with a
stick, was her first effort. The roaring of the cow brought B., her
master, who remonstrated with his angry neighbour, and received in reply
a demand for the value of the ale which Crummie had drunk up. B. refused
payment, and was conveyed before C., the Bailie, or sitting Magistrate.
He heard the case patiently; and then demanded of the plaintiff A.,
whether the cow had sat down to her potation, or taken it standing. The
plaintiff answered she had not seen the deed committed, but she supposed
the cow drank the ale standing on her feet; adding, that had she been
near, she would have made her use them to some purpose. The Bailie,
on this admission, solemnly adjudged the cow's drink to be DEOCH
AN DORUIS--a stirrup-cup, for which no charge could be made without
violating the ancient hospitality of Scotland.


NOTE 9.--CANTING HERALDRY

Although canting heraldry is generally reprobated, it seems nevertheless
to have been adopted in the arms and mottoes of many honourable
families. Thus the motto of the Vernons, VER NON SEMPER VIRET, is a
perfect pun, and so is that of the Onslows, FESTINA LENTE. The PERIISSEM
NI PER-IISSEM of the Anstruthers is liable to a similar objection. One
of that ancient race, finding that an antagonist, with whom he had
fixed a friendly meeting, was determined to take the opportunity of
assassinating him, prevented the hazard by dashing out his brains with
a battle-axe. Two sturdy arms brandishing such a weapon, form the usual
crest of the family, with the above motto--PERIISSEM NI PER-IISSEM--I
had died, unless I had gone through with it.


NOTE 10.--THE LEVYING OF BLACKMAIL

Mac-Donald of Barrisdale, one of the very last Highland gentlemen who
carried on the plundering system to any great extent, was a scholar and
a well-bred gentleman. He engraved on his broadswords the well-known
lines--

Hae tibi erunt artes--pacisque imponere morem,

Parcere subiectis, et debellare superbos.
