    The sun no sooner shall ascend, than fame
    Shall wide divulge the deed that I have done,
    Slaying the suitors under my own roof.
    Thou, therefore, with thy maidens, sit retired
    In thy own chamber at the palace-top,
    Nor question ask, nor, curious, look abroad.
      He said, and cov'ring with his radiant arms                    440
    His shoulders, called Telemachus; he roused
    Eumaeus and the herdsman too, and bade
    All take their martial weapons in their hand.
    Not disobedient they, as he enjoin'd,
    Put armour on, and issued from the gates
    Ulysses at their head. The earth was now
    Enlighten'd, but Minerva them in haste
    Led forth into the fields, unseen by all.


FOOTNOTES:

[108] The proof consisted in this--that the bed being attached to the
stump of an olive tree still rooted, was immovable, and Ulysses having
made it himself, no person present, he must needs be apprized of the
impossibility of her orders, if he were indeed Ulysses; accordingly, this
demonstration of his identity satisfies all her scruples.

[109] See the note on the same passage, Book XI.

[110] Aristophanes the grammarian and Aristarchus chose that the Odyssey
should end here; but the story is not properly concluded till the tumult
occasioned by the slaughter of so many Princes being composed, Ulysses
finds himself once more in peaceful possession of his country.




BOOK XXIV

ARGUMENT

Mercury conducts the souls of the suitors down to Ades. Ulysses discovers
himself to Laertes, and quells, by the aid of Minerva, an insurrection of
the people resenting the death of the suitors.


    And now Cyllenian Hermes summon'd forth
    The spirits of the suitors; waving wide
    The golden wand of pow'r to seal all eyes
    In slumber, and to ope them wide again,
    He drove them gibb'ring down into the shades,[111]
    As when the bats within some hallow'd cave
    Flit squeaking all around, for if but one
    Fall from the rock, the rest all follow him,
    In such connexion mutual they adhere,
    So, after bounteous Mercury, the ghosts,                          10
    Troop'd downward gibb'ring all the dreary way.[111]
    The Ocean's flood and the Leucadian rock,
    The Sun's gate also and the land of Dreams
    They pass'd, whence, next, into the meads they came
    Of Asphodel, by shadowy forms possess'd,
    Simulars of the dead. They found the souls
    Of brave Pelides there, and of his friend
    Patroclus, of Antilochus renown'd,
    And of the mightier Ajax, for his form
    And bulk (Achilles sole except) of all                            20
    The sons of the Achaians most admired.
    These waited on Achilles. Then, appear'd
    The mournful ghost of Agamemnon, son
    Of Atreus, compass'd by the ghosts of all
    Who shared his fate beneath AEgisthus' roof,
    And him the ghost of Peleus' son bespake.
      Atrides! of all Heroes we esteem'd
    Thee dearest to the Gods, for that thy sway
    Extended over such a glorious host
    At Ilium, scene of sorrow to the Greeks.                          30
    But Fate, whose ruthless force none may escape
    Of all who breathe, pursued thee from the first.
    Thou should'st have perish'd full of honour, full
    Of royalty, at Troy; so all the Greeks
    Had rais'd thy tomb, and thou hadst then bequeath'd
    Great glory to thy son; but Fate ordain'd
    A death, oh how deplorable! for thee.
      To whom Atrides' spirit thus replied.
    Blest son of Peleus, semblance of the Gods,
    At Ilium, far from Argos, fall'n! for whom                        40
    Contending, many a Trojan, many a Chief
    Of Greece died also, while in eddies whelm'd
    Of dust thy vastness spread the plain,[112] nor thee
    The chariot aught or steed could int'rest more!
    All day we waged the battle, nor at last
    Desisted, but for tempests sent from Jove.
    At length we bore into the Greecian fleet
    Thy body from the field; there, first, we cleansed
    With tepid baths and oil'd thy shapely corse,
    Then placed thee on thy bier, while many a Greek                  50
    Around thee wept, and shore his locks for thee.
    Thy mother, also, hearing of thy death
    With her immortal nymphs from the abyss
    Arose and came; terrible was the sound
    On the salt flood; a panic seized the Greeks,
    And ev'ry warrior had return'd on board
    That moment, had not Nestor, ancient Chief,
    Illumed by long experience, interposed,
    His counsels, ever wisest, wisest proved
    Then also, and he thus address'd the host.                        60
      Sons of Achaia; fly not; stay, ye Greeks!
    Thetis arrives with her immortal nymphs
    From the abyss, to visit her dead son.
      So he; and, by his admonition stay'd,
    The Greeks fled not. Then, all around thee stood
    The daughters of the Ancient of the Deep,
    Mourning disconsolate; with heav'nly robes
    They clothed thy corse, and all the Muses nine
    Deplored thee in full choir with sweetest tones
    Responsive, nor one Greecian hadst thou seen                      70
    Dry-eyed, such grief the Muses moved in all.
    Full sev'nteen days we, day and night, deplored
    Thy death, both Gods in heav'n and men below,
    But, on the eighteenth day, we gave thy corse
    Its burning, and fat sheep around thee slew
    Num'rous, with many a pastur'd ox moon-horn'd.
    We burn'd thee clothed in vesture of the Gods,
    With honey and with oil feeding the flames
    Abundant, while Achaia's Heroes arm'd,
    Both horse and foot, encompassing thy pile,                       80
    Clash'd on their shields, and deaf'ning was the din.
    But when the fires of Vulcan had at length
    Consumed thee, at the dawn we stored thy bones
    In unguent and in undiluted wine;
    For Thetis gave to us a golden vase
    Twin-ear'd, which she profess'd to have received
    From Bacchus, work divine of Vulcan's hand.
    Within that vase, Achilles, treasured lie
    Thine and the bones of thy departed friend
    Patroclus, but a sep'rate urn we gave                             90
    To those of brave Antilochus, who most
    Of all thy friends at Ilium shared thy love
    And thy respect, thy friend Patroclus slain.
    Around both urns we piled a noble tomb,
    (We warriors of the sacred Argive host)
    On a tall promontory shooting far
    Into the spacious Hellespont, that all
    Who live, and who shall yet be born, may view
    Thy record, even from the distant waves.
    Then, by permission from the Gods obtain'd,                      100
    To the Achaian Chiefs in circus met
    Thetis appointed games. I have beheld
    The burial rites of many an Hero bold,
    When, on the death of some great Chief, the youths
    Girding their loins anticipate the prize,
    But sight of those with wonder fill'd me most,
    So glorious past all others were the games
    By silver-footed Thetis giv'n for thee,
    For thou wast ever favour'd of the Gods.
    Thus, hast thou not, Achilles! although dead,                    110
    Foregone thy glory, but thy fair report
    Is universal among all mankind;
    But, as for me, what recompense had I,
    My warfare closed? for whom, at my return,
    Jove framed such dire destruction by the hands
    Of fell AEgisthus and my murth'ress wife.
      Thus, mutual, they conferr'd; meantime approach'd,
    Swift messenger of heav'n, the Argicide,
    Conducting thither all the shades of those
    Slain by Ulysses. At that sight amazed                           120
    Both moved toward them. Agamemnon's shade
    Knew well Amphimedon, for he had been
    Erewhile his father's guest in Ithaca,
    And thus the spirit of Atreus' son began.
      Amphimedon! by what disastrous chance,
    Cooevals as ye seem, and of an air
    Distinguish'd all, descend ye to the Deeps?
    For not the chosen youths of a whole town
    Should form a nobler band. Perish'd ye sunk
    Amid vast billows and rude tempests raised                       130
    By Neptune's pow'r? or on dry land through force
    Of hostile multitudes, while cutting off
    Beeves from the herd, or driving flocks away?
    Or fighting for your city and your wives?
    Resolve me? I was once a guest of yours.
    Remember'st not what time at your abode
    With godlike Menelaus I arrived,
    That we might win Ulysses with his fleet
    To follow us to Troy? scarce we prevail'd
    At last to gain the city-waster Chief,                           140
    And, after all, consumed a whole month more
    The wide sea traversing from side to side.
      To whom the spirit of Amphimedon.
    Illustrious Agamemnon, King of men!
    All this I bear in mind, and will rehearse
    The manner of our most disastrous end.
    Believing brave Ulysses lost, we woo'd
    Meantime his wife; she our detested suit
    Would neither ratify nor yet refuse,
    But, planning for us a tremendous death,                         150
    This novel stratagem, at last, devised.
    Beginning, in her own recess, a web
    Of slend'rest thread, and of a length and breadth
    Unusual, thus the suitors she address'd.
      Princes, my suitors! since the noble Chief
    Ulysses is no more, enforce not yet
    My nuptials; wait till I shall finish first
    A fun'ral robe (lest all my threads decay)
    Which for the ancient Hero I prepare,
    Laertes, looking for the mournful hour                           160
    When fate shall snatch him to eternal rest;
    Else, I the censure dread of all my sex,
    Should he so wealthy, want at last a shroud.
      So spake the Queen; we, unsuspicious all,
    With her request complied. Thenceforth, all day
    She wove the ample web, and by the aid
    Of torches ravell'd it again at night.
    Three years she thus by artifice our suit
    Eluded safe, but when the fourth arrived,
    And the same season, after many moons                            170
    And fleeting days, return'd, a damsel then
    Of her attendants, conscious of the fraud,
    Reveal'd it, and we found her pulling loose
    The splendid web. Thus, through constraint, at length,
    She finish'd it, and in her own despight.
    But when the Queen produced, at length, her work
    Finish'd, new-blanch'd, bright as the sun or moon,
    Then came Ulysses, by some adverse God
    Conducted, to a cottage on the verge
    Of his own fields, in which his swine-herd dwells;               180
    There also the illustrious Hero's son
    Arrived soon after, in his sable bark
    From sandy Pylus borne; they, plotting both
    A dreadful death for all the suitors, sought
    Our glorious city, but Ulysses last,
    And first Telemachus. The father came
    Conducted by his swine-herd, and attired
    In tatters foul; a mendicant he seem'd,
    Time-worn, and halted on a staff. So clad,
    And ent'ring on the sudden, he escaped                           190
    All knowledge even of our eldest there,
    And we reviled and smote him; he although
    Beneath his own roof smitten and reproach'd,
    With patience suffer'd it awhile, but roused
    By inspiration of Jove AEgis-arm'd
    At length, in concert with his son convey'd
    To his own chamber his resplendent arms,
    There lodg'd them safe, and barr'd the massy doors
    Then, in his subtlety he bade the Queen
    A contest institute with bow and rings                           200
    Between the hapless suitors, whence ensued
    Slaughter to all. No suitor there had pow'r
    To overcome the stubborn bow that mock'd
    All our attempts; and when the weapon huge
    At length was offer'd to Ulysses' hands,
    With clamour'd menaces we bade the swain
    Withhold it from him, plead he as he might;
    Telemachus alone with loud command,
    Bade give it him, and the illustrious Chief
    Receiving in his hand the bow, with ease                         210
    Bent it, and sped a shaft through all the rings.
    Then, springing to the portal steps, he pour'd
    The arrows forth, peer'd terrible around,
    Pierced King Antinoues, and, aiming sure
    His deadly darts, pierced others after him,
    Till in one common carnage heap'd we lay.
    Some God, as plain appear'd, vouchsafed them aid,
    Such ardour urged them, and with such dispatch
    They slew us on all sides; hideous were heard
    The groans of dying men fell'd to the earth                      220
    With head-strokes rude, and the floor swam with blood.
    Such, royal Agamemnon! was the fate
    By which we perish'd, all whose bodies lie
    Unburied still, and in Ulysses' house,
    For tidings none have yet our friends alarm'd
    And kindred, who might cleanse from sable gore
    Our clotted wounds, and mourn us on the bier,
    Which are the rightful privilege of the dead.
      Him answer'd, then, the shade of Atreus' son.
    Oh happy offspring of Laertes! shrewd                            230
    Ulysses! matchless valour thou hast shewn
    Recov'ring thus thy wife; nor less appears
    The virtue of Icarius' daughter wise,
    The chaste Penelope, so faithful found
    To her Ulysses, husband of her youth.
    His glory, by superior merit earn'd,
    Shall never die, and the immortal Gods
    Shall make Penelope a theme of song
    Delightful in the ears of all mankind.
    Not such was Clytemnestra, daughter vile                         240
    Of Tyndarus; she shed her husband's blood,
    And shall be chronicled in song a wife
    Of hateful memory, by whose offence
    Even the virtuous of her sex are shamed.
      Thus they, beneath the vaulted roof obscure
    Of Pluto's house, conferring mutual stood.
      Meantime, descending from the city-gates,
    Ulysses, by his son and by his swains
    Follow'd, arrived at the delightful farm
    Which old Laertes had with strenuous toil                        250
    Himself long since acquired. There stood his house
    Encompass'd by a bow'r in which the hinds
    Who served and pleased him, ate, and sat, and slept.
    An ancient woman, a Sicilian, dwelt
    There also, who in that sequester'd spot
    Attended diligent her aged Lord.
    Then thus Ulysses to his followers spake.
      Haste now, and, ent'ring, slay ye of the swine
    The best for our regale; myself, the while,
    Will prove my father, if his eye hath still                      260
    Discernment of me, or if absence long
    Have worn the knowledge of me from his mind.
      He said, and gave into his servants' care
    His arms; they swift proceeded to the house,
    And to the fruitful grove himself as swift
    To prove his father. Down he went at once
    Into the spacious garden-plot, but found
    Nor Dolius there, nor any of his sons
    Or servants; they were occupied elsewhere,
    And, with the ancient hind himself, employ'd                     270
    Collecting thorns with which to fence the grove.
    In that umbrageous spot he found alone
    Laertes, with his hoe clearing a plant;
    Sordid his tunic was, with many a patch
    Mended unseemly; leathern were his greaves,
    Thong-tied and also patch'd, a frail defence
    Against sharp thorns, while gloves secured his hands
    From briar-points, and on his head he bore
    A goat-skin casque, nourishing hopeless woe.
    No sooner then the Hero toil-inured                              280
    Saw him age-worn and wretched, than he paused
    Beneath a lofty pear-tree's shade to weep.
    There standing much he mused, whether, at once,
    Kissing and clasping in his arms his sire,
    To tell him all, by what means he had reach'd
    His native country, or to prove him first.
    At length, he chose as his best course, with words
    Of seeming strangeness to accost his ear,
    And, with that purpose, moved direct toward him.
    He, stooping low, loosen'd the earth around                      290
    A garden-plant, when his illustrious son
    Now, standing close beside him, thus began.
      Old sir! thou art no novice in these toils
    Of culture, but thy garden thrives; I mark
    In all thy ground no plant, fig, olive, vine,
    Pear-tree or flow'r-bed suff'ring through neglect.
    But let it not offend thee if I say
    That thou neglect'st thyself, at the same time
    Oppress'd with age, sun-parch'd and ill-attired.
    Not for thy inactivity, methinks,                                300
    Thy master slights thee thus, nor speaks thy form
    Or thy surpassing stature servile aught
    In thee, but thou resemblest more a King.
    Yes--thou resemblest one who, bathed and fed,
    Should softly sleep; such is the claim of age.
    But tell me true--for whom labourest thou,
    And whose this garden? answer me beside,
    For I would learn; have I indeed arrived
    In Ithaca, as one whom here I met
    Ev'n now assured me, but who seem'd a man                        310
    Not overwise, refusing both to hear
    My questions, and to answer when I ask'd
    Concerning one in other days my guest
    And friend, if he have still his being here,
    Or have deceas'd and journey'd to the shades.
    For I will tell thee; therefore mark. Long since
    A stranger reach'd my house in my own land,
    Whom I with hospitality receiv'd,
    Nor ever sojourn'd foreigner with me
    Whom I lov'd more. He was by birth, he said,                     320
    Ithacan, and Laertes claim'd his sire,
    Son of Arcesias. Introducing him
    Beneath my roof, I entertain'd him well,
    And proved by gifts his welcome at my board.
    I gave him seven talents of wrought gold,
    A goblet, argent all, with flow'rs emboss'd,
    Twelve single cloaks, twelve carpets, mantles twelve
    Of brightest lustre, with as many vests,
    And added four fair damsels, whom he chose
    Himself, well born and well accomplish'd all.                    330
      Then thus his ancient sire weeping replied.
    Stranger! thou hast in truth attain'd the isle
    Of thy enquiry, but it is possess'd
    By a rude race, and lawless. Vain, alas!
    Were all thy num'rous gifts; yet hadst thou found
    Him living here in Ithaca, with gifts
    Reciprocated he had sent thee hence,
    Requiting honourably in his turn
    Thy hospitality. But give me quick
    Answer and true. How many have been the years                    340
    Since thy reception of that hapless guest
    My son? for mine, my own dear son was he.
    But him, far distant both from friends and home,
    Either the fishes of the unknown Deep
    Have eaten, or wild beasts and fowls of prey,
    Nor I, or she who bare him, was ordain'd
    To bathe his shrouded body with our tears,
    Nor his chaste wife, well-dow'r'd Penelope
    To close her husband's eyes, and to deplore
    His doom, which is the privilege of the dead.                    350
    But tell me also thou, for I would learn,
    Who art thou? whence? where born? and sprung from whom?
    The bark in which thou and thy godlike friends
    Arrived, where is she anchor'd on our coast?
    Or cam'st thou only passenger on board
    Another's bark, who landed thee and went?
      To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    I will with all simplicity relate
    What thou hast ask'd. Of Alybas am I,
    Where in much state I dwell, son of the rich                     360
    Apheidas royal Polypemon's son,
    And I am named Eperitus; by storms
    Driven from Sicily I have arrived,
    And yonder, on the margin of the field
    That skirts your city, I have moor'd my bark.
    Five years have pass'd since thy Ulysses left,
    Unhappy Chief! my country; yet the birds
    At his departure hovered on the right,
    And in that sign rejoicing, I dismiss'd
    Him thence rejoicing also, for we hoped                          370
    To mix in social intercourse again,
    And to exchange once more pledges of love.
      He spake; then sorrow as a sable cloud
    Involved Laertes; gath'ring with both hands
    The dust, he pour'd it on his rev'rend head
    With many a piteous groan. Ulysses' heart
    Commotion felt, and his stretch'd nostrils throbb'd
    With agony close-pent, while fixt he eyed
    His father; with a sudden force he sprang
    Toward him, clasp'd, and kiss'd him, and exclaim'd.              380
      My father! I am he. Thou seest thy son
    Absent these twenty years at last return'd.
    But bid thy sorrow cease; suspend henceforth
    All lamentation; for I tell thee true,
    (And the occasion bids me briefly tell thee)
    I have slain all the suitors at my home,
    And all their taunts and injuries avenged.
      Then answer thus Laertes quick return'd.
    If thou hast come again, and art indeed
    My son Ulysses, give me then the proof                           390
    Indubitable, that I may believe.
      To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    View, first, the scar which with his iv'ry tusk
    A wild boar gave me, when at thy command
    And at my mother's, to Autolycus
    Her father, on Parnassus, I repair'd
    Seeking the gifts which, while a guest of yours,
    He promis'd should be mine. Accept beside
    This proof. I will enum'rate all the trees
    Which, walking with thee in this cultured spot                   400
    (Boy then) I begg'd, and thou confirm'dst my own.
    We paced between them, and thou mad'st me learn
    The name of each. Thou gav'st me thirteen pears,[113]
    Ten apples,[113] thirty figs,[113] and fifty ranks
    Didst promise me of vines, their alleys all
    Corn-cropp'd between. There, oft as sent from Jove
    The influences of the year descend,
    Grapes of all hues and flavours clust'ring hang.
      He said; Laertes, conscious of the proofs
    Indubitable by Ulysses giv'n,                                    410
    With fault'ring knees and fault'ring heart both arms
    Around him threw. The Hero toil-inured
    Drew to his bosom close his fainting sire,
    Who, breath recov'ring, and his scatter'd pow'rs
    Of intellect, at length thus spake aloud.
      Ye Gods! oh then your residence is still
    On the Olympian heights, if punishment
    At last hath seized on those flagitious men.
    But terrour shakes me, lest, incensed, ere long
    All Ithaca flock hither, and dispatch                            420
    Swift messengers with these dread tidings charged
    To ev'ry Cephallenian state around.
      Him answer'd then Ulysses ever-wise.
    Courage! fear nought, but let us to the house
    Beside the garden, whither I have sent
    Telemachus, the herdsman, and the good
    Eumaeus to prepare us quick repast.
      So they conferr'd, and to Laertes' house
    Pass'd on together; there arrived, they found
    Those three preparing now their plenteous feast,                 430
    And mingling sable wine; then, by the hands
    Of his Sicilian matron, the old King
    Was bathed, anointed, and attired afresh,
    And Pallas, drawing nigh, dilated more
    His limbs, and gave his whole majestic form
    Encrease of amplitude. He left the bath.
    His son, amazed as he had seen a God
    Alighted newly from the skies, exclaim'd.
      My father! doubtless some immortal Pow'r
    Hath clothed thy form with dignity divine.                       440
      Then thus replied his venerable sire.
    Jove! Pallas! Phoebus! oh that I possess'd
    Such vigour now, as when in arms I took
    Nericus, continental city fair,
    With my brave Cephallenians! oh that such
    And arm'd as then, I yesterday had stood
    Beside thee in thy palace, combating
    Those suitors proud, then had I strew'd the floor
    With num'rous slain, to thy exceeding joy.
      Such was their conference; and now, the task                   450
    Of preparation ended, and the feast
    Set forth, on couches and on thrones they sat,
    And, ranged in order due, took each his share.
    Then, ancient Dolius, and with him, his sons
    Arrived toil-worn, by the Sicilian dame
    Summon'd, their cat'ress, and their father's kind
    Attendant ever in his eve of life.
    They, seeing and recalling soon to mind
    Ulysses, in the middle mansion stood
    Wond'ring, when thus Ulysses with a voice                        460
    Of some reproof, but gentle, them bespake.
      Old servant, sit and eat, banishing fear
    And mute amazement; for, although provoked
    By appetite, we have long time abstain'd,
    Expecting ev'ry moment thy return.
      He said; then Dolius with expanded arms
    Sprang right toward Ulysses, seized his hand,
    Kiss'd it, and in wing'd accents thus replied.
      Oh master ever dear! since thee the Gods
    Themselves in answer to our warm desires,                        470
    Have, unexpectedly, at length restored,
    Hail, and be happy, and heav'n make thee such!
    But say, and truly; knows the prudent Queen
    Already thy return, or shall we send
    Ourselves an herald with the joyful news?
      To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    My ancient friend, thou may'st release thy mind
    From that solicitude; she knows it well.
      So he; then Dolius to his glossy seat
    Return'd, and all his sons gath'ring around                      480
    Ulysses, welcom'd him and grasp'd his hand,
    Then sat beside their father; thus beneath
    Laertes' roof they, joyful, took repast.
      But Fame with rapid haste the city roam'd
    In ev'ry part, promulging in all ears
    The suitors' horrid fate. No sooner heard
    The multitude that tale, than one and all
    Groaning they met and murmuring before
    Ulysses' gates. Bringing the bodies forth,
    They buried each his friend, but gave the dead                   490
    Of other cities to be ferried home
    By fishermen on board their rapid barks.
    All hasted then to council; sorrow wrung
    Their hearts, and, the assembly now convened,
    Arising first Eupithes spake, for grief
    Sat heavy on his soul, grief for the loss
    Of his Antinoues by Ulysses slain
    Foremost of all, whom mourning, thus he said.
      My friends! no trivial fruits the Greecians reap
    Of this man's doings. _Those_ he took with him                   500
    On board his barks, a num'rous train and bold,
    Then lost his barks, lost all his num'rous train,
    And _these_, our noblest, slew at his return.
    Come therefore--ere he yet escape by flight
    To Pylus or to noble Elis, realm
    Of the Epeans, follow him; else shame
    Attends us and indelible reproach.
    If we avenge not on these men the blood
    Of our own sons and brothers, farewell then
    All that makes life desirable; my wish                           510
    Henceforth shall be to mingle with the shades.
    Oh then pursue and seize them ere they fly.
      Thus he with tears, and pity moved in all.
    Then, Medon and the sacred bard whom sleep
    Had lately left, arriving from the house
    Of Laertiades, approach'd; amid
    The throng they stood; all wonder'd seeing them,
    And Medon, prudent senior, thus began.
      Hear me, my countrymen! Ulysses plann'd
    With no disapprobation of the Gods                               520
    The deed that ye deplore. I saw, myself,
    A Pow'r immortal at the Hero's side,
    In semblance just of Mentor; now the God,
    In front apparent, led him on, and now,
    From side to side of all the palace, urged
    To flight the suitors; heaps on heaps they fell.
      He said; then terrour wan seiz'd ev'ry cheek,
    And Halitherses, Hero old, the son
    Of Mastor, who alone among them all
    Knew past, and future, prudent, thus began.                      530
      Now, O ye men of Ithaca! my words
    Attentive hear! by your own fault, my friends,
