laughed as he told me the story. As we rode along from Dover, talking in
French, he spoke about you, and your coming to him at Bar; he called
you 'le grand serieux,' Don Bellianis of Greece, and I don't know what
names; mimicking your manner" (here Castlewood laughed himself)--"and
he did it very well. He seems to sneer at everything. He is not like a
king: somehow Harry, I fancy you are like a king. He does not seem
to think what a stake we are all playing. He would have stopped at
Canterbury to run after a barmaid there, had I not implored him to come
on. He hath a house at Chaillot, where he used to go and bury himself
for weeks away from the Queen, and with all sorts of bad company," says
Frank, with a demure look; "you may smile, but I am not the wild fellow
I was; no, no, I have been taught better," says Castlewood devoutly,
making a sign on his breast.

"Thou art my dear brave boy," says Colonel Esmond, touched at the young
fellow's simplicity, "and there will be a noble gentleman at Castlewood
so long as my Frank is there."

The impetuous young lad was for going down on his knees again, with
another explosion of gratitude, but that we heard the voice from the
next chamber of the august sleeper, just waking, calling out:--"Eh,
La-Fleur, un verre d'eau!" His Majesty came out yawning:--"A pest," says
he, "upon your English ale, 'tis so strong that, ma foi, it hath turned
my head."

The effect of the ale was like a spur upon our horses, and we rode
very quickly to London, reaching Kensington at nightfall. Mr. Esmond's
servant was left behind at Rochester, to take care of the tired horses,
whilst we had fresh beasts provided along the road. And galloping by
the Prince's side the Colonel explained to the Prince of Wales what his
movements had been; who the friends were that knew of the expedition;
whom, as Esmond conceived, the Prince should trust; entreating him,
above all, to maintain the very closest secrecy until the time should
come when his Royal Highness should appear. The town swarmed with
friends of the Prince's cause; there were scores of correspondents with
St. Germains; Jacobites known and secret; great in station and humble;
about the Court and the Queen; in the Parliament, Church, and among the
merchants in the City. The Prince had friends numberless in the army,
in the Privy Council, and the Officers of State. The great object, as it
seemed, to the small band of persons who had concerted that bold stroke,
who had brought the Queen's brother into his native country, was, that
his visit should remain unknown till the proper time came, when his
presence should surprise friends and enemies alike; and the latter
should be found so unprepared and disunited, that they should not
find time to attack him. We feared more from his friends than from his
enemies. The lies and tittle-tattle sent over to St. Germains by the
Jacobite agents about London, had done an incalculable mischief to his
cause, and wofully misguided him, and it was from these especially, that
the persons engaged in the present venture were anxious to defend the
chief actor in it.*

     * The managers were the Bishop, who cannot be hurt by having
     his name mentioned, a very active and loyal Nonconformist
     Divine, a lady in the highest favor at Court, with whom
     Beatrix Esmond had communication, and two noblemen of the
     greatest rank, and a member of the House of Commons, who was
     implicated in more transactions than one in behalf of the
     Stuart family.

The party reached London by nightfall, leaving their horses at the
Posting-House over against Westminster, and being ferried over the
water, where Lady Esmond's coach was already in waiting. In another hour
we were all landed at Kensington, and the mistress of the house had that
satisfaction which her heart had yearned after for many years, once more
to embrace her son, who, on his side, with all his waywardness, ever
retained a most tender affection for his parent.

She did not refrain from this expression of her feeling, though the
domestics were by, and my Lord Castlewood's attendant stood in the hall.
Esmond had to whisper to him in French to take his hat off. Monsieur
Baptiste was constantly neglecting his part with an inconceivable
levity: more than once on the ride to London, little observations of the
stranger, light remarks, and words betokening the greatest ignorance of
the country the Prince came to govern, had hurt the susceptibility of
the two gentlemen forming his escort; nor could either help owning in
his secret mind that they would have had his behavior otherwise,
and that the laughter and the lightness, not to say license, which
characterized his talk, scarce befitted such a great Prince, and such a
solemn occasion. Not but that he could act at proper times with spirit
and dignity. He had behaved, as we all knew, in a very courageous manner
on the field. Esmond had seen a copy of the letter the Prince had writ
with his own hand when urged by his friends in England to abjure his
religion, and admired that manly and magnanimous reply by which he
refused to yield to the temptation. Monsieur Baptiste took off his
hat, blushing at the hint Colonel Esmond ventured to give him, and
said:--"Tenez, elle est jolie, la petite mere. Foi de Chevalier! elle
est charmante; mais l'autre, qui est cette nymphe, cet astre qui brille,
cette Diane qui descend sur nous?" And he started back, and pushed
forward, as Beatrix was descending the stair. She was in colors for the
first time at her own house; she wore the diamonds Esmond gave her; it
had been agreed between them, that she should wear these brilliants on
the day when the King should enter the house, and a Queen she looked,
radiant in charms, and magnificent and imperial in beauty.

Castlewood himself was startled by that beauty and splendor; he stepped
back and gazed at his sister as though he had not been aware before (nor
was he very likely) how perfectly lovely she was, and I thought blushed
as he embraced her. The Prince could not keep his eyes off her; he quite
forgot his menial part, though he had been schooled to it, and a little
light portmanteau prepared expressly that he should carry it. He pressed
forward before my Lord Viscount. 'Twas lucky the servants' eyes were
busy in other directions, or they must have seen that this was no
servant, or at least a very insolent and rude one.

Again Colonel Esmond was obliged to cry out, "Baptiste," in a loud
imperious voice, "have a care to the valise;" at which hint the wilful
young man ground his teeth together with something very like a curse
between them, and then gave a brief look of anything but pleasure to his
Mentor. Being reminded, however, he shouldered the little portmanteau,
and carried it up the stair, Esmond preceding him, and a servant with
lighted tapers. He flung down his burden sulkily in the bedchamber:--"A
Prince that will wear a crown must wear a mask," says Mr. Esmond in
French.

"Ah peste! I see how it is," says Monsieur Baptiste, continuing the
talk in French. "The Great Serious is seriously"--"alarmed for Monsieur
Baptiste," broke in the Colonel. Esmond neither liked the tone with
which the Prince spoke of the ladies, nor the eyes with which he
regarded them.

The bedchamber and the two rooms adjoining it, the closet and the
apartment which was to be called my lord's parlor, were already lighted
and awaiting their occupier; and the collation laid for my lord's
supper. Lord Castlewood and his mother and sister came up the stair
a minute afterwards, and, so soon as the domestics had quitted the
apartment, Castlewood and Esmond uncovered, and the two ladies went down
on their knees before the Prince, who graciously gave a hand to each.
He looked his part of Prince much more naturally than that of servant,
which he had just been trying, and raised them both with a great deal of
nobility, as well as kindness in his air. "Madam," says he, "my mother
will thank your ladyship for your hospitality to her son; for you,
madam," turning to Beatrix, "I cannot bear to see so much beauty in such
a posture. You will betray Monsieur Baptiste if you kneel to him; sure
'tis his place rather to kneel to you."

A light shone out of her eyes; a gleam bright enough to kindle passion
in any breast. There were times when this creature was so handsome,
that she seemed, as it were, like Venus revealing herself a goddess in a
flash of brightness. She appeared so now; radiant, and with eyes bright
with a wonderful lustre. A pang, as of rage and jealousy, shot through
Esmond's heart, as he caught the look she gave the Prince; and he
clenched his hand involuntarily and looked across to Castlewood, whose
eyes answered his alarm-signal, and were also on the alert. The Prince
gave his subjects an audience of a few minutes, and then the two ladies
and Colonel Esmond quitted the chamber. Lady Castlewood pressed his hand
as they descended the stair, and the three went down to the lower rooms,
where they waited awhile till the travellers above should be refreshed
and ready for their meal.

Esmond looked at Beatrix, blazing with her jewels on her beautiful neck.
"I have kept my word," says he: "And I mine," says Beatrix, looking down
on the diamonds.

"Were I the Mogul Emperor," says the Colonel, "you should have all that
were dug out of Golconda."

"These are a great deal too good for me," says Beatrix, dropping her
head on her beautiful breast,--"so are you all, all!" And when she
looked up again, as she did in a moment, and after a sigh, her eyes,
as they gazed at her cousin, wore that melancholy and inscrutable look
which 'twas always impossible to sound.

When the time came for the supper, of which we were advertised by a
knocking overhead, Colonel Esmond and the two ladies went to the upper
apartment, where the Prince already was, and by his side the young
Viscount, of exactly the same age, shape, and with features not
dissimilar, though Frank's were the handsomer of the two. The Prince
sat down and bade the ladies sit. The gentlemen remained standing: there
was, indeed, but one more cover laid at the table:--"Which of you will
take it?" says he.

"The head of our house," says Lady Castlewood, taking her son's hand,
and looking towards Colonel Esmond with a bow and a great tremor of the
voice; "the Marquis of Esmond will have the honor of serving the King."

"I shall have the honor of waiting on his Royal Highness," says Colonel
Esmond, filling a cup of wine, and, as the fashion of that day was, he
presented it to the King on his knee.

"I drink to my hostess and her family," says the Prince, with no very
well-pleased air; but the cloud passed immediately off his face, and he
talked to the ladies in a lively, rattling strain, quite undisturbed
by poor Mr. Esmond's yellow countenance, that, I dare say, looked very
glum.

When the time came to take leave, Esmond marched homewards to his
lodgings, and met Mr. Addison on the road that night, walking to a
cottage he had at Fulham, the moon shining on his handsome serene
face:--"What cheer, brother?" says Addison, laughing: "I thought it was
a footpad advancing in the dark, and behold 'tis an old friend. We
may shake hands, Colonel, in the dark, 'tis better than fighting by
daylight. Why should we quarrel, because I am a Whig and thou art
a Tory? Turn thy steps and walk with me to Fulham, where there is a
nightingale still singing in the garden, and a cool bottle in a cave I
know of; you shall drink to the Pretender if you like, and I will drink
my liquor my own way: I have had enough of good liquor?--no, never!
There is no such word as enough as a stopper for good wine. Thou wilt
not come? Come any day, come soon. You know I remember Simois and the
Sigeia tellus, and the praelia mixta mero, mixta mero," he repeated,
with ever so slight a touch of merum in his voice, and walked back a
little way on the road with Esmond, bidding the other remember he was
always his friend, and indebted to him for his aid in the "Campaign"
poem. And very likely Mr. Under-Secretary would have stepped in and
taken t'other bottle at the Colonel's lodging, had the latter invited
him, but Esmond's mood was none of the gayest, and he bade his friend an
inhospitable good-night at the door.

"I have done the deed," thought he, sleepless, and looking out into the
night; "he is here, and I have brought him; he and Beatrix are sleeping
under the same roof now. Whom did I mean to serve in bringing him? Was
it the Prince? was it Henry Esmond? Had I not best have joined the manly
creed of Addison yonder, that scouts the old doctrine of right
divine, that boldly declares that Parliament and people consecrate the
Sovereign, not bishops, nor genealogies, nor oils, nor coronations."
The eager gaze of the young Prince, watching every movement of Beatrix,
haunted Esmond and pursued him. The Prince's figure appeared before him
in his feverish dreams many times that night. He wished the deed undone
for which he had labored so. He was not the first that has regretted his
own act, or brought about his own undoing. Undoing? Should he write
that word in his late years? No, on his knees before heaven, rather be
thankful for what then he deemed his misfortune, and which hath caused
the whole subsequent happiness of his life.

Esmond's man, honest John Lockwood, had served his master and the family
all his life, and the Colonel knew that he could answer for John's
fidelity as for his own. John returned with the horses from Rochester
betimes the next morning, and the Colonel gave him to understand that on
going to Kensington, where he was free of the servants' hall, and indeed
courting Miss Beatrix's maid, he was to ask no questions, and betray no
surprise, but to vouch stoutly that the young gentleman he should see in
a red coat there was my Lord Viscount Castlewood, and that his attendant
in gray was Monsieur Baptiste the Frenchman. He was to tell his friends
in the kitchen such stories as he remembered of my Lord Viscount's youth
at Castlewood; what a wild boy he was; how he used to drill Jack and
cane him, before ever he was a soldier; everything, in fine, he knew
respecting my Lord Viscount's early days. Jack's ideas of painting
had not been much cultivated during his residence in Flanders with his
master; and, before my young lord's return, he had been easily got to
believe that the picture brought over from Paris, and now hanging in
Lady Castlewood's drawing-room, was a perfect likeness of her son, the
young lord. And the domestics having all seen the picture many times,
and catching but a momentary imperfect glimpse of the two strangers on
the night of their arrival, never had a reason to doubt the fidelity
of the portrait; and next day, when they saw the original of the piece
habited exactly as he was represented in the painting, with the same
periwig, ribbons, and uniform of the Guard, quite naturally addressed
the gentleman as my Lord Castlewood, my Lady Viscountess's son.

The secretary of the night previous was now the viscount; the viscount
wore the secretary's gray frock; and John Lockwood was instructed to
hint to the world below stairs that my lord being a Papist, and very
devout in that religion, his attendant might be no other than his
chaplain from Bruxelles; hence, if he took his meals in my lord's
company there was little reason for surprise. Frank was further
cautioned to speak English with a foreign accent, which task he
performed indifferently well, and this caution was the more necessary
because the Prince himself scarce spoke our language like a native of
the island: and John Lockwood laughed with the folks below stairs at the
manner in which my lord, after five years abroad, sometimes forgot his
own tongue, and spoke it like a Frenchman. "I warrant," says he, "that,
with the English beef and beer, his lordship will soon get back the
proper use of his mouth;" and, to do his new lordship justice, he took
to beer and beef very kindly.

The Prince drank so much, and was so loud and imprudent in his talk
after his drink, that Esmond often trembled for him. His meals were
served as much as possible in his own chamber, though frequently he made
his appearance in Lady Castlewood's parlor and drawing-room, calling
Beatrix "sister," and her ladyship "mother," or "madam" before the
servants. And, choosing to act entirely up to the part of brother and
son, the Prince sometimes saluted Mrs. Beatrix and Lady Castlewood with
a freedom which his secretary did not like, and which, for his part, set
Colonel Esmond tearing with rage.

The guests had not been three days in the house when poor Jack Lockwood
came with a rueful countenance to his master, and said: "My Lord--that
is the gentleman--has been tampering with Mrs. Lucy (Jack's sweetheart),
and given her guineas and a kiss." I fear that Colonel Esmond's mind was
rather relieved than otherwise when he found that the ancillary beauty
was the one whom the Prince had selected. His royal tastes were known
to lie that way, and continued so in after life. The heir of one of
the greatest names, of the greatest kingdoms, and of the greatest
misfortunes in Europe, was often content to lay the dignity of his birth
and grief at the wooden shoes of a French chambermaid, and to repent
afterwards (for he was very devout) in ashes taken from the dust-pan.
'Tis for mortals such as these that nations suffer, that parties
struggle, that warriors fight and bleed. A year afterwards gallant heads
were falling, and Nithsdale in escape, and Derwentwater on the scaffold;
whilst the heedless ingrate, for whom they risked and lost all, was
tippling with his seraglio of mistresses in his petite maison of
Chaillot.

Blushing to be forced to bear such an errand, Esmond had to go to the
Prince and warn him that the girl whom his Highness was bribing was John
Lockwood's sweetheart, an honest resolute man, who had served in six
campaigns, and feared nothing, and who knew that the person calling
himself Lord Castlewood was not his young master: and the Colonel
besought the Prince to consider what the effect of a single man's
jealousy might be, and to think of other designs he had in hand, more
important than the seduction of a waiting-maid, and the humiliation of a
brave man.

Ten times, perhaps, in the course of as many days, Mr. Esmond had to
warn the royal young adventurer of some imprudence or some freedom. He
received these remonstrances very testily, save perhaps in this affair
of poor Lockwood's, when he deigned to burst out a-laughing, and said,
"What! the soubrette has peached to the amoureux, and Crispin is angry,
and Crispin has served, and Crispin has been a corporal, has he? Tell
him we will reward his valor with a pair of colors, and recompense his
fidelity."

Colonel Esmond ventured to utter some other words of entreaty, but the
Prince, stamping imperiously, cried out, "Assez, milord: je m'ennuye
a la preche; I am not come to London to go to the sermon." And he
complained afterwards to Castlewood, that "le petit jaune, le noir
Colonel, le Marquis Misanthrope" (by which facetious names his Royal
Highness was pleased to designate Colonel Esmond), "fatigued him with
his grand airs and virtuous homilies."

The Bishop of Rochester, and other gentlemen engaged in the transaction
which had brought the Prince over, waited upon his Royal Highness,
constantly asking for my Lord Castlewood on their arrival at Kensington,
and being openly conducted to his Royal Highness in that character, who
received them either in my lady's drawing-room below, or above in his
own apartment; and all implored him to quit the house as little as
possible, and to wait there till the signal should be given for him to
appear. The ladies entertained him at cards, over which amusement he
spent many hours in each day and night. He passed many hours more in
drinking, during which time he would rattle and talk very agreeably, and
especially if the Colonel was absent, whose presence always seemed to
frighten him; and the poor "Colonel Noir" took that hint as a command
accordingly, and seldom intruded his black face upon the convivial hours
of this august young prisoner. Except for those few persons of whom the
porter had the list, Lord Castlewood was denied to all friends of the
house who waited on his lordship. The wound he had received had broke
out again from his journey on horseback, so the world and the domestics
were informed. And Doctor A----,* his physician (I shall not mention his
name, but he was physician to the Queen, of the Scots nation, and a man
remarkable for his benevolence as well as his wit), gave orders that he
should be kept perfectly quiet until the wound should heal. With this
gentleman, who was one of the most active and influential of our party,
and the others before spoken of, the whole secret lay; and it was kept
with so much faithfulness, and the story we told so simple and natural,
that there was no likelihood of a discovery except from the imprudence
of the Prince himself, and an adventurous levity that we had the
greatest difficulty to control. As for Lady Castlewood, although she
scarce spoke a word, 'twas easy to gather from her demeanor, and one
or two hints she dropped, how deep her mortification was at finding the
hero whom she had chosen to worship all her life (and whose restoration
had formed almost the most sacred part of her prayers), no more than
a man, and not a good one. She thought misfortune might have chastened
him; but that instructress had rather rendered him callous than humble.
His devotion, which was quite real, kept him from no sin he had a mind
to. His talk showed good-humor, gayety, even wit enough; but there was
a levity in his acts and words that he had brought from among those
libertine devotees with whom he had been bred, and that shocked the
simplicity and purity of the English lady, whose guest he was. Esmond
spoke his mind to Beatrix pretty freely about the Prince, getting her
brother to put in a word of warning. Beatrix was entirely of their
opinion; she thought he was very light, very light and reckless; she
could not even see the good looks Colonel Esmond had spoken of. The
Prince had bad teeth, and a decided squint. How could we say he did not
squint? His eyes were fine, but there was certainly a cast in them. She
rallied him at table with wonderful wit; she spoke of him invariably as
of a mere boy; she was more fond of Esmond than ever, praised him to her
brother, praised him to the Prince, when his Royal Highness was pleased
to sneer at the Colonel, and warmly espoused his cause: "And if your
Majesty does not give him the Garter his father had, when the Marquis
of Esmond comes to your Majesty's court, I will hang myself in my own
garters, or will cry my eyes out." "Rather than lose those," says the
Prince, "he shall be made Archbishop and Colonel of the Guard" (it was
Frank Castlewood who told me of this conversation over their supper).

     * There can be very little doubt that the Doctor mentioned
     by my dear father was the famous Dr. Arbuthnot.--R. E. W.

"Yes," cries she, with one of her laughs--I fancy I hear it now.
Thirty years afterwards I hear that delightful music. "Yes, he shall be
Archbishop of Esmond and Marquis of Canterbury."

"And what will your ladyship be?" says the Prince; "you have but to
choose your place."

"I," says Beatrix, "will be mother of the maids to the Queen of his
Majesty King James the Third--Vive le Roy!" and she made him a great
curtsy, and drank a part of a glass of wine in his honor.

"The Prince seized hold of the glass and drank the last drop of it,"
Castlewood said, "and my mother, looking very anxious, rose up and asked
leave to retire. But that Trix is my mother's daughter, Harry," Frank
continued, "I don't know what a horrid fear I should have of her. I
wish--I wish this business were over. You are older than I am,
and wiser, and better, and I owe you everything, and would die for
you--before George I would; but I wish the end of this were come."

Neither of us very likely passed a tranquil night; horrible doubts and
torments racked Esmond's soul: 'twas a scheme of personal ambition,
a daring stroke for a selfish end--he knew it. What cared he, in his
heart, who was King? Were not his very sympathies and secret convictions
on the other side--on the side of People, Parliament, Freedom? And here
was he, engaged for a Prince that had scarce heard the word liberty;
that priests and women, tyrants by nature, both made a tool of. The
misanthrope was in no better humor after hearing that story, and his
grim face more black and yellow than ever.




CHAPTER X.

WE ENTERTAIN A VERY DISTINGUISHED GUEST AT KENSINGTON.


Should any clue be found to the dark intrigues at the latter end of
Queen Anne's time, or any historian be inclined to follow it, 'twill be
discovered, I have little doubt, that not one of the great personages
about the Queen had a defined scheme of policy, independent of that
private and selfish interest which each was bent on pursuing: St.
John was for St. John, and Harley for Oxford, and Marlborough for
John Churchill, always; and according as they could get help from
St. Germains or Hanover, they sent over proffers of allegiance to
the Princes there, or betrayed one to the other: one cause, or one
sovereign, was as good as another to them, so that they could hold the
best place under him; and like Lockit and Peachem, the Newgate chiefs
in the "Rogues' Opera," Mr. Gay wrote afterwards, had each in his hand
documents and proofs of treason which would hang the other, only he did
not dare to use the weapon, for fear of that one which his neighbor
also carried in his pocket. Think of the great Marlborough, the greatest
subject in all the world, a conqueror of princes, that had marched
victorious over Germany, Flanders, and France, that had given the law to
sovereigns abroad, and been worshipped as a divinity at home, forced to
sneak out of England--his credit, honors, places, all taken from him;
his friends in the army broke and ruined; and flying before Harley, as
abject and powerless as a poor debtor before a bailiff with a writ. A
paper, of which Harley got possession, and showing beyond doubt that the
Duke was engaged with the Stuart family, was the weapon with which the
Treasurer drove Marlborough out of the kingdom. He fled to Antwerp, and
began intriguing instantly on the other side, and came back to England,
as all know, a Whig and a Hanoverian.

Though the Treasurer turned out of the army and office every man,
military or civil, known to be the Duke's friend, and gave the vacant
posts among the Tory party; he, too, was playing the double game between
Hanover and St. Germains, awaiting the expected catastrophe of the
Queen's death to be Master of the State, and offer it to either family
that should bribe him best, or that the nation should declare for.
Whichever the King was, Harley's object was to reign over him; and to
this end he supplanted the former famous favorite, decried the actions
of the war which had made Marlborough's name illustrious, and disdained
no more than the great fallen competitor of his, the meanest arts,
flatteries, intimidations, that would secure his power. If the greatest
satirist the world ever hath seen had writ against Harley, and not for
him, what a history had he left behind of the last years of Queen Anne's
reign! But Swift, that scorned all mankind, and himself not the least of
all, had this merit of a faithful partisan, that he loved those chiefs
who treated him well, and stuck by Harley bravely in his fall, as he
gallantly had supported him in his better fortune.

Incomparably more brilliant, more splendid, eloquent, accomplished than
his rival, the great St. John could be as selfish as Oxford was, and
could act the double part as skilfully as ambidextrous Churchill. He
whose talk was always of liberty, no more shrunk from using persecution
and the pillory against his opponents than if he had been at Lisbon and
Grand Inquisitor. This lofty patriot was on his knees at Hanover and St.
Germains too; notoriously of no religion, he toasted Church and Queen
as boldly as the stupid Sacheverel, whom he used and laughed at; and
to serve his turn, and to overthrow his enemy, he could intrigue, coax,
bully, wheedle, fawn on the Court favorite and creep up the back-stair
as silently as Oxford, who supplanted Marlborough, and whom he himself
supplanted. The crash of my Lord Oxford happened at this very time
whereat my history is now arrived. He was come to the very last days of
his power, and the agent whom he employed to overthrow the conqueror of
Blenheim, was now engaged to upset the conqueror's conqueror, and hand
over the staff of government to Bolingbroke, who had been panting to
hold it.

In expectation of the stroke that was now preparing, the Irish regiments
in the French service were all brought round about Boulogne in Picardy,
to pass over if need were with the Duke of Berwick; the soldiers of
France no longer, but subjects of James the Third of England and Ireland
King. The fidelity of the great mass of the Scots (though a most active,
resolute, and gallant Whig party, admirably and energetically ordered
and disciplined, was known to be in Scotland too) was notoriously
unshaken in their King. A very great body of Tory clergy, nobility, and
gentry, were public partisans of the exiled Prince; and the indifferents
might be counted on to cry King George or King James, according as
either should prevail. The Queen, especially in her latter days,
inclined towards her own family. The Prince was lying actually in
London, within a stone's cast of his sister's palace; the first Minister
toppling to his fall, and so tottering that the weakest push of
a woman's finger would send him down; and as for Bolingbroke, his
successor, we know on whose side his power and his splendid eloquence
would be on the day when the Queen should appear openly before her
Council and say:--"This, my lords, is my brother; here is my father's
heir, and mine after me."

During the whole of the previous year the Queen had had many and
repeated fits of sickness, fever, and lethargy, and her death had been
constantly looked for by all her attendants. The Elector of Hanover had
wished to send his son, the Duke of Cambridge--to pay his court to his
cousin the Queen, the Elector said;--in truth, to be on the spot when
death should close her career. Frightened perhaps to have such a memento
mori under her royal eyes, her Majesty had angrily forbidden the young
Prince's coming into England. Either she desired to keep the chances for
her brother open yet; or the people about her did not wish to close with
the Whig candidate till they could make terms with him. The quarrels
of her Ministers before her face at the Council board, the pricks of
conscience very likely, the importunities of her Ministers, and constant
turmoil and agitation round about her, had weakened and irritated the
Princess extremely; her strength was giving way under these continual
trials of her temper, and from day to day it was expected she must
come to a speedy end of them. Just before Viscount Castlewood and his
companion came from France, her Majesty was taken ill. The St.
Anthony's fire broke out on the royal legs; there was no hurry for
the presentation of the young lord at Court, or that person who should
appear under his name; and my Lord Viscount's wound breaking out
opportunely, he was kept conveniently in his chamber until such time as
his physician would allow him to bend his knee before the Queen. At
the commencement of July, that influential lady, with whom it has been
mentioned that our party had relations, came frequently to visit her
young friend, the Maid of Honor, at Kensington, and my Lord Viscount
(the real or supposititious), who was an invalid at Lady Castlewood's
house.

On the 27th day of July, the lady in question, who held the most
intimate post about the Queen, came in her chair from the Palace hard
by, bringing to the little party in Kensington Square intelligence of
the very highest importance. The final blow had been struck, and my Lord
of Oxford and Mortimer was no longer Treasurer. The staff was as yet
given to no successor, though my Lord Bolingbroke would undoubtedly be
the man. And now the time was come, the Queen's Abigail said: and now my
Lord Castlewood ought to be presented to the Sovereign.

After that scene which Lord Castlewood witnessed and described to his
cousin, who passed such a miserable night of mortification and jealousy
as he thought over the transaction, no doubt the three persons who were
set by nature as protectors over Beatrix came to the same conclusion,
that she must be removed from the presence of a man whose desires
towards her were expressed only too clearly; and who was no more
scrupulous in seeking to gratify them than his father had been before
him. I suppose Esmond's mistress, her son, and the Colonel himself, had
been all secretly debating this matter in their minds, for when Frank
broke out, in his blunt way, with:--"I think Beatrix had best be
anywhere but here,"--Lady Castlewood said:--"I thank you, Frank, I have
thought so, too;" and Mr. Esmond, though he only remarked that it was
not for him to speak, showed plainly, by the delight on his countenance,
how very agreeable that proposal was to him.

"One sees that you think with us, Henry," says the viscountess, with
ever so little of sarcasm in her tone: "Beatrix is best out of this
house whilst we have our guest in it, and as soon as this morning's
business is done, she ought to quit London."

"What morning's business?" asked Colonel Esmond, not knowing what had
been arranged, though in fact the stroke next in importance to that of
bringing the Prince, and of having him acknowledged by the Queen,
was now being performed at the very moment we three were conversing
together.

The Court-lady with whom our plan was concerted, and who was a chief
agent in it, the Court physician, and the Bishop of Rochester, who
were the other two most active participators in our plan, had held many
councils in our house at Kensington and elsewhere, as to the means best
to be adopted for presenting our young adventurer to his sister the
Queen. The simple and easy plan proposed by Colonel Esmond had been
agreed to by all parties, which was that on some rather private day,
when there were not many persons about the Court, the Prince should
appear there as my Lord Castlewood, should be greeted by his sister in
waiting, and led by that other lady into the closet of the Queen. And
according to her Majesty's health or humor, and the circumstances that
might arise during the interview, it was to be left to the discretion
of those present at it, and to the Prince himself, whether he should
declare that it was the Queen's own brother, or the brother of Beatrix
Esmond, who kissed her Royal hand. And this plan being determined on,
we were all waiting in very much anxiety for the day and signal of
execution.

Two mornings after that supper, it being the 27th day of July, the
Bishop of Rochester breakfasting with Lady Castlewood and her family,
and the meal scarce over, Doctor A.'s coach drove up to our house at
Kensington, and the Doctor appeared amongst the party there, enlivening
a rather gloomy company; for the mother and daughter had had words in
the morning in respect to the transactions of that supper, and other
adventures perhaps, and on the day succeeding. Beatrix's haughty spirit
brooked remonstrances from no superior, much less from her mother, the
gentlest of creatures, whom the girl commanded rather than obeyed. And
feeling she was wrong, and that by a thousand coquetries (which she
could no more help exercising on every man that came near her, than the
sun can help shining on great and small) she had provoked the Prince's
dangerous admiration, and allured him to the expression of it, she was
only the more wilful and imperious the more she felt her error.

To this party, the Prince being served with chocolate in his bedchamber,
where he lay late, sleeping away the fumes of his wine, the Doctor came,
and by the urgent and startling nature of his news, dissipated instantly
that private and minor unpleasantry under which the family of Castlewood
was laboring.

He asked for the guest; the guest was above in his own apartment: he
bade Monsieur Baptiste go up to his master instantly, and requested that
MY LORD VISCOUNT CASTLEWOOD would straightway put his uniform on, and
come away in the Doctor's coach now at the door.

He then informed Madam Beatrix what her part of the comedy was to
be:--"In half an hour," says he, "her Majesty and her favorite lady
will take the air in the Cedar-walk behind the new Banqueting-house. Her
Majesty will be drawn in a garden-chair, Madam Beatrix Esmond and HER
BROTHER, MY LORD VISCOUNT CASTLEWOOD, will be walking in the private
garden, (here is Lady Masham's key,) and will come unawares upon the
Royal party. The man that draws the chair will retire, and leave the
Queen, the favorite, and the maid of honor and her brother together;
Mistress Beatrix will present her brother, and then!--and then, my Lord
Bishop will pray for the result of the interview, and his Scots clerk
