of Hanover's court, and yet we are well assured that our most private
communication is placed in her keeping.'

'VARIUM ET MUTABILE SEMPER FEMINA,' said Dr. Grumball.

'She puts his secrets into her work-bag,' said Maxwell; 'and out they
fly whenever she opens it. If I must hang, I would wish it to be in
somewhat a better rope than the string of a lady's hussey.'

'Are you, too, turning dastard, Maxwell?' said Redgauntlet, in a
whisper.

'Not I,' said Maxwell; 'let us fight for it, and let them win and wear
us; but to be betrayed by a brimstone like that'--

'Be temperate, gentlemen,' said Redgauntlet; 'the foible of which you
complain so heavily has always been that of kings and heroes; which I
feel strongly confident the king will surmount, upon the humble entreaty
of his best servants, and when he sees them ready to peril their all in
his cause, upon the slight condition of his resigning the society of
a female favourite, of whom I have seen reason to think he hath been
himself for some time wearied. But let us not press upon him rashly
with our well-meant zeal. He has a princely will as becomes his princely
birth, and we, gentlemen, who are royalists, should be the last to take
advantage of circumstances to limit its exercise. I am as much surprised
and hurt as you can be, to find that he has made her the companion of
this journey, increasing every chance of treachery and detection. But do
not let us insist upon a sacrifice so humiliating, while he has scarce
placed a foot upon the beach of his kingdom. Let us act generously by
our sovereign; and when we have shown what we will do for him, we
shall be able, with better face, to state what it is we expect him to
concede.'

'Indeed, I think it is but a pity,' said MacKellar, 'when so many pretty
gentlemen are got together, that they should part without the flash of a
sword among them.'

'I should be of that gentleman's opinion,' said Lord ------, 'had I
nothing to lose but my life; but I frankly own, that the conditions
on which our family agreed to join having been, in this instance, left
unfulfilled, I will not peril the whole fortunes of our house on the
doubtful fidelity of an artful woman.'

'I am sorry to see your lordship,' said Redgauntlet, 'take a course
which is more likely to secure your house's wealth than to augment its
honours.'

'How am I to understand your language, sir?' said the young nobleman,
haughtily.

'Nay, gentlemen,' said Dr Grumball, interposing, 'do not let friends
quarrel; we are all zealous for the cause--but truly, although I know
the license claimed by the great in such matters, and can, I hope, make
due allowance, there is, I may say, an indecorum in a prince who comes
to claim the allegiance of the Church of England, arriving on such an
errand with such a companion--SI NON CASTE, CAUTE TAMEN.'

'I wonder how the Church of England came to be so heartily attached to
his merry old namesake,' said Redgauntlet.

Sir Richard Glendale then took up the question, as one whose authority
and experience gave him right to speak with much weight.

'We have no leisure for hesitation,' he said; 'it is full time that
we decide what course we are to hold. I feel as much as you, Mr.
Redgauntlet, the delicacy of capitulating with our sovereign in his
present condition. But I must also think of the total ruin of the
cause, the confiscation and bloodshed which will take place among his
adherents, and all through the infatuation with which he adheres to
a woman who is the pensionary of the present minister, as she was
for years Sir Robert Walpole's. Let his Majesty send her back to the
continent, and the sword on which I now lay my hand shall instantly be
unsheathed, and, I trust, many hundred others at the same moment.'

The other persons present testified their unanimous acquiescence in what
Sir Richard Glendale had said.

'I see you have taken your resolutions, gentlemen,' said Redgauntlet;
'unwisely I think, because I believe that, by softer and more generous
proceedings, you would have been more likely to carry a point which I
think as desirable as you do. But what is to be done if Charles should
refuse, with the inflexibility of his grandfather, to comply with this
request of yours? Do you mean to abandon him to his fate?'

'God forbid!' said Sir Richard, hastily; 'and God forgive you, Mr.
Redgauntlet, for breathing such a thought. No! I for one will, with all
duty and humility, see him safe back to his vessel, and defend him with
my life against whosoever shall assail him. But when I have seen his
sails spread, my next act will be to secure, if I can, my own safety, by
retiring to my house; or, if I find our engagement, as is too probable,
has taken wind, by surrendering myself to the next Justice of Peace,
and giving security that hereafter I shall live quiet, and submit to the
ruling powers.'

Again the rest of the persons present intimated their agreement in
opinion with the speaker.

'Well, gentlemen,' said Redgauntlet, 'it is not for me to oppose the
opinion of every one; and I must do you the justice to say, that
the king has, in the present instance, neglected a condition of your
agreement which was laid before him in very distinct terms. The question
now is, who is to acquaint him with the result of this conference; for I
presume you would not wait on him in a body to make the proposal that
he should dismiss a person from his family as the price of your
allegiance.'

'I think Mr. Redgauntlet should make the explanation, said Lord--. 'As
he has, doubtless, done justice to our remonstrances by communicating
them to the king, no one can, with such propriety and force, state the
natural and inevitable consequence of their being neglected.'

'Now, I think,' said Redgauntlet, 'that those who make the objection
should state it, for I am confident the king will hardly believe, on
less authority than that of the heir of the loyal House of B--, that he
is the first to seek an evasion of his pledge to join him.'

'An evasion, sir!' repeated Lord ------, fiercely, 'I have borne too
much from you already, and this I will not endure. Favour me with your
company to the downs.'

Redgauntlet laughed scornfully, and was about to follow the fiery young
man, when Sir Richard again interposed. 'Are we to exhibit,' he said,
'the last symptoms of the dissolution of our party, by turning our
swords against each other? Be patient, Lord ------; in such conferences
as this, much must pass unquestioned which might brook challenge
elsewhere. There is a privilege of party as of parliament--men cannot,
in emergency, stand upon picking phrases. Gentlemen, if you will extend
your confidence in me so far, I will wait upon his Majesty, and I
hope my Lord ------ and Mr. Redgauntlet will accompany me. I trust the
explanation of this unpleasant matter will prove entirely satisfactory,
and that we shall find ourselves at liberty to render our homage to our
sovereign without reserve, when I for one will be the first to peril all
in his just quarrel.'

Redgauntlet at once stepped forward. 'My lord,' he said, 'if my zeal
made me say anything in the slightest degree offensive, I wish it
unsaid, and ask your pardon. A gentleman can do no more.'

'I could not have asked Mr. Redgauntlet to do so much,' said the young
nobleman, willingly accepting the hand which Redgauntlet offered. 'I
know no man living from whom I could take so much reproof without a
sense of degradation as from himself.'

'Let me then hope, my lord, that you will go with Sir Richard and me to
the presence. Your warm blood will heat our zeal--our colder resolves
will temper yours.

The young lord smiled, and shook his head. 'Alas! Mr. Redgauntlet,' he
said, 'I am ashamed to say, that in zeal you surpass us all. But I
will not refuse this mission, provided you will permit Sir Arthur, your
nephew, also to accompany us.'

'My nephew?' said Redgauntlet, and seemed to hesitate, then added, 'Most
certainly. I trust,' he said, looking at Darsie, 'he will bring to his
prince's presence such sentiments as fit the occasion.'

It seemed however to Darsie, that his uncle would rather have left
him behind, had he not feared that he might in that case have been
influenced by, or might perhaps himself influence, the unresolved
confederates with whom he must have associated during his absence.

'I will go,' said Redgauntlet, 'and request admission.'

In a moment after he returned, and without speaking, motioned for the
young nobleman to advance. He did so, followed by Sir Richard Glendale
and Darsie, Redgauntlet himself bringing up the rear. A short
passage, and a few steps, brought them to the door of the temporary
presence-chamber, in which the Royal Wanderer was to receive their
homage. It was the upper loft of one of those cottages which made
additions to the old inn, poorly furnished, dusty, and in disorder; for,
rash as the enterprise might be considered, they had been still careful
not to draw the attention of strangers by any particular attentions
to the personal accommodation of the prince. He was seated, when the
deputies, as they might be termed, of his remaining adherents entered;
and as he rose, and came forward and bowed, in acceptance of their
salutation, it was with a dignified courtesy which at once supplied
whatever was deficient in external pomp, and converted the wretched
garret into a saloon worthy of the occasion.

It is needless to add that he was the same personage already introduced
in the character of Father Buonaventure, by which name he was
distinguished at Fairladies. His dress was not different from what he
then wore, excepting that he had a loose riding-coat of camlet, under
which he carried an efficient cut-and-thrust sword, instead of his
walking rapier, and also a pair of pistols.

Redgauntlet presented to him successively the young Lord ------, and
his kinsman, Sir Arthur Darsie Redgauntlet, who trembled as, bowing
and kissing his hand, he found himself surprised into what might be
construed an act of high treason, which yet he saw no safe means to
avoid.

Sir Richard Glendale seemed personally known to Charles Edward, who
received him with a mixture of dignity and affection, and seemed to
sympathize with the tears which rushed into that gentleman's eyes as he
bade his Majesty welcome to his native kingdom.

'Yes, my good Sir Richard,' said the unfortunate prince in a tone
melancholy, yet resolved, 'Charles Edward is with his faithful friends
once more--not, perhaps, with his former gay hopes which undervalued
danger, but with the same determined contempt of the worst which can
befall him, in claiming his own rights and those of his country.'

'I rejoice, sire--and yet, alas! I must also grieve, to see you once
more on the British shores,' said Sir Richard Glendale, and stopped
short--a tumult of contradictory feelings preventing his further
utterance.

'It is the call of my faithful and suffering people which alone could
have induced me to take once more the sword in my hand. For my own part,
Sir Richard, when I have reflected how many of my loyal and devoted
friends perished by the sword and by proscription, or died indigent
and neglected in a foreign land, I have often, sworn that no view to my
personal aggrandizement should again induce me to agitate a title which
has cost my followers so dear. But since so many men of worth and honour
conceive the cause of England and Scotland to be linked with that of
Charles Stuart, I must follow their brave example, and, laying aside all
other considerations, once more stand forward as their deliverer. I am,
however, come hither upon your invitation; and as you are so completely
acquainted with circumstances to which my absence must necessarily
have rendered me a stranger, I must be a mere tool in the hands of my
friends. I know well I never can refer myself implicitly to more
loyal hearts or wiser heads, than Herries Redgauntlet, and Sir Richard
Glendale. Give me your advice, then, how we are to proceed, and decide
upon the fate of Charles Edward.'

Redgauntlet looked at Sir Richard, as if to say, 'Can you press any
additional or unpleasant condition at a moment like this?' And the other
shook his head and looked down, as if his resolution was unaltered, and
yet as feeling all the delicacy of the situation.

There was a silence, which was broken by the unfortunate representative
of an unhappy dynasty, with some appearance of irritation. 'This is
strange, gentlemen,' he said; 'you have sent for me from the bosom of my
family, to head an adventure of doubt and danger; and when I come, your
own minds seem to be still irresolute. I had not expected this on the
part of two such men.'

'For me, sire,' said Redgauntlet, 'the steel of my sword is not truer
than the temper of my mind.'

'My Lord ------'s and mine are equally so,' said Sir Richard; 'but you
had in charge, Mr. Redgauntlet, to convey our request to his Majesty,
coupled with certain conditions.'

'And I discharged my duty to his Majesty and to you,' said Redgauntlet.

'I looked at no condition, gentlemen,' said their king, with dignity,'
save that which called me here to assert my rights in person. That I
have fulfilled at no common risk. Here I stand to keep my word, and I
expect of you to be true to yours.'

'There was, or should have been, something more than that in our
proposal, please your Majesty,' said Sir Richard. 'There was a condition
annexed to it.'

'I saw it not,' said Charles, interrupting him. 'Out of tenderness
towards the noble hearts of whom I think so highly, I would neither
see nor read anything which could lessen them in my love and my esteem.
Conditions can have no part betwixt prince and subject.'

'Sire,' said Redgauntlet, kneeling on one knee, 'I see from Sir
Richard's countenance he deems it my fault that your Majesty seems
ignorant of what your subjects desired that I should communicate to your
Majesty. For Heaven's sake! for the sake of all my past services and
sufferings, leave not such a stain upon my honour! The note, Number D,
of which this is a copy, referred to the painful subject to which Sir
Richard again directs your attention.'

'You press upon me, gentlemen,' said the prince, colouring highly,'
recollections, which, as I hold them most alien to your character, I
would willingly have banished from my memory. I did not suppose that
my loyal subjects would think so poorly of me, as to use my depressed
circumstances as a reason for forcing themselves into my domestic
privacies, and stipulating arrangements with their king regarding
matters in which the meanest minds claim the privilege of thinking for
themselves. In affairs of state and public policy, I will ever be guided
as becomes a prince, by the advice of my wisest counsellors; in those
which regard my private affections and my domestic arrangements, I claim
the same freedom of will which I allow to all my subjects, and without
which a crown were less worth wearing than a beggar's bonnet.'

'May it please your Majesty,' said Sir Richard Glendale, 'I see it must
be my lot to speak unwilling truths; but believe me, I do so with as
much profound respect as deep regret. It is true, we have called you to
head a mighty undertaking, and that your Majesty, preferring honour to
safety, and the love of your country to your own ease, has condescended
to become our leader. But we also pointed out as a necessary and
indispensable preparatory step to the achievement of our purpose--and,
I must say, as a positive condition of our engaging in it--that an
individual, supposed,--I presume not to guess how truly,--to have your
Majesty's more intimate confidence, and believed, I will not say on
absolute proof but upon the most pregnant suspicion, to be capable of
betraying that confidence to the Elector of Hanover, should be removed
from your royal household and society.'

'This is too insolent, Sir Richard!' said Charles Edward. 'Have you
inveigled me into your power to bait me in this unseemly manner? And
you, Redgauntlet, why did you suffer matters to come to such a point as
this, without making me more distinctly aware what insults were to be
practised on me?'

'My gracious prince,' said Redgauntlet, 'I am so far to blame in this,
that I did not think so slight an impediment as that of a woman's
society could have really interrupted an undertaking of this magnitude.
I am a plain man, sire, and speak but bluntly; I could not have dreamt
but what, within the first five minutes of this interview, either Sir
Richard and his friends would have ceased to insist upon a condition so
ungrateful to your Majesty, or that your Majesty would have sacrificed
this unhappy attachment to the sound advice, or even to the over-anxious
suspicions, of so many faithful subjects. I saw no entanglement in such
a difficulty which on either side might not have been broken through
like a cobweb.'

'You were mistaken, sir,' said Charles Edward, 'entirely mistaken--as
much so as you are at this moment, when you think in your heart my
refusal to comply with this insolent proposition is dictated by a
childish and romantic passion for an individual, I tell you, sir, I
could part with that person to-morrow, without an instant's regret--that
I have had thoughts of dismissing her from my court, for reasons known
to myself; but that I will never betray my rights as a sovereign and a
man, by taking this step to secure the favour of any one, or to purchase
that allegiance which, if you owe it to me at all, is due to me as my
birthright.'

'I am sorry for this,' said Redgauntlet; 'I hope both your Majesty
and Sir Richard will reconsider your resolutions, or forbear this
discussion, in a conjuncture so pressing. I trust your Majesty will
recollect that you are on hostile ground; that our preparations cannot
have so far escaped notice as to permit us now with safety to retreat
from our purpose; insomuch, that it is with the deepest anxiety of
heart I foresee even danger to your own royal person, unless you can
generously give your subjects the satisfaction, which Sir Richard seems
to think they are obstinate in demanding.'

'And deep indeed your anxiety ought to be,' said the prince. 'Is it in
these circumstances of personal danger in which you expect to overcome a
resolution, which is founded on a sense of what is due to me as a man
or a prince? If the axe and scaffold were ready before the windows of
Whitehall, I would rather tread the same path with my great-grandfather,
than concede the slightest point in which my honour is concerned.'

He spoke these words with a determined accent, and looked around him on
the company, all of whom (excepting Darsie, who saw, he thought, a
fair period to a most perilous enterprise) seemed in deep anxiety and
confusion. At length, Sir Richard spoke in a solemn and melancholy tone.
'If the safety,' he said, 'of poor Richard Glendale were alone concerned
in this matter, I have never valued my life enough to weigh it
against the slightest point of your Majesty's service. But I am only a
messenger--a commissioner, who must execute my trust, and upon whom a
thousand voices will cry, Curse and woe, if I do it not with fidelity.
All of your adherents, even Redgauntlet himself, see certain ruin to
this enterprise--the greatest danger to your Majesty's person--the utter
destruction of all your party and friends, if they insist not on the
point, which, unfortunately, your Majesty is so unwilling to concede. I
speak it with a heart full of anguish--with a tongue unable to utter
my emotions--but it must be spoken--the fatal truth--that if your
royal goodness cannot yield to us a boon which we hold necessary to our
security and your own, your Majesty with one word disarms ten thousand
men, ready to draw their swords in your behalf; or, to speak yet more
plainly, you annihilate even the semblance of a royal party in Great
Britain.'

'And why do you not add,' said the prince, scornfully, 'that the men
who have been ready to assume arms in my behalf, will atone for their
treason to the Elector, by delivering me up to the fate for which so
many proclamations have destined me? Carry my head to St. James's,
gentlemen; you will do a more acceptable and a more honourable action,
than, having inveigled me into a situation which places me so completely
in your power, to dishonour yourselves by propositions which dishonour
me.

'My God, sire!' exclaimed Sir Richard, clasping his hands together,
in impatience, 'of what great and inexpiable crime can your Majesty's
ancestors have 'been guilty, that they have been punished by the
infliction of judicial blindness on their whole generation!--Come, my
Lord ------, we must to our friends.'

'By your leave, Sir Richard,' said the young nobleman, 'not till we,
have learned what measures can be taken for his Majesty's personal
safety.'

'Care not for me, young man,' said Charles Edward; 'when I was in the
society of Highland robbers and cattle-drovers, I was safer than I now
hold myself among the representatives of the best blood in England.
Farewell, gentlemen--I will shift for myself.'

'This must never be,' said Redgauntlet. 'Let me that brought you to the
point of danger, at least provide for your safe retreat.'

So saying, he hastily left the apartment, followed by his nephew. The
Wanderer, averting his eyes from Lord ------ and Sir Richard Glendale,
threw himself into a seat at the upper end of the apartment, while they,
in much anxiety, stood together, at a distance from him, and conversed
in whispers.




CHAPTER XXIII

NARRATIVE CONTINUED

When Redgauntlet left the room, in haste and discomposure, the first
person he met on the stair, and indeed so close by the door of the
apartment that Darsie thought he must have been listening there, was his
attendant Nixon.

'What the devil do you here?' he said, abruptly and sternly.

'I wait your orders,' said Nixon. 'I hope all's right!--excuse my zeal.'

'All is wrong, sir. Where is the seafaring fellow--Ewart--what do you
call him?'

'Nanty Ewart, sir. I will carry your commands,' said Nixon.

'I will deliver them myself to him,' said Redgauntlet; call him hither.'

'But should your honour leave the presence?' said Nixon, still
lingering.

''Sdeath, sir, do you prate to me?' said Redgauntlet, bending his brows.
'I, sir, transact my own business; you, I am told, act by a ragged
deputy.'

Without further answer, Nixon departed, rather disconcerted, as it
seemed to Darsie.

'That dog turns insolent and lazy,' said Redgauntlet; but I must bear
with him for a while.'

A moment after, Nixon returned with Ewart.

'Is this the smuggling fellow?' demanded Redgauntlet. Nixon nodded.

'Is he sober now? he was brawling anon.'

'Sober enough for business,' said Nixon.

'Well then, hark ye, Ewart;--man your boat with your best hands, and
have her by the pier--get your other fellows on board the brig--if you
have any cargo left, throw it overboard; it shall be all paid, five
times over--and be ready for a start to Wales or the Hebrides, or
perhaps for Sweden or Norway.'

Ewart answered sullenly enough, 'Aye, aye, sir.'

'Go with him, Nixon,' said Redgauntlet, forcing himself to speak with
some appearance of cordiality to the servant with whom he was offended;
'see he does his duty.'

Ewart left the house sullenly, followed by Nixon. The sailor was just in
that species of drunken humour which made him jealous, passionate,
and troublesome, without showing any other disorder than that of
irritability. As he walked towards the beach he kept muttering to
himself, but in such a tone that his companion lost not a word,
'Smuggling fellow--Aye, smuggler--and, start your cargo into the
sea--and be ready to start for the Hebrides, or Sweden--or the devil,
I suppose. Well, and what if I said in answer--Rebel, Jacobite--traitor;
I'll make you and your d----d confederates walk the plank--I have seen
better men do it--half a score of a morning--when I was across the
Line.'

'D--d unhandsome terms those Redgauntlet used to you, brother.' said
Nixon.

'Which do you mean?' said Ewart, starting, and recollecting himself. 'I
have been at my old trade of thinking aloud, have I?'

'No matter,' answered Nixon, 'none but a friend heard you. You cannot
have forgotten how Redgauntlet disarmed you this morning.'

'Why, I would bear no malice about that--only he is so cursedly high and
saucy,' said Ewart.

'And then,' said Nixon,'I know you for a true-hearted Protestant.'

'That I am, by G--,' said Ewart. 'No, the Spaniards could never get my
religion from me.'

'And a friend to King George, and the Hanover line of succession,' said
Nixon, still walking and speaking very slow.

'You may swear I am, excepting in the way of business, as Turnpenny
says. I like King George, but I can't afford to pay duties.'

'You are outlawed, I believe,' said Nixon.

'Am I?--faith, I believe I am,' said Ewart. 'I wish I were INLAWED
again with all my heart. But come along, we must get all ready for our
peremptory gentleman, I suppose.'

'I will teach you a better trick,' said Nixon. 'There is a bloody pack
of rebels yonder.'

'Aye, we all know that,' said the smuggler; 'but the snowball's melting,
I think.'

'There is some one yonder, whose head is worth--thirty
thousand--pounds--of sterling money,' said Nixon, pausing between each
word, as if to enforce the magnificence of the sum.

'And what of that?' said Ewart, quickly.

'Only that, instead of lying by the pier with your men on their oars, if
you will just carry your boat on board just now, and take no notice of
any signal from the shore, by G--d, Nanty Ewart. I will make a man of
you for life!'

'Oh ho! then the Jacobite gentry are not so safe as they think
themselves?' said Nanty.

'In an hour or two,' replied Nixon, 'they will be made safer in Carlisle
Castle.'

'The devil they will!' said Ewart; 'and you have been the informer, I
suppose?'

'Yes; I have been ill paid for my service among the Redgauntlets--have
scarce got dog's wages--and been treated worse than ever dog was used. I
have the old fox and his cubs in the same trap now, Nanty; and we'll see
how a certain young lady will look then. You see I am frank with you,
Nanty.'

'And I will be as frank with you,' said the smuggler. 'You are a d--d
old scoundrel--traitor to the man whose bread you eat! Me help to betray
poor devils, that have been so often betrayed myself! Not if they were
a hundred Popes, Devils, and Pretenders. I will back and tell them their
danger--they are part of cargo--regularly invoiced--put under my charge
by the owners--I'll back'--

'You are not stark mad?' said Nixon, who now saw he had miscalculated in
supposing Nanty's wild ideas of honour and fidelity could be shaken
even by resentment, or by his Protestant partialities. 'You shall not go
back--it is all a joke.'

'I'll back to Redgauntlet, and see whether it is a joke he will laugh
at.'

'My life is lost if you do,' said Nixon--'hear reason.'

They were in a clump or cluster of tall furze at the moment they were
speaking, about half-way between the pier and the house, but not in a
direct line, from which Nixon, whose object it was to gain time, had
induced Ewart to diverge insensibly.

He now saw the necessity of taking a desperate resolution. 'Hear
reason,' he said; and added, as Nanty still endeavoured to pass him, 'Or
else hear this!' discharging a pocket-pistol into the unfortunate man's
body.

Nanty staggered, but kept his feet. 'It has cut my back-bone asunder,'
he said; 'you have done me the last good office, and I will not die
ungrateful.'

As he uttered the last words, he collected his remaining strength, stood
firm for an instant, drew his hanger, and, fetching a stroke with both
hands, cut Cristal Nixon down. The blow, struck with all the energy of
a desperate and dying man, exhibited a force to which Ewart's exhausted
frame might have seemed inadequate;--it cleft the hat which the wretch
wore, though secured by a plate of iron within the lining, bit deep into
his skull, and there left a fragment of the weapon, which was broke by
the fury of the blow.

One of the seamen of the lugger, who strolled up attracted by the firing
of the pistol, though being a small one the report was very trifling,
found both the unfortunate men stark dead. Alarmed at what he saw,
which he conceived to have been the consequence of some unsuccessful
engagement betwixt his late commander and a revenue officer (for Nixon
chanced not to be personally known to him) the sailor hastened back
to the boat, in order to apprise his comrades of Nanty's fate, and to
advise them to take off themselves and the vessel.

Meantime Redgauntlet, having, as we have seen, dispatched Nixon for the
purpose of securing a retreat for the unfortunate Charles, in case of
extremity, returned to the apartment where he had left the Wanderer. He
now found him alone.

'Sir Richard Glendale,' said the unfortunate prince, 'with his
young friend, has gone to consult their adherents now in the house.
Redgauntlet, my friend, I will not blame you for the circumstances in
which I find myself, though I am at once placed in danger, and rendered
contemptible. But you ought to have stated to me more strongly the
weight which these gentlemen attached to their insolent proposition. You
should have told me that no compromise would have any effect--that they
desire not a prince to govern them, but one, on the contrary, over
whom they were to exercise restraint on all occasions, from the highest
affairs of the state, down to the most intimate and private concerns of
his own privacy, which the most ordinary men desire to keep secret and
sacred from interference.'

'God knows,' said Redgauntlet, in much agitation, 'I acted for the best
when I pressed your Majesty to come hither--I never thought that your
Majesty, at such a crisis, would have scrupled, when a kingdom was in
view, to sacrifice an attachment, which'--

'Peace, sir!' said Charles; 'it is not for you to estimate my feelings
upon such a subject.'

Redgauntlet coloured high, and bowed profoundly. 'At least,' he
resumed, 'I hoped that some middle way might be found, and it shall--and
must.--Come with me, nephew. We will to these gentlemen, and I am
confident I will bring back heart-stirring tidings.'

'I will do much to comply with them, Redgauntlet. I am loath, having
again set my foot on British land, to quit it without a blow for my
right. But this which they demand of me is a degradation, and compliance
is impossible.'

Redgauntlet, followed by his nephew, the unwilling spectator of this
extraordinary scene, left once more the apartment of the adventurous
Wanderer, and was met on the top of the stairs by Joe Crackenthorp.
'Where are the other gentlemen?' he said.

'Yonder, in the west barrack,' answered Joe; 'but Master
Ingoldsby,'--that was the name by which Redgauntlet was most generally
known in Cumberland,--'I wish to say to you that I must put yonder folk
together in one room.'

'What folk?' said Redgauntlet, impatiently.

'Why, them prisoner stranger folk, as you bid Cristal Nixon look after.
Lord love you! this is a large house enow, but we cannot have separate
lock-ups for folk, as they have in Newgate or in Bedlam. Yonder's a
mad beggar, that is to be a great man when he wins a lawsuit, Lord help
him!--Yonder's a Quaker and a lawyer charged with a riot; and, ecod, I
must make one key and one lock keep them, for we are chokeful, and you
have sent off old Nixon that could have given one some help in this
confusion. Besides, they take up every one a room, and call for naughts
on earth,--excepting the old man, who calls lustily enough,--but he has
not a penny to pay shot.'

'Do as thou wilt with them,' said Redgauntlet, who had listened
impatiently to his statement; 'so thou dost but keep them from getting
out and making some alarm in the country, I care not.'

'A Quaker and a lawyer!' said Darsie. 'This must be Fairford and
Geddes.--Uncle, I must request of you'--

'Nay, nephew,' interrupted Redgauntlet, 'this is no time for asking
questions. You shall yourself decide upon their fate in the course of an
hour--no harm whatever is designed them.'

So saying, he hurried towards the place where the Jacobite gentlemen
were holding their council, and Darsie followed him, in the hope that
the obstacle which had arisen to the prosecution of their desperate
adventure would prove insurmountable and spare him the necessity of a
dangerous and violent rupture with his uncle. The discussions among
them were very eager; the more daring part of the conspirators, who had
little but life to lose, being desirous to proceed at all hazards;
while the others, whom a sense of honour and a hesitation to disavow
long-cherished principles had brought forward, were perhaps not ill
satisfied to have a fair apology for declining an adventure, into which
they had entered with more of reluctance than zeal.

Meanwhile Joe Crackenthorp, availing himself of the hasty permission
attained from Redgauntlet, proceeded to assemble in one apartment
those whose safe custody had been thought necessary; and, without much
