
Other changes had likewise taken place, which may be here recorded. The
Earl of Surrey had made the tour of France, Italy, and the Empire,
and had fully kept his word, by proclaiming the supremacy of the Fair
Geraldine's beauty at all tilts and tournaments, at which he constantly
bore away the prize. But the greatest reward, and that which he hoped
would crown his fidelity--the hand of his mistress--was not reserved for
him.

At the expiration of three years, he returned home, polished by travel,
and accounted one of the bravest and most accomplished cavaliers of the
day. His reputation had preceded him, and he was received with marks of
the highest distinction and favour by Henry, as well as by Anne Boleyn.
But the king was still averse to the match, and forbade the Fair
Geraldine to return to court.

Finding so much opposition on all sides, the earl was at last brought to
assent to the wish of the Fair Geraldine, that their engagement should
be broken off. In her letters, she assured him that her love had
undergone no abatement--and never would do so--but that she felt they
must give up all idea of an union.

These letters, probably the result of some manoeuvring on his own part,
set on foot by the royal mandate, were warmly seconded by the Duke of
Norfolk, and after many and long solicitations, he succeeded in wringing
from his son a reluctant acquiescence to the arrangement.

The disappointment produced its natural consequences on the ardent
temperament of the young earl, and completely chilled and blighted his
feelings. He became moody and discontented; took little share in the
amusement and pastimes going forward; and from being the blithest
cavalier at court, became the saddest. The change in his demeanour did
not escape the notice of Anne Boleyn, who easily divined the cause, and
she essayed by raillery and other arts to wean him from his grief. But
all was for some time of no avail. The earl continued inconsolable. At
last, however, by the instrumentality of the queen and his father, he
was contracted to the Lady Frances Vere, daughter of the Earl of Oxford,
and was married to her in 1535.

Long before this the Duke of Richmond had been wedded to the Lady Mary
Howard.

For some time previous to the present era of this chronicle, Anne Boleyn
had observed a growing coolness towards her on the part of the king,
and latterly it had become evident that his passion for her was fast
subsiding, if indeed it had not altogether expired.

Though Anne had never truly loved her royal consort, and though at that
very time she was secretly encouraging the regards of another, she
felt troubled by this change, and watched all the king's movements
with jealous anxiety, to ascertain if any one had supplanted her in his
affections.

At length her vigilance was rewarded by discovering a rival in one
of the loveliest of her dames, Jane Seymour. This fair creature, the
daughter of Sir John Seymour, of Wolff Hall, in Wiltshire, and who was
afterwards, it is almost needless to say, raised to as high a dignity
as Anne Boleyn herself, was now in the very pride of her beauty. Tall,
exquisitely proportioned, with a complexion of the utmost brilliancy and
delicacy, large liquid blue eyes, bright chestnut tresses, and lovely
features, she possessed charms that could not fall to captivate the
amorous monarch. It seems marvellous that Anne Boleyn should have such
an attendant; but perhaps she felt confident in her own attractions.

Skilled in intrigue herself, Anne, now that her eyes were opened,
perceived all the allurements thrown out by Jane to ensnare the king,
and she intercepted many a furtive glance between them. Still she did
not dare to interfere. The fierceness of Henry's temper kept her in awe,
and she knew well that the slightest opposition would only make him the
more determined to run counter to her will. Trusting, therefore, to get
rid of Jane Seymour by some stratagem, she resolved not to attempt to
dismiss her, except as a last resource.

A slight incident occurred, which occasioned a departure from the
prudent course she had laid down to herself.

Accompanied by her dames, she was traversing the great gallery of the
palace at Greenwich, when she caught the reflection of Jane Seymour,
who was following her, in a mirror, regarding a jewelled miniature.
She instantly turned round at the sight, and Jane, in great confusion,
thrust the picture into her bosom.

"Ah I what have you there?" cried Anne.

"A picture of my father, Sir John Seymour," replied Jane, blushing
deeply.

"Let me look at it," cried Anne, snatching the picture from her. "Ah!
call you this your father? To my thinking it is much more like my royal
husband. Answer me frankly, minion--answer me, as you value your life!
Did the king give you this?"

"I must decline answering the question," replied Jane, who by this time
had recovered her composure.

"Ah! am I to be thus insolently treated by one of my own dames?" cried
Anne.

"I intend no disrespect to your majesty," replied Jane, "and I will,
since you insist upon it, freely confess that I received the portrait
from the king. I did not conceive there could be any harm in doing so,
because I saw your majesty present your own portrait, the other day, to
Sir Henry Norris."

Anne Boleyn turned as pale as death, and Jane Seymour perceived that she
had her in her power.

"I gave the portrait to Sir Henry as a recompense for an important
service he rendered me," said Anne, after a slight pause.

"No doubt," replied Jane; "and I marvel not that he should press it so
fervently to his lips, seeing he must value the gift highly. The king
likewise bestowed his portrait upon me for rendering him a service."

"And what was that?" asked Anne.

"Nay, there your majesty must hold me excused," replied the other. "It
were to betray his highness's confidence to declare it. I must refer you
to him for explanation."

"Well, you are in the right to keep the secret," said Anne, forcing a
laugh. "I dare say there is no harm in the portrait--indeed, I am
sure there is not, if it was given with the same intent that mine was
bestowed upon Norris. And so we will say no more upon the matter, except
that I beg you to be discreet with the king. If others should comment
upon your conduct, I may be compelled to dismiss you."

"Your majesty shall be obeyed," said Jane, with a look that intimated
that the request had but slight weight with her.

"Catherine will be avenged by means of this woman," muttered Anne as
she turned away. "I already feel some of the torments with which she
threatened me. And she suspects Norris. I must impress more caution
on him. Ah! when a man loves deeply, as he loves me, due restraint is
seldom maintained."

But though alarmed, Anne was by no means aware of the critical position
in which she stood. She could not persuade herself that she had
entirely lost her influence with the king; and she thought that when his
momentary passion had subsided, it would return to its old channels.

She was mistaken. Jane Seymour was absolute mistress of his heart; and
Anne was now as great a bar to him as she had before been an attraction.
Had her conduct been irreproachable, it might have been difficult to
remove her; but, unfortunately, she had placed herself at his mercy, by
yielding to the impulses of vanity, and secretly encouraging the passion
of Sir Henry Norris, groom of the stole.

This favoured personage was somewhat above the middle Size, squarely and
strongly built. His features were regularly and finely formed, and he
had a ruddy complexion, brown curling hair, good teeth, and fine eyes
of a clear blue. He possessed great personal strength, was expert in all
manly exercises, and shone especially at the jousts and the manege. He
was of an ardent temperament, and Anne Boleyn had inspired him with so
desperate a passion that he set at nought the fearful risk he ran to
obtain her favour.

In all this seemed traceable the hand of fate--in Henry's passion for
Jane Seymour, and Anne's insane regard for Norris--as if in this way,
and by the same means in which she herself had been wronged, the injured
Catherine of Arragon was to be avenged.

How far Henry's suspicions of his consort's regard for Norris had been
roused did not at the time appear. Whatever he felt in secret, he took
care that no outward manifestation should betray him. On the contrary he
loaded Norris, who had always been a favourite with him, with new marks
of regard, and encouraged rather than interdicted his approach to the
queen.

Things were in this state when the court proceeded to Windsor, as before
related, on Saint George's day.




II.

     How Anne Boleyn received Proof of Henry's Passion for Jane
     Seymour.


On the day after the solemnisation of the Grand Feast of the Order of
the Garter, a masqued fete of great splendour and magnificence was held
within the castle. The whole of the state apartments were thrown open to
the distinguished guests, and universal gaiety prevailed. No restraint
was offered to the festivity by the king, for though he was known to be
present, he did not choose to declare himself.

The queen sat apart on a fauteuil in the deep embrasure of a window; and
as various companies of fantastic characters advanced towards her,
she more than once fancied she detected amongst them the king, but the
voices convinced her of her mistake. As the evening was wearing, a mask
in a blue domino drew near her, and whispered in a devoted and familiar
tone, "My queen!"

"Is it you, Norris?" demanded Anne, under her breath.

"It is," he replied. "Oh, madam! I have been gazing at you the whole
evening, but have not dared to approach you till now."

"I am sorry you have addressed me at all, Norris," she rejoined. "Your
regard for me has been noticed by others, and may reach the king's ears.
You must promise never to address me in the language of passion again."

"If I may not utter my love I shall go mad," replied Norris. "After
raising me to the verge of Paradise, do not thrust me to the depths of
Tartarus."

"I have neither raised you nor do I cast you down," rejoined Anne.
"That I am sensible of your devotion, and grateful for it, I admit, but
nothing more. My love and allegiance are due to the king."

"True," replied Norris bitterly; "they are so, but he is wholly
insensible to your merits. At this very moment he is pouring his
love-vows in the ear of Jane Seymour."

"Ah! is he so?" cried Anne. "Let me have proof of his perfidy, and I may
incline a more favourable ear to you."

"I will instantly obtain you the proof, madam," replied Norris, bowing
and departing.

Scarcely had he quitted the queen, and mixed with the throng of dancers,
than he felt a pressure upon his arm, and turning at the touch, beheld
a tall monk, the lower part of whose face was muffled up, leaving only a
pair of fierce black eyes and a large aquiline nose visible.

"I know what you want, Sir Henry Norris," said the tall monk in a
low deep voice; "you wish to give the queen proof of her royal lord's
inconstancy. It is easily done. Come with me."

"Who are you?" demanded Norris doubtfully.

"What matters it who I am?" rejoined the other; "I am one of the
masquers, and chance to know what is passing around me. I do not inquire
into your motives, and therefore you have no right to inquire into
mine."

"It is not for my own satisfaction that I desire this proof," said
Norris, "because I would rather shield the king's indiscretions than
betray them. But the queen has conceived suspicions which she is
determined to verify."

"Think not to impose upon me," replied the monk with a sneer. "Bring the
queen this way, and she shall be fully satisfied."

"I can run no risk in trusting you," said Norris, "and therefore I
accept your offer."

"Say no more," cried the monk disdainfully, "I will await you here."

And Norris returned to the queen.

"Have you discovered anything?" she cried.

"Come with me, madam," said Norris, bowing and taking her hand.

Proceeding thus they glided through the throng of dancers, who
respectfully cleared a passage for them as they walked along until they
approached the spot where the tall monk was standing. As they drew near
him he moved on, and Norris and the queen followed in silence. Passing
from the great hall in which the crowd of dancers were assembled, they
descended a short flight of steps, at the foot of which the monk paused,
and pointed with his right hand to a chamber, partly screened by the
folds of a curtain.

At this intimation the queen and her companion stepped quickly on, and
as she advanced, Anne Boleyn perceived Jane Seymour and the king seated
on a couch within the apartment. Henry was habited like a pilgrim,
but he had thrown down his hat, ornamented with the scallop-shell, his
vizard, and his staff, and had just forced his fair companion to unmask.

At the sight, Anne was transfixed with jealous rage, and was for the
moment almost unconscious of the presence of Norris, or of the monk, who
remained behind the curtain, pointing to what was taking place.

"Your majesty is determined to expose my blushes," said Jane Seymour,
slightly struggling with her royal lover.

"Nay, I only want to be satisfied that it is really yourself,
sweetheart," cried Henry passionately. "It was in mercy to me, I
suppose, that you insisted upon shrouding those beauteous features from
my view.

"Hear you that, madam?" whispered Norris to Anne.

The queen answered by a convulsive clasp of the hand.

"Your majesty but jests with me," said Jane Seymour. "Jests!" cried
Henry passionately. "By my faith! I never understood the power of beauty
till now. No charms ever moved my heart like yours; nor shall I know a
moment's peace till you become mine."

"I am grieved to hear it, my liege," replied Jane Seymour, "for I never
can be yours, unless as your queen."

Again Norris hazarded a whisper to Anne Boleyn, which was answered by
another nervous grasp of the hand.

"That is as much as to say," pursued Jane, seeing the gloomy reverie
into which her royal lover was thrown, "I can give your majesty no hopes
at all."

"You have been schooled by Anne Boleyn, sweetheart," said Henry.

"How so, my liege?" demanded Jane Seymour.

"Those are the very words she used to me when I wooed her, and which
induced me to divorce Catherine of Arragon," replied Henry. "Now they
may bring about her own removal."

"Just Heaven!" murmured Anne.

"I dare not listen to your majesty," said Jane Seymour, in a tremulous
tone; "and yet, if I dared speak--"

"Speak on, fearlessly, sweetheart," said Henry.

"Then I am well assured," said Jane, "that the queen no longer loves
you; nay, that she loves another."

"It is false, minion!" cried Anne Boleyn, rushing forward, while Norris
hastily retreated, "it is false! It is you who would deceive the king
for your own purposes. But I have fortunately been brought hither to
prevent the injury you would do me. Oh, Henry! have I deserved this of
you?"

"You have chanced to overhear part of a scene in a masquerade,
madam--that is all," said the king.

"I have chanced to arrive most opportunely for myself," said Anne. "As
for this slanderous and deceitful minion, I shall dismiss her from my
service. If your majesty is determined to prove faithless to me, it
shall not be with one of my own dames."

"Catherine of Arragon should have made that speech," retorted Jane
Seymour bitterly. "She had reason to complain that she was supplanted by
one much beneath her. And she never played the king falsely."

"Nor have I!" cried Anne fiercely. "If I had my will, I should strike
thee dead for the insinuation. Henry, my lord--my love--if you have any
regard for me, instantly dismiss Jane Seymour."

"It may not be, madam," replied Henry in a freezing tone; "she has done
nothing to deserve dismissal. If any one is to blame in the matter, it
is myself."

"And will you allow her to make these accusations against me without
punishment?" cried Anne.

"Peace, madam!" cried the king sternly; "and thank my good-nature that
I go no further into the matter. If you are weary of the masque, I pray
you retire to your own apartments. For myself, I shall lead Jane Seymour
to the bransle."

"And if your majesty should need a partner," said Jane, walking up to
Anne and speaking in a low tone, "you will doubtless find Sir Henry
Norris disengaged."

The queen looked as if stricken by a thunderbolt. She heard the
triumphant laugh of her rival; she saw her led forth, all smiles and
beauty and triumph, by the king to the dance, and she covered her face
in agony. While she was in this state, a deep voice breathed in her
ears, "The vengeance of Catherine of Arragon begins to work!"

Looking up, she beheld the tall figure of the monk retreating from the
chamber.




III.

     What passed between Norris and the Tall Monk.


Tottering to the seat which Henry and Jane had just quitted, Anne
sank into it. After a little time, having in some degree recovered
her composure, she was about to return to the great hall, when Norris
appeared.

"I did not deceive you, madam," he said, "when I told you the king was
insensible to your charms; he only lives for Jane Seymour."

"Would I could dismiss her!" cried Anne furiously.

"If you were to do so, she would soon be replaced by another," rejoined
Norris. "The king delights only in change. With him, the last face is
ever the most beautiful."

"You speak fearful treason, sir!" replied Anne; "but I believe it to be
the truth."

"Oh, then, madam!" pursued Norris, "since the king is so regardless of
you, why trouble yourself about him? There are those who would sacrifice
a thousand lives, if they possessed them, for your love."

"I fear it is the same with all men," rejoined Anne. "A woman's heart is
a bauble which, when obtained, is speedily tossed aside."

"Your majesty judges our sex too harshly," said Norris. "If I had the
same fortune as the king, I should never change."

"The king himself once thought so--once swore so," replied Anne
petulantly. "It is the common parlance of lovers. But I may not listen
to such discourse longer."

"Oh, madam!" cried Norris, "you misjudge me greatly. My heart is
not made of the same stuff as that of the royal Henry. I can love
deeply--devotedly--lastingly."

"Know you not that by these rash speeches you place your head in
jeopardy?" said Anne.

"I would rather lose it than not be permitted to love you," he replied.

"But your rashness endangers me," said the queen. "Your passion
has already been noticed by Jane Seymour, and the slightest further
indiscretion will be fatal."

"Nay, if that be so," cried Norris, "and your majesty should be placed
in peril on my account, I will banish myself from the court, and from
your presence, whatever the effort cost me."

"No," replied Anne, "I will not tax you so hardly. I do not think," she
added tenderly, "deserted as I am by the king, that I could spare you."

"You confess, then, that I have inspired you with some regard?" he cried
rapturously.

"Do not indulge in these transports, Norris," said Anne mournfully.
"Your passion will only lead to your destruction--perchance to mine. Let
the certainty that I do love, content you, and seek not to tempt your
fate further."

"Oh, madam! you make me the happiest of men by the avowal," he cried. "I
envy not now the king, for I feel raised above him by your love."

"You must join the revel, Norris," said Anne; "your absence from it will
be observed."

And extending her hand to him, he knelt down and pressed it passionately
to his lips.

"Ah! we are observed," she cried suddenly, and almost with a shriek.
"Rise, sir!"

Norris instantly sprang to his feet, and, to his inexpressible dismay,
saw the figure of a tall monk gliding away. Throwing a meaning look at
the almost sinking queen, he followed the mysterious observer into
the great hall, determined to rid himself of him in some way before he
should have time to make any revelations.

Avoiding the brilliant throng, the monk entered the adjoining corridor,
and descending the great staircase, passed into the upper quadrangle.
From thence he proceeded towards the cloisters near St. George's Chapel,
where he was overtaken by Norris, who had followed him closely.

"What would you with me, Sir Henry Norris?" cried the monk, halting.

"You may guess," said Norris, sternly and drawing his sword. "There are
secrets which are dangerous to the possessor. Unless you swear never to
betray what you have seen and heard, you die."

The tall monk laughed derisively.

"You know that your life is in my power," he said, "and therefore you
threaten mine. Well, e'en take it, if you can."
