It looked, said those who saw it, more like a cheesebox on a raft
than anything else.

Like a tiger hungry for prey the Merrimac came back next morning.
The captain expected an easy victory, but to his surprise he found
this queer little cheesebox between him and his victims.  He would
soon do for the impertinent little minnow, he thought, and he opened
fire.  But his shells might have been peas for all the effect they
had, and the Monitor steamed on unhurt, until she was close to the
Merrimac.  Then she fired.

A tremendous duel now began which lasted three hours.  The lumbering
Merrimac tried to run down her enemy, but the quick little Monitor
danced round and round, turning the turret now this way, now that,
and firing how she pleased, like a terrier yapping at a maddened
bull.  And at length the Merrimac gave up the tussle, and sailed
away.

This was the first battle ever fought between ironclads and it has
been called a draw.  But after all the honours were with the little
Monitor, for she forced her big opponent to run away.

It might almost be said that this battle saved the Union, for it
showed the Confederates that they would not have it all their own
way on sea, and that if they were building ironclads the Federals
were building them also.  And indeed the Government built ships so
fast that by the end of the war, instead of having only about forty
they had over six hundred ship, many of them ironclad.

__________





Chapter 85 - Lincoln - The Battle of Shiloh and the Taking of New
Orleans




With Grant other successes soon followed the taking of Fort Donelson,
and many places both in Kentucky and Tennessee fell into the hands
of the Federals.

By the beginning of April Grant with an army of forty thousand men
lay at Pittsburg Landing on the Tennessee River.  At Corinth, about
thirty miles to the south, the Confederates were gathered in equal
force.  But although the Confederates were so near and in such
force the Federals took no heed.  They had of late won so many easy
victories that they had begun to think lightly of the foe.  So no
attempt was made to protect the Union army.  No trenches were dug,
and but few scouts were sent out to watch the movements of the
enemy.  The Confederate leader, General Johnston, therefore determined
to creep up stealthily, and attack the Federals where they lay in
fancied security.

As secretly as possible he left Corinth, and marched towards
Pittsburg Landing.  The weather had been wet, the roads were deep
in mud, but in spite of dreadful difficulties for two days the army
toiled silently on.  At length on the night of Saturday the 5th of
April they arrived within four miles of the Federal lines.

Here they halted for the night.  The men had brought no tents, they
dared light no fires lest they should be seen by the foe.  So, weary,
wet, and shivering they lay on the cold damp ground, awaiting the
dawn, while secure in the comfortable shelter of their tents the
Federals slept peacefully.  So secure indeed did Grant feel his
position to be that he was not with his army that night, but at
Savannah some miles distant.

At daybreak the Federal camp was astir.  Men were washing and dressing,
some were cooking or eating breakfast, most of the officers were
still abed, when suddenly the sound of shots broke the Sunday
stillness, and the wild "rebel yell" rent the air.

A moment later the surrounding woods seemed to open and pour forth
an army.  With tremendous dash the Confederates flung themselves
upon the half dressed, weaponless crowd of men who fled before them,
or were bayoneted before they could seize their muskets.  Thus the
greatest battle that as yet had been fought on the continent of
America was begun.

Soon the roar of cannon reached Grant at Savannah.  He knew at once
that a fierce battle had begun, and flinging himself on his horse
he hurried back to the camp.  At eight o'clock in the morning
he arrived.  But already it seemed as if his army was defeated.  It
was, however, to be no easy victory for the Confederates.  Many of
the Federals were only raw recruits, but after the first surprise
and flight they rallied repeatedly, making many a stubborn stand
against the onslaught of the foe, which from the first great charge
of early dawn till darkness fell never seemed to slacken.

In many coloured uniforms, with many coloured pennons waving over
them, the Confederates charged again and yet again.  And with each
charge the air was rent with their wild yell, which could be heard
far and wide, even above the roar of the cannon.  Bit by bit the
Union army was pressed back.  They fought doggedly as they went
while from division to division rode Grant cheering them, directing
them, urging them to greater and ever greater efforts.

Some of the fiercest fighting raged round the little log meeting
house called Shiloh, and from this meeting house the battle takes
its name.  Sherman commanded here, and he held his untried men
together with marvelous skill, handling them as no other commander
on the field could have done, said Grant later.

On the Confederate side through the thickest of the battle rode
Johnston.  More than once his horse was shot under him, and his
clothes were torn to pieces, but still through the fray he rode
unharmed.  At length a ball hit him in the thigh.  He paid no heed.
Still his tall soldierly figure dominated the battle, still his
ringing voice cheered on his men.  Then suddenly the voice grew faint,
the tall figure bent, and a deathly whiteness overspread his cheeks.

"General, are you wounded?" asked one of his officers, anxiously.

"Yes," he answered, faintly, "and I fear badly."

They were his last words.  Gently he was lifted from his horse and
laid on the ground, and in a few minutes he died.

When the sun went down the Confederates claimed the victory.  But
if victory it was it was too dearly bought with the death of their
commander-in-chief.  Nor did the Federals own themselves beaten.
They were dumbfounded and bleeding, but not shattered.  They felt
that the struggle was not over, and still facing each other the
weary armies lay down to rest on the field, under the lashing rain,
each side well aware that with the morrow would come the decisive
contest.

All through the night the guns from the river boomed and crashed,
and rain fell in torrents, adding to the discomforts of the wearied
men, making sleep almost impossible.

When day dawned rain still fell in a cold and dismal drizzle.  The
Federals, however, rose cheerfully, for the inspiriting news that
twenty-five thousand fresh troops had arrived ran through the lines.
Before the sun had well risen the battle began again, but now the
advantage was on the Federal side.

The Confederates fought bravely still.  To and fro rode General
Beauregard cheering on his men, but step by step they were driven
backward, and by noon were in full retreat.  Then as the Federals
realized that the day was theirs cheer after cheer went up from
their lines.

The second day's fighting had turned the battle of Shiloh into
a victory for the Union, although not a decisive one.  On the same
day, however, the navy captured a strongly fortified island on the
Mississippi called Island Number Ten, with its garrison of seven
thousand men and large stores of guns and ammunition.  This considerably
increased the force of the victory of Shiloh, and gave the Federals
control of the Mississippi Valley from Cairo to Memphis.

Meanwhile command of the lower Mississippi had also been wrested
from the Confederates by General Benjamin F.  Butler in command of
the army, and Commander David Glasgow Farragut in command of the
fleet.

Captain Farragut who was already sixty-three at this time was a
Southerner by birth, but he had never faltered in his allegiance to
the Union. "Mind what I tell you," he said to his brother officers,
when they tried to make him desert his flag, "you fellows will
catch the devil before you get through with this business." And so
unshaken was his faith that he was trusted with the most important
naval expedition of the war, the taking of New Orleans.

New Orleans is about a hundred miles from the mouth of the Mississippi
and the Confederates, who were aware even more than the Federals of
the importance of the great waterway, had from the very beginning
done their utmost to secure it.  Seventy-five miles below New Orleans
two forts named Jackson and St.  Phillips guarded the approaches
to the city.  These the Confederates had enormously strengthened,
and had stretched a great chain between them from bank to bank,
to prevent the passage of hostile ships.  They had also gathered a
fleet of ironclads and gunboats further to defend the city.

But in spite of all these defenses the Federals determined to take
New Orleans and on the 18th of April the Union ships began to bombard
the forts.  The Confederates replied fiercely, and for four days
the sky seemed ablaze and the earth shook.  Then having succeeded
in cutting the chain across the river Farragut determined to sail
past the fort and take New Orleans.

At two o'clock in the morning the ships began to move.  The night
was dark but very still and clear, and soon the noise of slipping
anchor cables warned the enemy of what was afoot.  Then a very hail
of shot and shell fell upon the Federal boats.  Burning fire ships
too were sent down upon them, and the red light of battle lit up
the darkness.  Yet through the baptism of fire the vessels held on
their way undaunted.  The forts were passed, the Confederate fleet
disabled and put to flight, and Farragut sailed unhindered up the
river.

At his approach, New Orleans was seized with panic.  Filled with a
nameless fear women and children ran weeping through the streets,
business of every kind was at a standstill.  The men, mostly
grey-haired veterans and boys, turned the keys in their office doors,
and hurried to join the volunteer regiments, bent on fighting to
the last for their beloved city.  Thousands of bales of cotton were
carried to the wharves, and there set on fire, lest they should
fall into the hands of the enemy.  Ships too were set on fire, and
cast loose, till it seemed as if the whole river front was wrapped
in flames.  Thirty miles away the glare could be seen in the sky,
and at the sight even strong men bowed their heads and wept.  For
they knew it meant that New Orleans had fallen, and that the Queen
of Southern cities was a captive.

But there was no fighting, for General Lovell who was in command
of the city marched away with his army as soon as the Union ships
appeared.  The citizens who were left were filled with impotent wrath
and despair.  They felt themselves betrayed.  They had been assured
that the city would fight to the last.  Now their defenders had
marched away leaving them to the mercy of the conqueror.

The streets were soon filled with a dangerous, howling cursing mob
man of them armed, all of them desperate.  Yet calmly through it,
as if on parade, marched two Federal officers, without escort of
protection of any kind.  The mob jostled them, shook loaded pistols
in their faces, yelling and cursing the while.  But the two officers
marched on side by side unmoved, showing neither anger nor fear,
turning neither to right nor to left until they reached the city
hall, where they demanded the surrender of the city.

"It was one of the bravest deeds I ever saw done," said a Southerner,
who as a boy of fourteen watched the scene.

By the taking of New Orleans Farragut won for himself great fame.
His fame was all the greater because in his fleet he had none of
the newly invented ironclads.  With only wooden vessels he had fought
and conquered. "It was a contest between iron hearts and wooden
vessels, and iron clads with iron beaks, and the iron hearts won,"
said Captain Bailey who served in the expedition under Farragut.

After taking New Orleans Farragut sailed up the river and took Baton
Rouge, the state capital.  So at length the Federals had control
of the whole lower river as far as Vicksburg.  The upper river from
Cairo was also secure to the Federals.  Thus save for Vicksburg the
whole valley was in their hands, and the Confederacy was practically
cut in two.

But Vicksburg stood firm for the South.  When called upon to
surrender the governor refused. "I have to state," he said, "that
Mississippians do not know, and refuse to learn, how to surrender
to an enemy.  If Commodore Farragut, or Brigadier General Butler,
can teach them, let them come and try."

At the time soldiers enough could not be spared to help the fleet
to take Vicksburg.  So for the time being it was left alone.

__________





Chapter 86 - Lincoln - The Slaves are Made Free




The Federals rejoiced greatly at the successes of Grant and the
navy, and indeed they had need of success somewhere to keep up their
spirits, for on the whole things did not go well.  George McClellan
was commander-in-chief, and although he drilled his army splendidly
he never did anything with it.  He was a wonderful organiser, but
he was cautious to a fault, and always believed the enemy to be
far stronger than he really was.

He was at last dismissed, and was succeeded by one commander-in-chief
after another.  Not none proved truly satisfactory.  Indeed it was
not until the last year of the war, when Ulysses Grant took command,
that a really great commander-in-chief was found.

At the beginning of the war no matter who was leader the long campaigns
in Virginia ended in failure for the Federals.  On the Confederate
side these campaigns were led first by Joseph E.  Johnston, and then
by the great soldier, Robert E.  Lee.

Lee came of a soldier stock, being the youngest son of "Light Horse
Harry Lee," who had won fame during the War of the Revolution.  He
was a noble, Christian gentleman, and when he made his choice, and
determined to fight for the South, he believed he was fighting for
the right.

With Lee was Stonewall Jackson, his great "right hand," and perhaps
a finer soldier than Lee himself.  His men adored him as they adored
no other leader.  Like Cromwell he taught them to pray as well as
to fight.  He never went into battle without commending his way to
God, and when he knelt long in prayer his men might feel certain that
a great fight was coming.  He was secret and swift in his movements,
so swift that his troops were nicknamed "Jackson's foot cavalry."
Yet he never wore his men out.  He thought for them always, and
however urgent haste might be he called frequent halts on his flying
marches, and made the men lie down even if it were only for a few
minutes.

To conquer such leaders, and the men devoted to them, was no easy
matter, and it was not wonderful that the campaigns in Virginia
marked few successes for the Federals.  At length the long series
of failures ended with a second, and for the Federals, disastrous,
battle of Bull Run.  This was followed two days later by the battle of
Chantilly, after which the whole Federal army fell back to Washington.

Lee, rejoicing at his successes in Virginia, made up his mind then
to invade Maryland, which state he believed would readily join
the Confederacy.  But he was disappointed.  For if the Marylanders
had not much enthusiasm for the Union cause they had still less
for the Confederate, and the invaders were greeted with exceeding
coldness.  Their unfailing good fortune, too, seemed to forsake
the Confederates, and the battle of Antietam, one of the fiercest
of the war, although hardly a victory for the Federals, was equal
to a defeat for the Confederates.  For fourteen hours the carnage
lasted, and when at length night put an end to the slaughter
thousands lay dead on either side.  Next day, having in a fortnight
lost half his army, Lee withdrew once more into Virginia.

Lincoln's chief object in carrying on the war was not to free
slaves, but to save the Union.

"My first object is to save the Union," he wrote, "and not either
to save or destroy slavery.  If I could save the Union without
freeing any slaves I would do it.  If I could save it by freeing all
the slaves I would do it.  And if I could save it by freeing some,
and leaving others alone I would also do that." Gradually, however,
Lincoln began to believe that the only way to save the Union was
to free the slaves.

Many people were impetuously urging him to do it.  But Lincoln
would do nothing rash.  It was a tremendous step to take, and the
question as to when would be the right moment to take it was, for
him, one of tremendous importance.  So he prepared his Proclamation
of Emancipation and bided his time.  Following his own good judgment
and the advice of one of his Cabinet he resolved not to announce
it so long as things were going badly with the North lest it should
be looked upon as the last measure of an exhausted government, a
cry for help.  It was not to be sent forth into the world as "a last
shriek in the retreat," but as a companion to victory.

But victory was slow in coming.  At length the great battle was
fought at Antietam.  It was scarce a victory, for the Federals had
lost more men than had the Confederates.  Yet it had to pass for
one.  And a few days after it Lincoln issued his Proclamation of
Emancipation.  In this he declared that in every state which should
be in arms against the Government on the 1st of January, 1863,
the slaves should be free forever more.  This gave the rebel states
more than three months in which to lay down their arms and return
to their allegiance.

Meanwhile the war went on.  In November General Ambrose E.  Burnside
was appointed commander of the army of the Potomac.  He accepted
the post unwillingly, for he did not think himself great enough to
fill it.  It was soon proved that he was right.

On December 13th a great battle was fought at Fredericksburg in
Virginia.  The weather had been very cold and the ground was covered
with frost and snow.  But on the morning of the 13th, although a
white mist shrouded the land, the sun shone so warmly that it seemed
like a September day.  Yet though the earth and sky alike seemed
calling men to mildness and peace the deadly game of war went on.

The centre of the Confederate army occupied some high ground known
as the Maryes Heights, and Burnside resolved to dislodge them.  It
was a foolhardy attempt, for the hill was strongly held, the summit
of it bristled with cannon.  Yet the order was given, and with
unquestioning valour the men rushed to the attack.  As they dashed
onward the Confederate guns swept their ranks, and they were mowed
down like hay before the reaper.  Still they pressed onward, and
after paying a fearful toll in dead and wounded they at length
reached the foot of the hill.  Here they were confronted by a stone
wall so thick and strong that their fire had not the slightest effect
on it, and from behind which the Confederates poured a deadly hail
of bullets upon them.

Here the carnage was awful, yet still the men came on in wave after
wave, only to melt away as it seemed before the terrible fire of
the Confederates. "It was like snow coming down and melting on warm
ground," said one of their leaders afterwards.

Never did men fling away their lives so bravely and so uselessly.
A battery was ordered forward.

"General," said an officer, "a battery cannot live there."

"Then it must die there," was the answer.

And the battery was led out as dashingly as if on parade, although
the men well knew that they were going to certain death.

At length the short winter's day drew to a close, and darkness
mercifully put an end to the slaughter.

Then followed a night of pain and horror.  The frost was intense,
and out on that terrible hillside the wounded lay beside the dead,
untended and uncared for, many dying from cold ere help could
reach them.  Still and white they lay beneath the starry sky while
the general who had sent them to a needless death wrung his hands
in cruel remorse. "Oh, those men, Oh, those men," he moaned, "those
men over there.  I am thinking of them all the time."

Burnside knew that he had failed as a general, and in his grief and
despair he determined to wipe out his failure by another attempt
next day.  But his officers well knew that this would only mean more
useless sacrifice of life.  With difficulty they persuaded him to
give up the idea, and two days later the Federal army crossed the
Rappahannock, and returned to their camp near Falmouth.

With this victory of Fredericksburg the hopes of the Confederates
rose high.  They believed that the war would soon end triumphantly
for them, and that the South would henceforth be a separate republic.
There was no need for them, they thought, to listen to the commands
of the President of the North, and not one state paid any heed to
Lincoln's demand that the slaves should be set free.

Nevertheless on New Year's Day, 1863, Lincoln signed the great
Proclamation of Freedom.

He had first held a great reception, and had shaken hands with so
many people that his right hand was trembling. "If they find my
hand trembling," he said to the Secretary of State, as he took up
his pen, "they will say, 'He hesitated,' but anyway it is going to
be done."

Then very carefully and steadily he wrote his name.  It was the
greatest deed of his life. "If my name is ever remembered," he
said, "it will be for this act, and my whole soul is in it."

And thus slavery came to an end.  From the beginning of the war there
had been a danger that France and Britain might help the South.
Lincoln had now made that impossible by making the war one against
slavery as well as one for Union.  For both France and Britain were
against slavery, and could not well help those who now fought to
protect it.

Now that they were free, many negroes entered the army.  At this the
Southerners were very angry, and declared that any negroes taken
prisoners would not be regarded as soldiers, but simply as rebellious
negroes, and would be punished accordingly.  But in spite of their
anger many black regiments were formed, and proved themselves good
soldiers.  And before the end of the war the Confederates, too, were
making use of Negro Soldiery.  But this was cutting the ground from
under their own feet, and showing the injustice of slavery.  For
as a Southerner said, "If a negro is fit to be a soldier he is not
fit to be a slave."

__________





Chapter 87 - Lincoln - Chancellorsville - The Death of Stonewall
Jackson




Still the war went on, and still the North suffered many losses.
Soon after the battle of Fredericksburg General Burnside resigned
the command of the army of the Potomac.  His place was taken by
General Joseph Hooker, known to his men as "Fighting Joe." He was
a tall and handsome man, brave, and dashing almost to rashness.
"Beware of rashness, beware of rashness," said Lincoln, when he
appointed him. "But with energy and sleepless vigilance go forward,
and give us victories."

But not even "Fighting Joe" could bring victory to the North at
once.  He found the army disheartened, dwindling daily by desertion,
and altogether in something like confusion.  He was, however, a
splendid organiser, and in less than two months he had pulled the
army together and once more made it a terrible fighting machine.  He
declared it to be the finest army in the world, and full of pride
in his men, and pride in himself, he set out to crush Lee.

Near the tiny hamlet of Chancellorsville the two armies met, and
the four days' fighting which followed is known as the battle of
Chancellorsville.

Everything seemed to favour the Federals.  They had the larger army,
they were encamped in a good position, and above all the men were
full of admiration for, and trust in, 'Fighting Joe."

General Hooker's movements had been quick and sure, his plans well
laid.  But he had expected the enemy to "flee ingloriously" before
him.

The enemy, however, did not flee, but showed a stubborn intention
of fighting.  Then Hooker's courage failed him.  He seemed to lose
his grip on things, and much to the surprise of his officers he
left his high position and took a lower one.

"Great heavens," said General Meade, when he heard the order, "if
we cannot hold the top of a hill we certainly cannot hold the bottom
of it."

The first day of the battle passed without any great loss on either
side.  Night came, the fighting ceased, and the weary men lay down
to rest.  But for Lee and Jackson there was little sleep.  Beneath
a small clump of pine trees they sat on packing cases, with maps
spread out before them.  For Jackson was planning one of his quick
and stealthy marches, intent on catching the Federals unawares
where they least expected it.  And Lee, seeing the indecision of
the Federal leader, was nothing loath.  He had grown bold even to
rashness in proportion as Hooker had grown cautious.

"What exactly do you propose to do?" asked Lee, as he studied the
map.

"Go around here," replied Jackson, as with his finger he traced a
line on the map which encircled the whole right wing of the Federal
army.

"With what force do you propose to make this movement?" asked Lee.

"With my whole corps," answered Jackson.

General Lee thought for a few minutes in silence.  Then he spoke.

"Well, go on," he said.

He knew that it was a great gamble.  The Federal army was twice as
large as his own and yet Jackson proposed to cut it in two, and
place the whole Federal army between the two halves.  If the movement
failed it would be a terrible failure.  If it succeeded it would be
a great success.  It was worth the risk.  So he said, "Go on."

As for Jackson he had no doubts.  At Lee's words he rose, smiling,
and eager.

"My troops will move at once, sir," he said, and with a salute he
was gone.

Soon in the cool and lovely May morning Jackson's men were marching
through what was known as the Wilderness.  It was a forest of smallish
trees, so thickly set that a man could hardly march through it
gun on shoulder.  The Federals saw the great column of men move off
without misgivings, imagining them to be retreating.  Soon they were
lost to sight, swallowed up by the Wilderness.

Here and there through the wood narrow, unmade roads were cut,
and along these hour after hour twenty-five thousand men moved
ceaselessly and silently.  Through the thick foliage there came to
them faint echoes of the thundering guns, while close about them
the cries of startled birds broke the stillness, and the timid,
wild things of the woods scurried in terror before them.  As the day
went on the heat became stifling, and dust rose in clouds beneath
the tramping feet.  Still, choking, hot and dusty the men pressed
on.

The soldiers of the right wing of the Federal army were resting
about six o'clock that evening.  Their arms were stacked, some
were cooking supper, others were smoking or playing cards, when
suddenly from the woods there came the whirr of wings, and a rush
of frightened squirrels and rabbits, and other woodland creatures.

It was the first warning the Federals had of the approach of the
enemy.  They flew to arms, but it was already too late.  With their
wild yell the Confederates dashed into the camp.  The Federals
fought bravely, but they were taken both in front and rear, and
were utterly overwhelmed.

Now and again a regiment tried to make a stand, only to be swept
away by the terrific onslaught of the Confederates, and leaving
half their number dead on the field they fled in panic.  Still with
desperate courage the Federal leaders sought to stem the onrush of
the enemy and stay the rout.

"You must charge into those woods, and hold the foe until I get
some guns into position," said General Pleasonton, turning to Major
Peter Keenan.

"I will, sir," replied Keenan.  Then calmly smiling, at the head of
his handful of men he rode to certain death.

Ten minutes later he lay dead with more than half his gallant
followers beside him.  But his sacrifice was not in vain.  For his
desperate thrust had held the Confederates until the guns were
placed, and the army saved from utter rout.

The sun went down on a brilliant victory for the Confederates.  Yet
the night brought disaster for them.

Eager to find out what the Federals were doing General Jackson
rode out towards their lines in the gathering darkness.  It was a
dangerous thing to do, for he ran the risk of being picked off by
their sharp-shooters.  The danger indeed was so great that an officer
of his staff tried to make him turn back. "General," he said, "don't
you think that this is the wrong place for you?'

But Jackson would not listen. "The danger is all over," he said
carelessly. "The enemy is routed.  Go back and tell Hill to press
right on."

Soon after giving this order Jackson himself turned, and rode
back with his staff at a quick trot.  But in the dim light his men
mistook the little party for a company of Federals charging, and
they fired.  Many of his officers were killed, Jackson himself was
sorely wounded and fell from his horse into the arms of one of his
officers.

"General," asked some one, anxiously, "are you much hurt?"

"I think I am," replied Jackson. "And all my wounds are from my
own men," he added sadly.

As tenderly as might be he was carried to the rear, and all that
could be done was done.  But Stonewall Jackson had fought his last
victorious fight.  Eight days later the Conqueror of all men laid
his hand upon him, and he passed to the land of perfect Peace.

During these days he seemed to forget the Great War.  His wife and
children were with him, and thoughts of them filled his heart.
But at the end he was once more in imagination with his men on the
field of battle.

"Order A.P.  Hill to prepare for action," he cried. "Pass the infantry
to the front.  Tell Major Hawks-"

Then he stopped, leaving the sentence unfinished.  A puzzled, troubled
look overspread his handsome, worn face.  But in a few minutes it
passed away, and calm peace took its place.

"Let us cross over the river," he said, softly and clearly, "and
rest under the shade of the trees."

Then with a contented sight he entered into his rest.

Stonewall Jackson was a true Christian and a great soldier, and his
loss to the Confederate cause was one which could not be replaced.
He believed to the end that he was fighting for the right, and,
mistaken although he might be, his honour and valour were alike
perfect.  Both North and South may unite in admiration for him as
a soldier, and in love for him as a Christian gentleman.

__________





Chapter 88 - Lincoln - The Battle of Gettysburg




The day after Jackson was wounded the battle of Chancellorsville
continued, and ended in a second victory for the Confederates.  On
the 4th and 5th the fighting was again renewed.  Then the Federals
retired across the Rappahannock to their former camping ground
unmolested, the Confederates being too exhausted to pursue them.

After Fredericksburg the Confederates had rejoiced.  After
Chancellorsville they rejoiced still more, and they made up their
minds to carry the war into the northern states.  So leaving part
of his army under General J.  E.  B.  Stuart to prevent the Federals
pursuing him Lee marched into Pennsylvania.  But General Stuart was
unable to hold the Federals back, and they were soon in pursuit of
Lee.

At Chancellorsville Hooker had shown that although he was a splendid
fighting general he was a poor commander-in-chief, and towards the
end of June, while the army was in full cry after the foe, General
George Gordon Meade was made commander-in-chief.  Meade continued
the pursuit, and Lee, seeing nothing for it, gave up his plans of
invasion, and turned to meet the foe.

The two forces met near the little town of Gettysburg in Pennsylvania,
and a great three-days' battle took place.

The fighting began on the first of July when the Federal army was
still widely scattered through the country, and Meade himself far
in the rear, and again the Confederates triumphed.

Late that night General Meade arrived upon the field, and began
to make preparations for the struggle on the morrow.  On both sides
the commanders and armies seemed to feel that a great turning point
of the war had come, and they bent all their energies on winning.
Both camps were early astir, yet each side seemed to hesitate to
begin the fearful game, and put fortune to the test.  So the morning
passed quietly, the hot silence of the summer day being broken only
now and again by fitful spurts of firing.

Late in the afternoon at length the Confederates attacked, and
soon the battle raged fiercely.  The fight swung this way and that,
first the one side and then the other gaining ground here, losing
