near the trail. Presently he held up his hand and shouted, and Jan ran
to him.

"Look, Baas," he said, pointing to a bush.

Jan looked, and there beneath the bush lay a man, a Zulu soldier, for
his tall grey plume was still fixed upon his head, and near him was his
broad assegai. At that moment the man, who was still alive, although he
was very near his death from dysentry, seemed to hear, for he sat up
and opened his eyes, saying, "_Manzie, umlungho, manzie_." (Water, white
man, water.)

"Bring a pannikin of water, here lies a sick Kaffir," shouted Jan to
Ralph, who was still seated on the waggon-box staring at the mountain.

Ralph brought the water, and the soldier drank it greedily.

"Who are you, and how come you here?" asked Jan.

"I am a soldier of Dingaan," answered the man, "but when we were
attacking the little people on that mountain I fell sick. Still I came
away with the impi, but here my strength failed me, and here I have lain
for a round of the sun and a round of the moon. I begged them to kill
me, but my brothers would not, for they said that I might recover and
join them."

"Where have they gone?" asked Jan.

"They have gone to eat up the Boers in Natal," the Zulu answered in
a hollow voice, his empty eyes wandering towards the mountains of the
Quathlamba range. "Yes, they have gone to do the King's bidding on the
white men, for his word came to us while we besieged yonder stronghold.
To-morrow at the dawn they attack the little laager beneath the white
koppie by the banks of the Tugela, and I must reach them by then--yes,
yes, now I am strong again, and I shall attack with them to-morrow at
the dawn. Farewell, white men, I will not kill you because you gave me
the water which has made me strong again," and, rising from the ground,
he grasped his spear and started forward at a run.

"Stay," cried Ralph. "I would question you as to what has happened on
that mountain;" but the man did not seem to hear him. For thirty paces
or so he ran on, then suddenly he halted and saluted with his spear,
crying in a loud voice:

"Chief, I report myself, I am present."

Next he stretched his arms wide and fell forward upon his face. When
they reached him he was quite dead.

"This is a strange story that we have heard about the Zulus and the folk
in Natal," said Jan, rubbing his forehead.

"I think that the man was wandering in his mind," answered Ralph, "still
there may be truth in it; but, father," he added, with a gasp of
fear, and, catching Jan by the arm, "what has happened on the mountain
Umpondwana? The Zulus have been there, and--what has happened on the
mountain?"

Jan shook his head, but did not answer, for he knew too well what
happens where the Zulu impis pass.

Notwithstanding that Ralph was mad with impatience we halted the waggon
for a few minutes to take counsel, and in the end decided to send the
voorlooper back to the camp which we had left to warn our friends of
what we had learned as to the onslaught on our brethren in Natal, though
we had small faith in the story. But either the lad ran away, or some
accident befell him, or he failed to find the Boers who had already
trekked, at the least our message never reached them, nor did we see him
again. Then we went on, Gaasha leading the oxen as quickly as they could
walk. All that afternoon we travelled almost in silence, following the
spoor of the impi backwards, for our hearts were full of fear. We met no
man, but once or twice we saw groups of cattle wandering unherded,
and this astonished us, giving us hope, for it was not the custom of a
victorious impi to leave the cattle of its enemy behind it, though
if the people of the Umpondwana had conquered, it was strange that we
should see no herds with the beasts.

At length, within two hours of sunset, we passed round the shoulder of
the mountain and beheld its eastern slope.

"It is the very place of my vision," cried Ralph, and certainly there
before us were the stone ridges shaped like the thumb and fingers of a
man, while between the thumb and first finger gushed the river, upon the
banks of which grew flat-topped green-leaved trees.

"Onward, onward!" he cried again, and, taking the long waggon whip, he
thrashed the oxen till they bellowed in the yokes. But I, who was seated
beneath the tent of the waggon, turned to look behind me, and in the
far distance saw that men were driving herds of cattle towards the
mountains.

"We are too late," I thought in my heart, "for, without doubt, whether
it be the Zulus or others, the place has been taken, since yonder go the
victors with the cattle. Now they will fall upon us and kill us. Well,
should God will it, so let it be, for if Suzanne is dead indeed I care
little if we die also; and to Ralph at least death will be welcome, for
I think that then death alone can save him from madness."

Now we had reached the banks of the river, and were trekking up
them towards the spot where it issued from the side of the mountain.
Everywhere was spoor, but we saw no people, although here and there
the vultures were hissing and quarrelling over the bones of a man or a
beast.

"There has been war in this place," whispered Jan, "and now the peace of
death has fallen upon it," but Ralph only flogged the weary oxen, saying
nothing.

At length they could drag the waggon no further, for the path grew too
steep for them, whereupon Ralph, seizing the first weapon that came to
hand, which, as it chanced, was the broad assegai that Gaasha had
taken that day from the side of the dead Zulu, ran forward up the trail
followed by Jan and myself. Another two hundred yards and the path took
a turn which led to the entrance of the first scherm, the same that the
Zulus had captured by forcing the passage of the river. The gateway was
open now, and Ralph entered.

At first he could see no one, but presently he heard a voice saying:

"Will you not tell, for death is very near you? Drink, witch, tell and
drink."

"Fool," answered another voice, a grating, broken voice, "I say that
death is near to both of us, and since she is saved I die gladly, taking
my secret with me."

"Then witch, I will try steel," said the first voice.

Now Ralph looked over the rock from behind which the sound of voices
came and saw the body of a little woman tied to a stone by the edge of
the water, while over her leant a man, a white man, holding a knife in
one hand and in the other a gourd of water, which he now placed close
to her lips, and now withdrew from them. He knew that woman, it was
Sihamba. Just at this moment the man looked up and their eyes met, and
Ralph knew him also.

It was Piet Van Vooren.



CHAPTER XXXIV

THE AVENGER OF BLOOD

For a moment the two men stood looking at each other, yes, the shedder
of blood and the avenger of blood stood quite still and silent, and
looked each other in the eyes, as though a spell had fallen upon them
striking them into stone. It was the voice of Sihamba that broke the
spell, and it issued from her parched throat with a sound like the sound
of a death-rattle.

"Ah! devil and torturer," it said, "did I not tell you that doom was at
hand? Welcome, Ralph Kenzie, husband of Swallow."

Then with a roar like that of a wounded beast, Ralph sprang forward, in
his hand the uplifted spear. For one instant Swart Piet hesitated, but
at the words of Sihamba a sudden terror had taken hold of him and he
dared not wait. Like a startled buck he turned and fled up the mountain,
but as he passed her he struck downwards with the knife he held,
stabbing Sihamba in the body.

Once also he looked round for help, but there was none, for during
the long torment of Sihamba all the black villains who served him had
slipped away, fearing lest others should secure their share of the
stolen cattle. Then he sped on up the pass and never did a man run
more swiftly. But after him came one who was swifter than he, the
light-footed, long-limbed Englishman with rage in his heart, and an
awful fire of vengeance blazing in his eyes.

Up the pass they ran, leaping over stones and dead cattle till at length
they reached the tableland at the top. Here once again Van Vooren paused
for an instant, for he bethought him that, perhaps, he might hold the
mouth of the cleft against his pursuer. But his wicked heart was too
full of fear to let him stay, so at full speed he set forward across the
plain, heading for that chair rock where still sat the whitened corpse,
for there he thought he could defend himself. Ralph followed him
somewhat more slowly, for of a sudden he had grown cold and cunning,
and, knowing that his foe could not escape him, he desired to save his
breath for the last struggle.

For six hundred yards or more they ran thus, and when Van Vooren
began to climb the pedestal of rock Ralph was fifty paces behind him.
Presently he also reached the pedestal and paused to look. Already Swart
Piet was standing by the stone chair, but it was not at him that he
looked, but rather at the figure which was tied in the chair that he now
saw for the first time. That figure no longer sat upright, draped in its
white fur cloak, for it had been disturbed, as I shall tell presently,
and the cloak was half torn from it. Now it hung over the arm of the
chair, the ghastly white face looking down towards Ralph and beneath it
the bare black breast.

Ralph stared, wondering what this might mean. Then the answer to the
riddle flashed into his mind, and he laughed aloud, for here he saw
the handiwork of Sihamba. Yes, that grisly shape told him that his love
still lived and that it was to win the secret of her whereabouts that
the devil above him had practised torment upon the little doctoress.

Ralph laughed aloud and began to climb the pinnacle. He might have
waited till Jan, who was struggling up the pass after them, arrived with
his gun, but he would not wait. He had no fear of the man above and he
was certain of the issue of the fray, for he knew that God is just. As
for that man above, he grinned and gibbered in his disappointed rage and
the agony of his dread; yes, he stood there by the painted corpse and
gibbered like an ape.

"Your evil doing has not prospered over much, Piet Van Vooren," called
Ralph, "and presently when you are dead you will taste the fruits of it.
Suzanne shall be mine till the end as she was mine from the beginning,
but look upon the Death-wife that your wickedness has won," and he
pointed at the body with his spear.

Black Piet made no answer, nor did Ralph speak any more, for he must set
himself to finish his task. The Boer took a heavy stone and threw it
at him, but it missed him and he could find no more. Then gripping the
wrist of the corpse in his left hand to steady himself upon that giddy
place, he leant forward and prepared to stab Ralph with the knife as
he set foot upon the platform. Ralph saw his plan, and stopping in his
climb, he took off his coat and wound it round his left arm as a shield.
Then he came on slowly, holding the broad spear in front of him. At the
last he made a rush and reached the flat space of rock. Piet stabbed
at him, but the strength of the thrust lost itself in the folds of the
coat.

Now who can say what happened. Round and round the rock chair they
swung, Van Vooren still holding fast to the arm of the dead woman who
was lashed in it. Yes, even from where I stood five hundred feet below I
could see the flash of spear and knife as they struck and struck again.

At length a blow went home; the Zulu assegai sank deep into Van Vooren's
chest and he hung backwards over the edge of the abyss, supported only
by his grip of the dead arm--from below it looked as though he were
drawing the corpse to him against its will. Yes, he hung back and
groaned aloud. Ralph looked at him and laughed again, since though he
was gentle-hearted, for this man he had no pity. He laughed, and crying
"That curse of God you mocked at falls at last," with a sudden stroke he
drew the sharp edge of the spear across the lashing that held the body
to the seat.

The rimpi parted, and with a swift and awful rush, like that of a
swooping bird, the dead woman and the living man plunged headlong into
space. One dreadful yell echoed down the pitiless precipices, followed
presently by a soft thudding sound, and there, lodged upon a flat rock
hundreds of feet beneath, lay what had been Piet Van Vooren, though,
indeed, none could have told that it was he.

Thus ended the life of this man, this servant of the devil upon earth,
and even now, after all these years, I can find but one excuse for him,
that the excess of his own wickedness had made him drunk and mad. Yes,
I believe that he who was always near to it, went quite mad when Ralph
struck him with the whip after the fight by the sheep kraal, mad with
hate of Ralph and love of Suzanne. Also his father was wicked before
him, and he had Kaffir blood in his veins. Ah! for how much must our
blood be called upon to answer, and how good is that man who can conquer
the natural promptings of his blood!



Jan and I were following Ralph when he entered the river scherm, and
reached it just in time to see pursued and pursuer vanishing up the
narrow cleft. I caught sight of Van Vooren's back only, but although I
had not seen him for years, I knew it at once.

"We have found the tiger at home," I said, "yonder goes Swart Piet."

"Allemachter! it is so," answered Jan. "Look, there lies the tiger's
prey," and pointing to Sihamba he followed them up the mountain side as
fast as his weight would allow, for in those days Jan was a very heavy
man.

Meanwhile I made my way to the little figure that was stretched upon
the rock at the edge of the river. She had fainted, but even before I
reached her I saw from her small size and the strange hoop of stiff
hair that she wore about her head, that it was none other than Sihamba,
Sihamba whom I had last seen upon the eve of that unlucky marriage day.

But oh! she was sadly changed. One of her legs, I forget which, had been
broken by a gunshot; the blood trickled from the wound where Van Vooren
had stabbed her in the back; her little body was wasted by the want of
water, and her face had shrunk to the size of that of a small child,
although strangely enough it still was pretty. I knelt down by her,
and placing my hand upon her heart felt that it still beat, though very
slowly. Then I took water and sprinkled it upon her, and at the touch of
it she opened her eyes at once.

"Give me to drink," she moaned, and I did so, pouring the water down her
throat, which was ridged and black like a dog's palate. Her eyes opened
and she knew me.

"Greeting, mother of Swallow," she said, "you come in a good hour, for
now I shall be able to tell you all before I die, and I am glad that I
was strong enough to endure the torment of thirst for so many hours."

"Tell me one thing, Sihamba," I said. "Does Suzanne live, and is she
safe?"

"Yes, she lives, and I hope that this night she will be safe with your
own people, the Boers, for she has crossed the mountains to seek shelter
in that laager which is by the white-topped koppie near the banks of the
Tugela in Natal."

"The laager by the white-topped koppie----" I gasped. "Oh, my God! that
must be the camp which the Zulus attack to-morrow at the dawn."

"What do you say?" Sihamba asked.

In a few words I told her the tale that we had heard from the dying
soldier, and she listened eagerly.

"I fear it must be true," she said, when I had finished, "for while he
was tormenting me Bull-Head let it fall that Dingaan's regiments had
gone hence by order of the King to make war upon the Boers in Natal, but
I took little heed, thinking that he lied.

"Well," she went on after resting a while, "they may be beaten off,
or--stay, in the glade yonder is the great _schimmel_ horse; Bull-Head's
people brought him down for him and I know that hours ago he has been
well fed and watered. If her husband mounts him at sunset, he can be
with the Swallow in the laager well before the dawn, in time to warn
them all. Presently, when he returns from killing Bull-Head, I will show
him the road, for I shall live till sunset. Give me more water, I pray
you."

Now I saw that nothing could be done till Ralph and Jan returned, if
they ever should return, so I prayed of Sihamba to tell me what had
passed, for I saw that she could not live long, and desired to know the
truth before she died. And she told me, with many rests and at no great
length indeed, but very clearly, and as I listened I marvelled more and
more at this Kaffir woman's love, faithfulness, and courage. At last she
came to the tale of how she had disguised Suzanne, and set up the corpse
in her place in the chair of rock.

"Step but a few paces there to the right," she said, "and you will see
it."

I did as she bade me, and then it was that on looking upwards I saw
Ralph and Swart Piet struggling together. They were so high above me
that their shapes seemed small, but I could see the light flashing from
the stabbing steel and I called out to Sihamba what I saw.

"Have no fear, lady," she answered, "it will only end one way." So
indeed it did as has been told, for presently Van Vooren and the corpse
rushed downwards to vanish in the abyss, while Ralph remained standing
by the empty chair of stone.

"It is finished," I said, returning to Sihamba.

"I know it, lady," she answered. "Bull-Head's last cry reached my ears,
and do you give thanks to the Spirit you worship that he is dead. You
wished to know what happened after the Swallow and I parted. Well, I
went and stood by the body on the pinnacle of rock, and there, as I
expected, came Bull-Head to seek his captive. He commanded us to come
down, but I refused, telling him that if he attempted to take the
Swallow--for he thought that the body wrapped in the white cloak was
she--she would certainly escape him by hurling herself from the cliff.
Thus I gained much time, for now from my height I could see her whom
I knew to be the lady Swallow travelling across the plain towards the
saw-edge rock, although I was puzzled because she seemed to carry a
child upon her back; but perhaps it was a bundle.

"At last he grew impatient, and without warning lifted his gun and
fired at me, aiming low, for he feared lest the ball should pierce my
mistress. The shot struck my leg where you see, and being unable to stop
myself, although I broke my fall by clutching with my hands, I rolled
down the rock to the ground beneath, but not over the edge of the
precipice as I could have wished to do, for at the last I had intended
to escape him by throwing myself from it.

"Leaving me unable to move he began to ascend the pinnacle, calling
your daughter Swallow by sweet names as a man calls a shy horse which
he fears will escape him. I watched from below, and even in my pain
