confederation. In the meantime a conference was going on at Munster
between the representatives of the various conflicting powers, but each
put forward such exorbitant demands that no progress was made.

The Duke of Bavaria, indignant at the small support that Austria had
given him, was playing off France against the latter power. Mazarin
was persuaded that he was only waiting for an opportunity to desert the
Imperialist cause, and therefore ordered Turenne not to cross the Rhine,
as the duke had promised that he would remain neutral unless the French
advanced into Germany, when the feelings of his subjects might force him
to take the field again on the side of Austria.

Turenne was therefore ordered to besiege Luxembourg. The marshal,
however, had no belief in the Bavarian promises, and on arriving on the
Rhine early in April, and seeing that were he to march with his army
away to Luxembourg the cause of France and Germany would be lost, he
continued to make various excuses for not moving, until the Duke of
Bavaria, having obtained many concessions from Austria, threw off
the mask, and marching with his army joined that of the emperor in
Franconia. Thus the whole Imperial forces were posted between the French
and the Swedes.

Turenne saw that his only hope of success would be to effect a juncture
with the Swedes, and wrote to the cardinal to that effect; then, without
waiting for an answer, he set his army in motion. A tremendous circuit
had to be made. He forded the Moselle six leagues above Coblenz, the
bridges over the Rhine being all in possession of the enemy, marched up
into Holland, and obtained permission from the king to cross at Wesel,
which he reached after fourteen days' march. Crossing the Rhine on the
15th of July he marched through the country of La Mark, and through
Westphalia, and on the 10th of August joined the Swedes under General
Wrangel, who had received news of his coming, and had intrenched himself
so strongly that the enemy, who had arrived before him, did not venture
to attack him. The enemy now fell back at once and encamped near
Freiburg. Their army was superior in force to that of the allies, they
having fourteen thousand horse and ten thousand foot, while the allies
had but ten thousand horse and seven thousand foot. The allies had,
however, sixty pieces of cannon against fifty of the Imperialists.
The allies advanced to Freiburg and offered battle, but the Archduke
Leopold, who commanded the Imperialists, declined to come out of the
great intrenchments he had thrown up round his camp.

Turenne then marched towards the Maine, and, halting ten leagues from
Mayence, sent for the infantry, of which he had left a portion there,
to join him. The whole force of the allies was now united, and took
many towns. As, however, they were still inferior in force to the
Imperialists, Turenne refused to weaken himself by placing garrisons in
these places, contenting himself with blowing up the fortifications of
some and carrying off the principal inhabitants of others as hostages.
The Imperialist army still remained inactive, and Turenne was able
therefore to turn his attention to Bavaria. Crossing the Rhine at
Donauwurth he besieged Augsburg and Rain. The latter place was captured,
but the former, being reinforced by fifteen hundred men, held out
stoutly, and it was necessary to open trenches and proceed in regular
form against it. The Duke of Bavaria, greatly alarmed at this invasion
of his dominions, sent off message after message to the emperor,
complaining of the manner in which the Imperial army remained inactive,
leaving the allies to employ their whole force against him. He
threatened that unless the army advanced at once to his assistance he
would make terms with France. Imperative orders were thereupon sent to
the archduke to move against the French. The allies fell back, as his
force was greatly superior to theirs, and the archduke took up a strong
position, intending to force the allies to retire into Franconia as soon
as the country round them was exhausted.

Turenne and Wrangel divined his purpose, and although it was now the
beginning of November and snow was on the ground, they marched
against him. On arriving near his camp they found that it was strongly
fortified, and could be attacked only by passing behind great marshes
and defiles. Changing their intentions, they left two thousand horse in
front of his camp, making believe that they intended to attack him, then
marched with all haste to the Lech and advanced against Landsberg, which
they took by assault. In the city were the principal magazines of the
Imperialist army, and the allies, finding sufficient provisions there to
last for six months, encamped round the city and decided to winter there
unless attacked, in the meantime sending out bodies of cavalry, which
levied contributions up to the very gates of Munich. Leopold, thus
deprived of his magazines, retired with the Austrian contingent, and the
Bavarians returned home.

The Duke of Bavaria, finding that his whole dominions would be captured
unless he made terms, therefore opened negotiations, and on the 14th of
March, 1646, peace was signed, the terms being that he should separate
himself entirely from the empire and deliver five of his fortresses to
the allies, who would thus, should he again break his word, have means
of access into his dominions. The allied forces were now in a condition
to march upon Vienna. They had during the winter plundered a large
portion of Bavaria; they and their horses had recovered from their
fatigue, and their force now amounted to fourteen thousand foot and
twenty thousand horse. At this moment, when the Imperialists believed
that all was lost, for without the assistance of Bavaria they could put
no army in the field that could hope to make head against the allies,
Mazarin interposed and saved Austria from destruction.

The Catholic powers had long been privately urging upon him the danger
that would arise should Austria be crushed. The Swedes would acquire
very large accessions of territory, the Protestant German princes, their
allies, would similarly benefit, and Protestantism would become the
dominant religion in Germany. Such would, indeed, have undoubtedly been
the case had the allies marched to Vienna and dictated terms of peace
there. An order was therefore sent to Turenne to march with his army to
Flanders, where the Spaniards were gaining great advantages, as Enghien,
now become Prince of Conde by the death of his father, had been sent
into Catalonia with the greater portion of his army. Turenne, foreseeing
that his German regiments would refuse to march to Flanders, leaving
their own country open to invasion and plunder by the Imperialists,
warmly opposed the plan, and sent messenger after messenger to the
cardinal urging him to countermand the order. The friends of Bavaria and
the Catholic princes urged strongly upon the queen that the continuance
of the war would utterly destroy the Catholic religion in Germany, and
that the Swedes alone would reap advantage from the fall of the house
of Austria. Moved by their arguments and those of Mazarin to the same
effect, she supported the latter, and peremptory orders were sent to
Turenne to march to Flanders, where matters were going from bad to
worse. Turenne obeyed them, captured on his march towards the Rhine
several towns and fortresses, destroying their fortifications so that
they would not be able to oppose him if he returned to Germany. But
on arriving on the Rhine his anticipations of trouble were fulfilled.
General Rosen, whose blunder had been the cause of the disaster at
Marienthal, and who had since his return from captivity persistently
worked in opposition to Turenne, fomented discontent among the troops of
Weimar, and directly they crossed the Rhine they absolutely refused
to advance. They had just cause for complaint; they had fought with
distinguished valour, and they alone had saved the French army from
suffering crushing defeat at Nordlingen; their pay was six months in
arrear, and the proposal now that they should leave their own country
and fight in Flanders was naturally most repugnant to them. They at
once marched away towards Strasburg. Turenne followed them with three
thousand infantry, four French regiments of horse, and the only one of
the Weimar cavalry that had remained faithful to him, and came up just
as they were about to recross the Rhine.

Partly by entreaties, partly by showing his confidence in them, by
putting himself wholly in their power, the marshal induced a portion of
the Weimar cavalry to return to their duty. General Rosen, who was to a
large extent responsible for the mutiny, was arrested and imprisoned
at Philippsburg, the rest of the mutineers rode away with the loss of a
portion of their number, and joined the Swedes. After this the order for
Turenne to march to Flanders was countermanded.

The war languished for a few months, the Imperialists were defeated
after a hard fought cavalry battle by Turenne and the Swedes, and the
country was overrun by the latter, whose horsemen raided almost up to
Innsbruck. But all parties were growing weary of the conflict, which had
now lasted thirty years. It had inflicted incredible suffering upon
all who were concerned in it, and had produced no important results
whatever, except that it had prevented the entire crushing out of
Protestantism in Germany, and the peace conference for the first time
began to work in earnest.

At last, after Bavaria had been wasted from end to end, and the duke
driven into exile, peace was concluded, the emperor yielding every
point demanded by France, as he saw plainly enough that unless he did
so Turenne's army would be at the gates of Vienna at the commencement
of the next campaign, and in October, 1648, hostilities ceased. Turenne
went to Munster and acted as the French negotiator in arranging the
peace, to which his genius, steadfast determination, and the expenditure
of his own means, by which he had kept the army on foot, had so largely
contributed.



CHAPTER XX: AN OLD SCORE


Hector was not present with the army during the last three campaigns of
the war. He had joined Turenne in April, 1646, and shared in the general
disappointment when the order was received that the army was not to
cross the Rhine, because Bavaria had promised to remain neutral if it
did not do so.

"I cannot think," the marshal said to him a day or two after he received
the order--for he had always maintained the same pleasant relations with
Hector that had subsisted between them in Italy, and placed the most
entire confidence in the discretion of the young colonel--"how Mazarin
can allow Bavaria to hoodwink him. Indeed, I cannot believe that he is
really deceived; he must know that that crafty old fox the duke is not
to be relied upon in any way, and that he is merely trying to save time.
'Tis hard indeed to see us powerless to move, now that the season for
campaigning is just opening, and when by advancing we could cut the
Bavarians off from Austria. As to besieging Luxembourg, it would be but
a waste of time, for before we could open a trench we should hear that
the duke has again declared against us, and we should have to hurry back
with all speed."

It was, indeed, but a fortnight later that the news came that the
Bavarians were on the move to join the Imperialists, and a fortnight
later it was known that the two armies had effected their junction.
Turenne at once collected his troops from the towns and villages where
they were placed, and marched to Mayence.

"I am going to send you to Paris, Campbell," he said on the evening
of their arrival there. "All is lost if the enemy, now united, throw
themselves upon the Swedes, and I have resolved to take upon myself the
responsibility of marching round through Holland and joining Wrangel.
There is, of course, risk in such an expedition, and the cardinal may
object very strongly to my undertaking such a movement, especially as
it will leave the frontier of France virtually unguarded, but I have no
fear that evil consequences will arise. The enemy will not hear of
my march until ten days after I have started, and even then they will
probably suppose that we have gone to Flanders. By the time they
find out what my intentions are, it will be too late for them to take
advantage of my absence.

"Even then they would have to storm Philippsburg or some other strong
place before they could cross the Rhine, and before they could do that
Wrangel and I would be at their heels. Moreover, as they would know
that, instead of pursuing them, we might, after effecting a junction,
make straight for Vienna, and that no army could be got together to
oppose us, I consider that the movement is a perfectly safe one. Now,
I am going to send you to Mazarin with my despatch telling him of my
intention. I am choosing you for the purpose, because you will be able
to explain and enforce the reasons that I have given him. He has a high
opinion of you, and will listen to you when perhaps he would not pay
any regard to Rosen or any other of these Weimar officers I might send.
Remember that there is no occasion for extreme hurry," and he smiled.
"Of course it is necessary that you should travel with a certain amount
of speed, but do not founder your horse. Every day is of value to me,
and if I am once well on my way north Mazarin could hardly recall me.

"Say that you take five days to get to Paris, by that time I should
be north of Cologne, and a courier from Mazarin can hardly overtake me
until I am in Holland, I should then feel justified in disregarding the
order, seeing that I should by pushing on effect a junction with the
Swedes quite as quickly as I could return here. Of course it would be
too late for you to overtake me, and I shall give you a written order
to remain in Paris until I am again so near the Rhine that you can join
your regiment. I consider that it will be an advantage to have you near
the cardinal, as, knowing my intentions and methods as you do, you would
be able to so explain matters to him that he will understand the reasons
for my various movements."

"Very well marshal, I am ready to start as soon as you hand me the
despatch."

"I will do that tomorrow morning, and you will then be able to tell
Mazarin that we were just setting out when you left us."

"As it will be some time before I shall rejoin my regiment, may I ask
you to appoint Captain de Thiou as second colonel? He has now served as
senior captain of the regiment for three years. He aided me heartily and
cordially in organizing it. He has seconded me throughout in a manner
of which I cannot speak too highly, and distinguished himself greatly
at Freiburg, and on every occasion in which we have been in contact with
the enemy. I think it very desirable that there should be an officer of
rank superior to the others while I am away; and both for the sake of
the regiment, and as a reward for the merit and conduct of Captain de
Thiou himself, I should be very glad were he promoted and should feel
that the regiment would in no way deteriorate during my absence."

"Certainly, Campbell, I will carry out your recommendation. He has
fairly earned his promotion, and as you say, it is better in your
absence that the regiment should be led by an officer of rank above the
others, and not by a captain having but a very slight seniority to some
of them. Doubtless you will be saying goodbye to the officers tonight.
I authorize you to inform de Thiou that he will be placed in orders
tomorrow morning as second colonel of the regiment."

"I did not think that we were likely to be back in Paris before next
winter, master," Paolo said rather discontentedly when Hector told him
that they were to start early next morning.

"Nor did I, Paolo, and I should very much rather have remained with the
regiment; but as the marshal is good enough to consider that my presence
there may be of advantage to him, I have of course nothing to say
against it."

There was great regret among the officers when they heard that their
colonel was not going to lead them, but all were pleased that de Thiou,
who was a general favourite, had obtained promotion. That officer was at
once surprised and gratified at the news, for it was not often that men
without strong family interest rose to the rank of colonel.

"I know that this is your doing," he said gratefully. "I never expected
to get above my present rank, and I am sure that I should never have
done so had it not been for you."

"You thoroughly deserve it, de Thiou, for it was by your support that
I was enabled, when I first joined, to introduce reforms, and get the
officers to take upon themselves more work and responsibilities, and
thus make the regiment what it is. I hope I shall rejoin before the end
of the campaign. This may be the last, for now that they have begun the
peace conference at Munster, something must surely come of it sooner or
later, for all parties must be thoroughly sick of this long and terrible
war, which has ruined Germany and impoverished France, and from which
neither party, after nigh thirty years of fighting, has gained any
material advantage. At any rate it will be a great satisfaction to me
to know that the regiment is in your hands. I know that during the time
that I have been away this winter things have gone on satisfactorily;
but it is clearly impossible for an officer to keep a regiment well
in hand when, as in your case, your appointment was only a day or two
earlier than that of some of the others. You are likely to have some
stiff marching now, for only one other infantry regiment besides ours
will accompany the cavalry, the rest will remain here until they get
an opportunity of rejoining. Of course I shall take Paolo and my four
mounted troopers back with me to Paris. I may probably send them on to
la Villar, as it is not likely that I shall need them at court."

On the evening of the fifth day after leaving Mayence Hector arrived in
Paris, and alighted at the cardinal's hotel.

"So you are again a bearer of despatches, Monsieur Campbell," the
cardinal said, as Hector entered his apartment. "They need be important,
or the marshal would hardly have sent you with them."

"They are, as you will see, important, your eminence, but I am sent
rather to explain further than the marshal could do in a letter his
reasons for the step that he has taken. As you have learned long before
this, the Duke of Bavaria has proved false to his promises. He has
effected a junction with the Imperialist army, and the marshal has news
that both are marching against the Swedes, who are in no strength to
show fight against so great a force."

The cardinal opened the despatch, and read it in silence.

"'Tis a grave step for the marshal to have taken without orders," he
said, frowning; "and do you mean to say that he has already started on
this expedition?"

"The troops had fallen into their ranks when I started, and by this time
they must be well on their way towards Holland. There was no time, sir,
for the marshal to await a reply to the despatch. The matter was most
urgent, every day was of importance, for if the Swedes fell back, as
they might do, before the archduke, the latter would be able to overrun
all northern Germany, to capture the towns of the Protestant princes,
break up their confederation, and compel them to give in their
submission; for Turenne with his small force would be powerless to
interfere with their operations, even if by pressing after them with all
speed he arrived within striking distance."

"And think you that he will reach Wrangel in time?"

"He hopes so, sir. He sent off a messenger before starting, with orders
to buy fresh horses at all cost at each halting place, to carry the news
as quickly as possible to Wrangel that he was on his way to join him,
and imploring him to intrench himself in some strong position until he
should come up.

"How long hence will that be?"

"The march will be pressed forward with all speed, your eminence, with
such delays only as may be needed to keep the horses in such a state
that they may be ready for fighting as soon as they join the Swedes. He
hopes to be there in a month from the day of starting."

"And in the meantime," Mazarin said, "France is open to invasion.
He says, indeed, that the Imperialists would hardly venture to march
hitherward, as thereby they in turn would leave it open to him and the
Swedes to march into the heart of Austria."

"Assuredly that is so, sir. The archduke will hardly get news that
Marshal Turenne has moved until he has been some ten or twelve days on
his march, and even when he hears it he will not know in what direction
he has gone, but may think it likely that he either intends to seize
Luxembourg or to reinforce your army in Flanders. By the time they
discover his true object he will be within a week's march of the Swedes,
possibly less than that. It will be too late for them then to think
of marching to the Rhine. If they consider themselves strong enough to
fight the marshal and the Swedes together, they will do so at once; if
they fear to give battle, still more would they fear to be attacked by
him when entering a country where they would have him in their rear,
and be hemmed in between him and the Rhine, not to speak of the risk of
leaving Austria open to invasion, should he, instead of pursuing them,
direct his march thither. If I might presume to judge, I should say that
the expedition that the marshal has undertaken is at once worthy of his
military genius, and will at the same time do far more to ensure the
safety of the Rhine provinces than he could do were he to remain there
with his small army until the Imperialists, having chased the Swedes out
of the country and reduced northern Germany, turned their whole forces
against him."

"I see, Monsieur Campbell," the cardinal said, turning the subject,
"that you have been five days coming here from Mayence. It is a very
different rate of speed to that at which you traveled from Rocroi."

"It is so, your eminence; but on that occasion the Duc d'Enghien had
placed relays of his best horses all along the road, so that we were
enabled to travel without making a halt."

"And moreover, my dear colonel," Mazarin said, "Turenne, far from urging
you to haste, was desirous of getting so far before he received my
answer as to render it impossible for me to recall him."

"I cannot think that your eminence would do that. It is a grand
enterprise, and almost without precedent in point both of daring and in
the great advantages to be gained from it."

"And Turenne thought that by sending you, you would be able to assist
him in persuading me to regard it favourably. Well, well, it is
certainly too late to recall him now. He has taken the responsibility
upon himself, and must stand or fall by the result. And now in the
first place are you going to hurry back again or are you going to remain
here?"

"My regiment is one of those that he has taken with him, sir, and as I
could not hope to overtake him he has requested me to remain here until
I receive orders from him."

"We shall be gainers so far," the cardinal said cordially, "and I am
sure that from your knowledge of the country and of Turenne's methods
your advice upon military matters will be of great service to us. I must
now go and report to the queen this sudden change in the situation, and
if she disapproves of it I shall tell her that if she will but listen
to you, you will convert her to the view that this escapade of the
marshal's is all for the best, and seems likely indeed to retrieve the
position that has been caused by the treachery of Bavaria."

During his stay in Paris Hector soon found that intrigue was more
rampant than ever. The Duke of Beaufort and others who had been
implicated in the plot on Mazarin's life had been pardoned and had
returned to Paris, and as the lesson that had been given them had taught
them prudence, they were now openly on good terms with the court. They
were secretly, however, intriguing with the parliament of Paris, which
was now bitterly opposed to Mazarin, had refused to register some of
his decrees, and had even forced him to dismiss his superintendent of
finance, an Italian named Emeri. The latter had imposed taxes at his
will to satisfy his extravagance and avarice, had raised the octroi
duty, made the sale of firewood a monopoly, and in various ways had
incurred the indignation and hatred of the Parisians.

Mazarin's own greed had been in no slight degree the cause of his
unpopularity; he who had come to France a penniless priest was now the
owner of great estates. It was even said that much of the money that
should have been devoted to the needs of the army had been privately
sent into Italy by him, and throughout the country it was felt to be
scandalous that while the deepest distress was universal on account of
the weight of taxation, these two Italians should be piling up wealth
for themselves. But, avaricious as he was, the cardinal was lavish
in his expenditure among his friends and adherents; honours, titles,
dignities, and estates were freely bestowed upon them, and he did not
hesitate to pay any sum that would gain him the support of those whose
aid he deemed to be essential. Madame de Chevreuse was again at court,
and was, as she had always been, the centre of the intrigues that were
going on. One evening she made a sign for Hector to take a place by her
side. She had taken a fancy to the young Scottish colonel on the evening
when he had been first introduced to her, and was always gracious to him
now.
