present retain,' said the Bailie.

'Certainly, Mr. Macwheeble; but will you not go down to the glen
yourself in the evening to meet your patron?'

'That I wad wi' a' my heart; and mickle obliged to your honour for
putting me in mind o' mybounden duty. But it will be past sunset afore
I get back frae the Captain's, and at these unsonsy hours the glen has
a bad name; there's something no that canny about auld Janet Gellatley.
The Laird he'll no believe thae things, but he was aye ower rash and
venturesome, and feared neither man nor deevil, an sae's seen o't. But
right sure am I Sir George Mackenyie says, that no divine can doubt
there are witches, since the Bible says thou shalt not suffer them to
live; and that no lawyer in Scotland can doubt it, since it is
punishable with death by our law. So there's baith law and gospel for
it. An his honour winna believe the Leviticus, he might aye believe the
Statute-book; but he may tak his ain way o't; it's a' ane to Duncan
Macwheeble. However, I shall send to ask up auld Janet this e'en; it's
best no to lightly them that have that character; and we'll want Davie
to turn the spit, for I'll gar Eppie put down a fat goose to the fire
for your honours to your supper.'

When it was near sunset Waverley hastened to the hut; and he could not
but allow that superstition had chosen no improper locality, or unfit
object, for the foundation of her fantastic terrors. It resembled
exactly the description of Spenser:--

    There, in a gloomy hollow glen, she found
    A little cottage built of sticks and reeds,
    In homely wise, and wall'd with sods around,
    In which a witch did dwell in loathly weeds,
    And wilful want, all careless of her needs,
    So choosing solitary to abide
    Far from all neighbours, that her devilish deeds,
    And hellish arts, from people she might hide,
    And hurt far off, unknown, whomsoever she espied.

He entered the cottage with these verses in his memory. Poor old Janet,
bent double with age and bleared with peat-smoke, was tottering about
the hut with a birch broom, muttering to herself as she endeavoured to
make her hearth and floor a little clean for the reception of her
expected guests. Waverley's step made her start, look up, and fall
a-trembling, so much had her nerves been on the rack for her patron's
safety. With difficulty Waverley made her comprehend that the Baron was
now safe from personal danger; and when her mind had admitted that
joyful news, it was equally hard to make her believe that he was not to
enter again upon possession of his estate. 'It behoved to be,' she
said, 'he wad get it back again; naebody wad be sae gripple as to tak
his gear after they had gi'en him a pardon: and for that Inch-Grabbit,
I could whiles wish mysell a witch for his sake, if I werena feared the
Enemy wad tak me at my word.' Waverley then gave her some money, and
promised that her fidelity should be rewarded. 'How can I be rewarded,
sir, sae weel as just to see my auld maister and Miss Rose come back
and bruik their ain?'

Waverley now took leave of Janet, and soon stood beneath the Baron's
Patmos. At a low whistle he observed the veteran peeping out to
reconnoitre, like an old badger with his head out of his hole. 'Ye hae
come rather early, my good lad,' said he, descending; 'I question if
the red-coats hae beat the tattoo yet, and we're not safe till then.'

'Good news cannot be told too soon,' said Waverley; and with infinite
joy communicated to him the happy tidings. The old man stood for a
moment in silent devotion, then exclaimed, 'Praise be to God! I shall
see my bairn again.'

'And never, I hope, to part with her more,' said Waverley.

'I trust in God not, unless it be to win the means of supporting her;
for my things are but in a bruckle state;--but what signifies warld's
gear?'

'And if,' said Waverley modestly, 'there were a situation in life which
would put Miss Bradwardine beyond the uncertainty of fortune, and in
the rank to which she was born, would you object to it, my dear Baron,
because it would make one of your friends the happiest man in the
world?' The Baron turned and looked at him with great earnestness.
'Yes,' continued Edward, 'I shall not consider my sentence of
banishment as repealed unless you will give me permission to accompany
you to the Duchran, and--'

The Baron seemed collecting all his dignity to make a suitable reply to
what, at another time, he would have treated as the propounding a
treaty of alliance between the houses of Bradwardine and Waverley. But
his efforts were in vain; the father was too mighty for the Baron; the
pride of birth and rank were swept away; in the joyful surprise a
slight convulsion passed rapidly over his features, as he gave way to
the feelings of nature, threw his arms around Waverley's neck, and
sobbed out--'My son, my son! if I had been to search the world, I would
have made my choice here.' Edward returned the embrace with great
sympathy of feeling, and for a little while they both kept silence. At
length it was broken by Edward. 'But Miss Bradwardine?'

'She had never a will but her old father's; besides, you are a likely
youth, of honest principles and high birth; no, she never had any other
will than mine, and in my proudest days I could not have wished a mair
eligible espousal for her than the nephew of my excellent old friend,
Sir Everard. But I hope, young man, ye deal na rashly in this matter? I
hope ye hae secured the approbation of your ain friends and allies,
particularly of your uncle, who is in loco parentis? Ah! we maun tak
heed o' that.' Edward assured him that Sir Everard would think himself
highly honoured in the flattering reception his proposal had met with,
and that it had his entire approbation; in evidence of which he put
Colonel Talbot's letter into the Baron's hand. The Baron read it with
great attention. 'Sir Everard,' he said, 'always despised wealth in
comparison of honour and birth; and indeed he hath no occasion to court
the Diva Pecunia. Yet I now wish, since this Malcolm turns out such a
parricide, for I can call him no better, as to think of alienating the
family inheritance--I now wish (his eyes fixed on a part of the roof
which was visible above the trees) that I could have left Rose the auld
hurley-house and the riggs belanging to it. And yet,' said he, resuming
more cheerfully, 'it's maybe as weel as it is; for, as Baron of
Bradwardine, I might have thought it my duty to insist upon certain
compliances respecting name and bearings, whilk now, as a landless
laird wi' a tocherless daughter, no one can blame me for departing
from.'

'Now, Heaven be praised!' thought Edward,'that Sir Everard does not
hear these scruples! The three ermines passant and rampant bear would
certainly have gone together by the ears.' He then, with all the ardour
of a young lover, assured the Baron that he sought for his happiness
only in Rose's heart and hand, and thought himself as happy in her
father's simple approbation as if he had settled an earldom upon his
daughter.

They now reached Little Veolan. The goose was smoking on the table, and
the Bailie brandished his knife and fork. A joyous greeting took place
between him and his patron. The kitchen, too, had its company. Auld
Janet was established at the ingle-nook; Davie had turned the spit to
his immortal honour; and even Ban and Buscar, in the liberality of
Macwheeble's joy, had been stuffed to the throat with food, and now lay
snoring on the floor.

The next day conducted the Baron and his young friend to the Duchran,
where the former was expected, in consequence of the success of the
nearly unanimous application of the Scottish friends of government in
his favour. This had been so general and so powerful that it was almost
thought his estate might have been saved, had it not passed into the
rapacious hands of his unworthy kinsman, whose right, arising out of
the Baron's attainder, could not be affected by a pardon from the
crown. The old gentleman, however, said, with his usual spirit, he was
more gratified by the hold he possessed in the good opinion of his
neighbours than he would have been in being rehabilitated and restored
in integrum, had it been found practicable.'

We shall not attempt to describe the meeting of the father and
daughter, loving each other so affectionately, and separated under such
perilous circumstances. Still less shall we attempt to analyse the deep
blush of Rose at receiving the compliments of Waverley, or stop to
inquire whether she had any curiosity respecting the particular cause
of his journey to Scotland at that period. We shall not even trouble
the reader with the humdrum details of a courtship Sixty Years Since.
It is enough to say that, under so strict a martinet as the Baron, all
things were conducted in due form. He took upon himself, the morning
after their arrival, the task of announcing the proposal of Waverley to
Rose, which she heard with a proper degree of maiden timidity. Fame
does, however, say that Waverley had the evening before found five
minutes to apprise her of what was coming, while the rest of the
company were looking at three twisted serpents which formed a, jet
d'eau in the garden.

My fair readers will judge for themselves; but, for my part, I cannot
conceive how so important an affair could be communicated in so short a
space of time; at least, it certainly took a full hour in the Baron's
mode of conveying it.

Waverley was now considered as a received lover in all the forms. He
was made, by dint of smirking and nodding on the part of the lady of
the house, to sit next Miss Bradwardine at dinner, to be Miss
Bradwardine's partner at cards. If he came into the room, she of the
four Miss Rubricks who chanced to be next Rose was sure to recollect
that her thimble or her scissors were at the other end of the room, in
order to leave the seat nearest to Miss Bradwardine vacant for his
occupation. And sometimes, if papa and mamma were not in the way to
keep them on their good behaviour, the misses would titter a little.
The old Laird of Duchran would also have his occasional jest, and the
old lady her remark. Even the Baron could not refrain; but here Rose
escaped every embarrassment but that of conjecture, for his wit was
usually couched in a Latin quotation. The very footmen sometimes
grinned too broadly, the maidservants giggled mayhap too loud, and a
provoking air of intelligence seemed to pervade the whole family. Alice
Bean, the pretty maid of the cavern, who, after her father's
misfortune, as she called it, had attended Rose as fille-de-chambre,
smiled and smirked with the best of them. Rose and Edward, however,
endured all these little vexatious circumstances as other folks have
done before and since, and probably contrived to obtain some
indemnification, since they are not supposed, on the whole, to have
been particularly unhappy during Waverley's six days' stay at the
Duchran.

It was finally arranged that Edward should go to Waverley-Honour to
make the necessary arrangements for his marriage, thence to London to
take the proper measures for pleading his pardon, and return as soon as
possible to claim the hand of his plighted bride. He also intended in
his journey to visit Colonel Talbot; but, above all, it was his most
important object to learn the fate of the unfortunate Chief of
Glennaquoich; to visit him at Carlisle, and to try whether anything
could be done for procuring, if not a pardon, a commutation at least,
or alleviation, of the punishment to which he was almost certain of
being condemned; and, in case of the worst, to offer the miserable
Flora an asylum with Rose, or otherwise to assist her views in any mode
which might seem possible. The fate of Fergus seemed hard to be
averted. Edward had already striven to interest his friend, Colonel
Talbot, in his behalf; but had been given distinctly to understand by
his reply that his credit in matters of that nature was totally
exhausted.

The Colonel was still in Edinburgh, and proposed to wait there for some
months upon business confided to him by the Duke of Cumberland. He was
to be joined by Lady Emily, to whom easy travelling and goat's whey
were recommended, and who was to journey northward under the escort of
Francis Stanley. Edward, therefore, met the Colonel at Edinburgh, who
wished him joy in the kindest manner on his approaching happiness, and
cheerfully undertook many commissions which our hero was necessarily
obliged to delegate to his charge. But on the subject of Fergus he was
inexorable. He satisfied Edward, indeed, that his interference would be
unavailing; but, besides, Colonel Talbot owned that he could not
conscientiously use any influence in favour of that unfortunate
gentleman. 'Justice,' he said, 'which demanded some penalty of those
who had wrapped the whole nation in fear and in mourning, could not
perhaps have selected a fitter victim. He came to the field with the
fullest light upon the nature of his attempt. He had studied and
understood the subject. His father's fate could not intimidate him; the
lenity of the laws which had restored to him his father's property and
rights could not melt him. That he was brave, generous, and possessed
many good qualities only rendered him the more dangerous; that he was
enlightened and accomplished made his crime the less excusable; that he
was an enthusiast in a wrong cause only made him the more fit to be its
martyr. Above all, he had been the means of bringing many hundreds of
men into the field who, without him, would never have broken the peace
of the country.

'I repeat it,' said the Colonel,'though Heaven knows with a heart
distressed for him as an individual, that this young gentleman has
studied and fully understood the desperate game which he has played. He
threw for life or death, a coronet or a coffin; and he cannot now be
permitted, with justice to the country, to draw stakes because the dice
have gone against him.'

Such was the reasoning of those times, held even by brave and humane
men towards a vanquished enemy. Let us devoutly hope that, in this
respect at least, we shall never see the scenes or hold the sentiments
that were general in Britain Sixty Years Since.





CHAPTER LXVIII

    To morrow? O that's sudden!--Spare him, spare him'

    SHAKSPEARE


Edward, attended by his former servant Alick Polwarth, who had
reentered his service at Edinburgh, reached Carlisle while the
commission of Oyer and Terminer on his unfortunate associates was yet
sitting. He had pushed forward in haste, not, alas! with the most
distant hope of saving Fergus, but to see him for the last time. I
ought to have mentioned that he had furnished funds for the defence of
the prisoners in the most liberal manner, as soon as he heard that the
day of trial was fixed. A solicitor and the first counsel accordingly
attended; but it was upon the same footing on which the first
physicians are usually summoned to the bedside of some dying man of
rank--the doctors to take the advantage of some incalculable chance of
an exertion of nature, the lawyers to avail themselves of the barely
possible occurrence of some legal flaw. Edward pressed into the court,
which was extremely crowded; but by his arriving from the north, and
his extreme eagerness and agitation, it was supposed he was a relation
of the prisoners, and people made way for him. It was the third sitting
of the court, and there were two men at the bar. The verdict of GUILTY
was already pronounced. Edward just glanced at the bar during the
momentous pause which ensued. There was no mistaking the stately form
and noble features of Fergus Mac-Ivor, although his dress was squalid
and his countenance tinged with the sickly yellow hue of long and close
imprisonment. By his side was Evan Maccombich. Edward felt sick and
dizzy as he gazed on them; but he was recalled to himself as the Clerk
of Arraigns pronounced the solemn words: 'Fergus Mac-Ivor of
Glennaquoich, otherwise called Vich Ian Vohr, and Evan Mac-Ivor, in the
Dhu of Tarrascleugh, otherwise called Evan Dhu, otherwise called Evan
Maccombich, or Evan Dhu MacCombich--you, and each of you, stand
attainted of high treason. What have you to say for yourselves why the
Court should not pronounce judgment against you, that you die according
to law?'

Fergus, as the presiding Judge was putting on the fatal cap of
judgment, placed his own bonnet upon his head, regarded him with a
steadfast and stern look, and replied in a firm voice, 'I cannot let
this numerous audience suppose that to such an appeal I have no answer
to make. But what I have to say you would not bear to hear, for my
defence would be your condemnation. Proceed, then, in the name of God,
to do what is permitted to you. Yesterday and the day before you have
condemned loyal and honourable blood to be poured forth like water.
Spare not mine. Were that of all my ancestors in my veins, I would have
perilled it in this quarrel.' He resumed his seat and refused again to
rise.

Evan Maccombich looked at him with great earnestness, and, rising up,
seemed anxious to speak; but the confusion of the court, and the
perplexity arising from thinking in a language different from that in
which he was to express himself, kept him silent. There was a murmur of
compassion among the spectators, from the idea that the poor fellow
intended to plead the influence of his superior as an excuse for his
crime. The Judge commanded silence, and encouraged Evan to proceed. 'I
was only ganging to say, my lord,' said Evan, in what he meant to be an
insinuating manner, 'that if your excellent honour and the honourable
Court would let Vich Ian Vohr go free just this once, and let him gae
back to France, and no to trouble King George's government again, that
ony six o' the very best of his clan will be willing to be justified in
his stead; and if you'll just let me gae down to Glennaquoich, I'll
fetch them up to ye mysell, to head or hang, and you may begin wi' me
the very first man.'

Notwithstanding the solemnity of the occasion, a sort of laugh was
heard in the court at the extraordinary nature of the proposal. The
Judge checked this indecency, and Evan, looking sternly around, when
the murmur abated, 'If the Saxon gentlemen are laughing,' he said,
'because a poor man, such as me, thinks my life, or the life of six of
my degree, is worth that of Vich Ian Vohr, it's like enough they may be
very right; but if they laugh because they think I would not keep my
word and come back to redeem him, I can tell them they ken neither the
heart of a Hielandman nor the honour of a gentleman.'

There was no farther inclination to laugh among the audience, and a
dead silence ensued.

The Judge then pronounced upon both prisoners the sentence of the law
of high treason, with all its horrible accompaniments. The execution
was appointed for the ensuing day. 'For you, Fergus Mac-Ivor,'
continued the Judge, 'I can hold out no hope of mercy. You must prepare
against to-morrow for your last sufferings here, and your great audit
hereafter.'

'I desire nothing else, my lord,' answered Fergus, in the same manly
and firm tone.

The hard eyes of Evan, which had been perpetually bent on his Chief,
were moistened with a tear. 'For you, poor ignorant man,' continued the
Judge, 'who, following the ideas in which you have been educated, have
this day given us a striking example how the loyalty due to the king
and state alone is, from your unhappy ideas of clanship, transferred to
some ambitious individual who ends by making you the tool of his
crimes--for you, I say, I feel so much compassion that, if you can make
up your mind to petition for grace, I will endeavour to procure it for
you. Otherwise--'

'Grace me no grace,' said Evan; 'since you are to shed Vich Ian Vohr's
blood, the only favour I would accept from you is to bid them loose my
hands and gie me my claymore, and bide you just a minute sitting where
you are!'

'Remove the prisoners,' said the Judge; 'his blood be upon his own
head.'

Almost stupefied with his feelings, Edward found that the rush of the
crowd had conveyed him out into the street ere he knew what he was
doing. His immediate wish was to see and speak with Fergus once more.
He applied at the Castle where his unfortunate friend was confined, but
was refused admittance. 'The High Sheriff,' a non-commissioned officer
said, 'had requested of the governor that none should be admitted to
see the prisoner excepting his confessor and his sister.'

'And where was Miss Mac-Ivor?' They gave him the direction. It was the
house of a respectable Catholic family near Carlisle.

Repulsed from the gate of the Castle, and not venturing to make
application to the High Sheriff or Judges in his own unpopular name, he
had recourse to the solicitor who came down in Fergus's behalf. This
gentleman told him that it was thought the public mind was in danger of
being debauched by the account of the last moments of these persons, as
given by the friends of the Pretender; that there had been a
resolution, therefore, to exclude all such persons as had not the plea
of near kindred for attending upon them. Yet he promised (to oblige the
heir of Waverley-Honour) to get him an order for admittance to the
prisoner the next morning, before his irons were knocked off for
execution.

'Is it of Fergus Mac-Ivor they speak thus,' thought Waverley, 'or do I
dream? Of Fergus, the bold, the chivalrous, the free-minded, the lofty
chieftain of a tribe devoted to him? Is it he, that I have seen lead
the chase and head the attack, the brave, the active, the young, the
noble, the love of ladies, and the theme of song,--is it he who is
ironed like a malefactor, who is to be dragged on a hurdle to the
common gallows, to die a lingering and cruel death, and to be mangled
by the hand of the most outcast of wretches? Evil indeed was the
spectre that boded such a fate as this to the brave Chief of
Glennaquoich!'

With a faltering voice he requested the solicitor to find means to warn
Fergus of his intended visit, should he obtain permission to make it.
He then turned away from him, and, returning to the inn, wrote a
scarcely intelligible note to Flora Mac-Ivor, intimating his purpose to
wait upon her that evening. The messenger brought back a letter in
Flora's beautiful Italian hand, which seemed scarce to tremble even
under this load of misery. 'Miss Flora Mac-Ivor,' the letter bore,
'could not refuse to see the dearest friend of her dear brother, even
in her present circumstances of unparalleled distress.'

When Edward reached Miss Mac-Ivor's present place of abode he was
instantly admitted. In a large and gloomy tapestried apartment Flora
was seated by a latticed window, sewing what seemed to be a garment of
white flannel. At a little distance sat an elderly woman, apparently a
foreigner, and of a religious order. She was reading in a book of
Catholic devotion, but when Waverley entered laid it on the table and
left the room. Flora rose to receive him, and stretched out her hand,
but neither ventured to attempt speech. Her fine complexion was totally
gone; her person considerably emaciated; and her face and hands as
white as the purest statuary marble, forming a strong contrast with her
sable dress and jet-black hair. Yet, amid these marks of distress there
was nothing negligent or ill-arranged about her attire; even her hair,
though totally without ornament, was disposed with her usual attention
to neatness. The first words she uttered were, 'Have you seen him?'

'Alas, no,' answered Waverley, 'I have been refused admittance.'

'It accords with the rest,' she said; 'but we must submit. Shall you
obtain leave, do you suppose?'

'For--for--tomorrow,' said Waverley; but muttering the last word so
faintly that it was almost unintelligible.

'Ay, then or never,' said Flora, 'until'--she added, looking
upward--'the time when, I trust, we shall all meet. But I hope you will
see him while earth yet bears him. He always loved you at his heart,
though--but it is vain to talk of the past.'

'Vain indeed!' echoed Waverley.

'Or even of the future, my good friend,' said Flora,'so far as earthly
events are concerned; for how often have I pictured to myself the
strong possibility of this horrid issue, and tasked myself to consider
how I could support my part; and yet how far has all my anticipation
fallen short of the unimaginable bitterness of this hour!'

'Dear Flora, if your strength of mind--'

'Ay, there it is,' she answered, somewhat wildly; 'there is, Mr.
Waverley, there is a busy devil at my heart that whispers--but it were
madness to listen to it--that the strength of mind on which Flora
prided herself has murdered her brother!'

'Good God! how can you give utterance to a thought so shocking?'

'Ay, is it not so? but yet it haunts me like a phantom; I know it is
unsubstantial and vain; but it will be present; will intrude its
horrors on my mind; will whisper that my brother, as volatile as
ardent, would have divided his energies amid a hundred objects. It was
I who taught him to concentrate them and to gage all on this dreadful
and desperate cast. Oh that I could recollect that I had but once said
to him, "He that striketh with the sword shall die by the sword"; that
I had but once said, "Remain at home; reserve yourself, your vassals,
your life, for enterprises within the reach of man." But O, Mr.
Waverley, I spurred his fiery temper, and half of his ruin at least
lies with his sister!'

The horrid idea which she had intimated, Edward endeavoured to combat
by every incoherent argument that occurred to him. He recalled to her
the principles on which both thought it their duty to act, and in which
they had been educated.

'Do not think I have forgotten them,' she said, looking up with eager
quickness; 'I do not regret his attempt because it was wrong!--O no! on
that point I am armed--but because it was impossible it could end
otherwise than thus.'

'Yet it did not always seem so desperate and hazardous as it was; and
it would have been chosen by the bold spirit of Fergus whether you had
approved it or no; your counsels only served to give unity and
consistence to his conduct; to dignify, but not to precipitate, his
resolution.' Flora had soon ceased to listen to Edward, and was again
intent upon her needlework.

'Do you remember,' she said, looking up with a ghastly smile, 'you once
found me making Fergus's bride-favours, and now I am sewing his bridal
garment. Our friends here,' she continued, with suppressed emotion,
'are to give hallowed earth in their chapel to the bloody relics of the
last Vich Ian Vohr. But they will not all rest together; no--his
head!--I shall not have the last miserable consolation of kissing the
cold lips of my dear, dear Fergus!'

The unfortunate Flora here, after one or two hysterical sobs, fainted
in her chair. The lady, who had been attending in the ante-room, now
entered hastily, and begged Edward to leave the room, but not the house.

When he was recalled, after the space of nearly half an hour, he found
that, by a strong effort, Miss Mac-Ivor had greatly composed herself.
It was then he ventured to urge Miss Bradwardine's claim to be
considered as an adopted sister, and empowered to assist her plans for
the future.

'I have had a letter from my dear Rose,' she replied, 'to the same
purpose. Sorrow is selfish and engrossing, or I would have written to
express that, even in my own despair, I felt a gleam of pleasure at
learning her happy prospects, and at hearing that the good old Baron
has escaped the general wreck. Give this to my dearest Rose; it is her
poor Flora's only ornament of value, and was the gift of a princess.'
She put into his hands a case containing the chain of diamonds with
which she used to decorate her hair. 'To me it is in future useless.
The kindness of my friends has secured me a retreat in the convent of
the Scottish Benedictine nuns in Paris. Tomorrow--if indeed I can
survive tomorrow--I set forward on my journey with this venerable
sister. And now, Mr. Waverley, adieu! May you be as happy with Rose as
your amiable dispositions deserve; and think sometimes on the friends
you have lost. Do not attempt to see me again; it would be mistaken
kindness.'

She gave him her hand, on which Edward shed a torrent of tears, and
with a faltering step withdrew from the apartment, and returned to the
town of Carlisle. At the inn he found a letter from his law friend
intimating that he would be admitted to Fergus next morning as soon as
the Castle gates were opened, and permitted to remain with him till the
arrival of the Sheriff gave signal for the fatal procession.





CHAPTER LXIX

    A darker departure is near,
    The death drum is muffled, and sable the bier

    CAMPBELL


After a sleepless night, the first dawn of morning found Waverley on
the esplanade in front of the old Gothic gate of Carlisle Castle. But
he paced it long in every direction before the hour when, according to
the rules of the garrison, the gates were opened and the draw-bridge
lowered. He produced his order to the sergeant of the guard and was
admitted.

The place of Fergus's confinement was a gloomy and vaulted apartment in
the central part of the Castle; a huge old tower, supposed to be of
great antiquity, and surrounded by outworks, seemingly of Henry VIII's
time, or somewhat later. The grating of the large old-fashioned bars
and bolts, withdrawn for the purpose of admitting Edward, was answered
by the clash of chains, as the unfortunate Chieftain, strongly and
heavily fettered, shuffled along the stone floor of his prison to fling
himself into his friend's arms.

'My dear Edward,' he said, in a firm and even cheerful voice,'this is
truly kind. I heard of your approaching happiness with the highest
pleasure. And how does Rose? and how is our old whimsical friend the
Baron? Well, I trust, since I see you at freedom. And how will you
settle precedence between the three ermines passant and the bear and
boot-jack?'

'How, O how, my dear Fergus, can you talk of such things at such a
moment!'

'Why, we have entered Carlisle with happier auspices, to be sure; on
the 16th of November last, for example, when we marched in side by
side, and hoisted the white flag on these ancient towers. But I am no
boy, to sit down and weep because the luck has gone against me. I knew
the stake which I risked; we played the game boldly and the forfeit
shall be paid manfully. And now, since my time is short, let me come to
the questions that interest me most--the Prince? has he escaped the
bloodhounds?'

'He has, and is in safety.'

'Praised be God for that! Tell me the particulars of his escape.'

Waverley communicated that remarkable history, so far as it had then
transpired, to which Fergus listened with deep interest. He then asked
after several other friends; and made many minute inquiries concerning
the fate of his own clansmen. They had suffered less than other tribes
who had been engaged in the affair; for, having in a great measure
dispersed and returned home after the captivity of their Chieftain,
according to the universal custom of the Highlanders, they were not in
arms when the insurrection was finally suppressed, and consequently
were treated with less rigour. This Fergus heard with great
satisfaction.

'You are rich,' he said, 'Waverley, and you are generous. When you hear
of these poor Mac-Ivors being distressed about their miserable
possessions by some harsh overseer or agent of government, remember you
have worn their tartan and are an adopted son of their race, The Baron,
who knows our manners and lives near our country, will apprise you of
the time and means to be their protector. Will you promise this to the
last Vich Ian Vohr?'

Edward, as may well be believed, pledged his word; which he afterwards
so amply redeemed that his memory still lives in these glens by the
name of the Friend of the Sons of Ivor.

'Would to God,' continued the Chieftain, 'I could bequeath to you my
rights to the love and obedience of this primitive and brave race; or
at least, as I have striven to do, persuade poor Evan to accept of his
life upon their terms, and be to you what he has been to me, the
kindest, the bravest, the most devoted--'

The tears which his own fate could not draw forth fell fast for that of
his foster-brother.

'But,' said he, drying them,'that cannot be. You cannot be to them Vich
Ian Vohr; and these three magic words,' said he, half smiling, 'are the
only Open Sesame to their feelings and sympathies, and poor Evan must
attend his foster-brother in death, as he has done through his whole
life.'

'And I am sure,' said Maccombich, raising himself from the floor, on
which, for fear of interrupting their conversation, he had lain so
still that, in the obscurity of the apartment, Edward was not aware of
his presence--'I am sure Evan never desired or deserved a better end
than just to die with his Chieftain.'

'And now,' said Fergus, 'while we are upon the subject of
clanship--what think you now of the prediction of the Bodach Glas?'
Then, before Edward could answer, 'I saw him again last night: he stood
in the slip of moonshine which fell from that high and narrow window
towards my bed. "Why should I fear him?" I thought; "to-morrow, long
ere this time, I shall be as immaterial as he." "False spirit," I said,
"art thou come to close thy walks on earth and to enjoy thy triumph in
the fall of the last descendant of thine enemy?" The spectre seemed to
beckon and to smile as he faded from my sight. What do you think of it?
I asked the same question of the priest, who is a good and sensible
man; he admitted that the church allowed that such apparitions were
possible, but urged me not to permit my mind to dwell upon it, as
imagination plays us such strange tricks. What do you think of it?'

'Much as your confessor,' said Waverley, willing to avoid dispute upon
such a point at such a moment. A tap at the door now announced that
good man, and Edward retired while he administered to both prisoners
the last rites of religion, in the mode which the Church of Rome
prescribes.

In about an hour he was re-admitted; soon after, a file of soldiers
entered with a blacksmith, who struck the fetters from the legs of the
prisoners.

'You see the compliment they pay to our Highland strength and courage;
we have lain chained here like wild beasts, till our legs are cramped
into palsy, and when they free us they send six soldiers with loaded
muskets to prevent our taking the castle by storm!'

Edward afterwards learned that these severe precautions had been taken
in consequence of a desperate attempt of the prisoners to escape, in
which they had very nearly succeeded.

Shortly afterwards the drums of the garrison beat to arms. 'This is the
last turn-out,' said Fergus, 'that I shall hear and obey. And now, my
dear, dear Edward, ere we part let us speak of Flora--a subject which
awakes the tenderest feeling that yet thrills within me'

'We part not here!' said Waverley.

'O yes, we do; you must come no farther. Not that I fear what is to
follow for myself,' he said proudly. 'Nature has her tortures as well
as art, and how happy should we think the man who escapes from the
throes of a mortal and painful disorder in the space of a short half
hour? And this matter, spin it out as they will, cannot last longer.
But what a dying man can suffer firmly may kill a living friend to look
upon. This same law of high treason,' he continued, with astonishing
firmness and composure, 'is one of the blessings, Edward, with which
your free country has accommodated poor old Scotland; her own
jurisprudence, as I have heard, was much milder. But I suppose one day
or other--when there are no longer any wild Highlanders to benefit by
its tender mercies--they will blot it from their records as levelling
them with a nation of cannibals. The mummery, too, of exposing the
senseless head--they have not the wit to grace mine with a paper
coronet; there would be some satire in that, Edward. I hope they will
set it on the Scotch gate though, that I may look, even after death, to
the blue hills of my own country, which I love so dearly. The Baron
would have added,

    Moritur, et moriens dukes reminiscitur Argos.'

A bustle, and the sound of wheels and horses' feet, was now heard in
the court-yard of the Castle. 'As I have told you why you must not
follow me, and these sounds admonish me that my time flies fast, tell
me how you found poor Flora.'

Waverley, with a voice interrupted by suffocating sensations, gave some
account of the state of her mind.

'Poor Flora!' answered the Chief, 'she could have borne her own
sentence of death, but not mine. You, Waverley, will soon know the
happiness of mutual affection in the married state--long, long may Rose
and you enjoy it!--but you can never know the purity of feeling which
combines two orphans like Flora and me, left alone as it were in the
world, and being all in all to each other from our very infancy. But
her strong sense of duty and predominant feeling of loyalty will give
new nerve to her mind after the immediate and acute sensation of this
parting has passed away. She will then think of Fergus as of the heroes
of our race, upon whose deeds she loved to dwell.'

'Shall she not see you then?' asked Waverley. 'She seemed to expect it.'

'A necessary deceit will spare her the last dreadful parting. I could
not part with her without tears, and I cannot bear that these men
should think they have power to extort them. She was made to believe
she would see me at a later hour, and this letter, which my confessor
will deliver, will apprise her that all is over.'

An officer now appeared and intimated that the High Sheriff and his
attendants waited before the gate of the Castle to claim the bodies of
Fergus Mac-Ivor and Evan Maccombich. 'I come,' said Fergus.
Accordingly, supporting Edward by the arm and followed by Evan Dhu and
the priest, he moved down the stairs of the tower, the soldiers
bringing up the rear. The court was occupied by a squadron of dragoons
and a battalion of infantry, drawn up in hollow square. Within their
ranks was the sledge or hurdle on which the prisoners were to be drawn
to the place of execution, about a mile distant from Carlisle. It was
painted black, and drawn by a white horse. At one end of the vehicle
sat the executioner, a horrid-looking fellow, as beseemed his trade,
with the broad axe in his hand; at the other end, next the horse, was
an empty seat for two persons. Through the deep and dark Gothic archway
that opened on the drawbridge were seen on horseback the High Sheriff
and his attendants, whom the etiquette betwixt the civil and military
powers did not permit to come farther. 'This is well GOT UP for a
closing scene,' said Fergus, smiling disdainfully as he gazed around
upon the apparatus of terror. Evan Dhu exclaimed with some eagerness,
after looking at the dragoons,' These are the very chields that
galloped off at Gladsmuir, before we could kill a dozen o' them. They
look bold enough now, however.' The priest entreated him to be silent.

The sledge now approached, and Fergus, turning round, embraced
Waverley, kissed him on each side of the face, and stepped nimbly into
his place. Evan sat down by his side. The priest was to follow in a
carriage belonging to his patron, the Catholic gentleman at whose house
Flora resided. As Fergus waved his hand to Edward the ranks closed
around the sledge, and the whole procession began to move forward.
There was a momentary stop at the gateway, while the governor of the
Castle and the High Sheriff went through a short ceremony, the military
officer there delivering over the persons of the criminals to the civil
power. 'God save King George!' said the High Sheriff. When the
formality concluded, Fergus stood erect in the sledge, and, with a firm
and steady voice, replied,' God save King JAMES!' These were the last
words which Waverley heard him speak.

The procession resumed its march, and the sledge vanished from beneath
the portal, under which it had stopped for an instant. The dead march
was then heard, and its melancholy sounds were mingled with those of a
muffled peal tolled from the neighbouring cathedral. The sound of
military music died away as the procession moved on; the sullen clang
of the bells was soon heard to sound alone.

The last of the soldiers had now disappeared from under the vaulted
archway through which they had been filing for several minutes; the
court-yard was now totally empty, but Waverley still stood there as if
stupefied, his eyes fixed upon the dark pass where he had so lately
seen the last glimpse of his friend. At length a female servant of the
governor's, struck with compassion, at the stupefied misery which his
countenance expressed, asked him if he would not walk into her master's
house and sit down? She was obliged to repeat her question twice ere he
comprehended her, but at length it recalled him to himself. Declining
the courtesy by a hasty gesture, he pulled his hat over his eyes, and,
leaving the Castle, walked as swiftly as he could through the empty
streets till he regained his inn, then rushed into an apartment and
bolted the door.

