the sick man, whose wound Paulus and Orion had already bound up, and
greeted him with a familiarity that he was far from showing to the other
penitents. He had long known the former name and the fate of Stephanus,
and it was by his advice that Hermas had been obliged to join the
deputation sent to Alexandria, for Agapitus was of opinion that no one
ought to flee from the battle of life without having first taken some
part in it.

Stephanus put out his hand to the bishop who sat down beside him, signed
to the bystanders to leave them alone, and listened attentively to the
feeble words of the sufferer. When he had ceased speaking, Agapitus
said:

"I praise the Lord with you for having permitted your lost wife to find
the ways that lead to Him, and your son will be--as you were once--a
valiant man of war. Your earthly house is set in order, but are you
prepared for the other, the everlasting mansion?"

"For eighteen years I have done penance, and prayed, and borne great
sufferings," answered the sick man. "The world lies far behind me, and I
hope I am walking in the path that leads to heaven."

"So do I hope for you and for your soul," said the bishop. "That which
it is hardest to endure has fallen to your lot in this world, but have
you striven to forgive those who did you the bitterest wrong, and can
you pray, 'Forgive us our sins as we forgive them that sin against us?'
Do you remember the words, 'If ye forgive men their trespasses your
heavenly father will also forgive you?'"

"Not only have I pardoned Glycera," answered Stephanus, "but I have
taken her again into my heart of hearts; but the man who basely seduced
her, the wretch, who although I had done him a thousand benefits,
betrayed me, robbed me and dishonored me, I wish him--"

"Forgive him," cried Agapitus, "as you would be forgiven."

"I have striven these eighteen years to bless my enemy," replied
Stephanus, "and I will still continue to strive--"

Up to this moment the bishop had devoted his whole attention to the sick
anchorite, but he was now called on all sides at once, and Gelasius, who
was standing by the declivity with some other anchorites, called out to
him, "Father--save us--the heathen there are climbing up the rocks."

Agapitus signed a blessing over Stephanus and then turned away from him,
saying earnestly once more, "Forgive, and heaven is open to you."

Many wounded and dead lay on the plain, and the Pharanites were
retreating into the ravine, for the Blemmyes had not indeed fled, but
had only dispersed themselves, and then had climbed up the rocks which
hemmed in the level ground and shot their arrows at their enemies from
thence.

"Where are the Romans?" Agapitus eagerly enquired of Orion.

"They are withdrawing into the gorge through which the road leads up
here," answered the Saite. "But look! only look at these heathen! The
Lord be merciful to us! they are climbing up the cliffs like woodpeckers
up a tree."

"The stones, fly to the stones!" cried Agapitus with flashing eyes to
the anchorites that stood by. "What is going on behind the wall
there? Do you hear? Yes that is the Roman tuba. Courage, brethren! the
emperor's soldiers are guarding the weakest side of the castle. But look
here at the naked figures in the cleft. Bring the blocks here; set your
shoulders stoutly to it, Orion! one more push, Salathiel! There it goes,
it crashes down if only it does not stick in the rift! No! thank God,
it has bounded off-that was a leap! Well done--there were six enemies of
the Lord destroyed at once."

"I see three more yonder," cried Orion. "Come here, Damianus, and help
me."

The man he called rushed forward with several others, and the first
success raised the courage of the anchorites so rapidly and wonderfully
that the bishop soon found it difficult to restrain their zeal, and to
persuade them to be sparing with the precious missiles.

While, under the direction of Agapitus stone after stone was hurled
clattering over the steep precipice down upon the Blemmyes, Paulus sat
by the sick man, looking at the ground.

"You are not helping them?" asked Stephanus. "Agapitus is right,"
replied the Alexandrian. "I have much to expiate, and fighting brings
enjoyment. How great enjoyment I can understand by the torture it is to
me to sit still. The bishop blessed you affectionately."

"I am near the goal," sighed Stephanus, "and he promises me the joys
of heaven if I only forgive him who stole my wife from me. He is
forgiven-yes, all is forgiven him, and may everything that he undertakes
turn to good; yea, and nothing turn to evil--only feel how my heart
throbs, it is rallying its strength once more before it utterly ceases
to beat. When it is all over repeat to Hermas everything that I have
told you, and bless him a thousand, thousand times in my name and his
mother's; but never, never tell him that in an hour of weakness she
ran away with that villain--that man, that miserable man I mean--whom
I forgive. Give Hermas this ring, and with it the letter that you will
find under the dry herbs on the couch in my cave; they will secure him a
reception from his uncle, who will also procure him a place in the army,
for my brother is in high favor with Caesar. Only listen how Agapitus
urges on our men; they are fighting bravely there; that is the Roman
tuba. Attend to me--the maniple will occupy the castle and shoot down
on the heathen from hence; when they come carry me into the tower. I am
weak and would fain collect my thoughts, and pray once more that I may
find strength to forgive the man not with my lips only."

"Down there see--there come the Romans," cried Paulus interrupting him.
"Here, up here!" he called down to the men, "The steps are more to the
left."

"Here we are," answered a sharp voice. "You stay there, you people, on
that projection of rock, and keep your eye on the castle. If any danger
threatens call me with the trumpet. I will climb up, and from the top of
the tower there I can see where the dogs come from."

During this speech Stephanus had looked down and listened; when a
few minutes later the Gaul reached the wall and called out to the men
inside, "Is there no one there who will give me a hand?" he turned to
Paulus, saying, "Lift me up and support me--quick!"

With an agility that astonished the Alexandrian, Stephanus stood upon
his feet, leaned over the wall towards the centurion--who had climbed
as far as the outer foot of it, looked him in the face with eager
attention, shuddered violently, and repressing his feelings with the
utmost effort offered him his lean hand to help him.

"Servianus!" cried the centurion, who was greatly shocked by such
a meeting and in such a place, and who, struggling painfully for
composure, stared first at the old man and then at Paulus.

Not one of the three succeeded in uttering a word; but Stephanus' eyes
were fixed on the Gaul's features, and the longer he looked at him the
hollower grew his cheeks and the paler his lips; at the same time he
still held out his hand to the other, perhaps in token of forgiveness.

So passed a long minute. Then Phoebicius recollected that he had climbed
the wall in the emperor's service, and stamping with impatience at
himself he took the old man's hand in a hasty grasp. But scarcely had
Stephanus felt the touch of the Gaul's fingers when he started as struck
by lightning, and flung himself with a hoarse cry on his enemy who was
hanging on the edge of the wall.

Paulus gazed in horror at the frightful scene, and cried aloud with
fervent unction, "Let him go--forgive that heaven may forgive you."

"Heaven! what is heaven, what is forgiveness!" screamed the old man.
"He shall be damned." Before the Alexandrian could hinder him, the loose
stone over which the enemies were wrestling in breathless combat gave
way, and both were hurled into the abyss with the falling rock.

Paulus groaned from the lowest depth of his breast and murmured while
the tears ran down his cheeks, "He too has fought the fight, and he too
has striven in vain."




CHAPTER XXI.

The fight was ended; the sun as it went to its rest behind the Holy
Mountain had lighted many corpses of Blemmyes, and now the stars shone
down on the oasis from the clear sky.

Hymns of praise sounded out of the church, and near it, under the hill
against which it was built, torches were blazing and threw their ruddy
light on a row of biers, on which under green palm-branches lay the
heroes who had fallen in the battle against the Blemmyes. Now the
hymn ceased, the gates of the house of God opened and Agapitus led his
followers towards the dead. The congregation gathered in a half-circle
round their peaceful brethren, and heard the blessing that their pastor
pronounced over the noble victims who had shed their blood in fighting
the heathen. When it was ended those who in life had been their nearest
and dearest went up to the dead, and many tears fell into the sand from
the eye of a mother or a wife, many a sigh went up to heaven from a
father's breast. Next to the bier, on which old Stephanus was resting,
stood another and a smaller one, and between the two Hermas knelt and
wept. He raised his face, for a deep and kindly voice spoke his name.

"Petrus," said the lad, clasping the hand that the senator held out
to him, "I felt forced and driven out into the world, and away from my
father--and now he is gone for ever how gladly I would have been kept by
him."

"He died a noble death, in battle for those he loved," said the senator
consolingly,

"Paulus was near him when he fell," replied Hermas. "My father fell
from the wall while defending the tower; but look here this girl--poor
child--who used to keep your goats, died like a heroine. Poor, wild
Miriam, how kind I would be to you if only you were alive now!"

Hermas as he spoke stroked the arm of the shepherdess, pressed a kiss
on her small, cold hand, and softly folded it with the other across her
bosom.

"How did the girl get into the battle with the men?" asked Petrus. "But
you can tell me that in my own house. Come and be our guest as long as
it pleases you, and until you go forth into the world; thanks are due to
you from us all."

Hermas blushed and modestly declined the praises which were showered
on him on all sides as the savior of the oasis. When the wailing women
appeared he knelt once more at the head of his father's bier, cast a
last loving look at Miriam's peaceful face, and then followed his host.

The man and boy crossed the court together. Hermas involuntarily glanced
up at the window where more than once he had seen Sirona, and said, as
he pointed to the centurion's house, "He too fell."

Petrus nodded and opened the door of his house. In the hall, which was
lighted up, Dorothea came hastily to meet him, asking, "No news yet of
Polykarp?"

Her husband shook his head, and she added, "How indeed is it possible?
He will write at the soonest from Klysma or perhaps even from
Alexandria."

"That is just what I think," replied Petrus, looking down to the ground.
Then he turned to Hermas and introduced him to his wife.

Dorothea received the young man with warm sympathy; she had heard
that his father had fallen in the fight, and how nobly he too had
distinguished himself. Supper was ready, and Hermas was invited to share
it. The mistress gave her daughter a sign to make preparations for
their guest, but Petrus detained Marthana, and said, "Hermas may fill
Antonius' place; he has still something to do with some of the workmen.
Where are Jethro and the house-slaves?"

"They have already eaten," said Dorothea.

The husband and wife looked at each other, and Petrus said with a
melancholy smile, "I believe they are up on the mountain."

Dorothea wiped a tear from her eye as she replied, "They will meet
Antonius there. If only they could find Polykarp! And yet I honestly
say--not merely to comfort you--it is most probable that he has not met
with any accident in the mountain gorges, but has gone to Alexandria to
escape the memories that follow him here at every step--Was not that the
gate?"

She rose quickly and looked into the court, while Petrus, who had
followed her, did the same, saying with a deep sigh, as he turned to
Marthana--who, while she offered meat and bread to Hermas was watching
her parents--"It was only the slave Anubis."

For some time a painful silence reigned round the large table, to-day so
sparely furnished with guests.

At last Petrus turned to his guest and said, "You were to tell me how
the shepherdess Miriam lost her life in the struggle. She had run away
from our house--"

"Up the mountain," added Hermas. "She supplied my poor father with water
like a daughter."

"You see, mother," interrupted Marthana, "she was not bad-hearted--I
always said so."

"This morning," continued Hermas, nodding in sad assent to the maiden,
"she followed my father to the castle, and immediately after his fall,
Paulus told me, she rushed away from it, but only to seek me and to
bring me the sad news. We had known each other a long time, for years
she had watered her goats at our well, and while I was still quite a boy
and she a little girl, she would listen for hours when I played on my
willow pipe the songs which Paulus had taught me. As long as I played
she was perfectly quiet, and when I ceased she wanted to hear more and
still more, until I had too much of it and went away. Then she would
grow angry, and if I would not do her will she would scold me with bad
words. But she always came again, and as I had no other companion
and she was the only creature who cared to listen to me, I was very
well-content that she should prefer our well to all the others. Then we
grew order and I began to be afraid of her, for she would talk in such a
godless way--and she even died a heathen. Paulus, who once overheard us,
warned me against her, and as I had long thrown away the pipe and hunted
beasts with my bow and arrow whenever my father would let me, I was with
her for shorter intervals when I went to the well to draw water, and we
became more and more strangers; indeed, I could be quite hard to her.
Only once after I came back from the capital something happened--but
that I need not tell you. The poor child was so unhappy at being a slave
and no doubt had first seen the light in a free-house.

"She was fond of me, more than a sister is of a brother--and when my
father was dead she felt that I ought not to learn the news from any one
but herself. She had seen which way I had gone with the Pharanites and
followed me up, and she soon found me, for she had the eyes of a gazelle
and the ears of a startled bird. It was not this time difficult to find
me, for when she sought me we were fighting with the Blemmyes in the
green hollow that leads from the mountain to the sea. They roared with
fury like wild beasts, for before we could get to the sea the fishermen
in the little town below had discovered their boats, which they had
hidden under sand and stones, and had carried them off to their harbor.
The boy from Raithu who accompanied me, had by my orders kept them in
sight, and had led the fishermen to the hiding-place. The watchmen whom
they had left with the boats had fled, and had reached their companions
who were fighting round the castle; and at least two hundred of them had
been sent back to the shore to recover possession of the boats and to
punish the fishermen. This troop met us in the green valley, and there
we fell to fighting.

"The Blemmyes outnumbered us; they soon surrounded us before and behind,
on the right side and on the left, for they jumped and climbed from rock
to rock like mountain goats and then shot down their reed-arrows from
above. Three or four touched me, and one pierced my hair and remained
hanging in it with the feather at the end of the shaft.

"How the battle went elsewhere I cannot tell you, for the blood mounted
to my head, and I was only conscious that I myself snorted and shouted
