herself for some time with watching them; but when the last man had
entered the stadium, and they had formed in companies, she again took up
the rolls.

One contained the gospel of Matthew and the other that of Luke.

The first, beginning with the genealogy, gave her a string of strange,
barbarous names which did not attract her; so she took up the roll of
Luke, and his simple narrative style at once charmed her. There were
difficulties in it, no doubt, and she skipped sundry unintelligible
passages, but the second chapter captivated her attention. It spoke of
the birth of the great Teacher whom the Christians worshiped as their
God. Angels had announced to the shepherds in the field that great joy
should come on the whole world, because the Saviour was born; and
this Saviour and Redeemer was no hero, no sage, but a child wrapped in
swaddling-clothes and lying in a manger.

At this she smiled, for she loved little children, and had long known
no greater pleasure than to play with them and help them. How many
delightful hours did she owe to the grandchildren of their neighbor
Skopas!

And this child, hailed at its birth by a choir of angels, had become
a God in whom many believed! and the words of the angels' chant were:
"Glory to God on high, and on earth peace, good-will toward men!"

How great and good it sounded! With eager excitement she fastened the
rolls together, and on her features was depicted impatient longing to
put an end to an intolerable state of things, as she exclaimed, though
there was no one but herself to hear: "Ay, peace, salvation, good-will!
Not this hatred, this thirst for revenge, this blood, this persecution,
and, as their hideous fruit, this terror, these horrible, cruel fears--"

Here she was interrupted by the clatter of arms and rapping of hammers
which came up from below. Caesar's Macedonian guard and other infantry
troops were silently coming up in companies and vanishing into the
side-doors which led to the upper tiers of the stadium. What could this
mean? Meanwhile carpenters were busy fastening up the chief entrance
with wooden beams. It looked like closing up sluice-gates to hinder the
invasion of a high tide. But the stadium was already full of men. She
had seen thousands of youths march in, and there they stood in close
ranks in the arena below her. Besides these, there were now an immense
number of soldiers. They must all get out again presently, and what a
crush there would be in the side exits if the vomitorium were closed!
She longed to call down, to warn the carpenters of the folly of their
act. Or was it that the youth of the town were to be pent into the
stadium to hear some new and more severe decree, while some of the more
refractory were secured?

It must be so. What a shame!

Then came a few vexilla of Numidian troopers at a slow pace. At their
head, on a particularly high horse, rode the legate, a very tall man.
He glanced up to the side where she was, and Melissa recognized the
Egyptian Zminis. At this her hand sought the place of her heart, for she
felt as though it had ceased to beat. What! This wretch, the deadly
foe of her father and brother, here, at the head of the Roman troops?
Something horrible, impossible, must be about to happen!

The sun was mirrored in the shining coat of his horse, and in the
lictor's axe he bore, carrying it like a commander's staff. He raised it
once, twice, and, high as she was above him, she could see how sharp the
contrast was between the yellow whites of his eyes and the swarthy color
of his face.

Now, for the third time, the bright steel of the axe flashed in the
sunshine, and immediately after trumpet-calls sounded and were repeated
at short intervals, which still, to her, seemed intolerably long. How
Melissa had presence of mind enough to count them she knew not, but she
did. At the seventh all was still, and soon after a short blast on the
tuba rang out from above, below, and from all sides of the stadium. Each
went like an arrow to the heart of the anxious, breathless girl. From
the moment when she had seen Zminis she had expected the worst, but the
cry of rage and despair from a thousand voices which now split her
ear told her how far the incredible reality outdid her most horrible
imaginings.

Breathless, and with a throbbing brain, she leaned out as far as she
could, and neither felt the burning sun-which was now beginning to fall
on the western face of the temple--nor heeded the risk of being seen and
involving herself and her protectress in ruin. Trembling like a gazelle
in a frosty winter's night, she would gladly have withdrawn from the
window, but she felt as if some spell held her there. She longed to shut
her ears and eyes, but she could not help looking on. Her every instinct
prompted her to shriek for help, but she could not utter a sound.

There she stood, seeing and hearing, and her low moaning changed to that
laughter which anguish borrows from gladness when it has exhausted all
forms of expression. At last she sank on her knees on the floor, and
while she shed tears of pain still laughed shrilly, till she understood
with sudden horror what was happening. She started violently; a sob
convulsed her bosom; she wept and wept, and these tears did her good.

When, at one in the afternoon, the sun fell full on her window, she
had not yet found strength to move. A flood of bright light, in which
whirled millions of motes, danced before her eyes; and as her breath
sent the atoms flying, it passed through her mind that at this very
moment the reprobate utterance of a madman's lips was blowing happiness,
joy, peace, and hope out of the lives of many thousands--blowing them
into nothingness, like the blast of a storm.

Then she commanded herself, for the horrible scene before her threatened
to stamp itself on her eye like the image her father could engrave on
an onyx; and she must avoid that, or give up all hope of ever being
light-hearted again. Hardly an hour since she had seen the arena looking
like a basket of fresh flowers, full of splendid, youthful men. Then the
warriors of the Macedonian phalanx had taken their places on the
long ranks of seats on which she looked down, with several cohorts
of archers, brown Numidians and black Ethiopians, like inquisitive
spectators of the expected show--but all in full armor. At first
the youths and men had formed in companies, with singing, talk, and
laughter, and here and there a satirical chant; but presently there
had been squabbles with the town-watch, and while the younger and more
careless still were gay enough, whole companies on the other hand had
looked up indignantly at the Romans; some had anxiously questioned each
other's eyes, or stared down in sullen dismay at the sand.

The hot, seething blood of these men--the sons of a free city,
and accustomed to a life of rapid action in hard work and frenzied
enjoyment--took the delay very much amiss; and when it was rumored that
the doors were being locked, impatience and distrust found emphatic
utterance. Timid whistling and other expressions of disapproval had been
followed by louder demonstrations, for to be locked up was intolerable.
But the lictors and guards took no notice, after removing the member of
the Museum who had perpetrated the epigram on Caesar's mother. This one,
who had certainly gone too far, was to pay for all, it would seem.

Then the trumpets sounded, and the most heedless of the troop of youths
began to feel acute anxiety and alarm. From her high post of observation
Melissa could see that, although the appearance of Zminis on the scene
had caused a fever of agitation, they now broke their serried squares,
wandered about as if undecided what to do, but prepared for the worst,
and turned their curly heads now to this side and now to that, till the
trumpetblast from the seats attracted every eye upward, and the butchery
began.

Did the cry, "Stop, wretches!" really break from Melissa's lips, or had
she only intended to shout it down to the people in the stadium? She did
not know; but as she recollected the long rank of Numidians who, quick
as lightning, lifted their curved bows and sent a shower of arrows down
on the defenseless lads in the arena, she felt as though she had again
shrieked out: "Stop!" Then it seemed as though a storm of wind had torn
thousands of straight boughs with metallic leaves that flashed in the
sunshine from some huge invisible tree, and flung them into the arena;
and, as her eve followed their fall, she could have fancied that she
looked on a corn-field beaten down by a terrific hail-storm; but the
boughs and leaves were lances and arrows, and each ear of corn cut down
was a young and promising human being.

Zminis's preposterous suggestion had been acted on. Caracalla was
avenged on the youth of Alexandria.

Not a tongue could wag now in abuse; every pair of young lips which
had dared utter a scornful cry or purse up to whistle at the sight of
Caesar, was silenced forever-and, with the few guilty, a hundred times
more who were innocent. She knew now why the great gate had been barred
with beams, and why the troop had entered by the side-doors. The scene
of the brilliant display had become a lake of blood, full of the dead
and dying. Death had invaded the rows of seats; instead of laurel
wreaths and prizes, deadly weapons were showered down into the arena.
It seemed now as though the sun, with its blinding radiance, were
mercifully fain to hinder the human eye from looking down on the
horrible picture. To avoid the sickening sight. Melissa closed her eyes
and dragged herself to her feet with an effort, to hide herself she knew
not where.

But again there was a flourish of trumpets and loud acclamations, and
again an irresistible power dragged her to the window.

A splendid quadriga had stopped at the gate of the stadium, surrounded
by courtiers and guards. It was Caracalla's, for Pandion held the reins.
Could Caracalla approve of this most horrible crime, organized by the
wretch Zminis, by appearing on the scene; or might it not be that, in
his wrath at the bloodthirsty zeal of his vile tool, he had come to
dismiss him?

She hoped it was this; and, at any cost, she must know the truth as to
this question, which was not based on mere curiosity. Holding one hand
to her wildly beating heart, she looked across the bloodstained arena
to the rows of seats and the dais decorated for Caesar. There stood
Caracalla, with the Egyptian at his side, pointing down at the arena
with his finger. And what was to be seen on the spot he indicated was
so horrible that she again shut her eyes, and this time she even covered
them with her hands. But she would and must see, and once more she
looked across; and the man whose assurances she had once believed, that
it was only his care for the throne and state and the compulsion of
cruel fate which had ever made him shed blood--that man was standing
side by side with the vile, ruthless spy whose tall figure towered far
above his master's. His hand lay on the villain's arm, his eye rested on
the corpse-strewn arena beneath; and now he raised his head, he turned
his face, whose look of suffering had once moved her soul, toward
her--and he laughed--she could see every feature--laughed so loud,
so heartily, so gleefully, as she had never before seen him laugh. He
laughed till his whole body and shoulders shook. Now he took his hand
from the Egyptian's arm and pointed to the dead lying at his feet.

As she saw that laugh, of which she could not hear a sound, Melissa
felt as though a hyena had yelled in her ear, and, yielding to an
irresistible impulse, she looked down once more at the destruction of
youthful life and happiness which had been wrought in one short hour--at
the stream of blood after which so many bitter tears must flow. The
sight indeed cut her to the heart, and yet she was thankful for it; for
the first time the reckless cruelty of that laughing monster was evident
in all its naked atrocity. Horror, aversion, loathing for that man to
whom everything but power, cruelty, and cunning, was as nothing, left
no room for fear or pity, or even the least shade of self-reproach for
having aroused in him a desire which she could not gratify.

She clenched her little fists, and, without vouchsafing another glance
at the detestable butcher who had dared to cast his eyes on her, she
withdrew from the window and cried out aloud, though startled at the
sound of her own voice: "The time, the time! It is fulfilled for him
this day!"

And how her eyes flashed and her bosom heaved and fell! With what a
firm step did she pace the long suite of rooms, while the conviction was
borne in on her that this deed of the vile assassin in the purple must
bring the day of salvation and peace nearer--that day of which Andreas
dreamed! As in her silent walk she passed the book-rolls which the lady
Euryale had so quietly laid by her bedside, she took up the glad message
of Luke with enthusiastic excitement, held it on high, and shouted the
angels' greeting which had impressed itself on her memory out of the
window, as though she longed that Caracalla should hear it--"Peace on
earth and good-will toward men!"

Then she resumed her walk through the rooms of the heathen mystics,
repeating to herself all the comfortable words she had ever heard from
Euryale and the freedman Andreas. The image of the divine Lord, who
had come to bestow love on the world, and seal his sublime doctrine
by sacrificing his life, rose up before her soul, and all that the
Christian Johanna had told her of him made the picture clear, till he
stood plainly before her, beautiful and gentle, in a halo of love and
kindness, and yet strong and noble, for the crucified One was a heroic
Saviour.

At this she remembered with satisfaction the struggle she herself
had fought, and her comfort when she had decided to sacrifice her own
happiness to save others from sorrow. She now resolutely grasped the
lady Euryale's book-rolls, for they contained the key to the inner
chambers of the wondrous structure into whose forecourt life itself and
her own intimate experience had led her. She was soon sitting with her
back to the window, and unrolled the gospel of Matthew till she came to
the first sentence which Euryale had marked for her with a red line.

Melissa was too restless to read straight on; as impatient as a child
who finds itself for the first time in a garden which its parents have
bought, she rushed from one tempting passage to another, applying
each to herself, to those whom she loved, or in another sense to the
disturber of her peace.

With a joyful heart she now believed the promise which at first had
staggered her, that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand.

But her eye ran swiftly over the open roll, and was attracted by a
mark drawing her attention to a whole chapter. She there read how Jesus
Christ had gone up on to a mountain to address the vast multitude who
followed him. He spoke of the kingdom of heaven, and of who those were
that should be suffered to enter there. First, they were the poor in
spirit--and she no doubt was one of those. Among those who were rich in
spirit her brother Philip was certainly one of the richest, and whither
had an acute understanding and restless brain led him that they so
seldom gave his feelings time to make themselves heard?

Then the mourners were to be comforted. Oh, that she could have called
the lady Berenike to her side and bid her participate in this promise!
And the meek--well, they might come to power perhaps after the downfall
of the wretch who had flooded the world with blood, and who, of all men
on earth, was the farthest removed from the spirit which gazed at her
from this scripture, so mild and genial. Of those who hungered and
thirsted after righteousness she again was one: they should be filled,
and the lady Euryale and Andreas had already loaded the board for her.

The merciful, she read, should obtain mercy; and she, if any one, had
a right to regard herself as a peacemaker: thus to her was the promise
that she should be called one of the children of God.

But at the next verse she drew herself up, and her face was radiant with
joy, for it seemed to have been written expressly for her; nay, to find
it here struck her as a marvel of good fortune, for there stood the
words: "Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake:
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you."

All these things had come upon her in these last days-though not,
indeed, for the sake of Jesus Christ and righteousness, but only for
the sake of those she loved; yet she would have been ready to endure the
worst.

And the hapless victims in the arena! Might not the promised bliss await
them too? Oh, how gladly would she have bestowed on them the fairest
reward! And if this should indeed be their lot after death, where was
the revenge of their bloodthirsty murderer?

Oh, that her mother were still alive--that she, Melissa, had been
permitted to share this great consolation with her! In a brief
aspiration she uplifted her soul to the beloved dead, and as she further
unrolled the manuscript her eye fell on the words: "Love your enemies;
bless them that curse you, and do good to them that hate you." No,
she could not do this; this seemed to her to be too much to ask; even
Andreas had not attained to this; and yet it must be good and lovely,
if only because it helped to cement the peace for which she longed more
fervently than for any other blessing.

Next she read: "For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged,"
and she shuddered as she thought of the future fate of the man who had
by treachery brought murder and death on an industrious and flourishing
city as a punishment for the light words and jests of a few mockers, and
the disappointment he had suffered from an insignificant girl.

But then, again, she breathed more freely, for she read: "Ask, and it
shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened." Could there be a more precious promise? And to her, she felt,
it was already fulfilled; for her trembling finger had, as it were, but
just touched the door, and, to! it stood open before her, and that which
she had so long sought she had now found. But it was quite natural that
it should be so, for the God of the Christians loved those who turned to
him as His own children. Here it was written why those who asked should
receive, and those who sought should find: "For what man is there of you
whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?"

If it were only as a peacemaker, she was already a child of Him who had
asked this, and she might look for none but good gifts from Him. And
what was commanded immediately after seemed to her so simple, so easy
to obey, and yet so wise. She thought it over a little, and saw that
in this precept--of which it was said that it was all the law and the
prophets--there was in fact a rule which, if it were obeyed, must
keep all mankind guiltless, and make every one happy. These words, she
thought, should be written over every door and on every heart, as the
winged sun was placed over every Egyptian temple gate, so that no one
should ever forget them for an instant. She herself would bear them in
mind, and she repeated them to herself in an undertone, "Whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them." Her eye
wandered to the window and out to the stadium. How happy might the world
be under a sovereign who should obey that law! And Caracalla?--No, she
would not allow the contentment which filled her to be troubled by a
thought of him.

With a hasty gesture she placed the ivory rod which she had found in
the middle of the roll so as to flatten it out, and her eye fell on the
words, "Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I
will give you rest." To her, if to any one, was this glorious bidding
addressed, for few had a heavier burden to bear. But indeed she already
felt it lighter, after the terrors she had gone through on the very
verge of despair; and now, even though she was still surrounded by
dangers, she was far from feeling oppressed or terrified. Now her heart
beat higher with hopeful gladness, and she was full of fervent gratitude
as she told herself with lively and confident assurance that she had
found a new guide, and, holding His loving and powerful hand, could walk
in the way in safety. She felt as though some beloved hand had given her
a vial of precious medicine that would cure every disease, when she had
learned this verse, too, by heart. She would never forget the friendly
promise and invitation that lay in those words. And to Alexander,
at least--poor, conscience-stricken Alexander--they might bring some
comfort, if not to her father and Philip, since the call of the Son of
God was addressed to him too. And she looked as happy as though she had
heard something to rejoice her heart and soul. Her red lips parted once
more, showing the two white teeth which were never to be seen but when
she smiled and some real happiness stirred her soul.

She fancied she was alone, but, even while she was reading the words
in which the Saviour called to him the weary and heavy-laden, the
lady Euryale had noiselessly opened a secret door leading to Melissa's
hiding-place, known only to herself and her husband, and had come close
to her. She now stood watching the girl with surprise and astonishment,
for she had expected to find her beside herself, desperate, and more
than ever needing comfort and soothing. The unhappy girl must have been
drawn to the window by the cries of the massacred, and at least have
glanced at the revolting scene in the stadium. She would have thought
it more natural if she had found Melissa overcome by the horrors she had
witnessed, half distraught or paralyzed by distress and rage. And there
sat the young creature, whom she knew to be soft-hearted and gentle,
smiling and with beaming eyes--though those eyes must have rested on the
most hideous spectacle--looking as though the roll in her lap were the
first enchanting raptures of a lover. The book lying on Melissa's knees
was the gospel of Matthew, which she herself early this morning, while
the girl was still sleeping, had laid by her side to comfort her and
give her some insight into the blessings of Christianity. But these
scriptures, so sacred to Euryale, had seemed to count for less than
nothing to this heathen girl, the sister of Philip the skeptic.

Euryale loved Melissa, but far dearer to her was the book to whose
all-important contents the maiden seemed to have closed her heart in
coldness.

It was for Melissa's sake that, when the high-priest's dwelling was
searched by the new magistrate's spies from cellar to garret, she had
patiently submitted to her husband's hard words. She had liked to think
that she might bring this girl as a pure white lamb into the fold of the
Good Shepherd, who to herself was so dear, and through whom her saddened
life had found new charm, her broken heart new joys. A few hours since
she had assured her friend Origen that she had found a young Greek who
would prove to him that a heathen who had gone through the school of
suffering with a pure and compassionate heart needed but a sign, a word
of flame, to recognize at once the beatitude of Christianity and long
to be baptized. And here she discovered the maiden of whom she had such
fair hopes, with a smile on her lips and beaming looks, while so many
innocent men were being slaughtered, as though this were a joy to her!

What had become of the girl's soft, tender heart, which but yesterday
had been ready for self-sacrifice if only she might secure the
well-being of those she loved? Was she, Euryale, in her dotage, that she
could be so deceived by a child?

Her heart beat faster with disappointment; and yet she would not condemn
the sinner unheard. So, with a swift impulse she took the roll up from
Melissa's lap, and her voice was sorrowful rather than severe as she
exclaimed:

"I had hoped, my child, that these scriptures might prove to you, as to
so many before you, a key to open the gates of eternal truth. I thought
that they would comfort you, and teach you to love the sublime Being
whose exemplary life and pathetic death are no longer unknown to
you, since Johanna told you the tale. Nay, I believed that they might
presently arouse in you the desire to join us who--"

But here she stopped, for Melissa had fallen on her neck, and while
Euryale, much amazed, tried to release herself from her embrace, the
girl cried out, half laughing and half in tears:

"It has all come about as you expected! I will live and die faithful
to that sublime Saviour, whom I love. I am one of you--yes, mother,
now--even before the baptism I long for. For I was weary and heavy-laden
above any, and the word of the Lord hath refreshed me. This book has
taught me that there is but one path to true happiness, and it is that
which is shown us by Jesus Christ. O lady, how much fairer would our
life on earth be if what is written here concerning blessedness were
stamped on every heart! I feel as though in this hour I had been born
again. I do not know myself; and how is it possible that a poor child of
man, in such fearful straits and peril as I, and after such a scene of
horror, should feel so thankful and so full of the purest gladness?"

The matron clasped her closely in her arms, and her tears bedewed the
girl's face while she kissed her again and again; and the cheerfulness
which had just now hurt her so deeply she now regarded as a beautiful
miracle.

Her time was limited, for she was watched; and she had seized the
half-hour during which the townguard had been mustered in the square to
report progress. So Melissa had to be brief, and in a few hasty words
she told her friend all that she had seen and heard from her high
window, and how the gospel of Matthew had been to her glad tidings; how
it had given her comfort and filled her soul with infinite happiness in
this the most terrible hour of her life. At this, Euryale also forgot
the horrors which surrounded them, till Melissa called her back to the
dreadful present; for, with bowed head and in deep anxiety, she desired
to know whether her friend knew anything of her relations and Diodoros.

The matron had a painful struggle with herself. It grieved her to
inflict anxiety on Melissa's heart, as she stood before her eyes like
one of the maidens robed in white and going to be baptized, to whom
presents were given on the festive occasion, and who were carefully
sheltered from all that could disturb them and destroy the silent, holy
joy of their souls. And yet the question must be answered: so she said
that of the other two she knew nothing, any more than of Berenike and
Diodoros, but that of Philip she had bad news. He was a noble man, and,
notwithstanding his errors in the search after truth, well worthy
of pity. At this, Melissa in great alarm begged to be told what had
happened to her brother, and the lady Euryale confessed that he no
longer walked among the living, but she did not relate the manner of his
death; and she bade the weeping girl to seek for comfort from the Friend
of all who grieve and whom she now knew; but to keep herself prepared
for the worst, in full assurance that none are tried beyond what they
are able to bear, for that the fury of the bloodthirsty tyrant hung like
a black cloud over Alexandria and its inhabitants. She herself, merely
by coming to Melissa, exposed herself to great danger, and she could not
see her again till the morrow. To Melissa's inquiry as to whether it
was her refusal to be his which had brought such a fearful fate on the
innocent youth of Alexandria, Euryale could reply in the negative; for
she had heard from her husband that it was a foul epigram written by a
pupil of the Museum which had led to Caesar's outbreak of rage.

With a few soothing words she pointed to a basket of food which she
had brought with her, showed the girl once more the secret door, and
embraced her at parting as fondly as though Heaven had restored to her
in Melissa the daughter she had lost.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

Melissa was once more alone.

She now knew that Philip walked no longer among the living. He must
have fallen a victim to the fury of the monster, but the thought that he
might have been slain for her sake left her mind no peace.

She felt that with the death of this youth--so gifted, and so dear to
her--a corner-stone had been torn from the paternal house.

In the loving circle that surrounded her, death had made another gap
which yawned before her, dismal and void.

One storm more, and what was left standing would fall with the rest.

Her tears flowed fast, and the torturing thought that the emperor had
slain her brother as a punishment for his sister's flight pierced her to
the heart.

Now she belonged indeed to the afflicted and oppressed; and as
yesterday, in the trouble of her soul, she had called upon Jesus Christ,
though she scarcely knew of Him then, so now she lifted up her heart to
Him who had become her friend, praying to Him to remember His promise of
comfort when she came to Him weary and heavy-laden.

And while she tried to realize the nature of the Saviour who had laid
down His life for others, she remembered all she had dared for her
father and brothers, and what fate had been her's during the time since;
and she felt she might acknowledge to herself that even if Philip had
met his death because of Caracalla's anger toward her, at any rate she
would never have approached Caesar had she not wanted to save her father
and brothers. She had never glossed over any wrong-doing of her own; but
her open and truthful nature was just as little inclined to the torment
of self-reproach when she was not absolutely certain of having committed
a fault.

In this case she was not quite sure of herself; but she now remembered a
saying of Euryale and Andreas which she had not understood before. Jesus
Christ, it said, had taken upon Himself the sins of the world. If she
understood its meaning aright, the merciful Lord would surely forgive
her a sin which she had committed unwittingly and in no wise for her
own advantage. Her prayer grew more and more to be a discourse with her
new-found friend; and, as she finished, she felt absolutely sure that He
at least understood her and was not angry with her. This reassured her,
but her cheerfulness had fled, and she could read no more.

Deeply troubled, and more and more distressed as time went on by new
disturbing thoughts, she hurriedly paced from side to side of the long,
narrow chamber in the gathering darkness. The revolting images around
her began to affect her unbearably once more. Near her chamber, to the
west, lay the race-course with its horrible scenes; so she turned to the
eastern end that looked out upon the street of Hermes, where the sight
could scarcely be so terrible as from the windows at the opposite end.
But she was mistaken; for, looking down upon the pavement, she perceived
that this, too, swam with blood, and that the ground was covered with
corpses.

Seized with a sudden horror, she flew back into the middle of the long
room. There she remained standing, for the scene of slaughter in the
west was still more appalling than that from which she had just fled.
She could not help wondering who could here have fallen a victim to the
tyrant after he had swept all the youth of the city off the face of the
earth.

The evening sun cast long shafts of golden light across the race-course
and in at the western window, and Melissa knew how quickly the night
fell in Alexandria. If she wished to find out who they were who had been
sacrificed to the fury of the tyrant, it must be done at once, for the
immense building of the temple already cast long shadows. Determined to
force herself to look out, she walked quickly to the eastern window and
gazed below. But it was some moments before she had the fortitude to
distinguish one form from another; they melted before her reluctant eyes
into one repulsive mass.

At last she succeeded in looking more calmly and critically.

Not heaped on one another as on the racecourse, hundreds of Caracalla's
victims lay scattered separately over the open square as far as the
entrance to the street of Hermes. Here lay an old man with a thick
beard, probably a Syrian or a Jew; there, his dress betraying him,
a seaman; and farther on-no, she could not be mistaken--the youthful
corpse that lay so motionless just beneath the window was that of
Myrtilos, a friend of Philip, and, like him, a member of the Museum.

In a fresh fit of terror she was going to flee again into her dreadful
hiding-place, when she caught sight of a figure leaning against the
basin of the beautiful marble fountain just in front of the eastern
side-door of the Serapeum, and immediately below her. The figure moved,
and could therefore only be wounded, not dead; and round the head
was bound a white cloth, reminding her of her beloved, and thereby
attracting her attention. The youth moved again, turning his face
upward, and with a low cry she leaned farther forward and gazed and
gazed, unmindful of the danger of being seen and falling a victim to the
tyrant's fury. The wounded, living man-there, he had moved again--was no
other than Diodoros, her lover!

Till the last glimmer of light disappeared she stood at the window
with bated breath, and eyes fixed upon him. No faintest movement of his
escaped her, and at each one, trembling with awakening hope, she thanked
Heaven and prayed for his rescue. At length the growing darkness hid
him from her sight. With every instant the night deepened, and without
thinking, without stopping to reflect--driven on by one absorbing
thought--she felt her way back to her couch, beside which stood the lamp
and fire-stick, and lighted the wick; then, inspired with new courage
at the thought of rescuing her lover from death, she considered for a
moment what had best be done.

It was easy for her to get out. She had a little money with her; on her
peplos she wore a clasp that had once belonged to her mother, with
two gems in it from her father's hand, and on her rounded arm a golden
circlet. With these she could buy help. The only thing now was to
disguise herself.

On the great, smoke-blackened metal plate over which those mystics
passed who had to walk through fire, there lay plenty of charcoal, and
yonder hung robes of every description. The next moment she had thrown
off her own, in order to blacken her glistening white limbs and her face
with soot. Among the sewing materials which the lady Euryale had laid
beside the scrolls was a pair of scissors. These the girl seized, and
with quick, remorseless hand cut off the long, thick locks that were her
brother's and her lover's delight. Then she chose out a chiton, which,
reaching only to her knees, gave her the appearance of a boy. Her breath
came fast and her hands trembled, but she was already on her way to the
secret door through which she should flee from this place of horror,
when she came to a standstill, shaking her head gently. She had looked
around her, and the wild disorder she was leaving behind her in the
little room went against her womanly feelings. But though this feeling
would not in itself have kept her back, it warned her to steady her mind
before leaving the refuge her friend had accorded to her. Thoughtful,
and accustomed to have regard for others, she realized at once how
dangerous it might prove to Euryale if these unmistakable traces of her
presence there should be discovered by an enemy. The kindness of her
motherly friend should not bring misfortune upon her. With active
presence of mind she gathered up her garments from the floor, swept the
long locks of hair together, and threw them all, with the sewing and the
basket that had contained the food, into the stove on the hearth, and
set them alight. The scissors she took with her as a weapon in case of
need.

Then, laying the books of the gospels beside the other manuscripts,
and casting a last look round to assure herself that every sign of her
presence had been destroyed, she addressed one more prayer to the tender
Comforter of the afflicted, who has promised to save those that are in
danger.

She then opened the secret door.

With a beating heart, and yet far more conscious of the desire to save
her lover while there was yet time than of the danger into which she was
rushing headlong, she flitted down the hidden staircase as lightly as a
child at play. So much time had been lost in clearing the room--and yet
she could not have left it so!

She had not forgotten where to press, so that the heavy stone which
closed the entrance should move aside; but as she sprang from the last
step her lamp had blown out, and blackest darkness concealed the surface
of the smooth granite wall which lay between her and the street.

What if, when she got outside, she should be seen by the lictors or
spies?

At this thought fear overcame her for the first time. As she felt about
the door her hands trembled and beads of perspiration stood upon her
brow. But she must go to her wounded lover! When any one was bleeding
to death every moment might bring the terrible "too late." It meant
Diodoros's death if she did not succeed in opening the granite slab.

She took her hands from the stone and forced herself, with the whole
strength of her will, to be calm.

Where had been the place by pressing which the granite might be moved?

It must have been high up on the right side. She carefully followed with
her fingers the groove in which the stone lay, and having recalled its
shape by her sense of touch, she began her search anew. Suddenly she
felt something beneath her finger-tips that was colder than the stone.
She had found the metal bolt! With a deep breath, and without stopping
to think of what might be before her, she pressed the spring; the slab
turned-one step-and she was in the street between the racecourse and the
Serapeum.

All was still around her. Not a sound was to be heard except from
the square to the north of the temple, where all who carried arms had
gathered together to enjoy the wine which flowed in streams as a mark of
the emperor's approbation, and from the inner circle of the race-course
voices were audible. Of the citizens not one dared show himself in the
streets, although the butchery had ceased at sundown. All who did not
carry the imperial arms had shut themselves up in their houses, and the
streets and squares were deserted since the soldiers had assembled in
front of the Serapeum.

No one noticed Melissa. The dangers that threatened her from afar
troubled her but little. She only knew that she must go on--go on as
fast as her feet would carry her, if she were to reach her loved one in
time.

Skirting the south side of the temple, in order to get to the fountain,
her chief thought was to keep in its shadow. The moon had not yet risen,
and they had forgotten to light either the pitch-pans or the torches
which usually burned in front of the south facade of the temple. They
had been too busy with other matters to-day, and now they needed all
hands in heaping the bodies together. The men whose voices sounded
across to her from the race-course had already begun the work. On--she
must hurry on!

But it was not so easy as last night. Her light sandals were wet
through, and there was ever a fresh impediment in her way. She knew what
it was that had wetted her foot--blood--noble, human blood--and every
obstacle against which she stumbled was a human body. But she would not
let herself dwell upon it, and hurried on as though they were but water
and stones, ever seeing before her the image of the wounded youth who
leaned against the basin.

Thus she reached the east side of the temple. Already she could hear
the splashing of the fountain, she saw the marble gleaming through the
darkness, and began seeking for the spot where she had seen her lover.
She suddenly stopped short; at the same time as herself, lights faint
and bright were coming along from the south, from the entrance of the
street that led to Rhakotis, and down to the water. She was in the
middle of the street, without a possibility of concealing herself except
in one of the niches of the Serapeum.

Should she abandon him? She must go on, and to seek protection in the
outer wall of the temple meant turning back. So she stood still and held
her breath as she watched the advancing lights. Now they stopped. She
heard the rattle of arms and men's voices. The lantern-bearers were
being detained by the watch. They were the first soldiers she had seen,
the others being engaged in drinking, or in the work on the race-course.
Would the soldiers find her, too? But, no! They moved on, the
torch-bearers in front, toward the street of Hermes.

Who were those people who went wandering about among the slain, turning
first to this side and then to that, as if searching for something?

They could not be robbing the dead, or the watch would have seized them.

Now they came quite close to her, and she trembled with fright, for one
of them was a soldier. The light of the lantern shone upon his armor.
He went before a man and two lads who were following a laden ass, and
in one of them Melissa recognized with beating heart a garden slave of
Polybius, who had often done her a service.

And now she took courage to look more closely at the man--and it
was--yes, even in the peasant's clothes he wore he could not deceive her
quick eyes--it was Andreas!

She felt that every breath that came from her young bosom must be a
prayer of thanksgiving; nor was it long before the freedman recognized
Melissa in the light-footed black boy who seemed to spring from the
earth in order to show them the way, and he, too, felt as if a miracle
