"Yes, you, Rustem; you of all men. We were talking over something in
the prison, and if only you were ready and willing to help us in the
matter."

"Willing!" laughed the worthy fellow striking his heart; and he went on
in his strangely-broken Greek, which was, however, quite intelligible:
"I would give hair and skin for the noble lady. You have only to speak
out."

The child clung to the big man with both hands and drew him to her
saying: "We knew you had a grate ful heart. But you see..." and she
interrupted herself to ask in an altered voice:

"Do you believe in a God? or stay--do you know what a sacred oath is?
Can you swear solemnly? Yes, yes..." and drawing herself up as tall as
possible she went on very seriously: "Swear by your bride Mandane--as
truly as you believe that she loves you...."

"But, sweet soul...."

"Swear that you will never betray to a living soul what I am going
to say--not even to Mother Joanna and Pulcheria; no, nor even to your
Mandane, unless you find you cannot help it and she gives her sacred
word...."

"What is it? You quite frighten me! What am I to swear?"

"Not to reveal what I am now going to tell you."

"Yes, yes, little Mistress; I can promise you that." Mary sighed, a
long-drawn "Ah...!" and told him that a trustworthy messenger must be
found to go forth to meet Amru, so as to be in time to save Paula. Then
came the question whether he knew the road over the hills from Babylon
to the ancient town of Berenice; and when he replied that he had lately
travelled that way, and that it was the shortest road to the sea for
Djidda and Medina, she repeated her satisfied "Ah!" took his hand, and
went on with coaxing but emphatic entreaty while she played with his big
fingers: "And now, best and kindest Rustem, in all Memphis there is but
one really trusty messenger; but he, you see, is betrothed, and so he
would rather get married and go home with his bride than help us to save
the life of poor Paula."

"The cur!" growled the Persian.

At this Mary laughed out: "Yes, the cur!" and went on gaily: "But you
are abusing yourself, you stupid Rustem. You, you are the messenger I
mean, the only faithful and trustworthy one far or near. You, you must
meet the governor...."

"I!" said the man, and he stood still with amazement; but Mary
pulled him onward, saying: "But come on, or the others will notice
something.--Yes, you, you must...."

"But child, child," interrupted Rustem lamentably,

"I must go back to my master; and you see, common right and justice...."

"You do not choose to leave your sweetheart; not even if the kind
creature who watched over you day and night should die for it--die the
most cruel and horrible death! You were ready enough to call that other,
as you supposed, a cur--that other whom no one nursed till he was well
again; but as for yourself...."

"Have patience then! Hear me, little Mistress!" Rustem broke in again,
and pulled away his hand. "I am quite willing to wait and Mandane must
just submit. But one man is not good for all tasks. To ride, or guide
a train of merchandise, to keep the cameldrivers in order, to pitch a
camp---all that I can do; but to parley with grand folks, to go
straight up to such a man as the great chief Amru with prayers and
supplications--all that, you see, sweetheart--even if it were to save my
own father, that would be...."

"But who asks you to do all that?" said the child. "You may stand as
mute as a fish: it will be your companion's business to do the talking."

"There is to be another one then? But, great Masdak! I hope that will be
enough at any rate!"

"Why will you constantly interrupt me?" the little girl put in. "Listen
first and raise objections after wards. The second messenger--now open
your ears wide--it is I, I myself;--but if you stand still again, you
will really betray me. The long and short of it is, that as surely as I
mean to save Paula, I mean to go forth to meet Amru, and if you
refuse to go with me I will set out alone and try whether Gibbus the
hunchback...."

Rustem had needed some time to collect his senses after this stupendous
surprise, but now he exclaimed: "You--you--to Berenice, and over the
mountains...."

"Yes, over the mountains," she repeated, "and if need be, through the
clouds."

"But such a thing was never heard of, never heard of on this earth!" the
Persian remonstrated. "A girl, a little lady like you--a messenger, and
all alone with a clumsy fellow like me. No, no, no!"

"And again no, and a hundred times over no!" cried the child merrily.
"The little lady will stop at home and you will take a boy with you--a
boy called Marius, not Mary."

"A boy! But I thought.--It is enough to puzzle one...."

"A boy who is a girl and a boy in one," laughed Mary. "But if you
must have it in plain words: I shall dress up as a boy to go with you;
to-morrow when we set out you will see, you will take me for my own
brother."

"Your own brother! With a little face like yours! Then the most
impossible things will become possible," cried Rustem laughing, and
he looked down good humoredly at the little girl. But suddenly the
preposterousness of her scheme rose again before his mind, and he
exclaimed half-frantically: "But then my master!--It will not do--It
will never do!"

"It is for his sake that you will do us this service," said Mary
confidently. "He is Paula's friend and protector; and when he hears what
you have done for her he will praise you, while if you leave us in the
lurch I am quite sure..."

"Well?"

"That he will say: 'I thought Rustem was a shrewder man and had a better
heart.'"

"You really think he will say that?"

"As surely as our house stands before us!--Well, we have no time for any
more discussion, so it is settled: we start together. Let me find you in
the garden early to-morrow morning. You must tell your Mandane that you
are called away by important business."

"And Dame Joanna?" asked the Persian, and his voice was grave and
anxious as he went on: "The thing I like least, child, is that you
should not ask her, and take her into your confidence."

"But she will hear all about it, only not immediately," replied Mary.
"And the day after to-morrow, when she knows what I have gone off for
and that you are with me, she will praise us and bless us; yes, she
will, as surely as I hope that the Almighty will succor us in our
journey!"

At these words, which evidently came from the very depths of her heart,
the Masdakite's resistance altogether gave way--just in time, for their
walk was at an end, and they both felt as though the long distance had
been covered by quite a few steps. They had passed close to several
groups of noisy and quarrelsome citizens, and many a funeral train had
borne the plague-stricken dead to the grave by torchlight under their
very eyes, but they had heeded none of these things.

It was not till they reached the garden-gate that they observed what
was going on around them. There they found the gardener and all the
household, anxiously watching for the return of their belated mistress.
Eudoxia too was waiting for them with some alarm. In the house they were
met by Horapollo, but Joanna and Pulcheria returned his greeting with
a cold bow, while Mary purposely turned her back on him. The old man
shrugged his shoulders with regretful annoyance, and in the solitude of
his own room he muttered to himself:

"Oh, that woman! She will be the ruin even of the peaceful days I hoped
to enjoy during the short remainder of my life!"

The widow and her daughter for some time sat talking of Mary. She
had bid them good-night as devotedly and tenderly as though they were
parting for life. Poor child! She had forebodings of the terrible fate
to which the bishop, and perhaps her own mother had predestined her.

But Mary did not look as if she were going to meet misfortune; Eudoxia,
who slept by her side, was rejoiced on the contrary at seeing her so
gay; only she was surprised to see the child, who usually fell asleep
as soon as her little head was on the pillow, lying awake so long
this evening. The elderly Greek, who suffered from a variety of little
ailments and always went to sleep late, could not help watching the
little girl's movements.

What was that? Between midnight and dawn Mary sprang from her bed, threw
on her clothes, and stole into the next room with the night-lamp in her
hand. Presently a brighter light shone through the door-way. She must
have lighted a lamp,-and presently, hearing the door of the sitting-room
opened, Eudoxia rose and noiselessly watched her. Mary immediately
returned, carrying a boy's clothes--a suit, in point of fact, which
Pulcheria and Eudoxia had lately been making as a Sunday garb--for the
lame gardener's boy. The child smilingly tried on the little blue tunic;
then, after tossing the clothes into a chest, she sat down at the table
to write. But she seemed to have set herself some hard task; for now she
looked down at the papyrus and rubbed her forehead, and now she gazed
thoughtfully into vacancy. She had written a few sentences when she
started up, called Eudoxia by name, and went towards the sleeping-room.

Eudoxia went forward to meet her; Mary threw herself into her arms, and
before her governess could ask any questions she told her that she had
been chosen to accomplish a great and important action. She had been
intending to wake her, to make her her confidant and to ask her advice.

How sweet and genuine it all sounded, and how charmingly confused she
seemed in spite of the ardent zeal that inspired her!

Eudoxia's heart went forth to her; the words of reproof died on her
lips, and for the first time she felt as though the orphaned child were
her own; as though their joy and grief were one; as though she, who all
her life long had thought only of herself and her own advantage, and who
had regarded her care of Mary as a mere return in kind for a salary and
home, were ready and willing to sacrifice herself and her last coin for
this child. So, when the little girl now threw her arms round Eudoxia's
neck, imploring her not to betray her, but, on the contrary, to help her
in the good work which aimed at nothing less than the rescue of Paula
and Orion-the imperilled victims of Fate, her dry eyes sparkled through
tears; she kissed Mary's burning cheeks once more and called her her own
dear, dear little daughter. This gave the child courage; with tragical
dignity, which brought a smile to the governess' lips, she took
Eudoxia's bible from the desk, and said, fixing her beseeching gaze on
the Greek's face:

"Swear!--nay, you must be quite grave, for nothing can be more
solemn--swear not to tell a soul, not even Mother Joanna, what I want to
confess to you."

Eudoxia promised, but she would take no oath. "Yea, yea, and nay, nay,"
was the oath of the Christian by the law of the Lord; but Mary clung to
her, stroked her thin cheeks, and at last declared she could not say a
word unless Eudoxia yielded. In such an hour the Greek could not resist
this tender coaxing; she allowed Mary to take possession of her hand and
lay it on the Bible; and when once this was done Eudoxia gave way, and
with much head shaking repeated the oath that her pupil dictated, though
much against her will.

After this the governess threw herself on the divan, as if exhausted and
shocked at her own weakness; and the little girl took advantage of her
victory, seating herself at her feet, and telling her all she knew about
Paula and the perils that threatened her and Orion; and she was artful
enough to give special prominence to Orion's danger, having long since
observed how high he stood in Eudoxia's good graces. So far Eudoxia had
not ceased stroking her hair, while she assented to everything that was
said; but when she heard that Mary proposed to undertake the embassy
to Amru herself, she started to her feet in horror, and declared most
positively that she would never, never consent to such rashness, to such
fatal folly.

Mary now brought to bear her utmost resources of persuasion and
flattery. There was no other fit messenger to be found, and the lives
of Orion and Paula were at stake. Was a ride across the mountains such
a tremendous matter after all? How well she knew how to manage a beast,
and how little she suffered from the heat! Had she not ridden more than
once from Memphis to their estates by the seaboard? And faithful Rustem
would be always with her, and the road over the mountains was the safest
in all the country, with frequent stations for the accommodation of
travellers. Then, if they found Amru, she could give a more complete
report than any other living soul.

But Eudoxia was not to be shaken; though she admitted that Mary's
project was not so entirely crazy as it had at first appeared.

At this the little girl began again; after reminding Eudoxia once more
of her oath, she went on to tell her of the doom she herself hoped to
escape by setting out on her errand. She told Eudoxia of her meeting
with the bishop, and that even Joanna was uneasy as to her future
fate. Ah! that life within walls under lock and key seemed to her so
frightful--and she pictured her terrors, her love of freedom and of a
busy, useful, active life among men and her friends, and her hope that
the great general, Amru, would defend her against every one if once she
could place herself under his protection--painting it all so vividly, so
passionately, and so pathetically, that the governess was softened.

She clasped her hands over her eyes, which were streaming with tears,
and exclaimed: "It is horrible, unheard-of--still, perhaps it is the
best thing to do. Well, go to meet the governor,--ride off, ride off!"

And when the sweet, warm-hearted, joyous creature clang round her neck
she was glad of her own weakness: this fair, fresh, and blooming bud of
humanity should not pine in confinement and seclusion; she should find
and give happiness, to her own joy and that of all good souls, and
unfold to a full and perfect flower. And Eudoxia knew the widow well;
she knew that Joanna would by-and-bye understand why she helped the
child to escape the greatest peril that can hang over a human soul:
that of living in perpetual conflict with itself in the effort to
become something totally different from what, by natural gifts and
inclinations, it is intended to be.

With a sigh of anguish Eudoxia reflected what she herself, forced by
cruel fate and lacking freedom and pleasurable ease, had become, from an
ardent and generous young creature; and she, the narrow-hearted teacher,
could make allowances for the strange, adventurous yearning of a child,
where a larger souled woman might have derided, and blamed and repressed
it.

When it was daylight Eudoxia fulfilled the offices she commonly left
to the maid: she arranged Mary's hair, talking to her and listening the
while, as though in this night the child had developed into a woman.
Then she went into the garden with her, and hardly let her out of her
sight.

At breakfast Joanna and Pulcheria wondered at her singular behavior, but
it did not displease them, and Marv was radiant with contentment.

The widow made no objection to allowing the child to go into the city
to execute her uncle's mysterious commission. Rustem was with her; and
whatever it was that made the child so happy must certainly be right and
unobjectionable. Orion's maps and lists were sent to the prison early
in the day, and before the child set out with her stalwart escort Gibbus
had returned with the prisoner's letter to the Arab governor.

On their way it was agreed that Mary should join Rustem at dusk at the
riverside inn of Nesptah. In these clays of famine and death beasts
of burthen of every description were easily procurable, as well as
attendants and guides; and the Masdakite, who was experienced in such
matters, thought it best to purchase none but swift dromedaries and to
carry only a light tent for the "little mistress!"

At the door of Gamaliel's shop Mary bid him wait; the jovial goldsmith
welcomed her with genuine pleasure....

What had befallen the house of the Mukaukas! Fire had destroyed the
dwelling-place of justice, like the Egyptian cities to whom the prophet
had announced a similar fate a thousand years since.

Gamaliel knew in what peril Orion stood, and the fate that hung over
the noble maiden who had once given him the costliest of gems, and
afterwards entrusted to him a portion of her fortune.

To see any member of his patron's family alive and well rejoiced his
heart. He asked Mary one sympathizing question after another, and his
wife wanted to give her some of her good apricot tarts; but the little
girl begged Gamaliel to grant her at once a private interview, so
the jeweller led her into his little work-shop, bidding her trust him
entirely, for whatever a grandchild of Mukaukas George might ask of him
it was granted beforehand.

Blushing with confusion she took Orion's ring out of its wrapper,
offered it to the Jew, and desired him to give her whatever was right.

She looked enquiringly into his face with her bright eyes, in full
confidence that the kind-hearted man would at once pay her down gold
coins and to spare; but he did not even take the ring out of her hand.
He merely glanced at it, and said gravely:

"Nay, my little maid, we do not do business with children."

"But I want the money, Gamaliel," she urged. "I must have it."

"Must?" he repeated with a smile. "Well, must is a nail that drives
through wood, no doubt; but if it hits iron it is apt to bend. Not that
I am so hard as that; but money, money, money! And whose money do you
mean, little maid? If you want money of mine to spend in bread, or in
cakes, which is more likely, I will shut my eyes and put my hand boldly
into my wallet; but, if I am not mistaken, you are well provided for by
Rufinus the Greek, in whose house there is no lack of anything; and I
have a nice round sum in my own keeping which your grandfather placed in
my hands at interest two years since, with a remark that it was a legacy
to you from your godmother, and the papers stand in your name; so your
necessity looks very like what other folks would call ease."

"Necessity! I am in no necessity," Mary broke in. "But I want the money
all the same; and if I have some of my own, and you perhaps have it
there in your box, give me as much of it as I want."

"As much as you want?" laughed the jeweller. "Not so fast, little maid.
Before such matters can be settled here in Egypt we must have plenty
of time, and papyrus and ink, a grand law court, sixteen witnesses, a
Kyrios..."

"Well then, buy the ring! You are such a good, kind man Gamaliel. Just
to please me. Why, you yourself do not really think that I want to buy
cakes!"

"No. But in these hard times, when so many are starving, a soft heart
may be moved to other follies."

"No indeed! Do buy the ring; and if you will do me this favor..."

"Old Gamaliel will be both a rogue and a simpleton!--Have you forgotten
the emerald? I bought that, and a pretty piece of business that was! I
can have nothing to say to the ring, my little maid." Mary withdrew her
hand, and the grief and disappointment expressed by her large, tearful
eyes were so bitter and touching, that the Jew paused, and then went on
seriously and heartily:

"I would sooner give my own old head to be an anvil than distress you,
sweet child; and Adonai! I do not mean to say--why should I--that you
should ever leave old Gamaliel without money. He has plenty, and though
he is always ready to take, he is ready to give, too, when it is
meet and fitting. I cannot buy the ring, to be sure, but do not be
down-hearted and look me well in the face, little maid. It is much to
ask, and I have handsomer things in my stores, but if you see anything
in it that gives you confidence, speak out and whisper to the man of
whom even your grandfather had some good opinion: 'I want so much, and
what is more--how did you put it?--what is more, I must have it.'"

Mary did see something in the Jew's merry round face that inspired her
with trust, and in her childlike belief in the sanctity of an oath she
made a third person--a believer too, in a third form of religion--swear
not to betray her secret, only marvelling that the administering of the
oath, in which she had now had some practice, should be so easy. Even
grown-up people will sometimes buy another's dearest secret for a light
asseveration. And when she had thus ensured the Israelite's silence, she
confided to him that she was charged by Orion to send out a messenger to
meet Amru, that he and Paula might be reprieved in time. The goldsmith
listened attentively, and even before she had ended he was busying
himself with an iron chest built into the wall, and interrupted her to
ask! "How much?"

She named the sum that Nilus had suggested, and hardly had she finished
her story when the Jew, who kept the trick by which he opened the chest
a secret even from his wife, exclaimed:

"Now, go and look out of the window, you wonder among envoys and
money-borrowers, and if you see nothing in the courtyard, then fancy to
yourself that a man is standing there who looks like old Gamaliel, and
who puts his hand on your head and gives you a good kiss. And you may
fancy him, too, as saying to himself: 'God in Heaven! if only my little
daughter, my Ruth may be such another as little Mary, grandchild of the
just Mukaukas!'"

And as he spoke, the vivacious but stout man, who had dropped on his
knees, rose panting, left the lid of his strong box open, hurried up
to the child, who had been standing at the window all the while, and
bending over her from behind pressed a kiss on her curly head, saying
with a laugh: "There, little pickpocket, that is my interest. But look
out still, till I call you again." He nimbly trotted back on his short
little legs, wiping his eyes; took from the strong box a little bag of
gold, which contained rather more than the desired sum, locked the
chest again, looking at Mary with a mixture of suspicion and hearty
approbation; then at last he called her to him. He emptied the money-bag
before her, counted out the sum she needed, put the remainder of the
coins into his girdle, and handed the bag to the little girl requesting
her to count his "advance", back into it, while he, with a cunning
smile, quitted the room.

He presently returned and she had finished her task, but she timidly
observed: "One gold piece is wanting." At this he clasped his hands over
his breast and raised his eyes to Heaven exclaiming: "My God! what a
child. There is the solidus, child; and you may take my word for it as
a man of experience: whatever you undertake will prosper. You know what
you are about; and when you are grown up and a suitor comes he will go
to a good market. And now sign your name here. You are not of age, to
be sure, and the receipt is worth no more than any other note scribbled
with ink--however, it is according to rule."

Mary took the pen, but she first hastily glanced through what Gamaliel
had written; the Jew broke out in fresh enthusiasm:

"A girl--a mere child! And she reads, and considers, and makes all sure
before she will sign! God bless thee, Child!--And here come the tarts,
and you can taste them before.... Just Heaven! a mere child, and such
important business!"




CHAPTER XXI.

While Rustem, to whom Mary had entrusted the jeweller's gold, was making
his preparations for their journey with all the care of a practised
guide, and while Mary was comforting her governess and Mandane, to whom
she explained that Rustem's journey was to save Paula's life, a fresh
trial was going forward in the Court of Justice.

This time Orion was the accused. He had scarcely begun to study the maps
and lists he required for his undertaking when he was bidden to appear
before his judges.

The members composing the Court were the same as yesterday. Among the
witnesses were Paula and the new bishop, as well as Gamaliel, who had
been sent for soon after Mary had left him.

The prosecutor accused the son of the Mukaukas of having made away, in
defiance of the patriarch's injunction, with a costly emerald bequeathed
to the Church by his father.

Orion had determined to conduct his own defence; he recapitulated
everything that he had told the prelate in self-justification in his
father's private room, and then added, that to put a speedy end to this
odious affair he was now prepared to restore the stone, and he placed it
at the disposal of his judges. He handed Paula's emerald to the Kadi who
presented it to the bishop. John, however, did not seem satisfied; he
referred to the written testimony of the widow Susannah, who had been
present when the deceased Mukaukas had designated all the jewels in
the Persian hanging as included in his gift to the Church. This was in
Orion's presence so he was still under suspicion of a fraud; and it
was difficult to determine whether the fine gem now lying on the table
before them were indeed the same to which the Church laid claim.

All this was urged with excessive vehemence and bore the stamp of a
hostile purpose.

Obedience and conviction alike prompted the zealous prelate to this
demeanor, for the same carrier-pigeon which had brought from the
patriarch his appointment to the bishopric required him to insist on
Orion's punishment, for he was a thorn in the flesh of the Jacobite
church, a tainted sheep who might infect the rest of the flock. If
the young man should offer an emerald it was therefore to be closely
examined, to see whether it were the original stone or a substitute.

On these grounds the bishop had expressed his doubts, and though they
gave rise to an indignant murmur among the judges, the Kadi so far
admitted the prelate's suspicions as to explain that last evening a
letter had reached him from his uncle at Djidda, Haschim the merchant,
in which mention was made of the emerald. His son happened to have
weighed that stone, without his knowledge, before he started for Egypt,
and Othman had here a note of its exact weight. The Jew Gamaliel had
been desired to attend with his balances, and could at once use them to
satisfy the bishop.

The jeweller immediately proceeded to do so, and old Horapollo, who
was an expert in such matters, went close up to him, and watched him
narrowly.

It was in feverish anxiety, and more eagerly than any other bystander,
that Paula and Orion kept their eyes fixed on the Jew's hands and lips;
after weighing it once, he did so a second time. Old Horapollo himself
weighed it a third time, with a keen eye though his hands trembled a
little; all three experiments gave the same result: this gem was heavier
by a few grains of doura than that which the merchant's son had weighed,
and yet the Jew declared that there was no purer, clearer, or finer
emerald in the world than this.

Orion breathed more freely, and the question arose among the judges as
to whether the young Arab might have failed in precision, or an exchange
had in fact been effected. This was difficult to imagine, since in that
case the accused would have given himself the loss, and the Church the
advantage.

The bishop, an honest man, now said that the patriarch's suspicions had
certainly led him too far in this instance, and after this he spoke no
more.

All through this enquiry the Vekeel had kept silence, but the defiant
gaze, assured of triumph, which he fixed on Paula and Orion alternately,
augured the worst.

When the prosecutor next accused the young man of complicity in the
much discussed escape of the nuns Orion again asserted his innocence,
pointing out that during the fatal contest between the Arabs and the
champions of the sisters, he had been with the Arab governor, as Amru
himself could testify. By an act of unparalleled despotism, he had been
deprived of his estates and his freedom on mere false suspicion, and he
put his trust in the first instance in a just sentence from his judges
and, failing that, he threw himself on the protection and satisfaction
of his sovereign lord the Khaliff.

As he spoke his eyes flashed flames at the Vekeel; but the negro still
preserved his self-control, and this doubled the alarm of those who
wished the youth well.

It was clear from all this that Obada felt sure that he had the noose
well around his victim's neck, and why he thought so, soon became
evident; for Orion had hardly finished his defence when he rose, and
with a malicious grin, handed to the Kadi the little tablet given him
yesterday by old Horapollo, describing it as a document addressed to
Paula and desiring the Kadi to examine it. The heat had effaced much of
what had been written on the wax, but most of the words could still be
deciphered. The venerable Horapollo had already made them out, and was
quite ready to read to the judges all that the accused--who by his
own account, was a spotless dove--had written in his innocence and
truthfulness for his fair one. He signed to the old man and helped
him as he rose with difficulty, but the Kadi begged him to wait, made
himself acquainted with the contents of the letter by the help of the
interpreter, and when the man had, with much pains, fulfilled his
task, he turned, not to Horapollo, but to Obada, and asked whence this
document had come.

"From Paula's desk," replied the Vekeel. "My old friend found it there."
He pointed to Horapollo, who confirmed his statement by a nod of assent.

The Kadi rose, went up to the girl, whose cheeks were pale with
indignation, and asked whether she recognized the tablets as her
property; Paula, after convincing herself, replied with a flaming glance
of scorn and aversion at Horapollo: "Yes, my lord. It is mine. That base
old man has taken it with atrocious meanness from among my things."
For an instant her voice failed her; then, turning to the judges, she
exclaimed:

"If there is one among you to whom helplessness and innocence are sacred
and malice and cunning odious, I beg him to go to Rufinus' wife, over
whose threshold this man has crept like a ferret into a dovecote, for
no other end but to tread hospitable kindness in the dust, to rifle her
home and make use of whatever might serve his vile purpose--to go, I
say, and warn the lonely woman against this treacherous spy and thief."

At this the old man, gasping and inarticulate, raised his withered arm;
the Christian judges whispered together, but at cross-purposes,
while the Jew fidgeted his round little person on the bench, drumming
incessantly with his fingers on his breast, and trying to meet Orion's
or Paula's eye and to make her understand that he was the man who would
warn Joanna. But a thump from the Vekeel's fist, that came down on
his shoulder unawares, reduced him to sitting still; and while he sat
rubbing the place with subdued sounds of pain, not daring to reproach
the all-powerful negro for his violence, the Kadi gave the tablets to
Horapollo and bid him read the letter.

But the terrible accusation cast at him by the hated Patrician maiden,
ascribing his removal to Rufinus house to a motive which, in truth, had
been far from his, had so enraged and agitated him that his old lungs,
at all times feeble, refused their office. This woman had done him a
fresh wrong, for he had gone to live with the widow from the kindest
impulse; only an accident had thrown this document in his way. And yet
it would not fail to be reported to Joanna in the course of the day
that he had gone to her house as a spy, and there would be an end to the
pleasant life of which he had dreamed--nay, even Philippus might perhaps
quarrel with him.

And all, all through this woman.

He could not utter a word but, as he sank back on the seat, a glance
so full of hatred, so dark with malignant fury, fell on Paula that she
shuddered, and told herself that this man was ready to die himself if
only he could drag her down too.

The interpreter now began to read Orion's letter and to translate it
for the Arabs; and while he blundered through it, declaring that not a
letter could be plainly made out, she recovered her self-control and,
before the interpreter had done his task, a gleam as of sunshine lighted
up her pure features. Some great, lofty, and rapturous thought must have
flashed through her brain, and it was evident that she had seized it and
was feeding on it.

Orion, sitting opposite to her, noticed this; still, he did not
understand what her beseeching gaze had to say to him, what it asked of
him as she pressed her hand on her breast, and looked into his eyes with
such urgent entreaty that it went to his very heart.

The interpreter ceased; but what he had read had had a great effect on
the judges. The Kadi's benevolent face expressed extreme apprehension,
and the contents of the letter were indeed such as to cause it. It ran
as follows:

"After waiting for you a long time in vain, I must at last make up my
mind to go; and how much I still had to say to you. A written farewell."

Here a few lines were effaced, and then came the--fatal and quite
legible conclusion:

"How far otherwise I had dreamed of ending this day, which has been for
the most part spent in preparations for the flight of the Sisters; and
I have found a pleasure in doing all that lay in my power for those kind
and innocent, unjustly persecuted nuns. We must hope for the best
for them; and for ourselves we must look to-morrow for an undisturbed
interview and a parting which may leave us memories on which we can
live for a long time. The noble governor Amru is, among the Arabs, such
another as he whom we mourn was among the Egyptians..." Here the letter
ended; not quite three lines were wanting to conclude it.

The Kadi held the tablets for a few minutes in his hand; then looking
up again at the assembly, who were waiting in great suspense, he began:
"Even if the accused was not one of those who raised their hands in
mutiny against our armed troops, it is nevertheless indisputable, after
what has just been read, that he not only knew of the escape of
the nuns, but aided them to the utmost.--When did you receive this
communication, noble maiden?"

At this Paula clasped her hands tightly and replied with a slightly bent
head and her eyes fixed on the ground.

"When did I receive it?--Never; for I wrote it myself. The writing is
mine."

"Yours?" said the Kadi in amazement. "It is from me to Orion," replied
Paula.

"From you to him? How then comes it in your desk?"

"In a very simple way," she explained, still looking down. "After
writing the letter to my betrothed I threw it in with the other tablets
as soon as I had no need for it; for he himself came, and there was no
necessity for his reading what could be better said by word of mouth."

As she spoke a peculiar smile passed over her lips and a loud murmur ran
through the room. Orion looked first at the girl and then at the Kadi in
growing bewilderment; but the Negro started up, struck his fist on the
table, making it shake, and roared out:

"An atrocious fabrication! Which of you can allow yourself to be taken
in by a woman's guile?" Horapollo, who had recovered himself by this
time, laughed hoarsely and maliciously; the judges looked at each other
much puzzled; but when the Vekeel went on raging the Kadi interrupted
him, and desired that Orion might speak, for he had twice tried to make
himself heard. Now, with scarlet cheeks and a choking utterance, he
said:

"No, Othman--no, no indeed, my lords. Do not believe her. Not she, but
I--I wrote the letter that...."

But Paula broke in:

"He? Do you not feel that all he wants is to save me, and so he takes my
guilt on himself? It is his generosity, his love for me! Do not, do not
believe him! Do not allow yourselves to be deceived by him."

"I? No, it is she, it is she," Orion again asserted; but, before he
could say more, Paula declared with a flashing glance that it was a poor
sort of love which sacrificed itself out of false generosity. And as,
at the same time, she again pressed her hand to her bosom with pathetic
entreaty, he was suddenly silent, and casting his eyes up to heaven, he
sank back on the prisoners' bench, deeply affected.

Paula joyfully went on:

"He has thought better of it, and given up his crazy attempt to take
my guilt on himself. You see, Othman, you all see, worthy men.--Let me
atone for what I did to help the poor nuns."

"Have your way!" shrieked the old man; but the Negro cried out:

"A hellish tissue of lies, an unheard-of deception! But in spite of
the shield a woman holds before you, I have my foot on your neck,
treacherous wretch! Is it credible--I ask you, judges--that a finished
letter should be found, after weeks had elapsed, in the hands of the
writer and not those of the person to whom it was addressed?"

The Kadi shrugged his shoulders and replied with calm dignity:

"Consider, Obada, that we are condemning this damsel on the evidence of
a letter which was found in possession, not of the person to whom it was
addressed, but of the writer. This document gave rise to no doubts in
your mind. The judge should mete out equal measure to all, Obada."

The aptness of these words, spoken in a dogmatic tone, aroused the
approval of the Arabs, and the Jew could not restrain himself from
exclaiming: "Capital!" but no sooner had it escaped him than he shrank
as quick as lightning out of the Vekeel's reach; and Obada hardly heard
him, for he did not allow himself to be interrupted by the Kadi but went
on to explain in wrathful words what a disgrace it was to them, as
men and judges, to have dust cast in their eyes by a woman, and allow
themselves to be molified by the arts of a pair of love-stricken fools;
and how desirable it must be in the eyes of every Moslem to guard the
security of life and bring the severest punishment on the instigator of
a sanguinary revolt against the champions of the Khaliff's power.

His eloquent and stormy address was not without effect; still, the
Christians, who ascribed every form of evil to the Melchite girl, would
have been satisfied with her death and have been ready to forgive the
son of the Mukaukas this crime--supposing him to have committed it. And
it was after the judges had agreed that it was impossible to decide by
whom the letter on the tablet had been written, and there had been a
great deal of argument on both sides, that the real discussion began.

It was long before the assembly could agree, and all the while Orion sat
now looking as though he had already been condemned to a cruel death,
and now exchanging glances with Paula, while he pressed his hand to his
heart as though to keep it from bursting. He perfectly understood her,
and her magnanimity upheld him. He had indeed persuaded himself to
accept her self-sacrifice, but he was fully determined that if she
must die he would follow her to the grave. "Non dolet,"--[It does not
hurt]--Arria cried to her lover Paetus, as she thrust the knife into her
heart that she might die before him; and the words rang in his ear; but
he said to himself that Paula would very likely be pardoned, and that
then he would be free and have a whole lifetime in which to thank her.

At last--at last. The Kadi announced the verdict: It was impossible to
find Orion worthy of death, and equally so to give up all belief in his
guilt; the court therefore declared itself inadequate to pronounce
a sentence, and left it to be decided by the Khaliff or by his
representative in Egypt, Amru. The court only went so far as to rule
that the prisoner was to be kept in close confinement, so that he might
be within reach of the hand of justice, if the supreme decision should
be "guilty!"

When the Kadi said that the matter was to be referred to the Khaliff or
