me ere now. I will be revenged, too, for I owe him a grudge for an old
score at the ordinary. Let me see--Black Feltham, and Dick Shakebag--we
shall want a fourth--I love to make sure, and the booty will stand
parting, besides what I can bucket them out of. Well, scrivener, lend
me two pieces.--Bravely done--nobly imparted! Give ye good-den." And
wrapping his disguise closer around him, away he went.

When he had left the room, the scrivener wrung his hands, and exclaimed,
"More blood--more blood! I thought to have had done with it, but this
time there was no fault with me--none--and then I shall have all the
advantage. If this ruffian falls, there is truce with his tugs at my
purse-strings; and if Lord Dalgarno dies--as is most likely, for though
as much afraid of cold steel as a debtor of a dun, this fellow is
a deadly shot from behind a bush,--then am I in a thousand ways
safe--safe--safe."

We willingly drop the curtain over him and his reflections.




CHAPTER XXXV


  We are not worst at once--the course of evil
  Begins so slowly, and from such slight source,
  An infant's hand might stem its breach with clay;
  But let the stream get deeper, and philosophy--
  Ay, and religion too--shall strive in vain
  To turn the headlong torrent.
                            _Old Play._

The Templars had been regaled by our friend Richie Moniplies in a
private chamber at Beaujeu's, where he might be considered as good
company; for he had exchanged his serving-man's cloak and jerkin for
a grave yet handsome suit of clothes, in the fashion of the times, but
such as might have befitted an older man than himself. He had positively
declined presenting himself at the ordinary, a point to which his
companions were very desirous to have brought him, for it will be
easily believed that such wags as Lowestoffe and his companion were not
indisposed to a little merriment at the expense of the raw and pedantic
Scotsman; besides the chance of easing him of a few pieces, of which
he appeared to have acquired considerable command. But not even a
succession of measures of sparkling sack, in which the little brilliant
atoms circulated like motes in the sun's rays, had the least effect
on Richie's sense of decorum. He retained the gravity of a judge, even
while he drank like a fish, partly from his own natural inclination to
good liquor, partly in the way of good fellowship towards his guests.
When the wine began to make some innovation on their heads, Master
Lowestoffe, tired, perhaps, of the humours of Richie, who began to
become yet more stoically contradictory and dogmatical than even in the
earlier part of the entertainment, proposed to his friend to break up
their debauch and join the gamesters.

The drawer was called accordingly, and Richie discharged the reckoning
of the party, with a generous remuneration to the attendants, which was
received with cap and knee, and many assurances of--"Kindly welcome,
gentlemen."

"I grieve we should part so soon, gentlemen," said Richie to his
companions,--"and I would you had cracked another quart ere you went, or
stayed to take some slight matter of supper, and a glass of Rhenish. I
thank you, however, for having graced my poor collation thus far; and
I commend you to fortune, in your own courses, for the ordinary neither
was, is, nor shall be, an element of mine."

"Fare thee well, then," said Lowestoffe, "most sapient and sententious
Master Moniplies. May you soon have another mortgage to redeem, and may
I be there to witness it; and may you play the good fellow, as heartily
as you have done this day."

"Nay, gentlemen, it is merely of your grace to say so--but, if you
would but hear me speak a few words of admonition respecting this wicked
ordinary--"

"Reserve the lesson, most honourable Richie," said Lowestoffe, "until
I have lost all my money," showing, at the same time, a purse
indifferently well provided, "and then the lecture is likely to have
some weight."

"And keep my share of it, Richie," said the other Templar, showing an
almost empty purse, in his turn, "till this be full again, and then I
will promise to hear you with some patience."

"Ay, ay, gallants," said Richie, "the full and the empty gang a' ae
gate, and that is a grey one--but the time will come."

"Nay, it is come already," said Lowestoffe; "they have set out the
hazard table. Since you will peremptorily not go with us, why, farewell,
Richie."

"And farewell, gentlemen," said Richie, and left the house, into which
they had returned.

Moniplies was not many steps from the door, when a person, whom, lost
in his reflections on gaming, ordinaries, and the manners of the age,
he had not observed, and who had been as negligent on his part, ran
full against him; and, when Richie desired to know whether he meant "ony
incivility," replied by a curse on Scotland, and all that belonged to
it. A less round reflection on his country would, at any time, have
provoked Richie, but more especially when he had a double quart of
Canary and better in his pate. He was about to give a very rough answer,
and to second his word by action, when a closer view of his antagonist
changed his purpose.

"You are the vera lad in the warld," said Richie, "whom I most wished to
meet."

"And you," answered the stranger, "or any of your beggarly countrymen,
are the last sight I should ever wish to see. You Scots are ever fair
and false, and an honest man cannot thrive within eyeshot of you."

"As to our poverty, friend," replied Richie, "that is as Heaven pleases;
but touching our falset, I'll prove to you that a Scotsman bears as leal
and true a heart to his friend as ever beat in English doublet."

"I care not whether he does or not," said the gallant. "Let me go--why
keep you hold of my cloak? Let me go, or I will thrust you into the
kennel."

"I believe I could forgie ye, for you did me a good turn once, in
plucking me out of it," said the Scot.

"Beshrew my fingers, then, if they did so," replied the stranger. "I
would your whole country lay there, along with you; and Heaven's curse
blight the hand that helped to raise them!--Why do you stop my way?" he
added, fiercely.

"Because it is a bad one, Master Jenkin," said Richie. "Nay, never start
about it, man--you see you are known. Alack-a-day! that an honest man's
son should live to start at hearing himself called by his own name!"
Jenkin struck his brow violently with his clenched fist.

"Come, come," said Richie, "this passion availeth nothing. Tell me what
gate go you?"

"To the devil!" answered Jin Vin.

"That is a black gate, if you speak according to the letter," answered
Richie; "but if metaphorically, there are worse places in this great
city than the Devil Tavern; and I care not if I go thither with you, and
bestow a pottle of burnt sack on you--it will correct the crudities of
my stomach, and form a gentle preparative for the leg of a cold pullet."

"I pray you, in good fashion, to let me go," said Jenkin. "You may mean
me kindly, and I wish you to have no wrong at my hand; but I am in the
humour to be dangerous to myself, or any one."

"I will abide the risk," said the Scot, "if you will but come with me;
and here is a place convenient, a howff nearer than the Devil, whilk
is but an ill-omened drouthy name for a tavern. This other of the Saint
Andrew is a quiet place, where I have ta'en my whetter now and
then, when I lodged in the neighbourhood of the Temple with Lord
Glenvarloch.--What the deil's the matter wi' the man, garr'd him gie sic
a spang as that, and almaist brought himself and me on the causeway?"

"Do not name that false Scot's name to me," said Jin Vin, "if you would
not have me go mad!--I was happy before I saw him--he has been the cause
of all the ill that has befallen me--he has made a knave and a madman of
me!"

"If you are a knave," said Richie, "you have met an officer--if you are
daft, you have met a keeper; but a gentle officer and a kind keeper.
Look you, my gude friend, there has been twenty things said about this
same lord, in which there is no more truth than in the leasings of
Mahound. The warst they can say of him is, that he is not always so
amenable to good advice as I would pray him, you, and every young man to
be. Come wi' me--just come ye wi' me; and, if a little spell of siller
and a great deal of excellent counsel can relieve your occasions, all
I can say is, you have had the luck to meet one capable of giving you
both, and maist willing to bestow them."

The pertinacity of the Scot prevailed over the sullenness of Vincent,
who was indeed in a state of agitation and incapacity to think for
himself, which led him to yield the more readily to the suggestions of
another. He suffered himself to be dragged into the small tavern which
Richie recommended, and where they soon found themselves seated in a
snug niche, with a reeking pottle of burnt sack, and a paper of sugar
betwixt them. Pipes and tobacco were also provided, but were only used
by Richie, who had adopted the custom of late, as adding considerably to
the gravity and importance of his manner, and affording, as it were,
a bland and pleasant accompaniment to the words of wisdom which flowed
from his tongue. After they had filled their glasses and drank them in
silence, Richie repeated the question, whither his guest was going when
they met so fortunately.

"I told you," said Jenkin, "I was going to destruction--I mean to the
gaming-house. I am resolved to hazard these two or three pieces, to get
as much as will pay for a passage with Captain Sharker, whose ship lies
at Gravesend, bound for America--and so Eastward, ho!--I met one devil
in the way already, who would have tempted me from my purpose, but I
spurned him from me--you may be another for what I know.--What degree
of damnation do you propose for me," he added wildly, "and what is the
price of it?"

"I would have you to know," answered Richie, "that I deal in no such
commodities, whether as buyer or seller. But if you will tell me
honestly the cause of your distress, I will do what is in my power to
help you out of it,--not being, however, prodigal of promises, until
I know the case; as a learned physician only gives advice when he has
observed the diagnostics."

"No one has any thing to do with my affairs," said the poor lad; and
folding his arms on the table, he laid his head upon them, with the
sullen dejection of the overburdened lama, when it throws itself down to
die in desperation.

Richard Moniplies, like most folk who have a good opinion of themselves,
was fond of the task of consolation, which at once displayed his
superiority, (for the consoler is necessarily, for the time at least,
superior to the afflicted person,) and indulged his love of talking.
He inflicted on the poor penitenta harangue of pitiless length, stuffed
full of the usual topics of the mutability of human affairs--the eminent
advantages of patience under affliction--the folly of grieving for what
hath no remedy--the necessity of taking more care for the future, and
some gentle rebukes on account of the past, which acid he threw in to
assist in subduing the patient's obstinacy, as Hannibal used vinegar in
cutting his way through rocks. It was not in human nature to endure this
flood of commonplace eloquence in silence; and Jin Vin, whether desirous
of stopping the flow of words--crammed thus into his ear, "against the
stomach of his sense," or whether confiding in Richie's protestations
of friendship, which the wretched, says Fielding, are ever so ready to
believe, or whether merely to give his sorrows vent in words, raised his
head, and turning his red and swollen eyes to Richie--

"Cocksbones, man, only hold thy tongue, and thou shall know all about
it,--and then all I ask of thee is to shake hands and part.--This
Margaret Ramsay,--you have seen her, man?"

"Once," said Richie, "once, at Master George Heriot's in Lombard
Street--I was in the room when they dined."

"Ay, you helped to shift their trenchers, I remember," said Jin Vin.
"Well, that same pretty girl--and I will uphold her the prettiest
betwixt Paul's and the Bar--she is to be wedded to your Lord
Glenvarloch, with a pestilence on him!"

"That is impossible," said Richie; "it is raving nonsense, man--they
make April gouks of you cockneys every month in the year--The Lord
Glenvarloch marry the daughter of a Lonnon mechanic! I would as soon
believe the great Prester John would marry the daughter of a Jew
packman."

"Hark ye, brother," said Jin Vin, "I will allow no one to speak
disregardfully of the city, for all I am in trouble."

"I crave your pardon, man--I meant no offence," said Richie; "but as to
the marriage, it is a thing simply impossible."

"It is a thing that will take place, though, for the Duke and the
Prince, and all of them, have a finger in it; and especially the old
fool of a king, that makes her out to be some great woman in her own
country, as all the Scots pretend to be, you know."

"Master Vincent, but that you are under affliction," said the consoler,
offended on his part, "I would hear no national reflections."

The afflicted youth apologised in his turns, but asserted, "it was true
that the king said Peg-a-Ramsay was some far-off sort of noblewoman; and
that he had taken a great interest in the match, and had run about like
an old gander, cackling about Peggie ever since he had seen her in hose
and doublet--and no wonder," added poor Vin, with a deep sigh.

"This may be all true," said Richie, "though it sounds strange in my
ears; but, man, you should not speak evil of dignities---Curse not the
king, Jenkin; not even in thy bed-chamber--stone walls have ears--no one
has a right to know better than I."

"I do not curse the foolish old man," said Jenkin; "but I would have
them carry things a peg lower.--If they were to see on a plain field
thirty thousand such pikes as I have seen in the artillery gardens,
it would not be their long-haired courtiers would help them, I trow."
[Footnote: Clarendon remarks, that the importance of the military
exercise of the citizens was severely felt by the cavaliers during the
civil war, notwithstanding the ridicule that had been showered upon it
by the dramatic poets of the day. Nothing less than habitual practice
could, at the battle of Newbury and elsewhere, have enabled the
Londoners to keep their ranks as pikemen, in spite of the repeated
charge of the fiery Prince Rupert and his gallant cavaliers.]

"Hout tout, man," said Richie, "mind where the Stewarts come frae, and
never think they would want spears or claymores either; but leaving sic
matters, whilk are perilous to speak on, I say once more, what is your
concern in all this matter?"

"What is it?" said Jenkin; "why, have I not fixed on Peg-a-Ramsay to be
my true love, from the day I came to her old father's shop? and have I
not carried her pattens and her chopines for three years, and borne her
prayer-book to church, and brushed the cushion for her to kneel down
upon, and did she ever say me nay?"

"I see no cause she had," said Richie, "if the like of such small
services were all that ye proffered. Ah, man! there are few--very few,
either of fools or of wise men, ken how to guide a woman."

"Why, did I not serve her at the risk of my freedom, and very nigh at
the risk of my neck? Did she not--no, it was not her neither, but that
accursed beldam whom she caused to work upon me--persuade me like a fool
to turn myself into a waterman to help my lord, and a plague to him,
down to Scotland? and instead of going peaceably down to the ship at
Gravesend, did not he rant and bully, and show his pistols, and make
me land him at Greenwich, where he played some swaggering pranks, that
helped both him and me into the Tower?"

"Aha!" said Richie, throwing more than his usual wisdom into his looks,
"so you were the green-jacketed waterman that rowed Lord Glenvarloch
down the river?"

"The more fool I, that did not souse him in the Thames," said Jenkin;
"and I was the lad who would not confess one word of who and what I
was, though they threatened to make me hug the Duke of Exeter's
daughter."[Footnote: A particular species of rack, used at the Tower of
London, was so called.]

"Wha is she, man?" said Richie; "she must be an ill-fashioned piece, if
you're so much afraid of her, and she come of such high kin."

"I mean the rack--the rack, man," said Jenkin. "Where were you bred
that never heard of the Duke of Exeter's daughter? But all the dukes and
duchesses in England could have got nothing out of me--so the truth came
out some other way, and I was set free.--Home I ran, thinking myself
one of the cleverest and happiest fellows in the ward. And she--she--she
wanted to pay me with _money_ for all my true service! and she spoke so
sweetly and so coldly at the same time, I wished myself in the deepest
dungeon of the Tower--I wish they had racked me to death before I heard
this Scottishman was to chouse me out of my sweetheart!"

"But are ye sure ye have lost her?" said Richie; "it sounds strange
in my ears that my Lord Glenvarloch should marry the daughter of a
dealer,--though there are uncouth marriages made in London, I'll allow
that."

"Why, I tell you this lord was no sooner clear of the Tower, than he and
Master George Heriot comes to make proposals for her, with the king's
assent, and what not; and fine fair-day prospects of Court favour for
this lord, for he hath not an acre of land."

"Well, and what said the auld watch-maker?" said Richie; "was he not, as
might weel beseem him, ready to loop out of his skin-case for very joy?"

"He multiplied six figures progressively, and reported the product--then
gave his consent."

"And what did you do?"

"I rushed into the streets," said the poor lad, "with a burning heart
and a blood-shot eye--and where did I first find myself, but with that
beldam, Mother Suddlechop--and what did she propose to me, but to take
the road?"

"Take the road, man? in what sense?" said Richie.

"Even as a clerk to Saint Nicholas--as a highwayman, like Poins and
Peto, and the good fellows in the play--and who think you was to be my
captain?--for she had the whole out ere I could speak to her--I fancy
she took silence for consent, and thought me damned too unutterably
to have one thought left that savoured of redemption--who was to be my
captain, but the knave that you saw me cudgel at the ordinary when you
waited on Lord Glenvarloch, a cowardly, sharking, thievish bully about
town here, whom they call Colepepper."

"Colepepper--umph--I know somewhat of that smaik," said Richie; "ken ye
by ony chance where he may be heard of, Master Jenkin?--ye wad do me a
sincere service to tell me."

"Why, he lives something obscurely," answered the apprentice, "on
account of suspicion of some villainy--I believe that horrid murder in
Whitefriars, or some such matter. But I might have heard all about him
from Dame Suddlechop, for she spoke of my meeting him at Enfield Chase,
with some other good fellows, to do a robbery on one that goes northward
with a store of treasure."

"And you did not agree to this fine project?" said Moniplies.

"I cursed her for a hag, and came away about my business," answered
Jenkin.

"Ay, and what said she to that, man? That would startle her," said
Richie.

"Not a whit. She laughed, and said she was in jest," answered Jenkin;
"but I know the she-devil's jest from her earnest too well to be taken
in that way. But she knows I would never betray her.'

"Betray her! No," replied Richie; "but are ye in any shape bound to this
birkie Peppercull, or Colepepper, or whatever they call him, that ye
suld let him do a robbery on the honest gentleman that is travelling to
the north, and may be a kindly Scot, for what we know?"

"Ay--going home with a load of English money," said Jenkin. "But be he
who he will, they may rob the whole world an they list, for I am robbed
and ruined."

Richie filled his friend's cup up to the brim, and insisted that he
should drink what he called "clean caup out." "This love," he said,
"is but a bairnly matter for a brisk young fellow like yourself, Master
Jenkin. And if ye must needs have a whimsy, though I think it would be
safer to venture on a staid womanly body, why, here be as bonny lasses
in London as this Peg-a-Ramsay. You need not sigh sae deeply, for it is
very true--there is as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it. Now
wherefore should you, who are as brisk and trig a young fellow of your
inches as the sun needs to shine on--wherefore need you sit moping this
way, and not try some bold way to better your fortune?"

"I tell you, Master Moniplies," said Jenkin, "I am as poor as any
Scot among you--I have broke my indenture, and I think of running my
country."

"A-well-a-day!" said Richie; "but that maunna be, man--I ken weel, by
sad experience, that poortith takes away pith, and the man sits full
still that has a rent in his breeks. [Footnote: This elegant speech was
made by the Earl of Douglas, called Tineman after being wounded and made
prisoner at the battle of Shrewsbury, where

     "His well labouring sword
     Had three times slain the semblance of the king,"]

But courage, man; you have served me heretofore, and I will serve you
now. If you will but bring me to speech of this same captain, it will be
the best day's work you ever did."

"I guess where you are, Master Richard--you would save your countryman's
long purse," said Jenkin. "I cannot see how that should advantage me,
but I reck not if I should bear a hand. I hate that braggart, that
bloody-minded, cowardly bully. If you can get me mounted I care not if I
show you where the dame told me I should meet him--but you must stand
to the risk, for though he is a coward himself, I know he will have more
than one stout fellow with him."

"We'll have a warrant, man," said Richie, "and the hue and cry, to
boot."

"We will have no such thing," said Jenkin, "if I am to go with you. I
am not the lad to betray any one to the harmanbeck. You must do it by
manhood if I am to go with you. I am sworn to cutter's law, and will
sell no man's blood."

"Aweel," said Richie, "a wilful man must have his way; ye must think
that I was born and bred where cracked crowns were plentier than whole
ones. Besides, I have two noble friends here, Master Lowestoffe of the
Temple, and his cousin Master Ringwood, that will blithely be of so
gallant a party."

"Lowestoffe and Ringwood!" said Jenkin; "they are both brave
gallants--they will be sure company. Know you where they are to be
found?"

"Ay, marry do I," replied Richie. "They are fast at the cards and dice,
till the sma' hours, I warrant them."

"They are gentlemen of trust and honour," said Jenkin, "and, if they
advise it, I will try the adventure. Go, try if you can bring them
hither, since you have so much to say with, them. We must not be seen
abroad together.--I know not how it is, Master Moniplies," continued he,
as his countenance brightened up, and while, in his turn, he filled the
cups, "but I feel my heart something lighter since I have thought of
this matter."

"Thus it is to have counsellors, Master Jenkin," said Richie; "and truly
I hope to hear you say that your heart is as light as a lavrock's, and
that before you are many days aulder. Never smile and shake your head,
but mind what I tell you--and bide here in the meanwhile, till I go to
seek these gallants. I warrant you, cart-ropes would not hold them back
from such a ploy as I shall propose to them."




CHAPTER XXXVI


  The thieves have bound the true men--
  Now, could thou and I rob the thieves, and go
   merrily to London.
                    _Henry IV., Part I._

The sun was high upon the glades of Enfield Chase, and the deer, with
which it then abounded, were seen sporting in picturesque groups among
the ancient oaks of the forest, when a cavalier and a lady, on foot,
although in riding apparel, sauntered slowly up one of the long alleys
which were cut through the park for the convenience of the hunters.
Their only attendant was a page, who, riding a Spanish jennet, which
seemed to bear a heavy cloak-bag, followed them at a respectful
distance. The female, attired in all the fantastic finery of the period,
with more than the usual quantity of bugles, flounces, and trimmings,
and holding her fan of ostrich feathers in one hand, and her riding-mask
of black velvet in the other, seemed anxious, by all the little coquetry
practised on such occasions, to secure the notice of her companion,
who sometimes heard her prattle without seeming to attend to it, and
at other times interrupted his train of graver reflections, to reply to
her.

"Nay, but, my lord--my lord, you walk so fast, you will leave me behind
you.--Nay, I will have hold of your arm, but how to manage with my mask
and my fan? Why would you not let me bring my waiting-gentlewoman to
follow us, and hold my things? But see, I will put my fan in my girdle,
soh!--and now that I have a hand to hold you with, you shall not run
away from me."

"Come on, then," answered the gallant, "and let us walk apace, since you
would not be persuaded to stay with your gentlewoman, as you call her,
and with the rest of the baggage.--You may perhaps see _that_, though,
you will not like to see."

She took hold of his arm accordingly; but as he continued to walk at the
same pace, she shortly let go her hold, exclaiming that he had hurt her
hand. The cavalier stopped, and looked at the pretty hand and arm which
she showed him, with exclamations against his cruelty. "I dare say," she
said, baring her wrist and a part of her arm, "it is all black and blue
to the very elbow."

"I dare say you are a silly little fool," said the cavalier, carelessly
kissing the aggrieved arm; "it is only a pretty incarnate which sets off
the blue veins."

"Nay, my lord, now it is you are silly," answered the dame; "but I am
glad I can make you speak and laugh on any terms this morning. I am
sure, if I did insist on following you into the forest, it was all
for the sake of diverting you. I am better company than your page, I
trow.--And now, tell me, these pretty things with horns, be they not
deer?"

"Even such they be, Nelly," answered her neglectful attendant.

"And what can the great folk do with so many of them, forsooth?"

"They send them to the city, Nell, where wise men make venison pasties
of their flesh, and wear their horns for trophies," answered Lord
Dalgarno, whom our reader has already recognised.

"Nay, now you laugh at me, my lord," answered his companion; "but I know
all about venison, whatever you may think. I always tasted it once a
year when we dined with Mr. Deputy," she continued, sadly, as a sense
of her degradation stole across a mind bewildered with vanity and
folly, "though he would not speak to me now, if we met together in the
narrowest lane in the Ward!"

"I warrant he would not," said Lord Dalgarno, "because thou, Nell,
wouldst dash him with a single look; for I trust thou hast more spirit
than to throw away words on such a fellow as he?"

"Who, I!" said Dame Nelly. "Nay, I scorn the proud princox too much for
that. Do you know, he made all the folk in the Ward stand cap in hand to
him, my poor old John Christie and all?" Here her recollection began to
overflow at her eyes.

"A plague on your whimpering," said Dalgarno, somewhat harshly,--"Nay,
never look pale for the matter, Nell. I am not angry with you, you
simple fool. But what would you have me think, when you are eternally
looking back upon your dungeon yonder by the river, which smelt of pitch
and old cheese worse than a Welshman does of onions, and all this when I
am taking you down to a castle as fine as is in Fairy Land!"

"Shall we be there to-night, my lord?" said Nelly, drying her tears.

"To-night, Nelly?--no, nor this night fortnight."

"Now, the Lord be with us, and keep us!--But shall we not go by sea,
my lord?--I thought everybody came from Scotland by sea. I am sure Lord
Glenvarloch and Richie Moniplies came up by sea."

"There is a wide difference between coming up and going down, Nelly,"
answered Lord Dalgarno.

"And so there is, for certain," said his simple companion. "But yet I
think I heard people speaking of going down to Scotland by sea, as well
as coming up. Are you well avised of the way?--Do you think it possible
we can go by land, my sweet lord?"

"It is but trying, my sweet lady," said Lord Dalgarno. "Men say England
and Scotland are in the same island, so one would hope there may be some
road betwixt them by land."

"I shall never be able to ride so far," said the lady.

"We will have your saddle stuffed softer," said the lord. "I tell you
that you shall mew your city slough, and change from the caterpillar of
a paltry lane into the butterfly of a prince's garden. You shall have as
many tires as there are hours in the day--as many handmaidens as
there are days in the week--as many menials as there are weeks in the
year--and you shall ride a hunting and hawking with a lord, instead of
waiting upon an old ship-chandler, who could do nothing but hawk and
spit."

"Ay, but will you make me your lady?" said Dame Nelly.

"Ay, surely--what else?" replied the lord--"My lady-love."

"Ay, but I mean your lady-wife," said Nelly.

"Truly, Nell, in that I cannot promise to oblige you. A lady-wife,"
continued Dalgarno, "is a very different thing from a lady-love."

"I heard from Mrs. Suddlechop, whom you lodged me with since I left poor
old John Christie, that Lord Glenvarloch is to marry David Ramsay the
clockmaker's daughter?"

"There is much betwixt the cup and the lip, Nelly. I wear something
about me may break the bans of that hopeful alliance, before the day is
much older," answered Lord Dalgarno.

"Well, but my father was as good a man as old Davy Ramsay, and as well
to pass in the world, my lord; and, therefore, why should you not marry
me? You have done me harm enough, I trow--wherefore should you not do me
this justice?"

"For two good reasons, Nelly. Fate put a husband on you, and the king
passed a wife upon me," answered Lord Dalgarno.

"Ay, my lord," said Nelly, "but they remain in England, and we go to
Scotland."

"Thy argument is better than thou art aware of," said Lord Dalgarno. "I
have heard Scottish lawyers say the matrimonial tie may be unclasped
in our happy country by the gentle hand of the ordinary course of law,
whereas in England it can only be burst by an act of Parliament. Well,
Nelly, we will look into that matter; and whether we get married again
or no, we will at least do our best to get unmarried."

"Shall we indeed, my honey-sweet lord? and then I will think less about
John Christie, for he will marry again, I warrant you, for he is well to
pass; and I would be glad to think he had somebody to take care of him,
as I used to do, poor loving old man! He was a kind man, though he was
a score of years older than I; and I hope and pray he will never let a
young lord cross his honest threshold again!"

Here the dame was once more much inclined to give way to a passion of
tears; but Lord Dalgarno conjured down the emotion, by saying with some
asperity--"I am weary of these April passions, my pretty mistress, and
I think you will do well to preserve your tears for some more pressing
occasion. Who knows what turn of fortune may in a few minutes call for
more of them than you can render?"

"Goodness, my lord! what mean you by such expressions? John Christie
(the kind heart!) used to keep no secrets from me, and I hope your
lordship will not hide your counsel from me?"

"Sit down beside me on this bank," said the nobleman; "I am bound to
remain here for a short space, and if you can be but silent, I should
like to spend a part of it in considering how far I can, on the present
occasion, follow the respectable example which you recommend to me."

The place at which he stopped was at that time little more than a mound,
partly surrounded by a ditch, from which it derived the name of Camlet
Moat. A few hewn stones there were, which had escaped the fate of many
others that had been used in building different lodges in the forest for
the royal keepers. These vestiges, just sufficient to show that "herein
former times the hand of man had been," marked the ruins of the abode of
a once illustrious but long-forgotten family, the Mandevilles, Earls
of Essex, to whom Enfield Chase and the extensive domains adjacent had
belonged in elder days. A wild woodland prospect led the eye at various
points through broad and seemingly interminable alleys, which, meeting
at this point as at a common centre, diverged from each other as they
receded, and had, therefore, been selected by Lord Dalgarno as
the rendezvous for the combat, which, through the medium of Richie
Moniplies, he had offered to his injured friend, Lord Glenvarloch.

"He will surely come?" he said to himself; "cowardice was not wont to
be his fault--at least he was bold enough in the Park.--Perhaps yonder
churl may not have carried my message? But no--he is a sturdy knave--one
of those would prize their master's honour above their life.--Look to
the palfrey, Lutin, and see thou let him not loose, and cast thy falcon
glance down every avenue to mark if any one comes.--Buckingham has
undergone my challenge, but the proud minion pleads the king's paltry
commands for refusing to answer me. If I can baffle this Glenvarloch, or
slay him--If I can spoil him of his honour or his life, I shall go down
to Scotland with credit sufficient to gild over past mischances. I know
my dear countrymen--they never quarrel with any one who brings them
home either gold or martial glory, much more if he has both gold and
laurels."

As he thus reflected, and called to mind the disgrace which he had
suffered, as well as the causes he imagined for hating Lord Glenvarloch,
his countenance altered under the influence of his contending emotions,
to the terror of Nelly, who, sitting unnoticed at his feet, and looking
anxiously in his face, beheld the cheek kindle, the mouth become
compressed, the eye dilated, and the whole countenance express the
desperate and deadly resolution of one who awaits an instant and
decisive encounter with a mortal enemy. The loneliness of the place, the
scenery so different from that to which alone she had been accustomed,
the dark and sombre air which crept so suddenly over the countenance
of her seducer, his command imposing silence upon her, and the apparent
strangeness of his conduct in idling away so much time without any
obvious cause, when a journey of such length lay before them, brought
strange thoughts into her weak brain. She had read of women, seduced
from their matrimonial duties by sorcerers allied to the hellish powers,
nay, by the Father of Evil himself, who, after conveying his victim
into some desert remote from human kind, exchanged the pleasing shape in
which he gained her affections, for all his natural horrors. She chased
this wild idea away as it crowded itself upon her weak and bewildered
imagination; yet she might have lived to see it realised allegorically,
if not literally, but for the accident which presently followed.

The page, whose eyes were remarkably acute, at length called out to
his master, pointing with his finger at the same time down one of the
alleys, that horsemen were advancing in that direction. Lord Dalgarno
started up, and shading his eyes with his hand, gazed eagerly down the
alley; when, at the same instant, he received a shot, which, grazing his
hand, passed right through his brain, and laid him a lifeless corpse
at the feet, or rather across the lap, of the unfortunate victim of
his profligacy. The countenance, whose varied expression she had been
watching for the last five minutes, was convulsed for an instant, and
then stiffened into rigidity for ever. Three ruffians rushed from the
brake from which the shot had been fired, ere the smoke was dispersed.
One, with many imprecations seized on the page; another on the female,
upon whose cries he strove by the most violent threats to impose
silence; whilst the third began to undo the burden from the page's
horse. But an instant rescue prevented their availing themselves of the
advantage they had obtained.

It may easily be supposed that Richie Moniplies, having secured the
assistance of the two Templars, ready enough to join in any thing
which promised a fray, with Jin Vin to act as their guide, had set off,
gallantly mounted and well armed, under the belief that they would reach
Camlet Moat before the robbers, and apprehend them in the fact. They
