Messrs. Clippurse and Hookem, or that of their worthy official brethren
who had the charge of suing out the pardons of Edward Waverley and his
intended father-in-law, that we can but touch upon matters more
attractive. The mutual epistles, for example, which were exchanged
between Sir Everard and the Baron upon this occasion, though matchless
specimens of eloquence in their way, must be consigned to merciless
oblivion. Nor can I tell you at length how worthy Aunt Rachel, not
without a delicate and affectionate allusion to the circumstances which
had transferred Rose's maternal diamonds to the hands of Donald Bean
Lean, stocked her casket with a set of jewels that a duchess might have
envied. Moreover, the reader will have the goodness to imagine that Job
Houghton and his dame were suitably provided for, although they could
never be persuaded that their son fell otherwise than fighting by the
young squire's side; so that Alick, who, as a lover of truth, had made
many needless attempts to expound the real circumstances to them, was
finally ordered to say not a word more upon the subject. He indemnified
himself, however, by the liberal allowance of desperate battles, grisly
executions, and raw-head and bloody-bone stories with which he astonished
the servants' hall.

But although these important matters may be briefly told in narrative,
like a newspaper report of a Chancery suit, yet, with all the urgency
which Waverley could use, the real time which the law proceedings
occupied, joined to the delay occasioned by the mode of travelling at
that period, rendered it considerably more than two months ere Waverley,
having left England, alighted once more at the mansion of the Laird of
Duchran to claim the hand of his plighted bride.

The day of his marriage was fixed for the sixth after his arrival. The
Baron of Bradwardine, with whom bridals, christenings, and funerals were
festivals of high and solemn import, felt a little hurt that, including
the family of the Duchran and all the immediate vicinity who had title to
be present on such an occasion, there could not be above thirty persons
collected. 'When he was married,' he observed,'three hundred horse of
gentlemen born, besides servants, and some score or two of Highland
lairds, who never got on horseback, were present on the occasion.'

But his pride found some consolation in reflecting that, he and his
son-in-law having been so lately in arms against government, it might
give matter of reasonable fear and offence to the ruling powers if they
were to collect together the kith, kin, and allies of their houses,
arrayed in effeir of war, as was the ancient custom of Scotland on these
occasions--'And, without dubitation,' he concluded with a sigh, 'many of
those who would have rejoiced most freely upon these joyful espousals are
either gone to a better place or are now exiles from their native land.'

The marriage took place on the appointed day. The Reverend Mr. Rubrick,
kinsman to the proprietor of the hospitable mansion where it was
solemnised, and chaplain to the Baron of Bradwardine, had the
satisfaction to unite their hands; and Frank Stanley acted as bridesman,
having joined Edward with that view soon after his arrival. Lady Emily
and Colonel Talbot had proposed being present; but Lady Emily's health,
when the day approached, was found inadequate to the journey. In amends
it was arranged that Edward Waverley and his lady, who, with the Baron,
proposed an immediate journey to Waverley-Honour, should in their way
spend a few days at an estate which Colonel Talbot had been tempted to
purchase in Scotland as a very great bargain, and at which he proposed to
reside for some time.




CHAPTER XLII

This is no mine ain house, I ken by the bigging o't--Old Song.


The nuptial party travelled in great style. There was a coach and six
after the newest pattern, which Sir Everard had presented to his nephew,
that dazzled with its splendour the eyes of one half of Scotland; there
was the family coach of Mr. Rubrick;--both these were crowded with
ladies,--and there were gentlemen on horseback, with their servants, to
the number of a round score. Nevertheless, without having the fear of
famine before his eyes, Bailie Macwheeble met them in the road to entreat
that they would pass by his house at Little Veolan. The Baron stared, and
said his son and he would certainly ride by Little Veolan and pay their
compliments to the Bailie, but could not think of bringing with them the
'haill comitatus nuptialis, or matrimonial procession.' He added, 'that,
as he understood that the barony had been sold by its unworthy possessor,
he was glad to see his old friend Duncan had regained his situation under
the new Dominus, or proprietor.' The Bailie ducked, bowed, and fidgeted,
and then again insisted upon his invitation; until the Baron, though
rather piqued at the pertinacity of his instances, could not nevertheless
refuse to consent without making evident sensations which he was anxious
to conceal.

He fell into a deep study as they approached the top of the avenue, and
was only startled from it by observing that the battlements were
replaced, the ruins cleared away, and (most wonderful of all) that the
two great stone bears, those mutilated Dagons of his idolatry, had
resumed their posts over the gateway. 'Now this new proprietor,' said he
to Edward, 'has shown mair gusto, as the Italians call it, in the short
time he has had this domain, than that hound Malcolm, though I bred him
here mysell, has acquired vita adhuc durante. And now I talk of hounds,
is not yon Ban and Buscar who come scouping up the avenue with Davie
Gellatley?'

'I vote we should go to meet them, sir,' said Waverley, 'for I believe
the present master of the house is Colonel Talbot, who will expect to see
us. We hesitated to mention to you at first that he had purchased your
ancient patrimonial property, and even yet, if you do not incline to
visit him, we can pass on to the Bailie's.'

The Baron had occasion for all his magnanimity. However, he drew a long
breath, took a long snuff, and observed, since they had brought him so
far, he could not pass the Colonel's gate, and he would be happy to see
the new master of his old tenants. He alighted accordingly, as did the
other gentlemen and ladies; he gave his arm to his daughter, and as they
descended the avenue pointed out to her how speedily the 'Diva Pecunia of
the Southron--their tutelary deity, he might call her--had removed the
marks of spoliation.'

In truth, not only had the felled trees been removed, but, their stumps
being grubbed up and the earth round them levelled and sown with grass,
every mark of devastation, unless to an eye intimately acquainted with
the spot, was already totally obliterated. There was a similar
reformation in the outward man of Davie Gellatley, who met them, every
now and then stopping to admire the new suit which graced his person, in
the same colours as formerly, but bedizened fine enough to have served
Touchstone himself. He danced up with his usual ungainly frolics, first
to the Baron and then to Rose, passing his hands over his clothes,
crying, 'Bra', bra' Davie,' and scarce able to sing a bar to an end of
his thousand-and-one songs for the breathless extravagance of his joy.
The dogs also acknowledged their old master with a thousand gambols.
'Upon my conscience, Rose,' ejaculated the Baron, 'the gratitude o' thae
dumb brutes and of that puir innocent brings the tears into my auld een,
while that schellum Malcolm--but I'm obliged to Colonel Talbot for
putting my hounds into such good condition, and likewise for puir Davie.
But, Rose, my dear, we must not permit them to be a life-rent burden upon
the estate.'

As he spoke, Lady Emily, leaning upon the arm of her husband, met the
party at the lower gate with a thousand welcomes. After the ceremony of
introduction had been gone through, much abridged by the ease and
excellent breeding of Lady Emily, she apologised for having used a little
art to wile them back to a place which might awaken some painful
reflections--'But as it was to change masters, we were very desirous that
the Baron--'

'Mr. Bradwardine, madam, if you please,' said the old gentleman.

'--Mr. Bradwardine, then, and Mr. Waverley should see what we have done
towards restoring the mansion of your fathers to its former state.'

The Baron answered with a low bow. Indeed, when he entered the court,
excepting that the heavy stables, which had been burnt down, were
replaced by buildings of a lighter and more picturesque appearance, all
seemed as much as possible restored to the state in which he had left it
when he assumed arms some months before. The pigeon-house was
replenished; the fountain played with its usual activity, and not only
the bear who predominated over its basin, but all the other bears
whatsoever, were replaced on their several stations, and renewed or
repaired with so much care that they bore no tokens of the violence which
had so lately descended upon them. While these minutiae had been so
needfully attended to, it is scarce necessary to add that the house
itself had been thoroughly repaired, as well as the gardens, with the
strictest attention to maintain the original character of both, and to
remove as far as possible all appearance of the ravage they had
sustained. The Baron gazed in silent wonder; at length he addressed
Colonel Talbot--

'While I acknowledge my obligation to you, sir, for the restoration of
the badge of our family, I cannot but marvel that you have nowhere
established your own crest, whilk is, I believe, a mastiff, anciently
called a talbot; as the poet has it,

    A talbot strong, a sturdy tyke.

At least such a dog is the crest of the martial and renowned Earls of
Shrewsbury, to whom your family are probably blood-relations.'

'I believe,' said the Colonel, smiling, 'our dogs are whelps of the same
litter; for my part, if crests were to dispute precedence, I should be
apt to let them, as the proverb says, "fight dog, fight bear."'

As he made this speech, at which the Baron took another long pinch of
snuff, they had entered the house, that is, the Baron, Rose, and Lady
Emily, with young Stanley and the Bailie, for Edward and the rest of the
party remained on the terrace to examine a new greenhouse stocked with
the finest plants. The Baron resumed his favourite topic--'However it may
please you to derogate from the honour of your burgonet, Colonel Talbot,
which is doubtless your humour, as I have seen in other gentlemen of
birth and honour in your country, I must again repeat it as a most
ancient and distinguished bearing, as well as that of my young friend
Francis Stanley, which is the eagle and child.'

'The bird and bantling they call it in Derbyshire, sir,' said Stanley.

'Ye're a daft callant, sir,' said the Baron, who had a great liking to
this young man, perhaps because he sometimes teased him--'Ye're a daft
callant, and I must correct you some of these days,' shaking his great
brown fist at him. 'But what I meant to say, Colonel Talbot, is, that
yours is an ancient prosapia, or descent, and since you have lawfully and
justly acquired the estate for you and yours which I have lost for me and
mine, I wish it may remain in your name as many centuries as it has done
in that of the late proprietor's.'

'That,' answered the Colonel, 'is very handsome, Mr. Bradwardine,
indeed.'

'And yet, sir, I cannot but marvel that you, Colonel, whom I noted to
have so much of the amor patritz when we met in Edinburgh as even to
vilipend other countries, should have chosen to establish your Lares, or
household gods, procul a patrice finibus, and in a manner to expatriate
yourself.'

'Why really, Baron, I do not see why, to keep the secret of these foolish
boys, Waverley and Stanley, and of my wife, who is no wiser, one old
soldier should continue to impose upon another. You must know, then, that
I have so much of that same prejudice in favour of my native country,
that the sum of money which I advanced to the seller of this extensive
barony has only purchased for me a box in----shire, called Brere-wood
Lodge, with about two hundred and fifty acres of land, the chief merit of
which is, that it is within a very few miles of Waverley-Honour.'

'And who, then, in the name of Heaven, has bought this property?'

'That,' said the Colonel, 'it is this gentleman's profession to explain.'

The Bailie, whom this reference regarded, and who had all this while
shifted from one foot to another with great impatience, 'like a hen,' as
he afterwards said, 'upon a het girdle'; and chuckling, he might have
added, like the said hen in all the glory of laying an egg, now pushed
forward. 'That I can, that I can, your honour,' drawing from his pocket a
budget of papers, and untying the red tape with a hand trembling with
eagerness. 'Here is the disposition and assignation by Malcolm
Bradwardine of Inch-Grabbit, regularly signed and tested in terms of the
statute, whereby, for a certain sum of sterling money presently contented
and paid to him, he has disponed, alienated, and conveyed the whole
estate and barony of Bradwardine, Tully-Veolan, and others, with the
fortalice and manor-place--'

'For God's sake, to the point, sir; I have all that by heart,' said the
Colonel.

'--To Cosmo Comyne Bradwardme, Esq.,' pursued the Bailie, 'his heirs and
assignees, simply and irredeemably, to be held either a me vel de me--'

'Pray read short, sir.'

'On the conscience of an honest man, Colonel, I read as short as is
consistent with style--under the burden and reservation always--'

'Mr. Macwheeble, this would outlast a Russian winter; give me leave. In
short, Mr. Bradwardine, your family estate is your own once more in full
property, and at your absolute disposal, but only burdened with the sum
advanced to re-purchase it, which I understand is utterly disproportioned
to its value.'

'An auld sang--an auld sang, if it please your honours,' cried the
Bailie, rubbing his hands; 'look at the rental book.'

'--Which sum being advanced, by Mr. Edward Waverley, chiefly from the
price of his father's property which I bought from him, is secured to his
lady your daughter and her family by this marriage.'

'It is a catholic security,' shouted the Bailie,' to Rose Comyne
Bradwardine, alias Wauverley, in life-rent, and the children of the said
marriage in fee; and I made up a wee bit minute of an antenuptial
contract, intuitu matrimonij, so it cannot be subject to reduction
hereafter, as a donation inter virum et uxorem.'

It is difficult to say whether the worthy Baron was most delighted with
the restitution of his family property or with the delicacy and
generosity that left him unfettered to pursue his purpose in disposing of
it after his death, and which avoided as much as possible even the
appearance of laying him under pecuniary obligation. When his first pause
of joy and astonishment was over, his thoughts turned to the unworthy
heir-male, who, he pronounced, had sold his birthright, like Esau, for a
mess o' pottage.

'But wha cookit the parritch for him?' exclaimed the Bailie; 'I wad like
to ken that;--wha but your honour's to command, Duncan Macwheeble? His
honour, young Mr. Wauverley, put it a' into my hand frae the
beginning--frae the first calling o' the summons, as I may say. I
circumvented them--I played at bogle about the bush wi' them--I cajolled
them; and if I havena gien Inch-Grabbit and Jamie Howie a bonnie begunk,
they ken themselves. Him a writer! I didna gae slapdash to them wi' our
young bra' bridegroom, to gar them baud up the market. Na, na; I scared
them wi' our wild tenantry, and the Mac-Ivors, that are but ill settled
yet, till they durstna on ony errand whatsoever gang ower the doorstane
after gloaming, for fear John Heatherblutter, or some siccan
dare-the-deil, should tak a baff at them; then, on the other hand, I
beflummed them wi' Colonel Talbot; wad they offer to keep up the price
again' the Duke's friend? did they na ken wha was master? had they na
seen eneugh, by the sad example of mony a puir misguided unhappy body--'

'Who went to Derby, for example, Mr. Macwheeble?' said the Colonel to him
aside.

'O whisht, Colonel, for the love o' God! let that flee stick i' the wa'.
There were mony good folk at Derby; and it's ill speaking of
halters'--with a sly cast of his eye toward the Baron, who was in a deep
reverie.

Starting out of it at once, he took Macwheeble by the button and led him
into one of the deep window recesses, whence only fragments of their
conversation reached the rest of the party. It certainly related to
stamp-paper and parchment; for no other subject, even from the mouth of
his patron, and he once more an efficient one, could have arrested so
deeply the Bailie's reverent and absorbed attention.

'I understand your honour perfectly; it can be dune as easy as taking out
a decreet in absence.'

'To her and him, after my demise, and to their heirs-male, but preferring
the second son, if God shall bless them with two, who is to carry the
name and arms of Bradwardine of that ilk, without any other name or
armorial bearings whatsoever.'

'Tut, your honour!' whispered the Bailie, 'I'll mak a slight jotting the
morn; it will cost but a charter of resignation in favorem; and I'll hae
it ready for the next term in Exchequer.'

Their private conversation ended, the Baron was now summoned to do the
honours of Tully-Veolan to new guests. These were Major Melville of
Cairnvreckan and the Reverend Mr. Morton, followed by two or three others
of the Baron's acquaintances, who had been made privy to his having again
acquired the estate of his fathers. The shouts of the villagers were also
heard beneath in the courtyard; for Saunders Saunderson, who had kept the
secret for several days with laudable prudence, had unloosed his tongue
upon beholding the arrival of the carriages.

But, while Edward received Major Melville with politeness and the
clergyman with the most affectionate and grateful kindness, his
father-in-law looked a little awkward, as uncertain how he should answer
the necessary claims of hospitality to his guests, and forward the
festivity of his tenants. Lady Emily relieved him by intimating that,
though she must be an indifferent representative of Mrs. Edward Waverley
in many respects, she hoped the Baron would approve of the entertainment
she had ordered in expectation of so many guests; and that they would
find such other accommodations provided as might in some degree support
the ancient hospitality of Tully-Veolan. It is impossible to describe the
pleasure which this assurance gave the Baron, who, with an air of
gallantry half appertaining to the stiff Scottish laird and half to the
officer in the French service, offered his arm to the fair speaker, and
led the way, in something between a stride and a minuet step, into the
large dining parlour, followed by all the rest of the good company.

By dint of Saunderson's directions and exertions, all here, as well as in
the other apartments, had been disposed as much as possible according to
the old arrangement; and where new movables had been necessary, they had
been selected in the same character with the old furniture. There was one
addition to this fine old apartment, however, which drew tears into the
Baron's eyes. It was a large and spirited painting, representing Fergus
Mac-Ivor and Waverley in their Highland dress, the scene a wild, rocky,
and mountainous pass, down which the clan were descending in the
background. It was taken from a spirited sketch, drawn while they were in
Edinburgh by a young man of high genius, and had been painted on a
full-length scale by an eminent London artist. Raeburn himself (whose
'Highland Chiefs' do all but walk out of the canvas) could not have done
more justice to the subject; and the ardent, fiery, and impetuous
character of the unfortunate Chief of Glennaquoich was finely contrasted
with the contemplative, fanciful, and enthusiastic expression of his
happier friend. Beside this painting hung the arms which Waverley had
borne in the unfortunate civil war. The whole piece was beheld with
admiration and deeper feelings.

Men must, however, eat, in spite both of sentiment and vertu; and the
Baron, while he assumed the lower end of the table, insisted that Lady
Emily should do the honours of the head, that they might, he said, set a
meet example to the YOUNG FOLK. After a pause of deliberation, employed
in adjusting in his own brain the precedence between the Presbyterian
kirk and Episcopal church of Scotland, he requested Mr. Morton, as the
stranger, would crave a blessing, observing that Mr. Rubrick, who was at
HOME, would return thanks for the distinguished mercies it had been his
lot to experience. The dinner was excellent. Saunderson attended in full
costume, with all the former domestics, who had been collected, excepting
one or two, that had not been heard of since the affair of Culloden. The
cellars were stocked with wine which was pronounced to be superb, and it
had been contrived that the Bear of the Fountain, in the courtyard,
should (for that night only) play excellent brandy punch for the benefit
of the lower orders.

When the dinner was over the Baron, about to propose a toast, cast a
somewhat sorrowful look upon the sideboard, which, however, exhibited
much of his plate, that had either been secreted or purchased by
neighbouring gentlemen from the soldiery, and by them gladly restored to
the original owner.

"In the late times," he said, "those must be thankful who have saved life
and land; yet when I am about to pronounce this toast, I cannot but
regret an old heirloom, Lady Emily, a POCULUM POTATORIUM, Colonel
Talbot--"

Here the Baron's elbow was gently touched by his major-domo, and, turning
round, he beheld in the hands of Alexander ab Alexandro the celebrated
cup of Saint Duthac, the Blessed Bear of Bradwardine! I question if the
recovery of his estate afforded him more rapture. "By my honour," he
said, "one might almost believe in brownies and fairies, Lady Emily, when
your ladyship is in presence!"

"I am truly happy," said Colonel Talbot, "that, by the recovery of this
piece of family antiquity, it has fallen within my power to give you some
token of my deep interest in all that concerns my young friend Edward.
But that you may not suspect Lady Emily for a sorceress, or me for a
conjuror, which is no joke in Scotland, I must tell you that Frank
Stanley, your friend, who has been seized with a tartan fever ever since
he heard Edward's tales of old Scottish manners, happened to describe to
us at second-hand this remarkable cup. My servant, Spontoon, who, like a
true old soldier, observes everything and says little, gave me afterwards
to understand that he thought he had seen the piece of plate Mr. Stanley
mentioned in the possession of a certain Mrs. Nosebag, who, having been
originally the helpmate of a pawnbroker, had found opportunity during the
late unpleasant scenes in Scotland to trade a little in her old line, and
so became the depositary of the more valuable part of the spoil of half
the army. You may believe the cup was speedily recovered; and it will
give me very great pleasure if you allow me to suppose that its value is
not diminished by having been restored through my means."

A tear mingled with the wine which the Baron filled, as he proposed a cup
of gratitude to Colonel Talbot, and 'The Prosperity of the united Houses
of Waverley-Honour and Bradwardine!'

It only remains for me to say that, as no wish was ever uttered with more
affectionate sincerity, there are few which, allowing for the necessary
mutability of human events, have been upon the whole more happily
fulfilled.




CHAPTER XLIII

A POSTSCRIPT WHICH SHOULD HAVE BEEN A PREFACE


Our journey is now finished, gentle reader; and if your patience has
accompanied me through these sheets, the contract is, on your part,
strictly fulfilled. Yet, like the driver who has received his full hire,
I still linger near you, and make, with becoming diffidence, a trifling
additional claim upon your bounty and good nature. You are as free,
however, to shut the volume of the one petitioner as to close your door
in the face of the other.

This should have been a prefatory chapter, but for two reasons: First,
that most novel readers, as my own conscience reminds me, are apt to be
guilty of the sin of omission respecting that same matter of prefaces;
Secondly, that it is a general custom with that class of students to
begin with the last chapter of a work; so that, after all, these remarks,
being introduced last in order, have still the best chance to be read in
their proper place.

There is no European nation which, within the course of half a century or
little more, has undergone so complete a change as this kingdom of
Scotland. The effects of the insurrection of 1745,--the destruction of
the patriarchal power of the Highland chiefs,--the abolition of the
heritable jurisdictions of the Lowland nobility and barons,--the total
eradication of the Jacobite party, which, averse to intermingle with the
English, or adopt their customs, long continued to pride themselves upon
maintaining ancient Scottish manners and customs,--commenced this
innovation. The gradual influx of wealth and extension of commerce have
since united to render the present people of Scotland a class of beings
as different from their grandfathers as the existing English are from
those of Queen Elizabeth's time.

The political and economical effects of these changes have been traced by
Lord Selkirk with great precision and accuracy. But the change, though
steadily and rapidly progressive, has nevertheless been gradual; and,
like those who drift down the stream of a deep and smooth river, we are
not aware of the progress we have made until we fix our eye on the now
distant point from which we have been drifted. Such of the present
generation as can recollect the last twenty or twenty-five years of the
eighteenth century will be fully sensible of the truth of this statement;
especially if their acquaintance and connexions lay among those who in my
younger time were facetiously called 'folks of the old leaven,' who still
cherished a lingering, though hopeless, attachment to the house of
Stuart.

This race has now almost entirely vanished from the land, and with it,
doubtless, much absurd political prejudice; but also many living examples
of singular and disinterested attachment to the principles of loyalty
which they received from their fathers, and of old Scottish faith,
hospitality, worth, and honour.

It was my accidental lot, though not born a Highlander (which may be an
apology for much bad Gaelic), to reside during my childhood and youth
among persons of the above description; and now, for the purpose of
preserving some idea of the ancient manners of which I have witnessed the
almost total extinction, I have embodied in imaginary scenes, and
ascribed to fictitious characters, a part of the incidents which I then
received from those who were actors in them. Indeed, the most romantic
parts of this narrative are precisely those which have a foundation in
fact.

The exchange of mutual protection between a Highland gentleman and an
officer of rank in the king's service, together with the spirited manner
in which the latter asserted his right to return the favour he had
received, is literally true. The accident by a musket shot, and the
heroic reply imputed to Flora, relate to a lady of rank not long
deceased. And scarce a gentleman who was 'in hiding' after the battle of
Culloden but could tell a tale of strange concealments and of wild and
hair'sbreadth'scapes as extraordinary as any which I have ascribed to my
heroes. Of this, the escape of Charles Edward himself, as the most
prominent, is the most striking example. The accounts of the battle of
Preston and skirmish at Clifton are taken from the narrative of
intelligent eye-witnesses, and corrected from the 'History of the
Rebellion' by the late venerable author of 'Douglas.' The Lowland
Scottish gentlemen and the subordinate characters are not given as
individual portraits, but are drawn from the general habits of the
period, of which I have witnessed some remnants in my younger days, and
partly gathered from tradition.

It has been my object to describe these persons, not by a caricatured and
exaggerated use of the national dialect, but by their habits, manners,
and feelings, so as in some distant degree to emulate the admirable Irish
portraits drawn by Miss Edgeworth, so different from the 'Teagues' and
'dear joys' who so long, with the most perfect family resemblance to each
other, occupied the drama and the novel.

I feel no confidence, however, in the manner in which I have executed my
purpose. Indeed, so little was I satisfied with my production, that I
laid it aside in an unfinished state, and only found it again by mere
accident among other waste papers in an old cabinet, the drawers of which
I was rummaging in order to accommodate a friend with some
fishing-tackle, after it had been mislaid for several years.

Two works upon similar subjects, by female authors whose genius is highly
creditable to their country, have appeared in the interval; I mean Mrs.
Hamilton's 'Glenburnie' and the late account of 'Highland Superstitions.'
But the first is confined to the rural habits of Scotland, of which it
has given a picture with striking and impressive fidelity; and the
traditional records of the respectable and ingenious Mrs. Grant of Laggan
are of a nature distinct from the fictitious narrative which I have here
attempted.

I would willingly persuade myself that the preceding work will not be
found altogether uninteresting. To elder persons it will recall scenes
and characters familiar to their youth; and to the rising generation the
tale may present some idea of the manners of their forefathers.

Yet I heartily wish that the task of tracing the evanescent manners of
his own country had employed the pen of the only man in Scotland who
could have done it justice--of him so eminently distinguished in elegant
literature, and whose sketches of Colonel Caustic and Umphraville are
perfectly blended with the finer traits of national character. I should
in that case have had more pleasure as a reader than I shall ever feel in
the pride of a successful author, should these sheets confer upon me that
envied distinction. And, as I have inverted the usual arrangement,
placing these remarks at the end of the work to which they refer, I will
venture on a second violation of form, by closing the whole with a
Dedication--

THESE VOLUMES BEING RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED TO OUR SCOTTISH ADDISON, HENRY
MACKENZIE, BY AN UNKNOWN ADMIRER OF HIS GENIUS.

THE END




NOTES--Volume I.

NOTE 1

LONG the oracle of the country gentlemen of the high Tory party. The
ancient News-Letter was written in manuscript and copied by clerks, who
addressed the copies to the subscribers. The politician by whom they were
compiled picked up his intelligence at coffee-houses, and often pleaded
for an additional gratuity in consideration of the extra expense attached
to frequenting such places of fashionable resort.

NOTE 2

There is a family legend to this purpose, belonging to the knightly
family of Bradshaigh, the proprietors of Haigh Hall, in Lancashire,
where, I have been told, the event is recorded on a painted glass window.
The German ballad of the Noble Moringer turns upon a similar topic. But
undoubtedly many such incidents may have taken place, where, the distance
being great and the intercourse infrequent, false reports concerning the
fate of the absent Crusaders must have been commonly circulated, and
sometimes perhaps rather hastily credited at home.

NOTE 3

The attachment to this classic was, it is said, actually displayed in the
manner mentioned in the text by an unfortunate Jacobite in that unhappy
period. He escaped from the jail in which he was confined for a hasty
trial and certain condemnation, and was retaken as he hovered around the
place in which he had been imprisoned, for which he could give no better
reason than the hope of recovering his favourite Titus Livius. I am sorry
to add that the simplicity of such a character was found to form no
apology for his guilt as a rebel, and that he was condemned and executed.

NOTE 4

Nicholas Amhurst, a noted political writer, who conducted for many years
a paper called the Craftsman, under the assumed name of Caleb D'Anvers.
He was devoted to the Tory interest, and seconded with much ability the
attacks of Pulteney on Sir Robert Walpole. He died in 1742, neglected by
his great patrons and in the most miserable circumstances.

'Amhurst survived the downfall of Walpole's power, and had reason to
expect a reward for his labours. If we excuse Bolingbroke, who had only
saved the shipwreck of his fortunes, we shall be at a loss to justify
Pulteney, who could with ease have given this man a considerable income.
The utmost of his generosity to Amhurst that I ever heard of was a
hogshead of claret! He died, it is supposed, of a broken heart; and was
buried at the charge of his honest printer, Richard Francklin.'--Lord
Chesterfield's Characters Reviewed, p. 42.

NOTE 5

I have now given in the text the full name of this gallant and excellent
man, and proceed to copy the account of his remarkable conversion, as
related by Doctor Doddridge.

'This memorable event,' says the pious writer, 'happened towards the
middle of July 1719. The major had spent the evening (and, if I mistake
not, it was the Sabbath) in some gay company, and had an unhappy
assignation with a married woman, whom he was to attend exactly at
twelve. The company broke up about eleven, and, not judging it convenient
to anticipate the time appointed, he went into his chamber to kill the
tedious hour, perhaps with some amusing book, or some other way. But it
very accidentally happened that he took up a religious book, which his
good mother or aunt had, without his knowledge, slipped into his
portmanteau. It was called, if I remember the title exactly, The
Christian Soldier, or Heaven taken by Storm, and it was written by Mr.
Thomas Watson. Guessing by the title of it that he would find some
phrases of his own profession spiritualised in a manner which he thought
might afford him some diversion, he resolved to dip into it, but he took
no serious notice of anything it had in it; and yet, while this book was
in his hand, an impression was made upon his mind (perhaps God only knows
how) which drew after it a train of the most important and happy
consequences. He thought he saw an unusual blaze of light fall upon the
book which he was reading, which he at first imagined might happen by
some accident in the candle, but, lifting up his eyes, he apprehended to
his extreme amazement that there was before him, as it were suspended in
the air, a visible representation of the Lord Jesus Christ upon the
cross, surrounded on all sides with a glory; and was impressed as if a
voice, or something equivalent to a voice, had come to him, to this
effect (for he was not confident as to the words), "Oh, sinner! did I
suffer this for thee, and are these thy returns?" Struck with so amazing
a phenomenon as this, there remained hardly any life in him, so that he
sunk down in the arm-chair in which he sat, and continued, he knew not
how long, insensible.'

'With regard to this vision,' says the ingenious Dr. Hibbert, 'the
appearance of our Saviour on the cross, and the awful words repeated, can
be considered in no other light than as so many recollected images of the
mind, which probably had their origin in the language of some urgent
appeal to repentance that the colonel might have casually read or heard
delivered. From what cause, however, such ideas were rendered as vivid as
actual impressions, we have no information to be depended upon. This
vision was certainly attended with one of the most important of
consequences connected with the Christian dispensation--the conversion of
a sinner. And hence no single narrative has, perhaps, done more to
confirm the superstitious opinion that apparitions of this awful kind
cannot arise without a divine fiat.' Doctor Hibbert adds in a note--'A
short time before the vision, Colonel Gardiner had received a severe fall
from his horse. Did the brain receive some slight degree of injury from
the accident, so as to predispose him to this spiritual
illusion?'--Hibbert's Philosophy of Apparitions, Edinburgh, 1824, p. 190.

NOTE 6

The courtesy of an invitation to partake a traveller's meal, or at least
that of being invited to share whatever liquor the guest called for, was
expected by certain old landlords in Scotland even in the youth of the
author. In requital mine host was always furnished with the news of the
country, and was probably a little of a humorist to boot. The devolution
of the whole actual business and drudgery of the inn upon the poor
gudewife was very common among the Scottish Bonifaces. There was in
ancient times, in the city of Edinburgh, a gentleman of good family who
condescended, in order to gain a livelihood, to become the nominal keeper
of a coffee-house, one of the first places of the kind which had been
opened in the Scottish metropolis. As usual, it was entirely managed by
the careful and industrious Mrs. B--; while her husband amused himself
with field sports, without troubling his head about the matter. Once upon
a time, the premises having taken fire, the husband was met walking up
the High Street loaded with his guns and fishing-rods, and replied calmly
to someone who inquired after his wife, 'that the poor woman was trying
to save a parcel of crockery and some trumpery books'; the last being
those which served her to conduct the business of the house.

There were many elderly gentlemen in the author's younger days who still
held it part of the amusement of a journey 'to parley with mine host,'
who often resembled, in his quaint humour, mine Host of the Garter in the
Merry Wives of Windsor; or Blague of the George in the Merry Devil of
Edmonton. Sometimes the landlady took her share of entertaining the
company. In either case the omitting to pay them due attention gave
displeasure, and perhaps brought down a smart jest, as on the following
occasion:

A jolly dame who, not 'Sixty Years Since,' kept the principal caravansary
at Greenlaw, in Berwickshire, had the honour to receive under her roof a
very worthy clergyman, with three sons of the same profession, each
having a cure of souls; be it said in passing, none of the reverend party
were reckoned powerful in the pulpit. After dinner was over, the worthy
senior, in the pride of his heart, asked Mrs. Buchan whether she ever had
had such a party in her house before. 'Here sit I,' he said, 'a placed
minister of the Kirk of Scotland, and here sit my three sons, each a
placed minister of the same kirk. Confess, Luckie Buchan, you never had
such a party in your house before.' The question was not premised by any
invitation to sit down and take a glass of wine or the like, so Mrs. B.
answered drily, 'Indeed, sir, I cannot just say that ever I had such a
party in my house before, except once in the forty-five, when I had a
Highland piper here, with his three sons, all Highland pipers; and deil a
spring they could play amang them.'

NOTE 7

There is no particular mansion described under the name of Tully-Veolan;
but the peculiarities of the description occur in various old Scottish
seats. The House of Warrender upon Bruntsfield Links and that of Old
Ravelston, belonging, the former to Sir George Warrender, the latter to
Sir Alexander Keith, have both contributed several hints to the
description in the text. The House of Dean, near Edinburgh, has also some
points of resemblance with Tully-Veolan. The author has, however, been
informed that the House of Grandtully resembles that of the Baron of
Bradwardine still more than any of the above.

NOTE 8

I am ignorant how long the ancient and established custom of keeping
fools has been disused in England. Swift writes an epitaph on the Earl of
Suffolk's fool--

Whose name was Dickie Pearce

In Scotland, the custom subsisted till late in the last century; at
Glamis Castle is preserved the dress of one of the jesters, very
handsome, and ornamented with many bells. It is not above thirty years
since such a character stood by the sideboard of a nobleman of the first
rank in Scotland, and occasionally mixed in the conversation, till he
carried the joke rather too far, in making proposals to one of the young
ladies of the family, and publishing the bans betwixt her and himself in
the public church.

NOTE 9

After the Revolution of 1688, and on some occasions when the spirit of
the Presbyterians had been unusually animated against their opponents,
the Episcopal clergymen, who were chiefly nonjurors, were exposed to be
mobbed, as we should now say, or rabbled, as the phrase then went, to
expiate their political heresies. But notwithstanding that the
Presbyterians had the persecution in Charles II and his brother's time to
exasperate them, there was little mischief done beyond the kind of petty
violence mentioned in the text.

NOTE 10

I may here mention that the fashion of compotation described in the text
was still occasionally practised in Scotland in the author's youth. A
company, after having taken leave of their host, often went to finish the
evening at the clachan or village, in 'womb of tavern.' Their entertainer
always accompanied them to take the stirrup-cup, which often occasioned a
long and late revel.

The poculum potatorium of the valiant Baron, his blessed Bear, has a
prototype at the fine old Castle of Glamis, so rich in memorials of
ancient times; it is a massive beaker of silver, double gilt, moulded
into the shape of a lion, and holding about an English pint of wine. The
form alludes to the family name of Strathmore, which is Lyon, and, when
exhibited, the cup must necessarily be emptied to the Earl's health. The
author ought perhaps to be ashamed of recording that he has had the
honour of swallowing the contents of the Lion; and the recollection of
the feat served to suggest the story of the Bear of Bradwardine. In the
family of Scott of Thirlestane (not Thirlestane in the Forest, but the
place of the same name in Roxburghshire) was long preserved a cup of the
same kind, in the form of a jack-boot. Each guest was obliged to empty
this at his departure. If the guest's name was Scott, the necessity was
doubly imperative.
