cautiously unclosed a part of the curtain which hung before the gallery,
and thus, unseen himself, looked down on the audience, and obtained a
view of the preacher.

About two hundred persons were assembled beneath, in an area filled up
with benches, as if for the exercise of worship; and they were all of
the male sex, and well armed with pikes and muskets, as well as swords
and pistols. Most of them had the appearance of veteran soldiers, now
past the middle of life, yet retaining such an appearance of strength as
might well supply the loss of youthful agility. They stood, or sat, in
various attitudes of stern attention; and, resting on their spears and
muskets, kept their eyes firmly fixed on the preacher, who ended the
violence of his declamation by displaying from the pulpit a banner,
on which was represented a lion, with the motto, "_Vicit Leo ex tribu
Judae._"

The torrent of mystical yet animating eloquence of the preacher--an old
grey-haired man, whom zeal seemed to supply with the powers of voice and
action, of which years had deprived him--was suited to the taste of his
audience, but could not be transferred to these pages without scandal
and impropriety. He menaced the rulers of England with all the judgments
denounced on those of Moab and Assyria--he called upon the saints to be
strong, to be up and doing; and promised those miracles which, in the
campaigns of Joshua, and his successors, the valiant Judges of Israel,
supplied all odds against the Amorites, Midianites, and Philistines. He
sounded trumpets, opened vials, broke seals, and denounced approaching
judgments under all the mystical signs of the Apocalypse. The end of the
world was announced, accompanied with all its preliminary terrors.

Julian, with deep anxiety, soon heard enough to make him aware that the
meeting was likely to terminate in open insurrection, like that of the
Fifth-Monarchy men, under Venner, at an earlier period of Charles's
reign; and he was not a little concerned at the probability of
Bridgenorth being implicated in so criminal and desperate an
undertaking. If he had retained any doubts of the issue of the meeting,
they must have been removed when the preacher called on his hearers to
renounce all expectation which had hitherto been entertained of safety
to the nation, from the execution of the ordinary laws of the land.
This, he said, was at best but a carnal seeking after earthly aid--a
going down to Egypt for help, which the jealousy of their Divine Leader
would resent as a fleeing to another rock, and a different banner, from
that which was this day displayed over them.--And here he solemnly swung
the bannered lion over their heads, as the only sign under which they
ought to seek for life and safety. He then proceeded to insist, that
recourse to ordinary justice was vain as well as sinful.

"The event of that day at Westminster," he said, "might teach them that
the man at Whitehall was even as the man his father;" and closed a long
tirade against the vices of the Court, with assurance "that Tophet was
ordained of old--for the King it was made hot."

As the preacher entered on a description of the approaching theocracy,
which he dared to prophesy, Bridgenorth, who appeared for a time to have
forgotten the presence of Julian, whilst with stern and fixed attention
he drunk in the words of the preacher, seemed suddenly to collect
himself, and, taking Julian by the hand, led him out of the gallery,
of which he carefully closed the door, into an apartment at no great
distance.

When they arrived there, he anticipated the expostulations of Julian, by
asking him, in a tone of severe triumph, whether these men he had seen
were likely to do their work negligently, or whether it would not
be perilous to attempt to force their way from a house, when all the
avenues were guarded by such as he had now seen--men of war from their
childhood upwards.

"In the name of Heaven," said Julian, without replying to Bridgenorth's
question, "for what desperate purpose have you assembled so many
desperate men? I am well aware that your sentiments of religion are
peculiar; but beware how you deceive yourself--No views of religion can
sanction rebellion and murder; and such are the natural and necessary
consequences of the doctrine we have just heard poured into the ears of
fanatical and violent enthusiasts."

"My son," said Bridgenorth calmly, "in the days of my non-age, I
thought as you do. I deemed it sufficient to pay my tithes of cummin and
aniseed--my poor petty moral observances of the old law; and I thought I
was heaping up precious things, when they were in value no more than the
husks of the swine-trough. Praised be Heaven, the scales are fallen from
mine eyes; and after forty years' wandering in the desert of Sinai, I
am at length arrived in the Land of Promise--My corrupt human nature has
left me--I have cast my slough, and can now with some conscience put
my hand to the plough, certain that there is no weakness left in me
where-through I may look back. The furrows," he added, bending his
brows, while a gloomy fire filled his large eyes, "must be drawn long
and deep, and watered by the blood of the mighty."

There was a change in Bridgenorth's tone and manner, when he used these
singular expressions, which convinced Julian that his mind, which had
wavered for so many years between his natural good sense and the insane
enthusiasm of the time, had finally given way to the latter; and,
sensible of the danger in which the unhappy man himself, the innocent
and beautiful Alice, and his own father, were likely to be placed--to
say nothing of the general risk of the community by a sudden
insurrection, he at the same time felt that there was no chance of
reasoning effectually with one, who would oppose spiritual conviction to
all arguments which reason could urge against his wild schemes. To
touch his feeling seemed a more probable resource; and Julian therefore
conjured Bridgenorth to think how much his daughter's honour and safety
were concerned in his abstaining from the dangerous course which he
meditated. "If you fall," he said, "must she not pass under the power
and guardianship of her uncle, whom you allow to have shown himself
capable of the grossest mistake in the choice of her female protectress;
and whom I believe, upon good grounds, to have made that infamous choice
with his eyes open?"

"Young man," answered Bridgenorth, "you make me feel like the poor
bird, around whose wing some wanton boy has fixed a line, to pull the
struggling wretch to earth at his pleasure. Know, since thou wilt play
this cruel part, and drag me down from higher contemplations, that she
with whom Alice is placed, and who hath in future full power to guide
her motions, and decide her fate, despite of Christian and every one
else, is--I will not tell thee who she is--Enough--no one--thou least of
all, needs to fear for her safety."

At this moment a side-door opened, and Christian himself came into the
apartment. He started and coloured when he saw Julian Peveril; then
turning to Bridgenorth with an assumed air of indifference, asked, "Is
Saul among the prophets?--Is a Peveril among the saints?"

"No, brother," replied Bridgenorth, "his time is not come more than
thine own--thou art too deep in the ambitious intrigues of manhood, and
he in the giddy passions of youth, to hear the still calm voice--You
will both hear it, as I trust and pray."

"Master Ganlesse, or Christian, or by whatever name you are called,"
said Julian, "by whatever reasons you guide yourself in this most
perilous matter, _you_ at least are not influenced by any idea of an
immediate divine command for commencing hostilities against the state.
Leaving, therefore, for the present, whatever subjects of discussion may
be between us, I implore you, as a man of shrewdness and sense, to join
with me in dissuading Master Bridgenorth from the fatal enterprise which
he now meditates."

"Young gentleman," said Christian, with great composure, "when we met in
the west, I was willing to have made a friend of you, but you rejected
the overture. You might, however, even then have seen enough of me to
be assured, that I am not likely to rush too rashly on any desperate
undertaking. As to this which lies before us, my brother Bridgenorth
brings to it the simplicity, though not the harmlessness of the dove,
and I the subtilty of the serpent. He hath the leading of saints who are
moved by the spirit; and I can add to their efforts a powerful body, who
have for their instigators the world, the devil, and the flesh."

"And can you," said Julian, looking at Bridgenorth, "accede to such an
unworthy union?"

"I unite not with them," said Bridgenorth; "but I may not, without
guilt, reject the aid which Providence sends to assist His servants. We
are ourselves few, though determined--Those whose swords come to help
the cutting down of the harvest, must be welcome--When their work is
wrought, they will be converted or scattered.--Have you been at York
Place, brother, with that unstable epicure? We must have his last
resolution, and that within an hour."

Christian looked at Julian, as if his presence prevented him from
returning an answer; upon which Bridgenorth arose, and taking the young
man by the arm, led him out of the apartment, into that in which they
had left his father; assuring him by the way, that determined and
vigilant guards were placed in every different quarter by which escape
could be effected, and that he would do well to persuade his father to
remain a quiet prisoner for a few hours.

Julian returned him no answer, and Bridgenorth presently retired,
leaving him alone with his father and Hudson. To their questions he
could only briefly reply, that he feared they were trepanned, since they
were in the house with at least two hundred fanatics, completely armed,
and apparently prepared for desperate enterprise. Their own want of arms
precluded the possibility of open violence; and however unpleasant it
might be to remain in such a condition, it seemed difficult, from the
strength of the fastenings at doors and windows, to attempt any secret
escape without instantaneous detection.

The valiant dwarf alone nursed hopes, with which he in vain endeavoured
to inspire his companions in affliction. "The fair one, whose eyes," he
said, "were like the twin stars of Leda"--for the little man was a great
admirer of lofty language--"had not invited him, the most devoted, and,
it might be, not the least favoured of her servants, into this place
as a harbour, in order that he might therein suffer shipwreck; and he
generously assured his friends, that in his safety they also should be
safe."

Sir Geoffrey, little cheered by this intimation, expressed his despair
at not being able to get the length of Whitehall, where he trusted to
find as many jolly Cavaliers as would help him to stifle the whole
nest of wasps in their hive; while Julian was of opinion that the best
service he could now render Bridgenorth, would be timeously to disclose
his plot, and, if possible, to send him at the same time warning to save
his person.

But we must leave them to meditate over their plans at leisure; no
one of which, as they all depended on their previous escape from
confinement, seemed in any great chance of being executed.




CHAPTER XLIV

         And some for safety took the dreadful leap;
         Some for the voice of Heaven seem'd calling on them;
         Some for advancement, or for lucre's sake--
         I leap'd in frolic.
                                                  --THE DREAM.

After a private conversation with Bridgenorth, Christian hastened to the
Duke of Buckingham's hotel, taking at the same time such a route as to
avoid meeting with any acquaintance. He was ushered into the apartment
of the Duke, whom he found cracking and eating filberts, with a flask
of excellent white wine at his elbow. "Christian," said his Grace,
"come help me to laugh--I have bit Sir Charles Sedley--flung him for a
thousand, by the gods!"

"I am glad at your luck, my Lord Duke," replied Christian; "but I am
come here on serious business."

"Serious?--why, I shall hardly be serious in my life again--ha, ha,
ha!--and for luck, it was no such thing--sheer wit, and excellent
contrivance; and but that I don't care to affront Fortune, like the
old Greek general, I might tell her to her face--In this thou hadst no
share. You have heard, Ned Christian, that Mother Cresswell is dead?"

"Yes, I did hear that the devil hath got his due," answered Christian.

"Well," said the Duke, "you are ungrateful; for I know you have been
obliged to her, as well as others. Before George, a most benevolent and
helpful old lady; and that she might not sleep in an unblest grave,
I betted--do you mark me--with Sedley, that I would write her funeral
sermon; that it should be every word in praise of her life and
conversation, that it should be all true, and yet that the diocesan
should be unable to lay his thumb on Quodling, my little chaplain, who
should preach it."

"I perfectly see the difficulty, my lord," said Christian, who well knew
that if he wished to secure attention from this volatile nobleman, he
must first suffer, nay, encourage him, to exhaust the topic, whatever it
might be, that had got temporary possession of his pineal gland.

"Why," said the Duke, "I had caused my little Quodling to go through his
oration thus--'That whatever evil reports had passed current during the
lifetime of the worthy matron whom they had restored to dust that day,
malice herself could not deny that she was born well, married well,
lived well, and died well; since she was born in Shadwell, married to
Cresswell, lived in Camberwell, and died in Bridewell.' Here ended
the oration, and with it Sedley's ambitious hopes of overreaching
Buckingham--ha, ha, ha!--And now, Master Christian, what are your
commands for me to-day?"

"First, to thank your Grace for being so attentive as to send so
formidable a person as Colonel Blood, to wait upon your poor friend and
servant. Faith, he took such an interest in my leaving town, that he
wanted to compel me to do it at point of fox, so I was obliged to spill
a little of his malapert blood. Your Grace's swordsmen have had ill luck
of late; and it is hard, since you always choose the best hands, and
such scrupleless knaves too."

"Come now, Christian," said the Duke, "do not thus exult over me;
a great man, if I may so call myself, is never greater than amid
miscarriage. I only played this little trick on you, Christian, to
impress on you a wholesome idea of the interest I take in your motions.
The scoundrel's having dared to draw upon you, is a thing not to be
forgiven.--What! injure my old friend Christian?"

"And why not," said Christian coolly, "if your old friend was so
stubborn as not to go out of town, like a good boy, when your Grace
required him to do so, for the civil purpose of entertaining his niece
in his absence?"

"How--what!--how do you mean by _my_ entertaining your niece, Master
Christian?" said the Duke. "She was a personage far beyond my poor
attentions, being destined, if I recollect aright, to something like
royal favour."

"It was her fate, however, to be the guest of your Grace's convent for
a brace of days, or so. Marry, my lord, the father confessor was not at
home, and--for convents have been scaled of late--returned not till the
bird was flown."

"Christian, thou art an old reynard--I see there is no doubling with
thee. It was thou, then, that stole away my pretty prize, but left me
something so much prettier in my mind, that, had it not made itself
wings to fly away with, I would have placed it in a cage of gold. Never
be downcast, man; I forgive thee--I forgive thee."

"Your Grace is of a most merciful disposition, especially considering it
is I who have had the wrong; and sages have said, that he who doth the
injury is less apt to forgive than he who only sustains it."

"True, true, Christian," said the Duke, "which, as you say, is something
quite new, and places my clemency in a striking point of view. Well,
then, thou forgiven man, when shall I see my Mauritanian Princess
again?"

"Wherever I am certain that a quibble, and a carwhichit, for a play or a
sermon, will not banish her from your Grace's memory."

"Not all the wit of South, or of Etherege," said Buckingham hastily, "to
say nothing of my own, shall in future make me oblivious of what I owe
the Morisco Princess."

"Yet, to leave the fair lady out of thought for a little while--a very
little while," said Christian, "since I swear that in due time your
Grace shall see her, and know in her the most extraordinary woman that
the age has produced--to leave her, I say out of sight for a little
while, has your Grace had late notice of your Duchess's health?"

"Health," said the Duke. "Umph--no--nothing particular. She has been
ill--but----"

"She is no longer so," subjoined Christian; "she died in Yorkshire
forty-eight hours since."

"Thou must deal with the devil," said the Duke.

"It would ill become one of my name to do so," replied Christian. "But
in the brief interval, since your Grace hath known of an event which
hath not yet reached the public ear, you have, I believe, made proposals
to the King for the hand of the Lady Anne, second daughter of the Duke
of York, and your Grace's proposals have been rejected."

"Fiends and firebrands, villain!" said the Duke, starting up and seizing
Christian by the collar; "who hath told thee that?"

"Take your hand from my cloak, my Lord Duke, and I may answer you," said
Christian. "I have a scurvy touch of old puritanical humour about me. I
abide not the imposition of hands--take off your grasp from my cloak, or
I will find means to make you unloose it."

The Duke, who had kept his right hand on his dagger-hilt while he held
Christian's collar with his left, unloosed it as he spoke, but slowly,
and as one who rather suspends than abandons the execution of some hasty
impulse; while Christian, adjusting his cloak with perfect composure,
said, "Soh--my cloak being at liberty, we speak on equal terms. I come
not to insult your Grace, but to offer you vengeance for the insult you
have received."

"Vengeance!" said the Duke--"It is the dearest proffer man can
present to me in my present mood. I hunger for vengeance--thirst for
vengeance--could die to ensure vengeance!---'Sdeath!" he continued,
walking up and down the large apartment with the most unrestrained and
violent agitation; "I have chased this repulse out of my brain with ten
thousand trifles, because I thought no one knew it. But it is known, and
to thee, the very common-sewer of Court-secrets--the honour of Villiers
is in thy keeping, Ned Christian! Speak, thou man of wiles and of
intrigue--on whom dost thou promise the vengeance? Speak! and if thy
answers meet my desires, I will make a bargain with thee as willingly as
with thy master, Satan himself."

"I will not be," said Christian, "so unreasonable in my terms as stories
tell of the old apostate; I will offer your Grace, as he might do,
temporal prosperity and revenge, which is his frequent recruiting money,
but I leave it to yourself to provide, as you may be pleased, for your
future salvation."

The Duke, gazing upon him fixedly and sadly, replied, "I would to God,
Christian, that I could read what purpose of damnable villainy thou hast
to propose to me in thy countenance, without the necessity of thy using
words!"

"Your Grace can but try a guess," said Christian, calmly smiling.

"No," replied the Duke, after gazing at him again for the space of a
minute; "thou art so deeply dyed a hypocrite, that thy mean features,
and clear grey eye, are as likely to conceal treason, as any petty
scheme of theft or larceny more corresponding to your degree."

"Treason, my lord!" echoed Christian; "you may have guessed more nearly
than you were aware of. I honour your Grace's penetration."

"Treason?" echoed the Duke. "Who dare name such a crime to me?"

"If a name startles your Grace, you may call it vengeance--vengeance on
the cabal of councillors, who have ever countermined you, in spite
of your wit and your interest with the King.--Vengeance on Arlington,
Ormond--on Charles himself."

"No, by Heaven," said the Duke, resuming his disordered walk through the
apartment--"Vengeance on these rats of the Privy Council,--come at it
as you will. But the King!--never--never. I have provoked him a hundred
times, where he has stirred me once. I have crossed his path in state
intrigue--rivalled him in love--had the advantage in both,--and, d--n
it, he has forgiven me! If treason would put me in his throne, I have no
apology for it--it were worse than bestial ingratitude."

"Nobly spoken, my lord," said Christian; "and consistent alike with
the obligations under which your Grace lies to Charles Stewart, and the
sense you have ever shown of them.--But it signifies not. If your
Grace patronise not our enterprise, there is Shaftesbury--there is
Monmouth----"

"Scoundrel!" exclaimed the Duke, even more vehemently agitated than
before, "think you that you shall carry on with others an enterprise
which I have refused?--No, by every heathen and every Christian
god!--Hark ye, Christian, I will arrest you on the spot--I will, by gods
and devils, and carry you to unravel your plot at Whitehall."

"Where the first words I speak," answered the imperturbable Christian,
"will be to inform the Privy Council in what place they may find certain
letters, wherewith your Grace has honoured your poor vassal, containing,
as I think, particulars which his Majesty will read with more surprise
than pleasure."

"'Sdeath, villain!" said the Duke, once more laying his hand on his
poniard-hilt, "thou hast me again at advantage. I know not why I forbear
to poniard you where you stand!"

"I might fall, my Lord Duke," said Christian, slightly colouring,
and putting his right hand into his bosom, "though not, I think,
unavenged--for I have not put my person into this peril altogether
without means of defence. I might fall, but, alas! your Grace's
correspondence is in hands, which, by that very act, would be rendered
sufficiently active in handing them to the King and the Privy Council.
What say you to the Moorish Princess, my Lord Duke? What if I have left
her executrix of my will, with certain instructions how to proceed if I
return not unharmed from York Place? Oh, my lord, though my head is
in the wolf's mouth, I was not goose enough to place it there without
settling how many carabines should be fired on the wolf, so soon as my
dying cackle was heard.--Pshaw, my Lord Duke! you deal with a man of
sense and courage, yet you speak to him as a child and a coward."

The Duke threw himself into a chair, fixed his eyes on the ground, and
spoke without raising them. "I am about to call Jerningham," he said;
"but fear nothing--it is only for a draught of wine--That stuff on
the table may be a vehicle of filberts, and walnuts, but not for such
communications as yours.--Bring me champagne," he said to the attendant
who answered to his summons.

The domestic returned, and brought a flask of champagne, with two large
silver cups. One of them he filled for Buckingham, who, contrary to the
usual etiquette, was always served first at home, and then offered the
other to Christian, who declined to receive it.

The Duke drank off the large goblet which was presented to him, and for
a moment covered his forehead with the palm of his hand; then instantly
withdrew it, and said, "Christian, speak your errand plainly. We know
each other. If my reputation be in some degree in your hands, you are
well aware that your life is in mine. Sit down," he said, taking a
pistol from his bosom and laying it on the table--"Sit down, and let me
hear your proposal."

"My lord," said Christian, smiling, "I shall produce no such ultimate
argument on my part, though possibly, in time of need, I may not be
found destitute of them. But my defence is in the situation of things,
and in the composed view which, doubtless, your Majesty will take of
them."

"Majesty!" repeated the Duke--"My good friend Christian, you have kept
company with the Puritans so long, that you confuse the ordinary titles
of the Court."

"I know not how to apologise," said Christian, "unless your Grace will
suppose that I spoke by prophecy."

"Such as the devil delivered to Macbeth," said the Duke--again paced the
chamber, and again seated himself, and said, "Be plain, Christian--speak
out at once, and manfully, what is it you intend?"

"_I_," said Christian--"What should I do?--I can do nothing in such
a matter; but I thought it right that your Grace should know that
the godly of this city"--(he spoke the word with a kind of ironical
grin)--"are impatient of inactivity, and must needs be up and doing. My
brother Bridgenorth is at the head of all old Weiver's congregation;
for you must know, that, after floundering from one faith to another, he
hath now got beyond ordinances, and is become a Fifth-Monarchy man. He
has nigh two hundred of Weiver's people, fully equipped, and ready to
fall on; and, with slight aid from your Grace's people, they must carry
Whitehall, and make prisoners of all within it."

"Rascal!" said the Duke, "and is it to a Peer of England you make this
communication?"

"Nay," answered Christian, "I admit it would be extreme folly in your
Grace to appear until all is over. But let me give Blood and the
others a hint on your part. There are the four Germans also--right
Knipperdolings and Anabaptists--will be specially useful. You are wise,
my lord, and know the value of a corps of domestic gladiators, as well
as did Octavius, Lepidus, and Anthony, when, by such family forces, they
divided the world by indenture tripartite."

"Stay, stay," said the Duke. "Even if these bloodhounds were to
join with you--not that I would permit it without the most positive
assurances for the King's personal safety--but say the villains were to
join, what hope have you of carrying the Court?"

"Bully Tom Armstrong,[*] my lord, hath promised his interest with the
Life Guards. Then there are my Lord Shaftesbury's brisk boys in the
city--thirty thousand on the holding up a finger."

[*] Thomas, or Sir Thomas Armstrong, a person who had distinguished
    himself in youth by duels and drunken exploits. He was
    particularly connected with the Duke of Monmouth, and was said to
    be concerned in the Rye-House Plot, for which he suffered capital
    punishment, 20th June 1684.

"Let him hold up both hands, and if he count a hundred for each finger,"
said the Duke, "it will be more than I expect. You have not spoken to
him?"

"Surely not till your Grace's pleasure was known. But, if he is not
applied to, there is the Dutch train, Hans Snorehout's congregation, in
the Strand--there are the French Protestants in Piccadilly--there are
the family of Levi in Lewkenor's Lane--the Muggletonians in Thames
Street----"

"Ah, faugh!--Out upon them--out upon them!--How the knaves will stink of
cheese and tobacco when they come upon action!--they will drown all the
perfumes in Whitehall. Spare me the detail; and let me know, my dearest
Ned, the sum total of thy most odoriferous forces."

"Fifteen hundred men, well armed," said Christian, "besides the rabble
that will rise to a certainty--they have already nearly torn to pieces
the prisoners who were this day acquitted on account of the Plot."

"All, then, I understand.--And now, hark ye, most Christian Christian,"
said he, wheeling his chair full in front of that on which his agent
was seated, "you have told me many things to-day--Shall I be equally
communicative? Shall I show you that my accuracy of information matches
yours? Shall I tell you, in a word, why you have at once resolved to
push every one, from the Puritan to the free-thinker, upon a general
attack of the Palace of Whitehall, without allowing me, a peer of the
realm, time either to pause upon or to prepare for a step so desperate?
Shall I tell you why you would lead or drive, seduce or compel me, into
countenancing your measures?"

"My lord, if you please to form a guess," said Christian, "I will answer
with all sincerity, if you have assigned the right cause."

"The Countess of Derby is this day arrived, and attends the Court this
evening, with hopes of the kindest reception. She may be surprised amid
the melee?--Ha! said I not right, Master Christian? You, who pretend to
offer me revenge, know yourself its exquisite sweetness."

"I would not presume," said Christian, half smiling, "to offer your
Grace a dish without acting as your taster as well as purveyor."

"That's honestly said," said the Duke. "Away then, my friend. Give Blood
this ring--he knows it, and knows how to obey him who bears it. Let
him assemble my gladiators, as thou dost most wittily term my _coup
jarrets_. The old scheme of the German music may be resorted to, for I
think thou hast the instruments ready. But take notice, I know nothing
on't; and Rowley's person must be safe--I will hang and burn on all
hands if a hair of his black periwig[*] be but singed.--Then what is to
follow--a Lord Protector of the realm--or stay--Cromwell has made
the word somewhat slovenly and unpopular--a Lord Lieutenant of the
Kingdom?--The patriots who take it on themselves to avenge the injustice
done to the country, and to remove evil counsellors from before
the King's throne, that it may be henceforward established in
righteousness--so I think the rubric runs--cannot fail to make a fitting
choice."

[*] Charles, to suit his dark complexion, always wore a black peruke.
    He used to say of the players, that if they wished to represent a
    villain on the stage, "Oddsfish, they always clapp'd on him a
    black periwig, whereas the greatest rogue in England [meaning,
    probably, Dr. Oates] wears a white one."--_See CIBBER's Apology_.

"They cannot, my Lord Duke," said Christian, "since there is but one man
in the three kingdoms on whom that choice can possibly fall."

"I thank you Christian," said his Grace; "and I trust you. Away, and
make all ready. Be assured your services shall not be forgot. We will
have you near to us."

"My Lord Duke," said Christian, "you bind me doubly to you. But remember
that as your Grace is spared any obnoxious proceedings which may befall
in the way of military execution, or otherwise, so it will be advisable
that you hold yourself in preparation, upon a moment's notice, to put
yourself at the head of a band of honourable friends and allies, and
come presently to the palace, where you will be received by the victors
as a commander, and by the vanquished as a preserver."

"I conceive you--I conceive you. I will be in prompt readiness," said
the Duke.

"Ay, my lord," continued Christian; "and for Heaven's sake, let none of
those toys, which are the very Delilahs of your imagination, come
across your Grace this evening, and interfere with the execution of this
sublime scheme."

"Why, Christian, dost think me mad?" was his Grace's emphatic reply. "It
is you who linger, when all should be ordered for a deed so daring.
Go then.--But hark ye, Ned; ere you go, tell me when I shall again
see yonder thing of fire and air--yon Eastern Peri, that glides into
apartments by the keyhole, and leaves them through the casement--yon
black-eyed houri of the Mahometan paradise--when, I say, shall I see her
once more?"

"When your Grace has the truncheon of Lord Lieutenant of the Kingdom,"
said Christian, and left the apartment.

Buckingham stood fixed in contemplation for a moment after he was gone.
"Should I have done this?" he said, arguing the matter with himself; "or
had I the choice rather of doing aught else? Should I not hasten to the
Court, and make Charles aware of the treason which besets him? I will,
by Heaven?--Here, Jerningham, my coach, with the despatch of light!--I
will throw myself at his feet, and tell him of all the follies which I
have dreamed of with this Christian.--And then he will laugh at me, and
spurn me.--No, I have kneeled to him to-day already, and my repulse was
nothing gentle. To be spurned once in the sun's daily round is enough
for Buckingham."

Having made this reflection, he seated himself, and began hastily to
mark down the young nobles and gentlemen of quality, and others, their
very ignoble companions, who he supposed might be likely to assume him
for their leader in any popular disturbance. He had nearly completed it,
when Jerningham entered, to say the coach would be ready in an instant,
and to bring his master's sword, hat, and cloak.

"Let the coachman draw off," said the Duke, "but be in readiness. And
send to the gentlemen thou wilt find named in this list; say I am but
ill at ease, and wish their company to a light collation. Let instant
expedition be made, and care not for expense; you will find most of them
at the Club House in Fuller's Rents."[*]

[*] The place of meeting of the Green Ribbon Club. "Their place of
    meeting," says Roger North, "was in a sort of Carrefour at
    Chancery Lance, in a centre of business and company most proper
    for such anglers of fools. The house was double balconied in
    front, as may yet be seen, for the clubbers to issue forth _in
    fresco_, with hats and no perukes, pipes in their mouths, merry
    faces, and dilated throats for vocal encouragement of the
    canaglia below on usual and unusual occasions."

The preparations for festivity were speedily made, and the intended
guests, most of them persons who were at leisure for any call that
promised pleasure, though sometimes more deaf to those of duty, began
speedily to assemble. There were many youths of the highest rank, and
with them, as is usual in those circles, many of a different class, whom
talents, or impudence, or wit, or a turn for gambling, had reared up
into companions for the great and the gay. The Duke of Buckingham was a
general patron of persons of this description; and a numerous attendance
took place on the present occasion.

The festivity was pursued with the usual appliances of wine, music, and
games of hazard; with which, however, there mingled in that period much
more wit, and a good deal more gross profligacy of conversation, than
the talents of the present generation can supply, or their taste would
permit.

The Duke himself proved the complete command which he possessed over his
versatile character, by maintaining the frolic, the laugh, and the jest,
while his ear caught up, and with eagerness, the most distant sounds, as
intimating the commencement of Christian's revolutionary project. Such
sounds were heard from time to time, and from time to time they died
away, without any of those consequences which Buckingham expected.

At length, and when it was late in the evening, Jerningham announced
Master Chiffinch from the Court; and that worthy personage followed the
annunciation.

"Strange things have happened, my Lord Duke," he said; "your presence at
Court is instantly required by his Majesty."

"You alarm me," said Buckingham, standing up. "I hope nothing has
happened--I hope there is nothing wrong--I hope his Majesty is well?"

"Perfectly well," said Chiffinch; "and desirous to see your Grace
without a moment's delay."

"This is sudden," said the Duke. "You see I have had merry fellows about
me, and am scarce in case to appear, Chiffinch."

"Your Grace seems to be in very handsome plight," said Chiffinch; "and
you know his Majesty is gracious enough to make allowances."

"True," said the Duke, not a little anxious in his mind, touching the
cause of this unexpected summons--"True--his Majesty is most gracious--I
will order my coach."

"Mine is below," replied the royal messenger; "it will save time, if
your Grace will condescend to use it."

Forced from every evasion, Buckingham took a goblet from the table, and
requested his friends to remain at his palace so long as they could find
the means of amusement there. He expected, he said, to return almost
immediately; if not, he would take farewell of them with his usual
toast, "May all of us that are not hanged in the interval, meet together
again here on the first Monday of next month."

This standing toast of the Duke bore reference to the character of
several of his guests; but he did not drink it on the present occasion
without some anticipation concerning his own fate, in case Christian had
betrayed him. He hastily made some addition to his dress, and attended
Chiffinch in the chariot to Whitehall.




CHAPTER XLV

           High feasting was there there--the gilded roofs
           Rung to the wassail-health--the dancer's step
           Sprung to the chord responsive--the gay gamester
           To fate's disposal flung his heap of gold,
           And laugh'd alike when it increased or lessen'd:
           Such virtue hath court-air to teach us patience
           Which schoolmen preach in vain.
                                       --WHY COME YE NOT TO COURT?

Upon the afternoon of this eventful day, Charles held his Court in the
Queen's apartments, which were opened at a particular hour to invited
guests of a certain lower degree, but accessible without restriction to
the higher classes of nobility who had from birth, and to the courtiers
who held by office the privilege of the _entree_.

It was one part of Charles's character, which unquestionably rendered
him personally popular, and postponed to a subsequent reign the
precipitation of his family from the throne, that he banished from his
Court many of the formal restrictions with which it was in other reigns
surrounded. He was conscious of the good-natured grace of his manners,
and trusted to it, often not in vain, to remove evil impressions arising
from actions, which he was sensible could not be justified on the
grounds of liberal or national policy.

In the daytime the King was commonly seen in the public walks alone, or
only attended by one or two persons; and his answer to the remonstrance
of his brother, on the risk of thus exposing his person, is well
known:--"Believe me, James," he said, "no one will murder _me_, to make
_you_ King."

In the same manner, Charles's evenings, unless such as were destined
to more secret pleasures, were frequently spent amongst all who had any
pretence to approach a courtly circle; and thus it was upon the night
which we are treating of. Queen Catherine, reconciled or humbled to her
fate, had long ceased to express any feelings of jealousy, nay,
seemed so absolutely dead to such a passion, that she received at
her drawing-room, without scruple, and even with encouragement, the
Duchesses of Portsmouth and Cleveland, and others, who enjoyed, though
in a less avowed character, the credit of having been royal favourites.
Constraint of every kind was banished from a circle so composed, and
which was frequented at the same time, if not by the wisest, at least by
the wittiest courtiers, who ever assembled round a monarch, and who, as
many of them had shared the wants, and shifts, and frolics of his exile,
had then acquired a sort of prescriptive licence, which the good-natured
prince, when he attained his period of prosperity, could hardly have
restrained had it suited his temper to do so. This, however, was the
least of Charles's thoughts. His manners were such as secured him
from indelicate obtrusion; and he sought no other protection from
over-familiarity, than what these and his ready wit afforded him.

On the present occasion, he was peculiarly disposed to enjoy the scene
of pleasure which had been prepared. The singular death of Major Coleby,
which, taking place in his own presence, had proclaimed, with the voice
of a passing bell, the ungrateful neglect of the Prince for whom he
had sacrificed everything, had given Charles much pain. But, in his own
opinion at least, he had completely atoned for this negligence by the
trouble which he had taken for Sir Geoffrey Peveril and his son, whose
liberation he looked upon not only as an excellent good deed in itself,
but, in spite of the grave rebuke of Ormond, as achieved in a very
pardonable manner, considering the difficulties with which he was
surrounded. He even felt a degree of satisfaction on receiving
intelligence from the city that there had been disturbances in the
streets, and that some of the more violent fanatics had betaken
themselves to their meeting-houses, upon sudden summons, to inquire, as
their preachers phrased it, into the causes of Heaven's wrath, and into
the backsliding of the Court, lawyers, and jury, by whom the false
and bloody favourers of the Popish Plot were screened and cloaked from
deserved punishment.

The King, we repeat, seemed to hear these accounts with pleasure, even
when he was reminded of the dangerous and susceptible character of those
with whom such suspicions originated. "Will any one now assert," he
said, with self-complacence, "that I am so utterly negligent of the
interest of friends?--You see the peril in which I place myself, and
even the risk to which I have exposed the public peace, to rescue a man
whom I have scarce seen for twenty years, and then only in his buff-coat
and bandoleers, with other Train-Band officers who kissed hands upon the
Restoration. They say Kings have long hands--I think they have as much
occasion for long memories, since they are expected to watch over and
reward every man in England, who hath but shown his goodwill by crying
'God save the King!'"

"Nay, the rogues are even more unreasonable still," said Sedley; "for
every knave of them thinks himself entitled to your Majesty's protection
in a good cause, whether he has cried God save the King or no."

The King smiled, and turned to another part of the stately hall, where
everything was assembled which could, according to the taste of the age,
make the time glide pleasantly away.

In one place, a group of the young nobility, and of the ladies of
the Court, listened to the reader's acquaintance Empson, who was
accompanying with his unrivalled breathings on the flute, a young siren,
who, while her bosom palpitated with pride and with fear, warbled to the
courtly and august presence the beautiful air beginning--

 "Young I am, and yet unskill'd,
  How to make a lover yield," &c.

She performed her task in a manner so corresponding with the strains of
the amatory poet, and the voluptuous air with which the words had
been invested by the celebrated Purcel, that the men crowded around in
ecstasies, while most of the ladies thought it proper either to look
extremely indifferent to the words she sung, or to withdraw from
the circle as quietly as possible. To the song succeeded a concerto,
performed by a select band of most admirable musicians, which the King,
whose taste was indisputable, had himself selected.
