feel delightful. And this way of having her misgivings eased made them
easier when they came again with no one to appease them. For she began
to think of what he had done, and how kind and considerate his mind must
be, and how hard it must seem to mistrust him.

Another thing that urged her to keep on now, without making any fuss
about it, was the wonderful style her sister Faith had shown since that
hairy monster came back again. It was manifest that the world contained
only one man of any high qualities, and nobody must dare to think even
twice about any conclusion he laid down. He had said to her, with a
penetrating glance--and it must have been that to get through such a
thicket--that dangerous people were about, and no girl possessing any
self-respect must think of wandering on the shore alone. The more she
was spied upon and admonished, the more she would do what she thought
right; and a man who had lived among savages for years must be a queer
judge of propriety. But, in spite of all these defiant thoughts, her
heart was very low, and her mind in a sad flutter, and she could
not even smile as she met her father's gaze. Supposing that she was
frightened at the number of the guests, and the noise of many tongues,
and the grandeur of the people, the gentle old man made a little signal
to her to come and have a whisper with him, as a child might do, under
courtesy of the good company. But Dolly feigned not to understand, at
the penalty of many a heart-pang.

The dinner went on with a very merry sound, and a genuine strength of
enjoyment, such as hearty folk have who know one another, and are met
together not to cut capers of wit, but refresh their goodwill and fine
principles. And if any dinner party can be so arranged that only five
per cent. has any trouble on its mind, the gentleman who whips away the
plates, at a guinea a mouth, will have to go home with a face of willow
pattern.

The other whose mind was away from her food, and reckless of its own
nourishment, was Blyth Scudamore's mother, as gentle a lady as ever
tried never to think of herself. In spite of all goodness, and faith in
the like, she had enough to make her very miserable now, whenever she
allowed herself to think about it, and that was fifty-nine minutes
out of sixty. For a brief account of her son's escape from Etaples had
reached her, through the kindness of Captain Desportes, who found means
to get a letter delivered to the Admiral. That brave French officer
spoke most highly of the honourable conduct of his English friend, but
had very small hope of his safety. For he added the result of his own
inquiries to the statement of M. Jalais, and from these it was clear
that poor Scuddy had set forth alone in a rickety boat, ill found and
ill fitted to meet even moderate weather in the open Channel. Another
young Englishman had done the like, after lurking in the forest of
Hardelot, but he had been recaptured by the French at the outset of his
hopeless voyage. Scudamore had not been so retaken; and the Captain
(who had not received his letter until it was too late to interfere,
by reason of his own despatch to Dieppe) had encountered a sharp summer
gale just then, which must have proved fatal to the poor old boat.
The only chance was that some English ship might have picked up the
wanderer, and if so the highly respected Admiral would have heard of it
before he received this letter. As no such tidings had been received,
there could be little doubt about the issue in any reasonable mind. But
the heart of a woman is not a mind, or the man that is born of her might
as well forego the honour.

However, as forty people were quite happy, the wisest course is to
rejoin them. The ladies were resolved upon this occasion to storm the
laws of usage which required their withdrawal before the toasts began;
and so many gentle voices challenged the garrison of men behind their
bottles that terms of unusual scope were arranged. It was known that the
Marquis would make a fine speech--short, and therefore all the finer--in
proposing the toast of the evening, to wit, "Our King, and our Country."
Under the vigorous lead of Mrs. Stubbard, the ladies demanded to hear
every word; after which they would go, and discuss their own affairs, or
possibly those of their neighbours. But the gentlemen must endure their
presence till his lordship had spoken, and the Admiral replied. Faith
was against this arrangement, because she foresaw that it would make
them very late; but she yielded to the wishes of so many of her guests,
consoled with the thought that she would be supported by some one on her
left hand, who would be her support for life.

When all had done well, except the two aforesaid, and good-will born of
good deeds was crowning comfort with jocund pleasure, and the long oak
table, rich of grain and dark with the friction of a hundred years,
shone in the wavering flow of dusk with the gleam of purple and golden
fruit, the glance of brilliant glass that puzzles the light with its
claim to shadow, and the glow of amber and amethyst wine decanted to
settle that question--then the bold Admiral, standing up, said, "Bring
in the lights, that we may see his lordship."

"I like to speak to some intelligence," said the guest, who was shrewd
at an answer. And Dolly, being quick at occasion, seized it, and in the
shifting of chairs left her own for some one else.

The curtains were drawn across the western window, to close the conflict
between God's light and man's, and then this well-known gentleman,
having placed his bottle handily--for he never "put wine into two
whites," to use his own expression--arose with his solid frame as
tranquil as a rock, and his full-fronted head like a piece of it. Every
gentleman bowed to his bow, and waited with silent respect for his
words, because they would be true and simple.

"My friends, I will take it for granted that we all love our country,
and hate its enemies. We may like and respect them personally, for they
are as good as we are; but we are bound to hate them collectively,
as men who would ruin all we love. For the stuff that is talked about
freedom, democracy, march of intellect, and so forth, I have nothing to
say, except to bid you look at the result among themselves. Is there a
man in France whose body is his own if he can carry arms, or his soul if
it ventures to seek its own good? As for mind--there is only the mind
of one man; a large one in many ways; in others a small one, because it
considers its owner alone.

"But we of England have refused to be stripped of all that we hold dear,
at the will of a foreign upstart. We have fought for years, and we still
are fighting, without any brag or dream of glory, for the rights of
ourselves and of all mankind. There have been among us weak-minded
fellows, babblers of abstract nonsense, and even, I grieve to
say--traitors. But, on the whole, we have stood together, and therefore
have not been trodden on. How it may end is within the knowledge of the
Almighty only; but already there are signs that we shall be helped, if
we continue to help ourselves.

"And now for the occasion of our meeting here. We rejoice most heartily
with our good host, the vigilant Defender of these shores, at the
restoration to his arms--or rather, to a still more delightful
embrace--of a British officer, who has proved a truth we knew already,
that nothing stops a British officer. I see a gentleman struck so keenly
with the force of that remark, because he himself has proved it, that I
must beg his next neighbour to fill up his glass, and allow nothing to
stop him from tossing it off. And as I am getting astray from my text, I
will clear my poor head with what you can see through."

The Marquis of Southdown filled his glass from a bottle of grand old
Chambertin--six of which had been laid most softly in a cupboard of
the wainscote for his use--and then he had it filled again, and saw his
meaning brilliantly.

"Our second point is the defeat of the French, and of this we may now
assure ourselves. They have not been defeated, for the very good reason
that they never would come out to fight; but it comes to the same thing,
because they are giving it over as a hopeless job. I have seen too many
ups and downs to say that we are out of danger yet; but when our fleets
have been chasing theirs all over the world, are they likely to come
and meet us in our own waters? Nelson has anchored at Spithead, and
is rushing up to London, as our host has heard to-day, with his usual
impetuosity. Every man must stick to his own business, even the mighty
Nelson; and he might not meddle with Billy Blue, or anybody else up
Channel. Still, Nelson is not the sort of man to jump into a chaise at
Portsmouth if there was the very smallest chance of the French coming
over to devour us.

"Well, my friends, we have done our best, and have some right to be
proud of it; but we should depart from our nature if we even exercised
that right. The nature of an Englishman is this--to be afraid of nothing
but his own renown. Feeling this great truth, I will avoid offence by
hiding as a crime my admiration of the glorious soldiers and sailors
here, yet beg them for once to remember themselves, as having enabled
me to propose, and all present to pledge, the welfare of our King and
Country."

The Marquis waved his glass above his head, without spilling a single
drop, although it was a bumper, then drained it at a draught, inverted
it, and cleverly snapped it in twain upon the table, with his other hand
laid on his heart, and a long low reverence to the company. Thereupon up
stood squires and dames, and repeating the good toast, pledged it, with
a deep bow to the proposer; and as many of the gentlemen as understood
the art, without peril to fair neighbours, snapped the glass.

His lordship was delighted, and in the spirit of the moment held up
his hand, which meant, "Silence, silence, till we all sing the National
Anthem!" In a clear loud voice he led off the strain, Erle Twemlow from
his hairy depths struck in, then every man, following as he might, and
with all his might, sustained it, and the ladies, according to their
wont, gave proof of the heights they can scale upon rapture.

The Admiral, standing, and beating time now and then with his
heel--though all the time deserved incessant beating--enjoyed the
performance a great deal more than if it had been much better, and
joined in the main roar as loudly as he thought his position as host
permitted. For although he was nearing the haven now of threescore years
and ten, his throat and heart were so sea-worthy that he could very
sweetly have outroared them all. But while he was preparing just to
prove this, if encouraged, and smiling very pleasantly at a friend who
said, "Strike up, Admiral," he was called from the room, and in the
climax of the roar slipped away for a moment, unheeded, and meaning to
make due apology to his guests as soon as he came back.



CHAPTER LXI

DISCHARGED FROM DUTY


While loyalty thus rejoiced and throve in the warmth of its own
geniality, a man who was loyal to himself alone, and had no geniality
about him, was watching with contempt these British doings. Carne had
tethered his stout black horse, who deserved a better master, in a dusky
dell of dark-winged trees at the back of the eastern shrubbery. Here the
good horse might rest unseen, and consider the mysterious ways of men;
for the main approach was by the western road, and the shades of evening
stretched their arms to the peaceful yawn of sunset. And here he found
good stuff spread by nature, more worthy of his attention, and
tucking back his forelegs, fared as well as the iron between his teeth
permitted.

Then the master drew his green riding-coat of thin velvet closer round
him, and buttoned the lappet in front, because he had heavy weight in
the pockets. Keeping warily along the lines of shadow, he gained a place
of vantage in the shrubbery, a spot of thick shelter having loops of
outlook. Above and around him hung a curtain of many-pointed ilex,
and before him a barberry bush, whose coral clusters caught the waning
light. In this snug nook he rested calmly, leaning against the ilex
trunk, and finished his little preparations for anything adverse to his
plans. In a belt which was hidden by his velvet coat he wore a short
dagger in a sheath of shagreen, and he fixed it so that he could draw it
in a moment, without unfastening the riding-coat. Then from the pockets
on either side he drew a pair of pistols, primed them well from a little
flask, and replaced them with the butts beneath the lappets. "Death for
at least three men," he muttered, "if they are fools enough to meddle
with me. My faith, these Darlings are grown very grand, on the strength
of the land that belongs to us!"

For he heard the popping of champagne corks, and the clink of abundant
silver, and tuning of instruments by the band, and he saw the flash of
lights, and the dash of serving-men, and the rush of hot hospitality;
and although he had not enough true fibre in his stomach to yearn for
a taste of the good things going round, there can be little doubt, from
what he did thereafter, that his gastric juices must have turned to
gall.

With all these sounds and sights and scents of things that he had no
right to despise, his patience was tried for an hour and a half, or at
any rate he believed so. The beautiful glow in the west died out, where
the sun had been ripening his harvest-field of sheafy gold and awny
cloud; and the pulse of quivering dusk beat slowly, so that a man might
seem to count it, or rather a child, who sees such things, which later
men lose sight of. The forms of the deepening distances against the
departure of light grew faint, and prominent points became obscure, and
lines retired into masses, while Carne maintained his dreary watch,
with his mood becoming darker. As the sound of joyful voices, and of
good-will doubled by good fare, came to his unfed vigil from the open
windows of the dining-room, his heart was not enlarged at all, and
the only solace for his lips was to swear at British revelry. For the
dining-room was at the western end, some fifty yards away from him, and
its principal window faced the sunset, but his lurking-place afforded a
view of the southern casements obliquely. Through these he had seen
that the lamps were brought, and heard the increase of merry noise, the
clapping of hands, and the jovial cheers at the rising of the popular
Marquis.

At last he saw a white kerchief waved at the window nearest to him, the
window of the Admiral's little study, which opened like a double door
upon the eastern grass-plat. With an ill-conditioned mind, and body
stiff and lacking nourishment, he crossed the grass in a few long
strides, and was admitted without a word.

"What a time you have been! I was giving it up," he whispered to the
trembling Dolly. "Where are the candles? I must strike a light. Surely
you might have brought one. Bolt the door, while I make a light, and
close the curtains quietly, but leave the window open. Don't shake, like
a child that is going to be whipped. Too late now for nonsense. What are
you afraid of? Silly child!"

As he spoke he was striking a light in a little French box containing a
cube of jade, and with very little noise he lit two candles standing on
the high oak desk. Dolly drew a curtain across the window, and then
went softly to the door, which opened opposite the corner of a narrow
passage, and made pretence to bolt it, but shot the bolt outside the
socket.

"Come and let me look at you," said Carne, for he knew that he had
been rough with her, and she was not of the kind that submits to that.
"Beauty, how pale you look, and yet how perfectly lovely in this evening
gown! I should like to kill the two gentlemen who sat next to you at
dinner. Darling, you know that whatever I do is only for your own sweet
sake."

"If you please not to touch me, it will be better," said the lady,
not in a whisper, but a firm and quiet voice, although her hands were
trembling; "you are come upon business, and you should do it."

If Carne had but caught her in his arms, and held her to his heart, and
vowed that all business might go to the devil while he held his angel
so, possibly the glow of nobler feelings might have been lost in
the fire of passion. But he kept his selfish end alone in view, and
neglected the womanly road to it.

"A despatch from London arrived today; I must see it," he said, shortly;
"as well as the copy of the answer sent. And then my beauty must insert
a NOT in the order to be issued in the morning, or otherwise invert its
meaning, simply to save useless bloodshed. The key for a moment, the
key, my darling, of this fine old piece of furniture!"

"Is it likely that I would give you the key? My father always keeps it.
What right have you with his private desk? I never promised anything so
bad as that."

"I am not to be trifled with," he whispered, sternly. "Do you think that
I came here for kissing? The key I must have, or break it open; and how
will you explain that away?"

His rudeness settled her growing purpose. The misery of indecision
vanished; she would do what was right, if it cost her life. Her face was
as white as her satin dress, but her dark eyes flashed with menace.

"There is a key that opens it," she said, as she pointed to the
bookcase; "but I forbid you to touch it, sir."

Carne's only reply was to snatch the key from the upper glass door of
the book-shelves, which fitted the lock of the Admiral's desk, though
the owner was not aware of it. In a moment the intruder had unlocked the
high and massive standing-desk, thrown back the cover, and placed one
candlestick among the documents. Many of them he brushed aside, as
useless for his purpose, and became bewildered among the rest, for the
Commander of the Coast-defence was not a man of order. He never knew
where to put a thing, nor even where it might have put itself, but found
a casual home for any paper that deserved it. This lack of method has
one compensation, like other human defects, to wit, that it puzzles a
clandestine searcher more deeply than cypher or cryptogram. Carne had
the Admiral's desk as wide as an oyster thrown back on his valve, and
just being undertucked with the knife, to make him go down easily. Yet
so great was the power of disorder that nothing could be made out of
anything. "Watch at the door," he had said to Dolly; and this suited her
intention.

For while he was thus absorbed, with his back towards her, she opened
the door a little, and presently saw the trusty Charles come hurrying
by, as if England hung upon his labours. "Tell my father to come here
this moment; go softly, and say that I sent you." As she finished her
whisper she closed the door, without any sound, and stood patiently.

"Show me where it is; come and find it for me. Everything here is in
the vilest mess," cried Carne, growing reckless with wrath and hurry.
"I want the despatch of this morning, and I find tailors' bills, way to
make water-proof blacking, a list of old women, and a stump of old pipe!
Come here, this instant, and show me where it is."

"If you forget your good manners," answered Dolly, still keeping in the
dark near the door, "I shall have to leave you. Surely you have practice
enough in spying, to find what you want, with two candles."

Carne turned for a moment, and stared at her. Her attitude surprised
him, but he could not believe in her courage to rebel. She stood with
her back to the door, and met his gaze without a sign of fear.

"There are no official papers here," he said, after another short
ransack; "there must have been some, if this desk is the one. Have you
dared to delude me by showing the wrong desk?"

Dolly met his gaze still, and then walked towards him. The band had
struck up, and the company were singing with a fine patriotic roar,
which rang very nobly in the distance--"Britannia, rule the waves!"
Dolly felt like a Briton as the words rolled through her, and the melody
lifted her proud heart.

"You have deluded yourself," she said, standing proudly before the
baffled spy; "you have ransacked my father's private desk, which I
allowed you to do, because my father has no secrets. He leaves it open
half the time, because he is a man of honour. He is not a man of plots,
and wiles, and trickery upon women. And you have deluded yourself, in
dreaming that a daughter of his would betray her Country."

"By the God that made me, I will have your life!" cried Carne in
French, as he dashed his hand under his coat to draw his dagger; but the
pressure of the desk had displaced that, so that he could not find it.
She thought that her time was come, and shrieked--for she was not at all
heroic, and loved life very dearly--but she could not take her eyes from
his, nor turn to fly from the spell of them; all she could do was to
step back; and she did so into her father's arms.

"Ho!" cried the Admiral, who had entered with the smile of good cheer
and good company glowing on his fine old countenance; "my Dolly and a
stranger at my private desk! Mr. Carne! I have had a glass or two of
wine, but my eyes must be playing me extraordinary tricks. A gentleman
searching my desk, and apparently threatening my dear daughter! Have the
kindness to explain, before you attempt to leave us."

If the curtain had not been drawn across the window, Carne would have
made his escape, and left the situation to explain itself. But the stuff
was thick, and it got between his legs; and before he could slip
away, the stout old Admiral had him by the collar with a sturdy grasp,
attesting the substance of the passing generation. And a twinkle of
good-humour was in the old eyes still--such a wonder was his Dolly that
he might be doing wrong in laying hands of force upon a visitor of hers.
Things as strange as this had been within his knowledge, and proved to
be of little harm--with forbearance. But his eyes grew stern, as Carne
tried to dash his hand off.

"If you value your life, you will let me go," said the young man to the
old one.

"I will not let you go, sir, till you clear up this. A gentleman must
see that he is bound to do so. If I prove to be wrong, I will apologise.
What! Are you going to fire at me? You would never be such a coward!"

He dropped upon the floor, with a bullet in his brain, and his course of
duty ended. Carne dashed aside the curtain, and was nearly through the
window, when two white arms were cast round his waist. He threw himself
forward with all his might, and wrenched at the little hands clasped
around him, but they held together like clenched iron. "Will you force
me to kill you?" "You may, if you like"--was the dialogue of these
lovers.

The strength of a fit was in her despair. She set her bent knees against
the window-frame, and a shower of glass fell between them; but she
flinched not from her convulsive grasp. "Let me come back, that I may
shoot myself," Carne panted, for his breath was straitened; "what is
life to me after losing you?" She made no answer, but took good care
not to release so fond a lover. Then he threw himself back with all his
weight, and she fell on the floor beneath him. Her clasp relaxed, and
he was free; for her eyes had encountered her father's blood, and she
swooned away, and lay as dead.

Carne arose quickly, and bolted the door. His breath was short, and his
body trembling, but the wits of the traitor were active still. "I must
have something to show for all this," he thought as he glanced at the
bodies on the floor. "Those revellers may not have heard this noise. I
know where it is now, and I will get it."

But the sound of the pistol, and shriek of the girl, had rung through
the guests, when the wine was at their lips, and all were nodding to one
another. Faith sprang up, and then fell back trembling, and several men
ran towards the door. Charles, the footman, met them there, with his
face whiter than his napkin, and held up his hands, but could not speak.
Erle Twemlow dashed past him and down the passage; and Lord Southdown
said: "Gentlemen, see to the ladies. There has been some little mishap,
I fear. Bob, and Arthur, come with me."

Twemlow was first at the study door, and finding it fastened, struck
with all his force, and shouted, at the very moment when Carne stood
before the true desk of office. "Good door, and good bolt," muttered
Carne; "my rule is never to be hurried by noises. Dolly will be quiet
for a quarter of an hour, and the old gentleman forever. All I want is
about two minutes."

Twemlow stepped back a few yards, and then with a good start delivered a
rushing kick; but the only result was a jar of his leg through the sole
of his thin dress sandal.

"The window!" cried the Marquis. "We'll stop here; you know the house;
take the shortest cut to the window. Whoever is there, we shall have him
so. I am too slow. Boy Bob, go with him."

"What a fool I was not to think of that!" shouted Twemlow, as he set off
for the nearest house door, and unluckily Carne heard him. He had struck
up the ledge of the desk with the butt of the pistol he had fired, and
pocketing a roll of fresh despatches, he strode across the body of the
Admiral, and with a glance at Dolly--whose eyes were wide open, but
her face drawn aside, like a peach with a split stone--out he went. He
smiled as he heard the thundering of full-bodied gentlemen against
the study door, and their oaths, as they damaged their knuckles and
knee-caps. Then he set off hot-foot, but was stopped by a figure
advancing from the corner of the house.

This was not a graceful figure, as of gentle maiden, nor venerable and
slow of foot, as that of an ancient mariner, but a man in the prime of
strength, and largely endowed with that blessing--the mate of truth.
Carne perceived that he had met his equal, and perhaps his better, in a
bout of muscle, and he tried to escape by superior mind.

"Twemlow, how glad I am that I have met you! You are the very man I
wanted. There has been a sad accident in there with one of the Admiral's
pistols, and the dear old man is badly wounded. I am off for a doctor,
for my horse is at hand. For God's sake run in, and hold his head up,
and try to staunch the bleeding. I shall be back in half an hour with
the man that lives at Pebbleridge. Don't lose a moment. Particulars
hereafter."

"Particulars now!" replied Twemlow, sternly, as he planted himself
before his cousin. "For years I have lived among liars, and they called
a lie Crom, and worshipped it. If this is not Crom, why did you bolt the
door?"

"You shall answer for this, when time allows. If the door was bolted, he
must have done it. Let me pass; the last chance depends on my speed."

Carne made a rush to pass, but Twemlow caught him by the breast, and
held him. "Come back," he said, fiercely, "and prove your words. Without
that, you go no further."

Carne seized him by the throat, but his mighty beard, like a collar of
hemp, protected him, and he brought his big brown fist like a hammer
upon the traitor's forehead. Carne wrenched at his dagger, but failed to
draw it, and the two strong men rolled on the grass, fighting like two
bull-dogs. Reason, and thought, and even sense of pain were lost in
brutal fury, as they writhed, and clutched, and dug at one another,
gashing their knuckles, and gnashing their teeth, frothing with one
another's blood, for Carne bit like a tiger. At length tough condition
and power of endurance got the mastery, and Twemlow planted his knee
upon the gasping breast of Carne.

"Surrend," he said, for his short breath could not fetch up the third
syllable; and Carne with a sign of surrender lay on his back, and
put his chin up, and shut his eyes as if he had fainted. Twemlow with
self-congratulation waited a little to recover breath, still keeping
his knee in the post of triumph, and pinning the foe's right arm to his
side. But the foe's left hand was free, and with the eyes still shut,
and a continuance of gasping, that left hand stole its way to the left
pocket, quietly drew forth the second pistol, pressed back the hammer on
the grass, and with a flash (both of eyes and of flint) fired into the
victor's forehead. The triumphant knee rolled off the chest, the body
swung over, as a log is rolled by the woodman's crowbar, and Twemlow's
back was on the grass, and his eyes were closed to the moonlight.

Carne scrambled up and shook himself, to be sure that all his limbs were
sound. "Ho, ho, ho!" he chuckled; "it is not so easy to beat me. Why,
who are you? Down with you, then!"

Lord Robert Chancton, a lad of about sixteen, the eldest son of
the Marquis, had lost his way inside the house, in trying to find a
short-cut to the door, and coming up after the pistol was fired, made a
very gallant rush at the enemy. With a blow of the butt Carne sent him
sprawling; then dashing among the shrubs and trees, in another minute
was in the saddle, and galloping towards the ancestral ruins.

As he struck into the main road through the grounds, Carne passed and
just missed by a turn of the bridle another horseman ascending the hill,
and urging a weary animal. The faces of the men shot past each other
within a short yard, and gaze met gaze; but neither in the dark flash
knew the other, for a big tree barred the moonlight. But Carne, in
another moment, thought that the man who had passed must be Scudamore,
probably fraught with hot tidings. And the thought was confirmed, as
he met two troopers riding as hard as ride they might; and then saw the
beacon on the headland flare. From point to point, and from height to
height, like a sprinkle of blood, the red lights ran; and the roar of
guns from the moon-lit sea made echo that they were ready. Then the
rub-a-dub-dub of the drum arose, and the thrilling blare of trumpet;
the great deep of the night was heaved and broken with the stir of human
storm; and the staunchest and strongest piece of earth--our England--was
ready to defend herself.



CHAPTER LXII

THE WAY OUT OF IT


"My father! my father! I must see my father. Who are you, that dare to
keep me out? Let me know the worst, and try to bear it. What are any of
you to him?"

"But, my dear child," Lord Southdown answered, holding the door against
poor Faith, as she strove to enter the room of death, "wait just one
minute, until we have lifted him to the sofa, and let us bring your poor
sister out."

"I have no sister. She has killed my father, and the best thing she can
do is to die. I feel that I could shoot her, if I had a pistol. Let me
see him, where he lies."

"But, my poor dear, you must think of others. Your dear father is beyond
all help. Your gallant lover lies on the grass. They hope to bring him
round, God willing! Go where you can be of use."

"How cruel you are! You must want to drive me mad. Let his father and
mother see to him, while I see to my own father. If you had a daughter,
you would understand. Am I crying? Do I even tremble?"

The Marquis offered his arm, and she took it in fear of falling, though
she did not tremble; so he led her to her father's last repose. The poor
Admiral lay by the open window, with his head upon a stool which Faith
had worked. The ghastly wound was in his broad smooth forehead, and his
fair round cheeks were white with death. But the heart had not quite
ceased to beat, and some remnant of the mind still hovered somewhere
in the lacerated brain. Stubbard, sobbing like a child, was lifting
and clumsily chafing one numb hand; while his wife, who had sponged the
wound, was making the white curls wave with a fan she had shaped from a
long official paper found upon the floor.

Dolly was recovering from her swoon, and sat upon a stool by the
bookcase, faintly wondering what had happened, but afraid to ask or
think. The corner of the bookcase, and the burly form of Stubbard,
concealed the window from her, and the torpid oppression which ensues
upon a fit lay between her and her agony. Faith, as she passed, darted
one glance at her, not of pity, not of love, but of cold contempt and
satisfaction at her misery.

Then Faith, the quiet and gentle maid, the tranquil and the
self-controlled (whom every one had charged with want of heart, because
she had borne her own grief so well), stood with the body of her father
at her feet, and uttered an exceeding bitter cry. The others had seen
enough of grief, as every human being must, but nothing half so sad
as this. They feared to look at her face, and durst not open lips to
comfort her.

"Don't speak. Don't look at him. You have no right here. When he comes
to himself, he will want none but me. I have always done everything for
him since dear mother died; and I shall get him to sit up. He will be
so much better when he sits up. I can get him to do it, if you will
only go. Oh, father, father, it is your own Faith come to make you well,
dear, if you will only look at me!"

As she took his cold limp hand and kissed it, and wiped a red splash
from his soft white hair, the dying man felt, by nature's feeling, that
he was being touched by a child of his. A faint gleam flitted through
the dimness of his eyes, which he had not the power to close, and the
longing to say "farewell" contended with the drooping of the underlip.
She was sure that he whispered, "Bless you, darling!" though nobody else
could have made it out; but a sudden rush of tears improved her hearing,
as rain brings higher voices down.

"Dolly too!" he seemed to whisper next; and Faith made a sign to Mrs.
Stubbard. Then Dolly was brought, and fell upon her knees, at the other
side of her father, and did not know how to lament as yet, and was
scarcely sure of having anything to mourn. But she spread out her hands,
as if for somebody to take them, and bowed her pale face, and closed her
lips, that she might be rebuked without answering.

Her father knew her; and his yearning was not to rebuke, but to bless
and comfort her. He had forgotten everything, except that he was dying,
with a daughter at each side of him. This appeared to make him very
happy, about everything, except those two. He could not be expected
to have much mind left; but the last of it was busy for his children's
good. Once more he tried to see them both, and whispered his last
message to them--"Forgive and love each other."

Faith bowed her head, as his fell back, and silently offered to kiss her
sister; but Dolly neither moved nor looked at her. "As you please,"
said Faith; "and perhaps you would like to see a little more of your
handiwork."

For even as she spoke, her lover's body was carried past the window,
with his father and mother on either side, supporting his limp arms and
sobbing. Then Dolly arose, and with one hand grasping the selvage of
the curtain, fixed one long gaze upon her father's corpse. There were
no tears in her eyes, no sign of anguish in her face, no proof that she
knew or felt what she had done. And without a word she left the room.

"Hard to the last, even hard to you!" cried Faith, as her tears fell
upon the cold forehead. "Oh, darling, how could you have loved her so?"

"It is not hardness; it is madness. Follow your sister," Lord Southdown
said. "We have had calamities enough."

But Faith was fighting with all her strength against an attack of
hysterics, and fetching long gasps to control herself. "I will go,"
replied Mrs. Stubbard; "this poor child is quite unfit. What on earth is
become of Lady Scudamore? A doctor's widow might have done some good."

The doctor's widow was doing good elsewhere. In the first rush from the
dining-room, Lady Scudamore had been pushed back by no less a person
than Mrs. Stubbard; when at last she reached the study door she found
it closed against her, and entering the next room, saw the flash of the
pistol fired at Twemlow. Bravely hurrying to the spot by the nearest
outlet she could find, she became at once entirely occupied with this
new disaster. For two men who ran up with a carriage lamp declared that
the gentleman was as dead as a door-nail, and hastened to make good
their words by swinging him up heels over head. But the lady made them
set him down and support his head, while she bathed the wound, and sent
to the house for his father and mother, and when he could be safely
brought in-doors, helped with her soft hands beneath his hair, and then
