would see her once more."

As at daybreak the loungers on Montmartre and the ramparts descended
into the streets--most windows in which were open, as they had been
all night, with anxious female faces peering palely down-they saw the
conveyances of the ambulances coming dismally along, and many an
eye turned wistfully towards the litter on which lay the idol of the
pleasure-loving Paris, with the dark, bareheaded figure walking beside
it,--onwards, onwards, till it reached the Hotel de Vandemar, and a
woman's cry was heard at the entrance--the mother's cry, "My son! my
son!"





BOOK XII.




CHAPTER I.

The last book closed with the success of the Parisian sortie on the
30th of November, to be followed by the terrible engagements no less
honourable to French valour, on the 2nd of December. There was the
sanguine belief that deliverance was at hand; that Trochu would break
through the circle of iron, and effect that junction with the army
of Aurelles de Paladine which would compel the Germans to raise the
investment;--belief rudely shaken by Ducrot's proclamation of the 4th,
to explain the recrossing of the Marne, and the abandonment of the
positions conquered, but not altogether dispelled till von Moltke's
letter to Trochu on the 5th announcing the defeat of the army of the
Loire and the recapture of Orleans. Even then the Parisians did not
lose hope of succour; and even after the desperate and fruitless sortie
against Le Bourget on the 21st, it was not without witticisms on defeat
and predictions of triumph, that Winter and Famine settled sullenly on
the city.

Our narrative reopens with the last period of the siege.

It was during these dreadful days, that if the vilest and the most
hideous aspects of the Parisian population showed themselves at
the worst, so all its loveliest, its noblest, its holiest
characteristics--unnoticed by ordinary observers in the prosperous days
of the capital--became conspicuously prominent. The higher classes,
including the remnant of the old noblesse, had, during the whole siege,
exhibited qualities in notable contrast to those assigned them by
the enemies of aristocracy. Their sons had been foremost among those
soldiers who never calumniated a leader, never fled before a foe; their
women had been among the most zealous and the most tender nurses of the
ambulances they had founded and served; their houses had been freely
opened, whether to the families exiled from the suburbs, or in
supplement to the hospitals. The amount of relief they afforded
unostentatiously, out of means that shared the general failure of
accustomed resource, when the famine commenced, would be scarcely
credible if stated. Admirable, too, were the fortitude and resignation
of the genuine Parisian bourgeoisie,--the thrifty tradesfolk and small
rentiers,--that class in which, to judge of its timidity when opposed
to a mob, courage is not the most conspicuous virtue. Courage became so
now--courage to bear hourly increasing privation, and to suppress every
murmur of suffering that would discredit their patriotism, and invoke
"peace at any price." It was on this class that the calamities of the
siege now pressed the most heavily. The stagnation of trade, and the
stoppage of the rents, in which they had invested their savings, reduced
many of them to actual want. Those only of their number who obtained the
pay of one-and-a-half franc a day as National Guards, could be sure to
escape from starvation. But this pay had already begun to demoralise the
receivers. Scanty for supply of food, it was ample for supply of drink.
And drunkenness, hitherto rare in that rank of the Parisians, became
a prevalent vice, aggravated in the case of a National Guard, when
it wholly unfitted him for the duties he undertook, especially such
National Guards as were raised from the most turbulent democracy of the
working class.

But of all that population; there were two sections in which the
most beautiful elements of our human nature were most touchingly
manifest--the women and the priesthood, including in the latter
denomination all the various brotherhoods and societies which religion
formed and inspired.

It was on the 27th of December that Frederic Lemercier stood gazing
wistfully on a military report affixed to a blank wall, which stated
that "the enemy, worn out by a resistance of over one hundred days,"
had commenced the bombardment. Poor Frederic was sadly altered; he had
escaped the Prussian's guns, but not the Parisian winter--the severest
known for twenty years. He was one of the many frozen at their
posts--brought back to the ambulance with Fox in his bosom trying
to keep him warm. He had only lately been sent forth as
convalescent,--ambulances were too crowded to retain a patient longer
than absolutely needful,--and had been hunger-pinched and frost-pinched
ever since. The luxurious Frederic had still, somewhere or other, a
capital yielding above three thousand a year, and of which he could not
now realise a franc, the title-deeds to various investments being in the
hands of Duplessis, the most trustworthy of friends, the most upright of
men, but who was in Bretagne, and could not be got at. And the time had
come at Paris when you could not get trust for a pound of horse-flesh,
or a daily supply of fuel. And Frederic Lemercier, who had long since
spent the 2000 francs borrowed from Alain (not ignobly, but somewhat
ostentatiously, in feasting any acquaintance who wanted a feast), and
who had sold to any one who could afford to speculate on such dainty
luxuries,--clocks, bronzes, amber-mounted pipes,--all that had made the
envied garniture of his bachelor's apartment--Frederic Lemercier was,
so far as the task of keeping body and soul together, worse off than
any English pauper who can apply to the Union. Of course he might have
claimed his half-pay of thirty sous as a National Guard. But he little
knows the true Parisian who imagines a seigneur of the Chaussee d'Antin,
the oracle of those with whom he lived, and one who knew life so well
that he had preached prudence to a seigneur of the Faubourg like Alain
de Rochebriant, stooping to apply for the wages of thirty sons. Rations
were only obtained by the wonderful patience of women, who had children
to whom they were both saints and martyrs. The hours, the weary hours,
one had to wait before one could get one's place on the line for the
distribution of that atrocious black bread, defeated men,--defeated most
wives if only for husbands, were defied only by mothers and daughters.
Literally speaking, Lemercier was starving. Alain had been badly wounded
in the sortie of the 21st, and was laid up in an ambulance. Even if
he could have been got at, he had probably nothing left to bestow upon
Lemercier.

Lemercier gazed on the announcement of the bombardment, and the
Parisian gaiety, which some French historian of the siege calls douce
philosophie, lingering on him still, he said, audibly, turning round
to any stranger who heard: "Happiest of mortals that we are! Under the
present Government we are never warned of anything disagreeable that can
happen; we are only told of it when it has happened, and then as rather
pleasant than otherwise. I get up. I meet a civil gendarme. 'What is
that firing? which of our provincial armies is taking Prussia in the
rear? 'Monsieur,' says the gendarme, 'it is the Prussian Krupp guns.' I
look at the proclamation, and my fears varnish,--my heart is relieved. I
read that the bombardment is a sure sign that the enemy is worn out."

Some of the men grouped round Frederic ducked their heads in terror;
others, who knew that the thunderbolt launched from the plateau of Avron
would not fall on the pavements of Paris, laughed and joked. But in
front, with no sign of terror, no sound of laughter, stretched, moving
inch by inch, the female procession towards the bakery in which the
morsel of bread for their infants was doled out.

"Hist, mon ami," said a deep voice beside Lemercier. "Look at those
women, and do not wound their ears by a jest."

Lemercier, offended by that rebuke, though too susceptible to good
emotions not to recognise its justice, tried with feeble fingers to turn
up his moustache, and to turn a defiant crest upon the rebuker. He
was rather startled to see the tall martial form at his side, and to
recognise Victor de Mauleon. "Don't you think, M. Lemercier," resumed
the Vicomte, half sadly, "that these women are worthy of better husbands
and sons than are commonly found among the soldiers whose uniform we
wear?"

"The National Guard! You ought not to sneer at them, Vicomte,--you
whose troop covered itself with glory on the great days of Villiers
and Champigny,--you in whose praise even the grumblers of Paris became
eloquent, and in whom a future Marshal of France is foretold."

"But, alas! more than half of my poor troop was left on the
battle-field, or is now wrestling for mangled remains of life in the
ambulances. And the new recruits with which I took the field on the
21st are not likely to cover themselves with glory, or to insure their
commander the baton of a marshal."

"Ay, I heard when I was in the hospital that you had publicly shamed
some of these recruits, and declared that you would rather resign than
lead them again to battle."

"True; and at this moment, for so doing, I am the man most hated by the
rabble who supplied those recruits." The men, while thus conversing,
had moved slowly on, and were now in front of a large cafe, from the
interior of which came the sound of loud bravos and clappings of hands.
Lemercier's curiosity was excited. "For what can be that applause?" he
said; "let us look in and see." The room was thronged. In the distance,
on a small raised platform, stood a girl dressed in faded theatrical
finery, making her obeisance to the crowd.

"Heavens!" exclaimed Frederic--"can I trust my eyes? Surely that is the
once superb Julie: has she been dancing here?"

One of the loungers, evidently belonging to the same world as Lemercier,
overheard the question and answered politely: "No, Monsieur: she has
been reciting verses, and really declaims very well, considering it
is not her vocation. She has given us extracts from Victor Hugo and De
Musset: and crowned all with a patriotic hymn by Gustave Rameau,--her
old lover, if gossip be true." Meanwhile De Mauleon, who at first had
glanced over the scene with his usual air of calm and cold indifference,
became suddenly struck by the girl's beautiful face, and gazed on it
with a look of startled surprise.

"Who and what did you say that poor fair creature is, M. Lemercier?"

"She is a Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin, and was a very popular coryphee.
She has hereditary right to be a good dancer, as the daughter of a once
more famous ornament of the ballet, la belle Leonie--whom you must have
seen in your young days."

"Of course. Leonie--she married a M. Surville, a silly bourgeois
gentilhomme, who earned the hatred of Paris by taking her off the stage.
So that is her daughter I see no likeness to her mother--much handsomer.
Why does she call herself Caumartin?"

"Oh," said Frederic, "a melancholy but trite story."

"Leonie was left a widow, and died in want. What could the poor young
daughter do? She found a rich protector, who had influence to get her
an appointment in the ballet: and there she did as most girls so
circumstanced do--appeared under an assumed name, which she has since
kept."

"I understand," said Victor, compassionately. "Poor thing! she has
quitted the platform, and is coming this way, evidently to speak to you.
I saw her eyes brighten as she caught sight of your face."

Lemercier attempted a languid air of modest self-complacency as the girl
now approached him. "Bonjour, M. Frederic! Ah, mon Dieu! how thin you
have grown! You have been ill?"

"The hardships of a military life, Mademoiselle. Ah, for the beaux
fours and the peace we insisted on destroying under the Empire which we
destroyed for listening to us! But you thrive well, I trust. I have seen
you better dressed, but never in greater beauty."

The girl blushed as she replied, "Do you really think as you speak?"

"I could not speak more sincerely if I lived in the legendary House of
Glass."

The girl clutched his arm, and said in suppressed tones, "Where is
Gustave?"

"Gustave Rameau? I have no idea. Do you never see him now?"

"Never,--perhaps I never shall see him again; but when you do meet
him, say that Julie owes to him her livelihood. An honest livelihood,
Monsieur. He taught her to love verses--told her how to recite them. I
am engaged at this cafe--you will find me here the same hour every day,
in case--in case--You are good and kind, and will come and tell me that
Gustave is well and happy even if he forgets me. Au revoir! Stop, you do
look, my poor Frederic, as if--as if--pardon me, Monsieur Lemercier, is
there anything I can do? Will you condescend to borrow from me? I am in
funds."

Lemercier at that offer was nearly moved to tears. Famished though he
was, he could not, however, have touched that girl's earnings.

"You are an angel of goodness, Mademoiselle! Ah, how I envy Gustave
Rameau! No, I don't want aid. I am always a--rentier."

"Bien! and if you see Gustave, you will not forget."

"Rely on me. Come away," he said to De Mauleon; "I don't want to hear
that girl repeat the sort of bombast the poets indite nowadays. It is
fustian; and that girl may have a brain of feather, but she has a heart
of gold."

"True," said Victor, as they regained the street. "I overheard what
she said to you. What an incomprehensible thing is a woman! how more
incomprehensible still is a woman's love! Ah, pardon me; I must leave
you. I see in the procession a poor woman known to me in better days."

De Mauleon walked towards the woman he spoke of--one of the long
procession to the bakery--a child clinging to her robe. A pale
grief-worn woman, still young, but with the weariness of age on her
face, and the shadow of death on her child's.

"I think I see Madame Monnier," said De Mauleon, softly.

She turned and looked at him drearily. A year ago, she would have
blushed if addressed by a stranger in a name not lawfully hers.

"Well," she said, in hollow accents broken by cough; "I don't know you,
Monsieur."

"Poor woman!" he resumed, walking beside her as she moved slowly on,
while the eyes of other women in the procession stared at him hungrily.
"And your child looks ill too. It is your youngest?"

"My only one! The others are in Pere la Chaise. There are but few
children alive in my street now. God has been very merciful, and taken
them to Himself."

De Mauleon recalled the scene of a neat comfortable apartment, and the
healthful happy children at play on the floor. The mortality among the
little ones, especially in the quartier occupied by the working classes,
had of late been terrible. The want of food, of fuel, the intense
severity of the weather, had swept them off as by a pestilence.

"And Monnier--what of him? No doubt he is a National Guard, and has his
pay?"

The woman made no answer, but hung down her head. She was stifling a
sob. Till then her eyes seemed to have exhausted the last source of
tears.

"He lives still?" continued Victor, pityingly: "he is not wounded?"

"No: he is well--in health; thank you kindly, Monsieur."

"But his pay is not enough to help you, and of course he can get no
work. Excuse me if I stopped you. It is because I owed Armand Monnier a
little debt for work, and I am ashamed to say that it quite escaped my
memory in these terrible events. Allow me, Madame, to pay it to you,"
and he thrust his purse into her hand. "I think this contains about the
sum I owed; if more or less, we will settle the difference later. Take
care of yourself."

He was turning away when the woman caught hold of him.

"Stay, Monsieur. May Heaven bless you!--but--but tell me what name I am
to give to Armand. I can't think of any one who owed him money. It must
have been before that dreadful strike, the beginning of all our woes.
Ah, if it were allowed to curse any one, I fear my last breath would not
be a prayer."

"You would curse the strike, or the master who did not forgive Armand's
share in it?"

"No, no,--the cruel man who talked him into it--into all that has
changed the best workman, the kindest heart--the--the--" again her voice
died in sobs.

"And who was that man?" asked De Mauleon, falteringly.

"His name was Lebeau. If you were a poor man, I should say 'Shun him.'"

"I have heard of the name you mention; but if we mean the same person,
Monnier cannot have met him lately. He has not been in Paris since the
siege."

"I suppose not, the coward! He ruined us--us who were so happy before;
and then, as Armand says, cast us away as instruments he had done with.
But--but if you do know him, and do see him again, tell him--tell him
not to complete his wrong--not to bring murder on Armand's soul. For
Armand isn't what he was--and has become, oh, so violent! I dare not
take this money without saying who gave it. He would not take money as
alms from an aristocrat. Hush! he beat me for taking money from the good
Monsieur Raoul de Vandemar--my poor Armand beat me!"

De Mauleon shuddered. "Say that it is from a customer whose rooms
he decorated in his spare hours on his own account before the
strike,--Monsieur --------;" here he uttered indistinctly some
unpronounceable name and hurried off, soon lost as the streets grew
darker. Amid groups of a higher order of men-military men, nobles,
ci-devant deputies--among such ones his name stood very high. Not only
his bravery in the recent sorties had been signal, but a strong belief
in his military talents had become prevalent; and conjoined with
the name he had before established as a political writer, and the
remembrance of the vigour and sagacity with which he had opposed the
war, he seemed certain, when peace and order became established, of
a brilliant position and career in a future administration: not less
because he had steadfastly kept aloof from the existing Government,
which it was rumoured, rightly or erroneously, that he had been
solicited to join; and from every combination of the various democratic
or discontented factions.

Quitting these more distinguished associates, he took his way alone
towards the ramparts. The day was closing; the thunders of the cannon
were dying down.

He passed by a wine-shop round which were gathered many of the worse
specimens of the Moblots and National Guards, mostly drunk, and loudly
talking in vehement abuse of generals and officers and commissariat. By
one of the men, as he came under the glare of a petroleum lamp (there
was gas no longer in the dismal city), he was recognised as the
commander who had dared to insist on discipline, and disgrace honest
patriots who claimed to themselves the sole option between fight and
flight. The man was one of those patriots--one of the new recruits whom
Victor had shamed and dismissed for mutiny and cowardice. He made a
drunken plunge at his former chief, shouting, "A bas Pai-isto! Comrades,
this is the coquin De Mauleon who is paid by the Prussians for getting
us killed: a la lanterne!" "A la lanterne!" stammered and hiccupped
others of the group; but they did not stir to execute their threat.
Dimly seen as the stern face and sinewy form of the threatened man was
by their drowsied eyes, the name of De Mauleon, the man without fear
of a foe, and without ruth for a mutineer, sufficed to protect him from
outrage; and with a slight movement of his arm that sent his denouncer
reeling against the lamp-post, De Mauleon passed on:--when another man,
in the uniform of a National Guard, bounded from the door of the tavern,
crying with a loud voice, "Who said De Mauleon?--let me look on him:"
and Victor, who had strode on with slow lion-like steps, cleaving the
crowd, turned, and saw before him in the gleaming light a face, in which
the bold frank, intelligent aspect of former days was lost in a wild,
reckless, savage expression--the face of Armand Monnier.

"Ha! are you really Victor de Mauleon?" asked Monnier, not fiercely, but
under his breath,--in that sort of stage whisper which is the natural
utterance of excited men under the mingled influence of potent drink and
hoarded rage.

"Certainly; I am Victor de Mauleon."

"And you were in command of the--company of the National Guard on the
30th of November at Champigny and Villiers?"

"I was."

"And you shot with your own hand an officer belonging to another company
who refused to join yours?"

"I shot a cowardly soldier who ran away from the enemy, and seemed a
ringleader of other runaways; and in so doing, I saved from dishonour
the best part of his comrades."

"The man was no coward. He was an enlightened Frenchman, and worth fifty
of such aristos as you; and he knew better than his officers that he was
to be led to an idle slaughter. Idle--I say idle. What was France the
better, how was Paris the safer, for the senseless butchery of that day?
You mutinied against a wiser general than Saint Trochu when you murdered
that mutineer."

"Armand Monnier, you are not quite sober to-night, or I would argue with
you that question. But you no doubt are brave: how and why do you take
the part of a runaway?"

"How and why? He was my brother, and you own you murdered him: my
brother--the sagest head in Paris. If I had listened to him, I should
not be,--bah!--no matter now what I am."

"I could not know he was your brother; but if he had been mine I would
have done the same."

Here Victor's lip quivered, for Monnier griped him by the arm, and
looked him in the face with wild stony eyes. "I recollect that voice!
Yet--yet--you say you are a noble, a Vicomte--Victor de Mauleon, and you
shot my brother!"

Here he passed his left hand rapidly over his forehead. The fumes of
wine still clouded his mind, but rays of intelligence broke through the
cloud. Suddenly he said in a loud, and calm, and natural voice:

"Mons. le Vicomte, you accost me as Armand Monnier--pray how do you know
my name?"

"How should I not know it? I have looked into the meetings of the 'Clubs
rouges.' I have heard you speak, and naturally asked your name. Bon soir
M. Monnier! When you reflect in cooler moments, you will see that if
patriots excuse Brutus for first dishonouring and then executing his own
son, an officer charged to defend his country may be surely pardoned for
slaying a runaway to whom he was no relation, when in slaying he saved
the man's name and kindred from dishonour--unless, indeed, you insist on
telling the world why he was slain."

"I know your voice--I know it. Every sound becomes clearer to my ear.
And if--"

But while Monnier thus spoke, De Mauleon had hastened on. Monnier looked
round, saw him gone, but did not pursue. He was just intoxicated enough
to know that his footsteps were not steady, and he turned back to the
wine-shop and asked surlily for more wine. Could you have seen him then
as he leant swinging himself to and fro against the wall,--had you known
the man two years ago, you would have been a brute if you felt disgust.
You could only have felt that profound compassion with which we gaze on
a great royalty fallen. For the grandest of all royalties is that which
takes its crown from Nature, needing no accident of birth. And Nature
made the mind of Armand Monnier king-like; endowed it with lofty scorn
of meanness and falsehood and dishonour, with warmth and tenderness of
heart which had glow enough to spare from ties of kindred and hearth and
home, to extend to those distant circles of humanity over which royal
natures would fain extend the shadow of their sceptre.

How had the royalty of the man's nature fallen thus? Royalty rarely
falls from its own constitutional faults. It falls when, ceasing to be
royal, it becomes subservient to bad advisers. And what bad advisers,
always appealing to his better qualities and so enlisting his worser,
had discrowned this mechanic?

"A little knowledge is a dangerous thing," says the old-fashioned poet.

"Not so," says the modern philosopher; "a little knowledge; is safer
than no knowledge." Possibly, as all individuals and all communities
must go through the stage of a little knowledge before they can arrive
at that of much knowledge, the philosopher's assertion may be right
in the long-run, and applied to humankind in general. But there is
a period, as there is a class, in which a little knowledge tends to
terrible demoralisation. And Armand Monnier lived in that period and
was one of that class. The little knowledge that his mind, impulsive
and ardent, had picked up out of books that warred with the great
foundations of existing society, had originated in ill advices. A man
stored with much knowledge would never have let Madame de Grantmesnil's
denunciations of marriage rites, or Louis Blane's vindication of
Robespierre as the representative of the working against the middle
class, influence his practical life. He would have assessed such
opinions at their real worth; and whatever that worth might seem to
him, would not to such opinions have committed the conduct of his
life. Opinion is not fateful: conduct is. A little knowledge crazes
an earnest, warm-blooded, powerful creature like Armand Monnier into a
fanatic. He takes an opinion which pleases him as a revelation from the
gods; that opinion shapes his conduct; that conduct is his fate. Woe to
the philosopher who serenely flings before the little knowledge of
the artisan dogmas as harmless as the Atlantis of Plato if only to be
discussed by philosophers, and deadly as the torches of Ate if seized as
articles of a creed by fanatics! But thrice woe to the artisan who makes
himself the zealot of the Dogma!

Poor Armand acts on the opinions he adopts; proves his contempt for the
marriage state by living with the wife of another; resents, as natures
so inherently manly must do, the Society that visits on her his defiance
of its laws; throws himself, head foremost, against that society
altogether; necessarily joins all who have other reasons for
hostility to Society; he himself having every inducement not to join
indiscriminate strikes--high wages, a liberal employer, ample savings,
the certainty of soon becoming employer himself. No; that is not enough
to the fanatic: he persists on being dupe and victim. He, this great
king of labour, crowned by Nature, and cursed with that degree of little
knowledge which does not comprehend how much more is required before
a schoolboy would admit it to be knowledge at all,--he rushes into the
maddest of all speculations--that of the artisan with little knowledge
and enormous faith--that which intrusts the safety and repose and
dignity of life to some ambitious adventurer, who uses his warm heart
for the adventurer's frigid purpose, much as the lawyer-government of
September used the Communists,--much as, in every revolution of France,
a Bertrand has used a Raton--much as, till the sound of the last
trumpet, men very much worse than Victor de Mauleon will use men very
much better than Armand Monnier, if the Armand Monniers disdain the
modesty of an Isaac Newton on hearing that a theorem to which he had
given all the strength of his patient intellect was disputed: "It may be
so;" meaning, I suppose, that it requires a large amount of experience
ascertained before a man of much knowledge becomes that which a man of
little knowledge is at a jump-the fanatic of an experiment untried.




CHAPTER II.

Scarcely had De Mauleon quitted Lemercier before the latter was joined
by two loungers scarcely less famished than himself--Savarin and De
Breze. Like himself, too, both had been sufferers from illness, though
not of a nature to be consigned to an hospital. All manner of diseases
then had combined to form the pestilence which filled the streets with
unregarded hearses--bronchitis, pneumonia, smallpox, a strange sort of
spurious dysentery much more speedily fatal than the genuine. The three
men, a year before so sleek, looked like ghosts under the withering sky;
yet all three retained embers of the native Parisian humour, which their
very breath on meeting sufficed to kindle up into jubilant sparks or
rapid flashes.

"There are two consolations," said Savarin, as the friends strolled or
rather crawled towards the Boulevards--"two consolations for the gourmet
and for the proprietor in these days of trial for the gourmand, because
the price of truffles is come down."

"Truffles!" gasped De Breze, with watering mouth; "impossible! They are
gone with the age of gold."

"Not so. I speak on the best authority--my laundress; for she attends
the succursale in the Rue de Chateaudun; and if the poor woman, being,
luckily for me, a childless widow, gets a morsel she can spare, she
sells it to me."

"Sells it!" feebly exclaimed Lemercier. "Croesus! you have money then,
and can buy?"

"Sells it--on credit! I am to pension her for life if I live to have
money again. Don't interrupt me. This honest woman goes this morning to
the succursale. I promise myself a delicious bifteck of horse. She gains
the succursale, and the employee informs her that there is nothing left
in his store except--truffles. A glut of those in the market allows him
to offer her a bargain-seven francs la boite. Send me seven francs, De
Breze, and you shall share the banquet."

De Breze shook his head expressively.

"But," resumed Savarin, "though credit exists no more except with my
laundress, upon terms of which the usury is necessarily proportioned to
the risk, yet, as I had the honour before to observe, there is comfort
for the proprietor. The instinct of property is imperishable."

"Not in the house where I lodge," said Lemercier. "Two soldiers were
billeted there; and during my stay in the ambulance they enter my rooms,
and cart away all of the little furniture left there, except a bed and a
table. Brought before a court-martial, they defend themselves by saying,
'The rooms were abandoned.' The excuse was held valid. They were let off
with a reprimand and a promise to restore what was not already disposed
of. They have restored me another table and four chairs."

"Nevertheless, they had the instinct of property, though erroneously
developed, otherwise they would not have deemed any excuse for their
act necessary. Now for my instance of the inherent tenacity of that
instinct. A worthy citizen in want of fuel sees a door in a garden wall,
and naturally carries off the door. He is apprehended by a gendarme who
sees the act. 'Voleur,' he cries to the gendarme, 'do you want to rob me
of my property?' 'That door your property? I saw you take it away.' 'You
confess,' cries the citizen, triumphantly--'you confess that it is my
property; for you saw me appropriate it.' Thus you see how imperishable
is the instinct of property. No sooner does it disappear as yours than
it reappears as mine."

"I would laugh if I could," said Lemercier, "but such a convulsion would
be fatal. Dieu des dieux, how empty I am!" He reeled as he spoke, and
clung to De Breze for support. De Breze had the reputation of being the
most selfish of men. But at that moment, when a generous man might be
excused for being selfish enough to desire to keep the little that he
had for his own reprieve from starvation, this egotist became superb.
"Friends," he cried, with enthusiasm, "I have something yet in my
pocket; we will dine, all three of us."

"Dine!" faltered Lemercier. "Dine! I have not dined since I left the
hospital. I breakfasted yesterday--on two mice upon toast. Dainty, but
not nutritious. And I shared them with Fox."

"Fox! Fox lives still, then?" cried De Breze, startled.

"In a sort of way he does. But one mouse since yesterday morning is not
much; and he can't expect that every day."

"Why don't you take him out?" asked Savarin. "Give him a chance of
picking up a bone somewhere."

"I dare not; he would be picked up himself. Dogs are getting very
valuable: they sell for 50 francs apiece. Come, De Breze, where are we
to dine?"

"I and Savarin can dine at the London Tavern upon rat pate or jugged
cat. But it would be impertinence to invite a satrap like yourself who
has a whole dog in his larder--a dish of 50 francs--a dish for a king.
Adieu, my dear Frederic. Allons, Savarin."

"I feasted you on better meats than dog when I could afford it," said
Frederic, plaintively; "and the first time you invite me you retract the
invitation. Be it so. Bon appetit."

"Bah!" said De Breze, catching Frederic's arm as he turned to depart.
"Of course I was but jesting. Only another day, when my pockets will be
empty, do think what an excellent thing a roasted dog is, and make up
your mind while Fox has still some little flesh on his bones."

"Flesh!" said Savarin, detaining them. "Look! See how right Voltaire was
in saying, 'Amusement is the first necessity of civilised man.' Paris
can do without bread Paris still retains Polichinello."

He pointed to the puppet-show, round which a crowd, not of children
alone, but of men-middle-aged and old-were collected; while sous were
dropped into the tin handed round by a squalid boy.

"And, mon ami," whispered De Breze to Lemercier, with the voice of a
tempting fiend, "observe how Punch is without his dog."

It was true. The dog was gone,--its place supplied by a melancholy
emaciated cat.

Frederic crawled towards the squalid boy. "What has become of Punch's
dog?"

"We ate him last Sunday. Next Sunday we shall have the cat in a pie,"
said the urchin, with a sensual smack of the lips.

"O Fox! Fox!" murmured Frederic, as the three men went slowly down
through the darkening streets--the roar of the Prussian guns heard afar,
while distinct and near rang the laugh of the idlers round the Punch
without a dog.




CHAPTER III.

While De Breze and his friends were feasting at the cafe Anglais, and
faring better than the host had promised--for the bill of fare comprised
such luxuries as ass, mule, peas, fried potatoes, and champagne
(champagne in some mysterious way was inexhaustible during the time of
famine)--a very different group had assembled in the rooms of
Isaura Cicogna. She and the Venosta had hitherto escaped the extreme
destitution to which many richer persons had been reduced. It is true
that Isaura's fortune placed in the hands of the absent Louvier, and
invested in the new street that was to have been, brought no return. It
was true that in that street the Venosta, dreaming of cent. per cent.,
had invested all her savings. But the Venosta, at the first announcement
of war, had insisted on retaining in hand a small sum from the amount
Isaura had received from her "roman," that might suffice for current
expenses, and with yet more acute foresight had laid in stores of
provisions and fuel immediately after the probability of a siege became
apparent. But even the provident mind of the Venosta had never foreseen
that the siege would endure so long, or that the prices of all articles
of necessity would rise so high. And meanwhile all resources--money,
fuel, provisions--had been largely drawn upon by the charity and
benevolence of Isaura, without much remonstrance on the part of the
Venosta, whose nature was very accessible to pity. Unfortunately, too,
of late money and provisions had failed to Monsieur and Madame Rameau,
their income consisting partly of rents no longer paid, and the profits
of a sleeping partnership in the old shop, from which custom had
departed; so that they came to share the fireside and meals at the rooms
of their son's fiancee with little scruple, because utterly unaware that
the money retained and the provisions stored by the Venosta were now
nearly exhausted.

The patriotic ardour which had first induced the elder Rameau to
volunteer his services as a National Guard had been ere this cooled
if not suppressed, first by the hardships of the duty, and then by the
disorderly conduct of his associates, and their ribald talk and obscene
songs. He was much beyond the age at which he could be registered. His
son was, however, compelled to become his substitute, though from
his sickly health and delicate frame attached to that portion of
the National Guard which took no part in actual engagements, and was
supposed to do work on the ramparts and maintain order in the city.

In that duty, so opposed to his tastes and habits, Gustave signalised
himself as one of the loudest declaimers against the imbecility of the
Government, and in the demand for immediate and energetic action, no
matter at what loss of life, on the part of all--except the heroic force
to which he himself was attached. Still, despite his military
labours, Gustave found leisure to contribute to Red journals, and his
contributions paid him tolerably well. To do him justice, his parents
concealed from him the extent of their destitution; they, on their part,
not aware that he was so able to assist them, rather fearing that he
himself had nothing else for support but his scanty pay as a National
Guard. In fact, of late the parents and son had seen little of each
other. M. Rameau, though a Liberal politician, was Liberal as a
tradesman, not as a Red Republican or a Socialist. And, though little
heeding his son's theories while the Empire secured him from the
practical effect of them, he was now as sincerely frightened at the
chance of the Communists becoming rampant as most of the Parisian
tradesmen were. Madame Rameau, on her side, though she had the dislike
to aristocrats which was prevalent with her class, was a stanch Roman
Catholic; and seeing in the disasters that had befallen her country the
punishment justly incurred by its sins, could not but be shocked by the
opinions of Gustave, though she little knew that he was the author
of certain articles in certain journals, in which these opinions were
proclaimed with a vehemence far exceeding that which they assumed in
his conversation. She had spoken to him with warm anger, mixed with
passionate tears, on his irreligious principles; and from that moment
Gustave shunned to give her another opportunity of insulting his pride
and depreciating his wisdom.

Partly to avoid meeting his parents, partly because he recoiled
almost as much from the ennui of meeting the other visitors at her
apartments--the Paris ladies associated with her in the ambulance, Raoul
de Vandeniar, whom he especially hated, and the Abbe Vertpre, who had
recently come into intimate friendship with both the Italian ladies--his
visits to Isaura had become exceedingly rare. He made his incessant
military duties the pretext for absenting himself; and now, on this
evening, there were gathered round Isaura's hearth--on which burned
almost the last of the hoarded fuel--the Venosta, the two Rameaus, the
Abbe Vertpre, who was attached as confessor to the society of which
Isaura was so zealous a member. The old priest and the young poetess had
become dear friends. There is in the nature of a woman (and especially
of a woman at once so gifted and so childlike as Isaura, combining
an innate tendency towards faith with a restless inquisitiveness of
intellect, which is always suggesting query or doubt) a craving for
something afar from the sphere of her sorrow, which can only be obtained
through that "bridal of the earth and sky" which we call religion. And
hence, to natures like Isaura's, that link between the woman and the
priest, which the philosophy of France has never been able to dissever.

"It is growing late," said Madame Rameau; "I am beginning to feel
uneasy. Our dear Isaura is not yet returned."

"You need be under no apprehension," said the Abby. "The ladies attached
to the ambulance of which she is so tender and zealous a sister incur no
risk. There are always brave men related to the sick and wounded who
see to the safe return of the women. My poor Raoul visits that ambulance
daily. His kinsman, M. de Rochebriant, is there among the wounded."

"Not seriously hurt, I hope," said the Venosta; "not disfigured? He
was so handsome; it is only the ugly warrior whom a scar on the face
improves."

"Don't be alarmed, Signora; the Prussian guns spared his face. His
wounds in themselves were not dangerous, but he lost a good deal of
blood. Raoul and the Christian brothers found him insensible among a
heap of the slain."

"M. de Vandemar seems to have very soon recovered the shock of his poor
brother's death," said Madame Rameau. "There is very little heart in an
aristocrat."

The Abbe's mild brow contracted. "Have more charity, my daughter. It is
because Raoul's sorrow for his lost brother is so deep and so holy that
he devotes himself more than ever to the service of the Father which
is in heaven. He said, a day or two after the burial, when plans for
a monument to Enguerrand were submitted to him: 'May my prayer be
vouchsafed, and my life be a memorial of him more acceptable to his
gentle spirit than monuments of bronze or marble. May I be divinely
guided and sustained in my desire to do such good acts as he would have
done had he been spared longer to earth. And whenever tempted to weary,
may my conscience whisper, Betray not the trust left to thee by thy
brother, lest thou be not reunited to him at last."'

"Pardon me, pardon!" murmured Madame Rameau humbly, while the Venosta
burst into tears.

The Abbe, though a most sincere and earnest ecclesiastic, was a cheery
and genial man of the world; and, in order to relieve Madame Rameau
from the painful self-reproach he had before excited, he turned the
conversation. "I must beware, however," he said, with his pleasant
laugh, "as to the company in which I interfere in family questions;
and especially in which I defend my poor Raoul from any charge brought
against him. For some good friend this day sent me a terrible organ
of communistic philosophy, in which we humble priests are very roughly
handled, and I myself am especially singled out by name as a pestilent
intermeddler in the affairs of private households. I am said to set
the women against the brave men who are friends of the people, and
am cautioned by very truculent threats to cease from such villainous
practices." And here, with a dry humour that turned into ridicule
what would otherwise have excited disgust and indignation among his
listeners, he read aloud passages replete with the sort of false
eloquence which was then the vogue among the Red journals. In these
passages, not only the Abbe was pointed out for popular execration, but
Raoul de Vandemar, though not expressly named, was clearly indicated as
a pupil of the Abbe's, the type of a lay Jesuit.

The Venosta alone did not share in the contemptuous laughter with which
the inflated style of these diatribes inspired the Rameaus. Her simple
Italian mind was horror-stricken by language which the Abbe treated with
ridicule.

"Ah!" said M. Rameau, "I guess the author--that firebrand Felix Pyat."

"No," answered the Abbe; "the writer signs himself by the name of a
more learned atheist--Diderot le jeune." Here the door opened, and Raoul
entered, accompanying Isaura. A change had come over the face of the
young Vandemar since his brother's death. The lines about the mouth had
deepened, the cheeks had lost their rounded contour and grown somewhat
hollow. But the expression was as serene as ever, perhaps even less
pensively melancholy. His whole aspect was that of a man who
has sorrowed, but been supported in sorrow; perhaps it was more
sweet-certainly it was more lofty.

And, as if there were in the atmosphere of his presence something that
communicated the likeness of his own soul to others, since Isaura had
been brought into his companionship, her own lovely face had caught
the expression that prevailed in his--that, too, had become more
sweet--that, too, had become more lofty.

The friendship that had grown up between these two young mourners was of
a very rare nature. It had in it no sentiment that could ever warm into
the passion of human love. Indeed, had Isaura's heart been free to give
away, love for Raoul de Vandemar would have seemed to her a profanation.
He was never more priestly than when he was most tender. And the
tenderness of Raoul towards her was that of some saint-like nature
towards the acolyte whom it attracted upwards. He had once, just before
Enguerrand's death, spoken to Isaura with a touching candour as to his
own predilection for a monastic life. "The worldly avocations that open
useful and honourable careers for others have no charm for me. I care
not for riches nor power, nor honours nor fame. The austerities of the
conventual life have no terror for me; on the contrary, they have
a charm, for with them are abstraction from earth and meditation on
heaven. In earlier years I might, like other men, have cherished
dreams of human love, and felicity in married life, but for the sort
of veneration with which I regarded one to whom I owe--humanly
speaking--whatever of good there may be in me. Just when first taking
my place among the society of young men who banish from their life all
thought of another, I came under the influence of a woman who taught me
to see that holiness was beauty. She gradually associated me with her
acts of benevolence, and from her I learned to love God too well not to
be indulgent to his creatures. I know not whether the attachment I
felt to her could have been inspired in one who had not from childhood
conceived a romance, not perhaps justified by history, for the ideal
images of chivalry. My feeling for her at first was that of the pure
and poetic homage which a young knight was permitted, sans reproche, to
render to some fair queen or chatelaine, whose colours he wore in the
lists, whose spotless repute he would have perilled his life to defend.
But soon even that sentiment, pure as it was, became chastened from all
breath of earthly love, in proportion as the admiration refined itself
into reverence. She has often urged me to marry, but I have no bride on
this earth. I do but want to see Enguerrand happily married, and then I
quit the world for the cloister."

But after Enguerrand's death, Raoul resigned all idea of the convent.
That evening, as he attended to their homes Isaura and the other ladies
at to the ambulance, he said, in answer to inquiries about his mother,
"She is resigned and calm. I have promised her I will not, while she
lives, bury her other son: I renounce my dreams of the monastery."

Raoul did not remain many minutes at Isaura's. The Abbe accompanied him
on his way home. "I have a request to make to you," said the former;
"you know, of course, your distant cousin the Vicomte de Mauleon?"

"Yes. Not so well as I ought, for Enguerrand liked him."

"Well enough, at all events, to call on him with a request which I am
commissioned to make, but it might come better from you as a kinsman.
I am a stranger to him, and I know not whether a man of that sort would
not regard as an officious intermeddling any communication made to him
by a priest. The matter, however, is a very simple one. At the convent
of ------- there is a poor nun who is, I fear, dying. She has an intense
desire to see M. de Mauleon, whom she declares to be her uncle, and her
only surviving relative. The laws of the convent are not too austere to
prevent the interview she seeks in such a case. I should add that I am
not acquainted with her previous history. I am not the confessor of the
sisterhood; he, poor man, was badly wounded by a chance ball a few
days ago when attached to an ambulance on the ramparts. As soon as the
surgeon would allow him to see any one, he sent for me, and bade me go
to the nun I speak of--Sister Ursula. It seems that he had informed
her that M. de Mauleon was at Paris, and had promised to ascertain his
address. His wound had prevented his doing so, but he trusted to me to
procure the information. I am well acquainted with the Superieure of
the convent, and I flatter myself that she holds me in esteem. I had
therefore no difficulty to obtain her permission to see this poor nun,
which I did this evening. She implored me for the peace of her soul to
lose no time in finding out M. de Mauleon's address, and entreating him
to visit her. Lest he should demur, I was to give him the name by which
he had known her in the world--Louise Duval. Of course I obeyed. The
address of a man who has so distinguished himself in this unhappy
siege I very easily obtained, and repaired at once to M. de Mauleon's
apartment. I there learned that he was from home, and it was uncertain
whether he would not spend the night on the ramparts."

"I will not fail to see him early in the morning," said Raoul, "and
execute your commission."

