party return punctually. The boys had been up early, and had slept
but little the night before, and were not sorry at eight o'clock
to lie down on the bed of freshly cut rushes covered with home spun
sheets, for regular beds of feathers were still but little used in
England. At five o'clock they were astir again, and their hostess
insisted on their eating a manchet of bread with some cheese, washed
down by a stoup of ale, before starting. Dick had the boat at the
jetty ready to row them off, and as soon as they were on board the
Susan preparations were made for a start.

The mainsail was first hoisted, its size greatly surprising the
boys; then the foresail and jib were got up, and lastly the mizzen.
Then the capstan was manned, and the anchor slowly brought on
board, and the sails being sheeted home, the craft began to steal
through the water. The tide was still draining up, and she had not
as yet swung. The wind was light, and, as the skipper had predicted,
was nearly due south. As the ketch made its way out from the mouth
of the river, and the wide expanse of water opened before them, the
boys were filled with delight. They had taken their seats, one on
each side of the skipper, who was at the tiller.

"I suppose you steer by the compass, Master Chambers?" Geoffrey
said. "Which is the compass? I have heard about it, always pointing
to the north."

"It's down below, young sir; I will show it you presently. We steer
by that at night, or when it's foggy; but on a fine day like this
there is no need for it. There are marks put up on all the sands,
and we steer by them. You see, the way the wind is now we can lay
our course for the Whittaker. That's a cruel sand, that is, and
stretches out a long way from a point lying away on the right there.
Once past that we bear away to the southwest, for we are then, so
to speak, fairly in the course of the river. There is many a ship
has been cast away on the Whittaker. Not that it is worse than
other sands. There are scores of them lying in the mouth of the
river, and if it wasn't for the marks there would be no sailing in
or out."

"Who put up the marks?" Lionel asked.

"They are put up by men who make a business of it. There is one
boat of them sails backwards and forwards where the river begins
to narrow above Sheerness, and every ship that goes up or down pays
them something according to her size. Others cruise about with long
poles, putting them in the sands wherever one gets washed away.
They have got different marks on them. A single cross piece, or
two cross pieces, or a circle, or a diamond; so that each sand has
got its own particular mark. These are known to the masters of all
ships that go up and down the river, and so they can tell exactly
where they are, and what course to take. At night they anchor, for
there would be no possibility of finding the way up or down in the
dark. I have heard tell from mariners who have sailed abroad that
there ain't a place anywhere with such dangerous sands as those we
have got here at the mouth of the Thames."

In the first three or four hours' sail Geoffrey and Lionel acquired
much nautical knowledge. They learned the difference between the
mainmast and the mizzen, found that all the strong ropes that kept
the masts erect and stiff were called stays, that the ropes that
hoist sails are called halliards, and that sheets is the name given
to the ropes that restrain the sails at the lower corner, and are
used to haul them in more tightly when sailing close to the wind,
or to ease them off when the wind is favourable. They also learned
that the yards at the head of the main and mizzen sails are called
gaffs, and those at the bottom, booms.

"I think that's about enough for you to remember in one day, young
masters," John Lirriper said. "You bear all that in your mind,
and remember that each halliard and sheet has the name of the sail
to which it is attached, and you will have learnt enough to make
yourself useful, and can lend a hand when the skipper calls out,
`Haul in the jib sheet,' or `Let go the fore halliards.' Now sit
yourselves down again and see what is doing. That beacon you can
just see right ahead marks the end of the Whittaker Spit. When we
get there we shall drop anchor till the tide turns. You see we are
going across it now, but when we round that beacon we shall have it
dead against us, and the wind would be too light to take us against
it even if it were not from the quarter it is. You see there are
two or three other craft brought up there."

"Where have they come from, do you think, Master Lirriper?"

"Well, they may have come out from Burnham, or they may have come
down from London and be going up to Burnham or to Bricklesey when
the tide turns. There is a large ship anchored in the channel beyond
the Whittaker. Of course she is going up when tide begins to flow.
And there are the masts of two vessels right over there. They are
in another channel. Between us and them there is a line of sands
that you will see will show above the water when it gets a bit
lower. That is the main channel, that is; and vessels coming from
the south with a large draught of water generally use that, while
this is the one that is handiest for ships from the north. Small
vessels from the south come in by a channel a good bit beyond those
ships. That is the narrowest of the three; and even light draught
vessels don't use it much unless the wind is favourable, for there
is not much room for them to beat up if the wind is against them."

"What is to beat up, Master Lirriper?"

"Well, you will see about that presently. I don't think we shall
be able to lay our course beyond the Whittaker. To lay our course
means to steer the way we want to go; and if we can't do that we
shall have to beat, and that is tedious work with a light wind like
this."

They dropped anchor off the beacon, and the captain said that this
was the time to take breakfast. The lads already smelt an agreeable
odour arising from the cabin forward, where the boy had been for
some time busily engaged, and soon the whole party were seated on
the lockers in the cabin devouring fried fish.

"Master Chambers," Geoffrey said, "we have got two boiled pullets
in our basket. Had we not better have them for dinner? They were
cooked the evening before we came away, and I should think they
had better be eaten now."

"You had better keep them for yourselves, Master Geoffrey," the
skipper said. "We are accustomed to living on fish, but like enough
you would get tired of it before we got to London."

But this the boys would not hear of, and it was accordingly arranged
that the dinner should be furnished from the contents of the basket.

As soon as tide turned the anchor was hove up and the Susan got under
way again. The boys soon learnt the meaning of the word beating,
and found that it meant sailing backwards and forwards across
the channel, with the wind sometimes on one side of the boat and
sometimes on the other. Geoffrey wanted very much to learn why,
when the wind was so nearly ahead, the boat advanced instead of
drifting backwards or sideways. But this was altogether beyond the
power of either Master Lirriper or Joe Chambers to explain. They
said every one knew that when the sails were full a vessel went in
the direction in which her head pointed. "It's just the same way
with yourself, Master Geoffrey. You see, when you look one way
that's the way you go. When you turn your head and point another
way, of course you go off that way; and it's just the same thing
with the ship."

"I don't think it's the same thing, Master Lirriper," Geoffrey
said puzzled. "In one case the power that makes one go comes from
the inside, and so one can go in any direction one likes; in the
other it comes from outside, and you would think the ship would
have to go any way the wind pushes her. If you stand up and I give
you a push, I push you straight away from me. You don't go sideways
or come forward in the direction of my shoulder, which is what the
ship does."

John Lirriper took off his cap and scratched his head.

"I suppose it is as you say, Master Geoffrey, though I never thought
of it before. There is some reason, no doubt, why the craft moves
up against the wind so long as the sails are full, instead of drifting
away to leeward; though I never heard tell of it, and never heard
anyone ask before. I dare say a learned man could tell why it is;
and if you ask your good father when you go back I would wager he
can explain it. It always seems to me as if a boat have got some
sort of sense, just like a human being or a horse, and when she
knows which way you wants her to go she goes. That's how it seems
to me--ain't it, Joe?"

"Something like that, uncle. Every one knows that a boat's got her
humours, and sometimes she sails better than she does others; and
each boat's got her own fancies. Some does their best when they are
beating, and some are lively in a heavy sea, and seem as if they
enjoy it; and others get sulky, and don't seem to take the trouble
to lift their bows up when a wave meets them; and they groans and
complains if the wind is too hard for them, just like a human being.
When you goes to a new vessel you have got to learn her tricks
and her ways and what she will do, and what she won't do, and just
to humour her as you would a child. I don't say as I think she
is actually alive; but every sailor will tell you that there is
something about her that her builders never put there."

"That's so," John Lirriper agreed. "Look at a boat that is hove
up when her work's done and going to be broke up. Why, anyone can
tell her with half an eye. She looks that forlorn and melancholy
that one's inclined to blubber at the sight of her. She don't look
like that at any other time. When she is hove up she is going to
die, and she knows it."

"But perhaps that's because the paint's off her sides and the ropes
all worn and loose," Geoffrey suggested.

But Master Lirriper waved the suggestion aside as unworthy even of
an answer, and repeated, "She knows it. Anyone can see that with
half an eye."

Geoffrey and Lionel talked the matter over when they were sitting
together on deck apart from the others. It was an age when there
were still many superstitions current in the land. Even the upper
classes believed in witches and warlocks, in charms and spells, in
lucky and unlucky days, in the arts of magic, in the power of the
evil eye; and although to the boys it seemed absurd that a vessel
should have life, they were not prepared altogether to discredit an
idea that was evidently thoroughly believed by those who had been
on board ships all their lives. After talking it over for some time
they determined to submit the question to their father on their
return.

It took them two more tides before they were off Sheerness. The
wind was now more favourable, and having increased somewhat in
strength, the Susan made her way briskly along, heeling over till
the water ran along her scuppers. There was plenty to see now, for
there were many fishing boats at work, some belonging, as Master
Chambers told them, to the Medway, others to the little village of
Leigh, whose church they saw at the top of the hill to their right.
They met, too, several large craft coming down the river, and passed
more than one, for the Susan was a fast boat.

"They would beat us," the skipper said when the boys expressed
their surprise at their passing such large vessels, "if the wind
were stronger or the water rough. We are doing our best, and if the
wind rises I shall have to take in sail; while they could carry all
theirs if it blew twice as hard. Then in a sea, weight and power
tell; a wave that would knock the way almost out of us would hardly
affect them at all."

So well did the Susan go along, that before the tide was much more
than half done they passed the little village of Gravesend on their
left, with the strong fort of Tilbury on the opposite shore, with
its guns pointing on the river, and ready to give a good account
of any Spaniard who should venture to sail up the Thames. Then at
the end of the next reach the hamlet of Grays was passed on the
right; a mile further Greenhithe on the left. Tide was getting
slack now, but the Susan managed to get as far as Purfleet, and
then dropped her anchor.

"This is our last stopping place," Joe Chambers said. "The morning
tide will carry us up to London Bridge."

"Then you will not go on with tonight's tide?" Geoffrey asked.

"No; the river gets narrower every mile, and I do not care to take
the risk of navigating it after dark, especially as there is always
a great deal of shipping moored above Greenwich. Tide will begin
to run up at about five o'clock, and by ten we ought to be safely
moored alongside near London Bridge. So we should not gain a great
deal by going on this evening instead of tomorrow morning, and I
don't suppose you are in a particular hurry."

"Oh, no," Lionel said. "We would much rather go on in the morning,
otherwise we should miss everything by the way; and there is the
Queen's Palace at Greenwich that I want to see above all things."

Within a few minutes of the hour the skipper had named for their
arrival, the Susan was moored alongside some vessels lying off one
of the wharves above the Tower. The boys' astonishment had risen with
every mile of their approach to the city, and they were perfectly
astounded at the amount of shipping that they now beheld. The great
proportion were of course coasters, like themselves, but there were
many large vessels among them, and of these fully half were flying
foreign colours. Here were traders from the Netherlands, with the
flag that the Spaniards had in vain endeavoured to lower, flying
at their mastheads. Here were caravels from Venice and Genoa, laden
with goods from the East. Among the rest Master Chambers pointed out
to the lads the ship in which Sir Francis Drake had circumnavigated
the world, and that in which Captain Stevens had sailed to India,
round the Cape of Good Hope. There were many French vessels also
in the Pool, and indeed almost every flag save that of Spain was
represented. Innumerable wherries darted about among the shipping,
and heavier cargo boats dropped along in more leisurely fashion.
Across the river, a quarter of a mile above the point at which
they were lying, stretched London Bridge, with its narrow arches
and the houses projecting beyond it on their supports of stout
timbers. Beyond, on the right, rising high above the crowded roofs,
was the lofty spire of St. Paul's. The boys were almost awed by
this vast assemblage of buildings. That London was a great city they
had known, but they were not prepared for so immense a difference
between it and the place where they had lived all their lives. Only
with the Tower were they somewhat disappointed. It was very grand
and very extensive, but not so much grander than the stately abode
of the Veres as they had looked for.

"I wouldn't change, if I were the earl, with the queen's majesty,"
Geoffrey said. "Of course it is larger than Hedingham, but not so
beautiful, and it is crowded in by the houses, and has not like our
castle a fair lookout on all sides. Why, there can be no hunting
or hawking near here, and I can't think what the nobles can find
to do all day."

"Now, young sirs," Master Lirriper said, "if you will get your
wallets we will go ashore at once."

The boys were quite bewildered as they stepped ashore by the bustle
and confusion. Brawny porters carrying heavy packages on their
backs pushed along unceremoniously, saying from time to time
in a mechanical sort of way, "By your leave, sir!" but pushing
on and shouldering passersby into the gutter without the smallest
compunction. The narrowness and dinginess of the streets greatly
surprised and disappointed the boys, who found that in these
respects even Harwich compared favourably with the region they
were traversing. Presently, however, after passing through several
lanes and alleys, they emerged into a much broader street, alive
with shops. The people who were walking here were for the most
part well dressed and of quiet demeanour, and there was none of
the rough bustle that had prevailed in the riverside lanes.

"This is Eastchepe," their conductor said; "we have not far to go
now. The street in which my friend dwells lies to the right, between
this and Tower Street. I could have taken you a shorter way there,
but I thought that your impressions of London would not be favourable
did I take you all the way through those ill smelling lanes."

In a quarter of an hour they arrived at their destination, and
entered the shop, which smelt strongly of tar; coils of rope of
all sizes were piled up one upon another by the walls, while on
shelves above them were blocks, lanterns, compasses, and a great
variety of gear of whose use the boys were ignorant. The chandler
was standing at his door.

"I am right glad to see you, Master Lirriper," he said, "and have
been expecting you for the last two or three days. My wife would
have it that some evil must have befallen you; but you know what
women are. They make little allowance for time or tide or distance,
but expect that every one can so arrange his journeys as to arrive
at the very moment when they begin to expect him. But who have you
here with you?"

"These are the sons of the worshipful Mr. Vickars, the rector of
our parish and tutor to the Earl of Oxford and several of the young
Veres, his cousins--a wise gentleman and a kind one, and much
loved among us. He has entrusted his two sons to me that I might
show them somewhat of this city of yours. I said that I was right
sure that you and your good dame would let them occupy the chamber
you intended for me, while I can make good shift on board the
Susan."

"Nay, nay, Master Lirriper; our house is big enough to take in you
and these two young masters, and Dorothy would deem it a slight
indeed upon her hospitality were you not to take up your abode here
too.

"You will be heartily welcome, young sirs, and though such
accommodation as we can give you will not be equal to that which
you are accustomed to, I warrant me that you will find it a pleasant
change after that poky little cabin on board the Susan. I know it
well, for I supply her with stores, and have often wondered how
men could accustom themselves to pass their lives in places where
there is scarce room to turn, to say nothing of the smell of fish
that always hangs about it. But if you will follow me I will take
you up to my good dame, to whose care I must commit you for the
present, as my foreman, John Watkins, is down by the riverside
seeing to the proper delivery of divers stores on board a ship
which sails with the next tide for Holland. My apprentices, too,
are both out, as I must own is their wont. They always make excuses
to slip down to the riverside when there is aught doing, and I am
far too easy with the varlets. So at present, you see, I cannot
long leave my shop."

So saying the chandler preceded them up a wide staircase that led
from a passage behind the shop, and the boys perceived that the
house was far more roomy and comfortable than they had judged from
its outward appearance. Turning to the left when he reached the
top of the stairs the chandler opened a door.

"Dorothy," he said, "here is your kinsman, Master Lirriper, who
has suffered none of the misadventures you have been picturing to
yourself for the last two days, and he has brought with him these
young gentlemen, sons of the rector of Hedingham, to show them
something of London."

"You are welcome, young gentlemen," Dame Dorothy said, "though why
anyone should come to London when he can stay away from it I know
not."

"Why, Dorothy, you are always running down our city, though I know
right well that were I to move down with you to your native Essex
again you would very soon cry out for the pleasures of the town."

"That would I not," she said. "I would be well contented to live
in fresh country air all the rest of my life, though I do not say
that London has not its share of pleasures also, though I care but
little for them."

"Ah, Master Lirriper," her husband said laughing, "you would not
think, to hear her talk, that there is not a feast or a show that
Dorothy would stay away from. She never misses an opportunity, I
warrant you, of showing herself off in her last new kirtle and gown.
But I must be going down; there is no one below, and if a customer
comes and finds the shop empty he will have but a poor idea of me,
and will think that I am away gossiping instead of attending to my
business."

"Are you hungry, young sirs?" the dame asked. "Because if so the
maid shall bring up a manchet of bread and a cup of sack; if not,
our evening meal will be served in the course of an hour."

The boys both said that they were perfectly able to wait until the
meal came; and Geoffrey added, "If you will allow us, mistress, as
doubtless you have private matters to talk of with Master Lirriper,
my brother and I will walk out for an hour to see something of the
town."

"Mind that you lose not your way," Master Lirriper said. "Do not go
beyond Eastchepe, I beg you. There are the shops to look at there,
and the fashions of dress and other matters that will occupy your
attention well enough for that short time. Tomorrow morning I will
myself go with you, and we can then wander further abroad. I have
promised your good father to look after you, you know; and it will
be but a bad beginning if you meet with any untoward adventure upon
this the first day of your arrival here."

"We will not go beyond the limits of Eastchepe; and as to adventures,
I can't see very well how any can befall us."

"Oh, there are plenty of adventures to be met with in London, young
sir; and I shall be well content if on the day when we again embark
on board the Susan none of them have fallen to your share."

The two lads accordingly sallied out and amused themselves greatly
by staring at the goods exhibited in the open shops. They were
less surprised at the richness and variety of the silver work, at
the silks from the East, the costly satins, and other stuffs, than
most boys from the country would have been, for they were accustomed
to the splendour and magnificence displayed by the various noble
guests at the castle, and saw nothing here that surpassed the
brilliant shows made at the jousting and entertainments at Hedingham.

It was the scene that was novel to them: the shouts of the apprentices
inviting attention to their employers' wares, the crowd that filled
the street, consisting for the most part of the citizens themselves,
but varied by nobles and knights of the court, by foreigners from
many lands, by soldiers and men-at-arms from the Tower, by countrymen
and sailors. Their amusement was sometimes turned into anger by
the flippant remarks of the apprentices; these varlets, perceiving
easily enough by the manner of their attire that they were from
the country, were not slow, if their master happened for the moment
to be absent, in indulging in remarks that set Geoffrey and Lionel
into a fever to commit a breach of the peace. The "What do you lack,
masters?" with which they generally addressed passersby would be
exchanged for remarks such as, "Do not trouble the young gentlemen,
Nat. Do you not see they are up in the town looking for some of
their master's calves?" or, "Look you, Philip, here are two rustics
