eyes, and let him say his prayers.

Hereupon he was invited to go down on his knees, and the guards of
Loewestein, twelve in number, at a sign from a sergeant, very cleverly
lodged a musket-ball each in his body.

In consequence of this proceeding, Mathias incontinently did then and
there die.

Cornelius listened with the greatest attention to this delightful
recital, and then said,--

"Ah! ah! within twelve hours, you say?"

"Yes, the twelfth hour had not even struck, if I remember right," said
the guard who had told him the story.

"Thank you," said Cornelius.

The guard still had the smile on his face with which he accompanied and
as it were accentuated his tale, when footsteps and a jingling of spurs
were heard ascending the stair-case.

The guards fell back to allow an officer to pass, who entered the cell
of Cornelius at the moment when the clerk of Loewestein was still making
out his report.

"Is this No. 11?" he asked.

"Yes, Captain," answered a non-commissioned officer.

"Then this is the cell of the prisoner Cornelius van Baerle?"

"Exactly, Captain."

"Where is the prisoner?"

"Here I am, sir," answered Cornelius, growing rather pale,
notwithstanding all his courage.

"You are Dr. Cornelius van Baerle?" asked he, this time addressing the
prisoner himself.

"Yes, sir."

"Then follow me."

"Oh! oh!" said Cornelius, whose heart felt oppressed by the first dread
of death. "What quick work they make here in the fortress of Loewestein.
And the rascal talked to me of twelve hours!"

"Ah! what did I tell you?" whispered the communicative guard in the ear
of the culprit.

"A lie."

"How so?"

"You promised me twelve hours."

"Ah, yes, but here comes to you an aide-de-camp of his Highness, even
one of his most intimate companions Van Deken. Zounds! they did not
grant such an honour to poor Mathias."

"Come, come!" said Cornelius, drawing a long breath. "Come, I'll show
to these people that an honest burgher, godson of Cornelius de Witt, can
without flinching receive as many musket-balls as that Mathias."

Saying this, he passed proudly before the clerk, who, being interrupted
in his work, ventured to say to the officer,--

"But, Captain van Deken, the protocol is not yet finished."

"It is not worth while finishing it," answered the officer.

"All right," replied the clerk, philosophically putting up his paper and
pen into a greasy and well-worn writing-case.

"It was written," thought poor Cornelius, "that I should not in this
world give my name either to a child to a flower, or to a book,--the
three things by which a man's memory is perpetuated."

Repressing his melancholy thoughts, he followed the officer with a
resolute heart, and carrying his head erect.

Cornelius counted the steps which led to the Esplanade, regretting that
he had not asked the guard how many there were of them, which the man,
in his official complaisance, would not have failed to tell him.

What the poor prisoner was most afraid of during this walk, which he
considered as leading him to the end of the journey of life, was to see
Gryphus and not to see Rosa. What savage satisfaction would glisten in
the eyes of the father, and what sorrow dim those of the daughter!

How Gryphus would glory in his punishment! Punishment? Rather savage
vengeance for an eminently righteous deed, which Cornelius had the
satisfaction of having performed as a bounden duty.

But Rosa, poor girl! must he die without a glimpse of her, without an
opportunity to give her one last kiss, or even to say one last word of
farewell?

And, worst of all, must he die without any intelligence of the black
tulip, and regain his consciousness in heaven with no idea in what
direction he should look to find it?

In truth, to restrain his tears at such a crisis the poor wretch's
heart must have been encased in more of the aes triplex--"the triple
brass"--than Horace bestows upon the sailor who first visited the
terrifying Acroceraunian shoals.

In vain did Cornelius look to the right and to the left; he saw no sign
either of Rosa or Gryphus.

On reaching the Esplanade, he bravely looked about for the guards
who were to be his executioners, and in reality saw a dozen soldiers
assembled. But they were not standing in line, or carrying muskets, but
talking together so gayly that Cornelius felt almost shocked.

All at once, Gryphus, limping, staggering, and supporting himself on a
crooked stick, came forth from the jailer's lodge; his old eyes, gray
as those of a cat, were lit up by a gleam in which all his hatred was
concentrated. He then began to pour forth such a torrent of disgusting
imprecations against Cornelius, that the latter, addressing the officer,
said,--

"I do not think it very becoming sir, that I should be thus insulted by
this man, especially at a moment like this."

"Well! hear me," said the officer, laughing, "it is quite natural that
this worthy fellow should bear you a grudge,--you seem to have given it
him very soundly."

"But, sir, it was only in self-defence."

"Never mind," said the Captain, shrugging his shoulders like a true
philosopher, "let him talk; what does it matter to you now?"

The cold sweat stood on the brow of Cornelius at this answer, which he
looked upon somewhat in the light of brutal irony, especially as coming
from an officer of whom he had heard it said that he was attached to the
person of the Prince.

The unfortunate tulip-fancier then felt that he had no more resources,
and no more friends, and resigned himself to his fate.

"God's will be done," he muttered, bowing his head; then, turning
towards the officer, who seemed complacently to wait until he had
finished his meditations he asked,--

"Please, sir, tell me now, where am I to go?"

The officer pointed to a carriage, drawn by four horses, which reminded
him very strongly of that which, under similar circumstances, had before
attracted his attention at Buytenhof.

"Enter," said the officer.

"Ah!" muttered Cornelius to himself, "it seems they are not going to
treat me to the honours of the Esplanade."

He uttered these words loud enough for the chatty guard, who was at his
heels, to overhear him.

That kind soul very likely thought it his duty to give Cornelius some
new information; for, approaching the door of the carriage, whilst the
officer, with one foot on the step, was still giving some orders, he
whispered to Van Baerle,--

"Condemned prisoners have sometimes been taken to their own town to be
made an example of, and have then been executed before the door of their
own house. It's all according to circumstances."

Cornelius thanked him by signs, and then said to himself,--

"Well, here is a fellow who never misses giving consolation whenever an
opportunity presents itself. In truth, my friend, I'm very much obliged
to you. Goodbye."

The carriage drove away.

"Ah! you villain, you brigand," roared Gryphus, clinching his fists at
the victim who was escaping from his clutches, "is it not a shame that
this fellow gets off without having restored my daughter to me?"

"If they take me to Dort," thought Cornelius, "I shall see, in passing
my house, whether my poor borders have been much spoiled."




Chapter 30. Wherein the Reader begins to guess the Kind of Execution
that was awaiting Van Baerle


The carriage rolled on during the whole day; it passed on the right of
Dort, went through Rotterdam, and reached Delft. At five o'clock in the
evening, at least twenty leagues had been travelled.

Cornelius addressed some questions to the officer, who was at the same
time his guard and his companion; but, cautious as were his inquiries,
he had the disappointment of receiving no answer.

Cornelius regretted that he had no longer by his side the chatty
soldier, who would talk without being questioned.

That obliging person would undoubtedly have given him as pleasant
details and exact explanations concerning this third strange part of his
adventures as he had done concerning the first two.

The travellers passed the night in the carriage. On the following
morning at dawn Cornelius found himself beyond Leyden, having the North
Sea on his left, and the Zuyder Zee on his right.

Three hours after, he entered Haarlem.

Cornelius was not aware of what had passed at Haarlem, and we shall
leave him in ignorance of it until the course of events enlightens him.

But the reader has a right to know all about it even before our hero,
and therefore we shall not make him wait.

We have seen that Rosa and the tulip, like two orphan sisters, had
been left by Prince William of Orange at the house of the President van
Systens.

Rosa did not hear again from the Stadtholder until the evening of that
day on which she had seen him face to face.

Toward evening, an officer called at Van Systen's house. He came from
his Highness, with a request for Rosa to appear at the Town Hall.

There, in the large Council Room into which she was ushered, she found
the Prince writing.

He was alone, with a large Frisian greyhound at his feet, which looked
at him with a steady glance, as if the faithful animal were wishing to
do what no man could do,--read the thoughts of his master in his face.

William continued his writing for a moment; then, raising his eyes, and
seeing Rosa standing near the door, he said, without laying down his
pen,--

"Come here, my child."

Rosa advanced a few steps towards the table.

"Sit down," he said.

Rosa obeyed, for the Prince was fixing his eyes upon her, but he had
scarcely turned them again to his paper when she bashfully retired to
the door.

The Prince finished his letter.

During this time, the greyhound went up to Rosa, surveyed her and began
to caress her.

"Ah, ah!" said William to his dog, "it's easy to see that she is a
countrywoman of yours, and that you recognise her."

Then, turning towards Rosa, and fixing on her his scrutinising, and at
the same time impenetrable glance, he said,--

"Now, my child."

The Prince was scarcely twenty-three, and Rosa eighteen or twenty. He
might therefore perhaps better have said, My sister.

"My child," he said, with that strangely commanding accent which chilled
all those who approached him, "we are alone; let us speak together."

Rosa began to tremble, and yet there was nothing but kindness in the
expression of the Prince's face.

"Monseigneur," she stammered.

"You have a father at Loewestein?"

"Yes, your Highness."

"You do not love him?"

"I do not; at least, not as a daughter ought to do, Monseigneur."

"It is not right not to love one's father, but it is right not to tell a
falsehood."

Rosa cast her eyes to the ground.

"What is the reason of your not loving your father?"

"He is wicked."

"In what way does he show his wickedness?"

"He ill-treats the prisoners."

"All of them?"

"All."

"But don't you bear him a grudge for ill-treating some one in
particular?"

"My father ill-treats in particular Mynheer van Baerle, who----"

"Who is your lover?"

Rosa started back a step.

"Whom I love, Monseigneur," she answered proudly.

"Since when?" asked the Prince.

"Since the day when I first saw him."

"And when was that?"

"The day after that on which the Grand Pensionary John and his brother
Cornelius met with such an awful death."

The Prince compressed his lips, and knit his brow and his eyelids
dropped so as to hide his eyes for an instant. After a momentary
silence, he resumed the conversation.

"But to what can it lead to love a man who is doomed to live and die in
prison?"

"It will lead, if he lives and dies in prison, to my aiding him in life
and in death."

"And would you accept the lot of being the wife of a prisoner?"

"As the wife of Mynheer van Baerle, I should, under any circumstances,
be the proudest and happiest woman in the world; but----"

"But what?"

"I dare not say, Monseigneur."

"There is something like hope in your tone; what do you hope?"

She raised her moist and beautiful eyes, and looked at William with a
glance full of meaning, which was calculated to stir up in the recesses
of his heart the clemency which was slumbering there.

"Ah, I understand you," he said.

