monks to live in!

About the ninth or tenth year of this reign, Dunstan died.  He was
growing old then, but was as stern and artful as ever.  Two circumstances
that happened in connexion with him, in this reign of Ethelred, made a
great noise.  Once, he was present at a meeting of the Church, when the
question was discussed whether priests should have permission to marry;
and, as he sat with his head hung down, apparently thinking about it, a
voice seemed to come out of a crucifix in the room, and warn the meeting
to be of his opinion.  This was some juggling of Dunstan's, and was
probably his own voice disguised.  But he played off a worse juggle than
that, soon afterwards; for, another meeting being held on the same
subject, and he and his supporters being seated on one side of a great
room, and their opponents on the other, he rose and said, 'To Christ
himself, as judge, do I commit this cause!'  Immediately on these words
being spoken, the floor where the opposite party sat gave way, and some
were killed and many wounded.  You may be pretty sure that it had been
weakened under Dunstan's direction, and that it fell at Dunstan's signal.
_His_ part of the floor did not go down.  No, no.  He was too good a
workman for that.

When he died, the monks settled that he was a Saint, and called him Saint
Dunstan ever afterwards.  They might just as well have settled that he
was a coach-horse, and could just as easily have called him one.

Ethelred the Unready was glad enough, I dare say, to be rid of this holy
saint; but, left to himself, he was a poor weak king, and his reign was a
reign of defeat and shame.  The restless Danes, led by SWEYN, a son of
the King of Denmark who had quarrelled with his father and had been
banished from home, again came into England, and, year after year,
attacked and despoiled large towns.  To coax these sea-kings away, the
weak Ethelred paid them money; but, the more money he paid, the more
money the Danes wanted.  At first, he gave them ten thousand pounds; on
their next invasion, sixteen thousand pounds; on their next invasion,
four and twenty thousand pounds: to pay which large sums, the unfortunate
English people were heavily taxed.  But, as the Danes still came back and
wanted more, he thought it would be a good plan to marry into some
powerful foreign family that would help him with soldiers.  So, in the
year one thousand and two, he courted and married Emma, the sister of
Richard Duke of Normandy; a lady who was called the Flower of Normandy.

And now, a terrible deed was done in England, the like of which was never
done on English ground before or since.  On the thirteenth of November,
in pursuance of secret instructions sent by the King over the whole
country, the inhabitants of every town and city armed, and murdered all
the Danes who were their neighbours.

Young and old, babies and soldiers, men and women, every Dane was killed.
No doubt there were among them many ferocious men who had done the
English great wrong, and whose pride and insolence, in swaggering in the
houses of the English and insulting their wives and daughters, had become
unbearable; but no doubt there were also among them many peaceful
Christian Danes who had married English women and become like English
men.  They were all slain, even to GUNHILDA, the sister of the King of
Denmark, married to an English lord; who was first obliged to see the
murder of her husband and her child, and then was killed herself.

When the King of the sea-kings heard of this deed of blood, he swore that
he would have a great revenge.  He raised an army, and a mightier fleet
of ships than ever yet had sailed to England; and in all his army there
was not a slave or an old man, but every soldier was a free man, and the
son of a free man, and in the prime of life, and sworn to be revenged
upon the English nation, for the massacre of that dread thirteenth of
November, when his countrymen and countrywomen, and the little children
whom they loved, were killed with fire and sword.  And so, the sea-kings
came to England in many great ships, each bearing the flag of its own
commander.  Golden eagles, ravens, dragons, dolphins, beasts of prey,
threatened England from the prows of those ships, as they came onward
through the water; and were reflected in the shining shields that hung
upon their sides.  The ship that bore the standard of the King of the sea-
kings was carved and painted like a mighty serpent; and the King in his
anger prayed that the Gods in whom he trusted might all desert him, if
his serpent did not strike its fangs into England's heart.

And indeed it did.  For, the great army landing from the great fleet,
near Exeter, went forward, laying England waste, and striking their
lances in the earth as they advanced, or throwing them into rivers, in
token of their making all the island theirs.  In remembrance of the black
November night when the Danes were murdered, wheresoever the invaders
came, they made the Saxons prepare and spread for them great feasts; and
when they had eaten those feasts, and had drunk a curse to England with
wild rejoicings, they drew their swords, and killed their Saxon
entertainers, and marched on.  For six long years they carried on this
war: burning the crops, farmhouses, barns, mills, granaries; killing the
labourers in the fields; preventing the seed from being sown in the
ground; causing famine and starvation; leaving only heaps of ruin and
smoking ashes, where they had found rich towns.  To crown this misery,
English officers and men deserted, and even the favourites of Ethelred
the Unready, becoming traitors, seized many of the English ships, turned
pirates against their own country, and aided by a storm occasioned the
loss of nearly the whole English navy.

There was but one man of note, at this miserable pass, who was true to
his country and the feeble King.  He was a priest, and a brave one.  For
twenty days, the Archbishop of Canterbury defended that city against its
Danish besiegers; and when a traitor in the town threw the gates open and
admitted them, he said, in chains, 'I will not buy my life with money
that must be extorted from the suffering people.  Do with me what you
please!'  Again and again, he steadily refused to purchase his release
with gold wrung from the poor.

At last, the Danes being tired of this, and being assembled at a drunken
merry-making, had him brought into the feasting-hall.

'Now, bishop,' they said, 'we want gold!'

He looked round on the crowd of angry faces; from the shaggy beards close
to him, to the shaggy beards against the walls, where men were mounted on
tables and forms to see him over the heads of others: and he knew that
his time was come.

'I have no gold,' he said.

'Get it, bishop!' they all thundered.

'That, I have often told you I will not,' said he.

They gathered closer round him, threatening, but he stood unmoved.  Then,
one man struck him; then, another; then a cursing soldier picked up from
a heap in a corner of the hall, where fragments had been rudely thrown at
dinner, a great ox-bone, and cast it at his face, from which the blood
came spurting forth; then, others ran to the same heap, and knocked him
down with other bones, and bruised and battered him; until one soldier
whom he had baptised (willing, as I hope for the sake of that soldier's
soul, to shorten the sufferings of the good man) struck him dead with his
battle-axe.

If Ethelred had had the heart to emulate the courage of this noble
archbishop, he might have done something yet.  But he paid the Danes
forty-eight thousand pounds, instead, and gained so little by the
cowardly act, that Sweyn soon afterwards came over to subdue all England.
So broken was the attachment of the English people, by this time, to
their incapable King and their forlorn country which could not protect
them, that they welcomed Sweyn on all sides, as a deliverer.  London
faithfully stood out, as long as the King was within its walls; but, when
he sneaked away, it also welcomed the Dane.  Then, all was over; and the
King took refuge abroad with the Duke of Normandy, who had already given
shelter to the King's wife, once the Flower of that country, and to her
children.

Still, the English people, in spite of their sad sufferings, could not
quite forget the great King Alfred and the Saxon race.  When Sweyn died
suddenly, in little more than a month after he had been proclaimed King
of England, they generously sent to Ethelred, to say that they would have
him for their King again, 'if he would only govern them better than he
had governed them before.'  The Unready, instead of coming himself, sent
Edward, one of his sons, to make promises for him.  At last, he followed,
and the English declared him King.  The Danes declared CANUTE, the son of
Sweyn, King.  Thus, direful war began again, and lasted for three years,
when the Unready died.  And I know of nothing better that he did, in all
his reign of eight and thirty years.

Was Canute to be King now?  Not over the Saxons, they said; they must
have EDMUND, one of the sons of the Unready, who was surnamed IRONSIDE,
because of his strength and stature.  Edmund and Canute thereupon fell
to, and fought five battles--O unhappy England, what a fighting-ground it
was!--and then Ironside, who was a big man, proposed to Canute, who was a
little man, that they two should fight it out in single combat.  If
Canute had been the big man, he would probably have said yes, but, being
the little man, he decidedly said no.  However, he declared that he was
willing to divide the kingdom--to take all that lay north of Watling
Street, as the old Roman military road from Dover to Chester was called,
and to give Ironside all that lay south of it.  Most men being weary of
so much bloodshed, this was done.  But Canute soon became sole King of
England; for Ironside died suddenly within two months.  Some think that
he was killed, and killed by Canute's orders.  No one knows.




CHAPTER V--ENGLAND UNDER CANUTE THE DANE


Canute reigned eighteen years.  He was a merciless King at first.  After
he had clasped the hands of the Saxon chiefs, in token of the sincerity
with which he swore to be just and good to them in return for their
acknowledging him, he denounced and slew many of them, as well as many
relations of the late King.  'He who brings me the head of one of my
enemies,' he used to say, 'shall be dearer to me than a brother.'  And he
was so severe in hunting down his enemies, that he must have got together
a pretty large family of these dear brothers.  He was strongly inclined
to kill EDMUND and EDWARD, two children, sons of poor Ironside; but,
being afraid to do so in England, he sent them over to the King of
Sweden, with a request that the King would be so good as 'dispose of
them.'  If the King of Sweden had been like many, many other men of that
day, he would have had their innocent throats cut; but he was a kind man,
and brought them up tenderly.

Normandy ran much in Canute's mind.  In Normandy were the two children of
the late king--EDWARD and ALFRED by name; and their uncle the Duke might
one day claim the crown for them.  But the Duke showed so little
inclination to do so now, that he proposed to Canute to marry his sister,
the widow of The Unready; who, being but a showy flower, and caring for
nothing so much as becoming a queen again, left her children and was
wedded to him.

Successful and triumphant, assisted by the valour of the English in his
foreign wars, and with little strife to trouble him at home, Canute had a
prosperous reign, and made many improvements.  He was a poet and a
musician.  He grew sorry, as he grew older, for the blood he had shed at
first; and went to Rome in a Pilgrim's dress, by way of washing it out.
He gave a great deal of money to foreigners on his journey; but he took
it from the English before he started.  On the whole, however, he
certainly became a far better man when he had no opposition to contend
with, and was as great a King as England had known for some time.

The old writers of history relate how that Canute was one day disgusted
with his courtiers for their flattery, and how he caused his chair to be
set on the sea-shore, and feigned to command the tide as it came up not
to wet the edge of his robe, for the land was his; how the tide came up,
of course, without regarding him; and how he then turned to his
flatterers, and rebuked them, saying, what was the might of any earthly
king, to the might of the Creator, who could say unto the sea, 'Thus far
shalt thou go, and no farther!'  We may learn from this, I think, that a
little sense will go a long way in a king; and that courtiers are not
easily cured of flattery, nor kings of a liking for it.  If the courtiers
of Canute had not known, long before, that the King was fond of flattery,
they would have known better than to offer it in such large doses.  And
if they had not known that he was vain of this speech (anything but a
wonderful speech it seems to me, if a good child had made it), they would
not have been at such great pains to repeat it.  I fancy I see them all
on the sea-shore together; the King's chair sinking in the sand; the King
in a mighty good humour with his own wisdom; and the courtiers pretending
to be quite stunned by it!

It is not the sea alone that is bidden to go 'thus far, and no farther.'
The great command goes forth to all the kings upon the earth, and went to
Canute in the year one thousand and thirty-five, and stretched him dead
upon his bed.  Beside it, stood his Norman wife.  Perhaps, as the King
looked his last upon her, he, who had so often thought distrustfully of
Normandy, long ago, thought once more of the two exiled Princes in their
uncle's court, and of the little favour they could feel for either Danes
or Saxons, and of a rising cloud in Normandy that slowly moved towards
England.




CHAPTER VI--ENGLAND UNDER HAROLD HAREFOOT, HARDICANUTE, AND EDWARD THE
CONFESSOR


Canute left three sons, by name SWEYN, HAROLD, and HARDICANUTE; but his
Queen, Emma, once the Flower of Normandy, was the mother of only
Hardicanute.  Canute had wished his dominions to be divided between the
three, and had wished Harold to have England; but the Saxon people in the
South of England, headed by a nobleman with great possessions, called the
powerful EARL GODWIN (who is said to have been originally a poor
cow-boy), opposed this, and desired to have, instead, either Hardicanute,
or one of the two exiled Princes who were over in Normandy.  It seemed so
certain that there would be more bloodshed to settle this dispute, that
many people left their homes, and took refuge in the woods and swamps.
Happily, however, it was agreed to refer the whole question to a great
meeting at Oxford, which decided that Harold should have all the country
north of the Thames, with London for his capital city, and that
Hardicanute should have all the south.  The quarrel was so arranged; and,
as Hardicanute was in Denmark troubling himself very little about
anything but eating and getting drunk, his mother and Earl Godwin
governed the south for him.

They had hardly begun to do so, and the trembling people who had hidden
themselves were scarcely at home again, when Edward, the elder of the two
exiled Princes, came over from Normandy with a few followers, to claim
the English Crown.  His mother Emma, however, who only cared for her last
son Hardicanute, instead of assisting him, as he expected, opposed him so
strongly with all her influence that he was very soon glad to get safely
back.  His brother Alfred was not so fortunate.  Believing in an
affectionate letter, written some time afterwards to him and his brother,
in his mother's name (but whether really with or without his mother's
knowledge is now uncertain), he allowed himself to be tempted over to
England, with a good force of soldiers, and landing on the Kentish coast,
and being met and welcomed by Earl Godwin, proceeded into Surrey, as far
as the town of Guildford.  Here, he and his men halted in the evening to
rest, having still the Earl in their company; who had ordered lodgings
and good cheer for them.  But, in the dead of the night, when they were
off their guard, being divided into small parties sleeping soundly after
a long march and a plentiful supper in different houses, they were set
upon by the King's troops, and taken prisoners.  Next morning they were
drawn out in a line, to the number of six hundred men, and were
barbarously tortured and killed; with the exception of every tenth man,
who was sold into slavery.  As to the wretched Prince Alfred, he was
stripped naked, tied to a horse and sent away into the Isle of Ely, where
his eyes were torn out of his head, and where in a few days he miserably
died.  I am not sure that the Earl had wilfully entrapped him, but I
suspect it strongly.

Harold was now King all over England, though it is doubtful whether the
Archbishop of Canterbury (the greater part of the priests were Saxons,
and not friendly to the Danes) ever consented to crown him.  Crowned or
uncrowned, with the Archbishop's leave or without it, he was King for
four years: after which short reign he died, and was buried; having never
done much in life but go a hunting.  He was such a fast runner at this,
his favourite sport, that the people called him Harold Harefoot.

Hardicanute was then at Bruges, in Flanders, plotting, with his mother
(who had gone over there after the cruel murder of Prince Alfred), for
the invasion of England.  The Danes and Saxons, finding themselves
without a King, and dreading new disputes, made common cause, and joined
in inviting him to occupy the Throne.  He consented, and soon troubled
them enough; for he brought over numbers of Danes, and taxed the people
so insupportably to enrich those greedy favourites that there were many
insurrections, especially one at Worcester, where the citizens rose and
killed his tax-collectors; in revenge for which he burned their city.  He
was a brutal King, whose first public act was to order the dead body of
poor Harold Harefoot to be dug up, beheaded, and thrown into the river.
His end was worthy of such a beginning.  He fell down drunk, with a
goblet of wine in his hand, at a wedding-feast at Lambeth, given in
honour of the marriage of his standard-bearer, a Dane named TOWED THE
PROUD.  And he never spoke again.

EDWARD, afterwards called by the monks THE CONFESSOR, succeeded; and his
first act was to oblige his mother Emma, who had favoured him so little,
to retire into the country; where she died some ten years afterwards.  He
was the exiled prince whose brother Alfred had been so foully killed.  He
had been invited over from Normandy by Hardicanute, in the course of his
short reign of two years, and had been handsomely treated at court.  His
cause was now favoured by the powerful Earl Godwin, and he was soon made
King.  This Earl had been suspected by the people, ever since Prince
Alfred's cruel death; he had even been tried in the last reign for the
Prince's murder, but had been pronounced not guilty; chiefly, as it was
supposed, because of a present he had made to the swinish King, of a
gilded ship with a figure-head of solid gold, and a crew of eighty
splendidly armed men.  It was his interest to help the new King with his
power, if the new King would help him against the popular distrust and
hatred.  So they made a bargain.  Edward the Confessor got the Throne.
The Earl got more power and more land, and his daughter Editha was made
queen; for it was a part of their compact that the King should take her
for his wife.

But, although she was a gentle lady, in all things worthy to be
beloved--good, beautiful, sensible, and kind--the King from the first
neglected her.  Her father and her six proud brothers, resenting this
cold treatment, harassed the King greatly by exerting all their power to
make him unpopular.  Having lived so long in Normandy, he preferred the
Normans to the English.  He made a Norman Archbishop, and Norman Bishops;
his great officers and favourites were all Normans; he introduced the
Norman fashions and the Norman language; in imitation of the state custom
of Normandy, he attached a great seal to his state documents, instead of
merely marking them, as the Saxon Kings had done, with the sign of the
cross--just as poor people who have never been taught to write, now make
the same mark for their names.  All this, the powerful Earl Godwin and
his six proud sons represented to the people as disfavour shown towards
the English; and thus they daily increased their own power, and daily
diminished the power of the King.

They were greatly helped by an event that occurred when he had reigned
eight years.  Eustace, Earl of Bologne, who had married the King's
sister, came to England on a visit.  After staying at the court some
time, he set forth, with his numerous train of attendants, to return
home.  They were to embark at Dover.  Entering that peaceful town in
armour, they took possession of the best houses, and noisily demanded to
be lodged and entertained without payment.  One of the bold men of Dover,
who would not endure to have these domineering strangers jingling their
heavy swords and iron corselets up and down his house, eating his meat
and drinking his strong liquor, stood in his doorway and refused
admission to the first armed man who came there.  The armed man drew, and
wounded him.  The man of Dover struck the armed man dead.  Intelligence
of what he had done, spreading through the streets to where the Count
Eustace and his men were standing by their horses, bridle in hand, they
passionately mounted, galloped to the house, surrounded it, forced their
way in (the doors and windows being closed when they came up), and killed
the man of Dover at his own fireside.  They then clattered through the
streets, cutting down and riding over men, women, and children.  This did
not last long, you may believe.  The men of Dover set upon them with
great fury, killed nineteen of the foreigners, wounded many more, and,
blockading the road to the port so that they should not embark, beat them
out of the town by the way they had come.  Hereupon, Count Eustace rides
as hard as man can ride to Gloucester, where Edward is, surrounded by
Norman monks and Norman lords.  'Justice!' cries the Count, 'upon the men
of Dover, who have set upon and slain my people!'  The King sends
immediately for the powerful Earl Godwin, who happens to be near; reminds
him that Dover is under his government; and orders him to repair to Dover
and do military execution on the inhabitants.  'It does not become you,'
says the proud Earl in reply, 'to condemn without a hearing those whom
you have sworn to protect.  I will not do it.'

The King, therefore, summoned the Earl, on pain of banishment and loss of
his titles and property, to appear before the court to answer this
disobedience.  The Earl refused to appear.  He, his eldest son Harold,
and his second son Sweyn, hastily raised as many fighting men as their
utmost power could collect, and demanded to have Count Eustace and his
followers surrendered to the justice of the country.  The King, in his
turn, refused to give them up, and raised a strong force.  After some
treaty and delay, the troops of the great Earl and his sons began to fall
off.  The Earl, with a part of his family and abundance of treasure,
sailed to Flanders; Harold escaped to Ireland; and the power of the great
family was for that time gone in England.  But, the people did not forget
them.

Then, Edward the Confessor, with the true meanness of a mean spirit,
visited his dislike of the once powerful father and sons upon the
helpless daughter and sister, his unoffending wife, whom all who saw her
(her husband and his monks excepted) loved.  He seized rapaciously upon
her fortune and her jewels, and allowing her only one attendant, confined
her in a gloomy convent, of which a sister of his--no doubt an unpleasant
lady after his own heart--was abbess or jailer.

Having got Earl Godwin and his six sons well out of his way, the King
favoured the Normans more than ever.  He invited over WILLIAM, DUKE OF
NORMANDY, the son of that Duke who had received him and his murdered
brother long ago, and of a peasant girl, a tanner's daughter, with whom
that Duke had fallen in love for her beauty as he saw her washing clothes
in a brook.  William, who was a great warrior, with a passion for fine
horses, dogs, and arms, accepted the invitation; and the Normans in
England, finding themselves more numerous than ever when he arrived with
his retinue, and held in still greater honour at court than before,
became more and more haughty towards the people, and were more and more
disliked by them.

The old Earl Godwin, though he was abroad, knew well how the people felt;
for, with part of the treasure he had carried away with him, he kept
spies and agents in his pay all over England.

Accordingly, he thought the time was come for fitting out a great
expedition against the Norman-loving King.  With it, he sailed to the
Isle of Wight, where he was joined by his son Harold, the most gallant
and brave of all his family.  And so the father and son came sailing up
the Thames to Southwark; great numbers of the people declaring for them,
and shouting for the English Earl and the English Harold, against the
Norman favourites!

The King was at first as blind and stubborn as kings usually have been
whensoever they have been in the hands of monks.  But the people rallied
so thickly round the old Earl and his son, and the old Earl was so steady
in demanding without bloodshed the restoration of himself and his family
to their rights, that at last the court took the alarm.  The Norman
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Norman Bishop of London, surrounded by
their retainers, fought their way out of London, and escaped from Essex
to France in a fishing-boat.  The other Norman favourites dispersed in
all directions.  The old Earl and his sons (except Sweyn, who had
committed crimes against the law) were restored to their possessions and
dignities.  Editha, the virtuous and lovely Queen of the insensible King,
was triumphantly released from her prison, the convent, and once more sat
in her chair of state, arrayed in the jewels of which, when she had no
champion to support her rights, her cold-blooded husband had deprived
her.

The old Earl Godwin did not long enjoy his restored fortune.  He fell
down in a fit at the King's table, and died upon the third day
afterwards.  Harold succeeded to his power, and to a far higher place in
the attachment of the people than his father had ever held.  By his
valour he subdued the King's enemies in many bloody fights.  He was
vigorous against rebels in Scotland--this was the time when Macbeth slew
Duncan, upon which event our English Shakespeare, hundreds of years
afterwards, wrote his great tragedy; and he killed the restless Welsh
King GRIFFITH, and brought his head to England.

What Harold was doing at sea, when he was driven on the French coast by a
tempest, is not at all certain; nor does it at all matter.  That his ship
was forced by a storm on that shore, and that he was taken prisoner,
there is no doubt.  In those barbarous days, all shipwrecked strangers
were taken prisoners, and obliged to pay ransom.  So, a certain Count
Guy, who was the Lord of Ponthieu where Harold's disaster happened,
seized him, instead of relieving him like a hospitable and Christian lord
as he ought to have done, and expected to make a very good thing of it.

But Harold sent off immediately to Duke William of Normandy, complaining
of this treatment; and the Duke no sooner heard of it than he ordered
Harold to be escorted to the ancient town of Rouen, where he then was,
and where he received him as an honoured guest.  Now, some writers tell
us that Edward the Confessor, who was by this time old and had no
children, had made a will, appointing Duke William of Normandy his
successor, and had informed the Duke of his having done so.  There is no
doubt that he was anxious about his successor; because he had even
invited over, from abroad, EDWARD THE OUTLAW, a son of Ironside, who had
come to England with his wife and three children, but whom the King had
strangely refused to see when he did come, and who had died in London
suddenly (princes were terribly liable to sudden death in those days),
and had been buried in St. Paul's Cathedral.  The King might possibly
have made such a will; or, having always been fond of the Normans, he
might have encouraged Norman William to aspire to the English crown, by
something that he said to him when he was staying at the English court.
But, certainly William did now aspire to it; and knowing that Harold
would be a powerful rival, he called together a great assembly of his
nobles, offered Harold his daughter ADELE in marriage, informed him that
he meant on King Edward's death to claim the English crown as his own
inheritance, and required Harold then and there to swear to aid him.
Harold, being in the Duke's power, took this oath upon the Missal, or
Prayer-book.  It is a good example of the superstitions of the monks,
that this Missal, instead of being placed upon a table, was placed upon a
tub; which, when Harold had sworn, was uncovered, and shown to be full of
dead men's bones--bones, as the monks pretended, of saints.  This was
supposed to make Harold's oath a great deal more impressive and binding.
As if the great name of the Creator of Heaven and earth could be made
more solemn by a knuckle-bone, or a double-tooth, or a finger-nail, of
Dunstan!

Within a week or two after Harold's return to England, the dreary old
Confessor was found to be dying.  After wandering in his mind like a very
weak old man, he died.  As he had put himself entirely in the hands of
the monks when he was alive, they praised him lustily when he was dead.
They had gone so far, already, as to persuade him that he could work
miracles; and had brought people afflicted with a bad disorder of the
skin, to him, to be touched and cured.  This was called 'touching for the
King's Evil,' which afterwards became a royal custom.  You know, however,
Who really touched the sick, and healed them; and you know His sacred
name is not among the dusty line of human kings.
