There was at that time in Avignon a man who controlled the populace. All
these terrible leaders of the Midi have acquired such fatal celebrity
that it suffices to name them for every one, even the least educated,
to know them. This man was Jourdan. Braggart and liar, he had made the
common people believe that it was he who had cut off the head of the
governor of the Bastille. So they called him Jourdan, Coupe-tete.
That was not his real name, which was Mathieu Jouve. Neither was he a
Provencal; he came from Puy-en-Velay. He had formerly been a muleteer
on those rugged heights which surround his native town; then a soldier
without going to war--war had perhaps made him more human; after that
he had kept a drink-shop in Paris. In Avignon he had been a vendor of
madder.

He collected three hundred men, carried the gates of the town, left
half of his troop to guard them, and with the remainder marched upon
the Church of the Cordeliers, preceded by two pieces of cannon. These he
stationed in front of the church and fired them into it at random. The
assassins fled like a flock of frightened birds, leaving some few dead
upon the church steps. Jourdan and his men trampled over the bodies and
entered the holy precincts. No one was there but the Virgin, and the
wretched Lescuyer, still breathing. Jourdan and his comrades took good
care not to despatch Lescuyer; his death agony was a supreme means
of exciting the mob. They picked up this remnant of a sentient being,
three-quarters dead, and carried it along, bleeding, quivering, gasping,
with them.

Every one fled from the sight, closing doors and windows. At the end of
an hour, Jourdan and his three hundred men were masters of the town.

Lescuyer was dead, but what of that; they no longer needed his agony.
Jourdan profited by the terror he had inspired to arrest or have
arrested eighty people, murderers, or so-called murderers of Lescuyer.
Thirty, perhaps, had never even set foot within the church. But when one
has such a good opportunity to be rid of one's enemies, one must profit
by it; good opportunities are rare.

These eighty people were huddled into the Trouillas Tower. Historically
it is known as the Tower de la Glaciere; but why change this name of
the Trouillas Tower? The name is unclean and harmonizes well with the
unclean deed which was now to be perpetrated there.

It had been the scene of the inquisitorial tortures. One can still see
on the walls the greasy soot which rose from the smoke of the funeral
pyre where human bodies were consumed. They still show you to-day the
instruments of torture which they have carefully preserved--the caldron,
the oven, the wooden horse, the chains, the dungeons, and even the
rotten bones. Nothing is wanting.

It was in this tower, built by Clement V., that they now confined the
eighty prisoners. These eighty men, once arrested and locked up in the
Trouillas Tower, became most embarrassing. Who was to judge them? There
were no legally constituted courts except those of the Pope. Could they
kill these unfortunates as they had killed Lescuyer?

We have said that a third, perhaps half of them, had not only taken no
part in the murder, but had not even set foot in the church. How should
they kill them? The killing must be placed upon the basis of reprisals.
But the killing of these eighty people required a certain number of
executioners.

A species of tribunal was improvised by Jourdan and held session in
one of the law-courts. It had a clerk named Raphel; a president, half
Italian, half French; an orator in the popular dialect named Barbe
Savournin de la Roua, and three or four other poor devils, a baker, a
pork butcher--their names are lost in the multitude of events.

These were the men who cried: "We must kill all! If one only escapes he
will be a witness against us."

But, as we have said, executioners were wanting. There were barely
twenty men at hand in the courtyard, all belonging to the petty
tradesfolk of Avignon--a barber, a shoemaker, a cobbler, a mason, and an
upholsterer--all insufficiently armed at random, the one with a sabre,
the other with a bayonet, a third with an iron bar, and a fourth with a
bit of wood hardened by fire. All of these people were chilled by a fine
October rain. It would be difficult to turn them into assassins.

Pooh! Is anything too difficult for the devil?

There comes an hour in such crises when God seems to abandon the earth.
Then the devil's chance comes.

The devil in person entered this cold, muddy courtyard. Assuming the
features, form and face of an apothecary of the neighborhood named
Mendes, he prepared a table lighted by two lanterns, on which he placed
glasses, jugs, pitchers and bottles.

What infernal beverage did these mysterious and curiously formed
receptacles contain? No one ever knew, but the result is well known.
All those who drank that diabolical liquor were suddenly seized with a
feverish rage, a lust of blood and murder. From that moment it was only
necessary to show them the door; they hurtled madly into the dungeon.

The massacre lasted all night; all night the cries, the sobs, the
groans of the dying sounded through the darkness. All were killed, all
slaughtered, men and women. It was long in doing; the killers, we have
said, were drunk and poorly armed. But they succeeded.

Among these butchers was a child remarked for his bestial cruelty, his
immoderate thirst for blood. It was Lescuyer's son. He killed and then
killed again; he boasted of having with his childish hand alone killed
ten men and four women.

"It's all right! I can kill as I like," said he. "I am not yet fifteen,
so they can do nothing to me for it."

As the killing progressed, they threw their victims, the living, dead
and wounded, into the Trouillas Tower, some sixty feet, down into the
pit. The men were thrown in first, and the women later. The assassins
wanted time to violate the bodies of those who were young and pretty. At
nine in the morning, after twelve hours of massacre, a voice was still
heard crying from the depths of the sepulchre:

"For pity's sake, come kill me! I cannot die."

A man, the armorer Bouffier, bent over the pit and looked down. The
others did not dare.

"Who was that crying?" they asked.

"That was Lami," replied Bouffier. Then, when he had returned, they
asked him:

"Well, what did you see at the bottom?"

"A queer marmalade," said he. "Men and women, priests and pretty girls,
all helter-skelter. It's enough to make one die of laughter."

"Decidedly man is a vile creature," said the Count of Monte-Cristo to M.
de Villefort.

Well, it is in this town, still reeking with blood, still warm, still
stirred by these last massacres, that we now introduce two of the
principal personages of our story.




CHAPTER I. A TABLE D'HOTE

The 9th of October, 1799, on a beautiful day of that meridional autumn
which ripens the oranges of Hyeres and the grapes of Saint-Peray, at the
two extremities of Provence, a travelling chaise, drawn by three post
horses, galloped at full speed over the bridge that crosses the Durance,
between Cavailhon and Chateau-Renard, on its way to Avignon, the ancient
papal city which a decree, issued the 25th of May, 1791, eight years
earlier, had reunited to France--a reunion confirmed by the treaty
signed in 1797, at Tolentino, between General Bonaparte and Pope Pius
VI.

The carriage entered by the gate of Aix and, without slackening speed,
traversed the entire length of the town, with its narrow, winding
streets, built to ward off both wind and sun, and halted at fifty paces
from the Porte d'Oulle, at the Hotel du Palais-Egalite, which they were
again beginning to quietly rename the Hotel du Palais-Royal, a name
which it bore formerly and still bears to-day.

These few insignificant words about the name of the inn, before which
halted the post-chaise which we had in view, indicate sufficiently well
the state of France under the government of the Thermidorian reaction,
called the Directory.

After the revolutionary struggle which had occurred between the 14th of
July, 1789, and the 9th Thermidor, 1794; after the days of the 5th and
6th of October, of the 21st of June, of the 10th of August, of the 2d
and 3d of September, of the 21st of May, of the 29th Thermidor and the
1st Prairial; after seeing fall the heads of the King and his judges,
and the Queen and her accusers, of the Girondins and the Cordeliers, the
Moderates and the Jacobins, France experienced that most frightful and
most nauseous of all lassitudes, the lassitude of blood!

She had therefore returned, if not to a need of monarchy, at least to a
desire for a stable government, in which she might place her confidence,
upon which she might lean, which would act for her, and which would
permit her some repose while it acted.

In the stead of this vaguely desired government, the country obtained
the feeble and irresolute Directory, composed for the moment of the
voluptuous Barres, the intriguing Sieyes, the brave Moulins, the
insignificant Roger Ducos, and the honest but somewhat too ingenuous
Gohier. The result was a mediocre dignity before the world at large and
a very questionable tranquillity at home.

It is true that at the moment of which we write our armies, so glorious
during those epic campaigns of 1796 and 1797, thrown back for a time
upon France by the incapacity of Scherer at Verona and Cassano, and by
the defeat and death of Joubert at Novi, were beginning to resume
the offensive. Moreau had defeated Souvarow at Bassignano; Brune had
defeated the Duke of York and General Hermann at Bergen; Massena had
annihilated the Austro-Russians at Zurich; Korsakof had escaped only
with the greatest difficulty; the Austrian, Hotz, with three other
generals, were killed, and five made prisoners. Massena saved France at
Zurich, as Villars, ninety years earlier, had saved it at Denain.

But in the interior, matters were not in so promising a state, and the
government of the Directory was, it must be confessed, much embarrassed
between the war in the Vendee and the brigandages of the Midi, to which,
according to custom, the population of Avignon were far from remaining
strangers.

Beyond doubt the two travellers who descended from the carriage at the
door of the Hotel du Palais-Royal had reason to fear the state of mind
in which the always excitable papal town might be at that time; for just
before reaching Orgon, at a spot where three crossroads stretched out
before the traveller--one leading to Nimes, the second to Carpentras,
the third to Avignon--the postilion had stopped his horses, and, turning
round, asked:

"Will the citizens go by way of Avignon or Carpentras?"

"Which of the two roads is the shorter?" asked the elder of the two
travellers in a harsh, strident voice. Though visibly the elder, he was
scarcely thirty years of age.

"Oh, the road to Avignon, citizen, by a good four miles at least."

"Then," he had replied, "go by way of Avignon."

And the carriage had started again at a gallop, which proclaimed that
the citizen travellers, as the postilion called them, although the title
of Monsieur was beginning to reappear in conversation, paid a fee of at
least thirty sous.

The same desire to lose no time manifested itself at the hotel entrance.
There, as on the road, it was the elder of the two travellers who spoke.
He asked if they could dine at once, and the way this demand was made
indicated that he was ready to overlook many gastronomical exigencies
provided that the repast in question be promptly served.

"Citizens," replied the landlord, who, at the sound of carriage wheels
hastened, napkin in hand, to greet the travellers, "you will be promptly
and comfortably served in your room; but if you will permit me to
advise--" He hesitated.

"Oh, go on! go on!" said the younger of the travellers, speaking for the
first time.

"Well, it would be that you dine at the table d'hote, like the traveller
for whom this coach, already harnessed, is waiting. The dinner is
excellent and all served."

The host at the same time indicated a comfortably appointed carriage,
to which were harnessed two horses who were pawing the ground, while the
postilion sought patience in the bottle of Cahors wine he was emptying
near the window-ledge. The first movement of him to whom this proposal
was made was negative; nevertheless, after a second's reflection,
the elder of the two travellers, as if he had reconsidered his first
decision, made an interrogative sign to his companion, who replied with
a look which signified, "You know that I am at your orders."

"Very well, so be it," said the other, "we will dine at the table
d'hote." Then, turning to the postilion, who, hat in hand, awaited
his order, he added, "Let the horses be ready in a half hour, at the
latest."

And the landlord pointing out the way, they both entered the
dining-room, the elder of the two walking first, the other following
him.

Everyone knows the impression generally produced at a table d'hote by
new-comers. All eyes were bent upon them and the conversation, which
seemed to be quite animated, stopped.

The guests consisted of the frequenters of the hotel, the traveller
whose carriage was waiting harnessed at the door, a wine merchant from
Bordeaux, sojourning temporarily at Avignon for reasons we shall shortly
relate, and a certain number of travellers going from Marseilles to
Lyons by diligence.

The new arrivals greeted the company with a slight inclination of the
head, and sat down at the extreme end of the table, thereby isolating
themselves from the other guests by three or four empty places. This
seemingly aristocratic reserve redoubled the curiosity of which they
were the object; moreover, they were obviously people of unquestionable
distinction, although their garments were simple in the extreme. Both
wore hightop boots and breeches, long-tailed coats, travelling overcoats
and broad-brimmed hats, the usual costume of the young men of that day.
But that which distinguished them from the fashionables of Paris, and
even of the provinces, was their long straight hair, and their black
stocks buckled round the neck, military fashion. The Muscadins--that
was the name then given to young dandies--the Muscadins wore dogs' ears
puffing at the temples, the rest of the hair combed up tightly in a bag
at the back, and an immense cravat with long floating ends, in which
the chin was completely buried. Some had even extended this reaction to
powder.

As to the personality of the two young men, they presented two
diametrically opposite types.

The elder of the two, he who, as we have already remarked, had taken
the initiative several times, and whose voice, even in its most familiar
intonations, denoted the habit of command, was about thirty years of
age. His black hair was parted in the middle, falling straight from
his temples to his shoulders. He had the swarthy skin of a man who has
travelled long in southern climes, thin lips, a straight nose, white
teeth, and those hawk-like eyes which Dante gives to Caesar. He was short
rather than tall, his hand was delicate, his foot slender and elegant.
His manner betrayed a certain awkwardness, suggesting that he was at
the moment wearing a costume to which he was not accustomed, and when he
spoke, his hearers, had they been beside the Loire instead of the Rhone,
would have detected a certain Italian accent in his pronunciation.

His companion seemed to be some three or four years younger than he. He
was a handsome young man with a rosy complexion, blond hair and light
blue eyes, a straight, firm nose and prominent but almost beardless
chin. He was perhaps a couple of inches taller than his companion,
and though his figure was somewhat above medium height, he was so well
proportioned, so admirably free in his movements, that he was evidently
if not extraordinarily strong, at least uncommonly agile and dexterous.
Although attired in the same manner and apparently on a footing of
equality, he evinced remarkable deference to the dark young man,
which, as it could not result from age, was doubtless caused by some
inferiority of position. Moreover, he called his companion citizen,
while the other addressed him as Roland.

These remarks which we make to initiate the reader more profoundly into
our story, were probably not made as extensively by the guests at the
table d'hote; for after bestowing a few seconds of attention upon
the new-comers, they turned their eyes away, and the conversation,
interrupted for an instant, was resumed. It must be confessed that
it concerned a matter most interesting to the travellers--that of the
stoppage of a diligence bearing a sum of sixty thousand francs belonging
to the government. The affair had occurred the day before on the road
from Marseilles to Avignon between Lambesc and Pont-Royal.

At the first words referring to this event, the two young men listened
with unmistakable interest. It had taken place on the same road which
they had just followed, and the narrator, the wine merchant of Bordeaux,
had been one of the principal actors in the scene on the highroad. Those
who seemed the most curious to hear the details were the travellers in
the diligence which had just arrived and was soon to depart. The other
guests, who belonged to the locality, seemed sufficiently conversant
with such catastrophes to furnish the details themselves instead of
listening to them.

"So, citizen," said a stout gentleman against whom a tall woman, very
thin and haggard, was crowding in her terror. "You say that the robbery
took place on the very road by which we have just come?"

"Yes, citizen, between Lambesc and Pont-Royal. Did you notice the spot
where the road ascends between two high banks? There are a great many
rocks there."

"Yes, yes, my friend," said the wife, pressing her husband's arm, "I
noticed it; I even said, as you must remember, 'Here is a bad place; I
would rather pass here by day than at night.'"

"Oh! madame," said a young man whose voice affected to slur his r's
after the fashion of the day, and who probably assumed to lead the
conversation at the table d'hote, on ordinary occasions, "you know the
Companions of Jehu know no day or night."

"What! citizen," asked the lady still more alarmed, "were you attacked
in broad daylight?"

"In broad daylight, citizeness, at ten o'clock in the morning."

"And how many were there?" asked the stout gentleman.

"Four, citizen."

"Ambushed beside the road?"

"No; they were on horseback, armed to the teeth and masked."

"That's their custom," said the young frequenter of the table d'hote,
"and they said, did they not: 'Do not defend yourself, we will not harm
you. We only want the government money.'"

"Word for word, citizen."

"Then," continued this well-informed young man, "two dismounted from
their horses, flinging their bridles to their comrades, and commanded
the conductor to deliver up the money."

"Citizen," said the stout man astonished, "you describe the thing as if
you had seen it."

"Monsieur was there, perhaps," said one of the travellers, half in jest,
half in earnest.

"I do not know, citizen, whether in saying that you intend a rudeness,"
carelessly observed the young man who had so pertinently and obligingly
come to the narrator's assistance, "but my political opinions are
such that I do not consider your suspicion an insult. Had I had the
misfortune to be among those attacked, or the honor to be one of those
who made the attack, I should admit it as frankly in the one case as in
the other. But yesterday at ten o'clock, at precisely the moment when
the diligence was stopped, twelve miles from here, I was breakfasting
quietly in this very seat. And, by-the-bye, with the two citizens who
now do me the honor to sit beside me."

"And," asked the younger of the two travellers who had lately joined the
table, whom his companion called Roland, "how many men were you in the
diligence?"

"Let me think; we were--yes, that's it--we were seven men and three
women."

"Seven men, not including the conductor?" repeated Roland.

"Yes."

"And you seven men allowed yourselves to be plundered by four brigands?
I congratulate you, gentlemen."

"We knew with whom we had to deal," replied the wine merchant, "and we
took good care not to defend ourselves."

"What! with whom you had to deal?" retorted the young man. "Why, it
seems to me, with thieves and bandits."

"Not at all. They gave their names."

"They gave their names?"

"They said, 'Gentlemen, it is useless to defend yourselves; ladies, do
not be alarmed, we are not bandits, we are Companions of Jehu.'"

"Yes," said the young man of the table d'hote, "they warned you that
there might be no misunderstanding. That's their way."

"Ah, indeed!" exclaimed Roland; "and who is this Jehu who has such
polite companions? Is he their captain?"

"Sir," said a man whose dress betrayed somewhat the secularized priest,
and who seemed also to be, not only an habitual guest at the table
d'hote, but also an initiate into the mysteries of the honorable company
whose merits were then under discussion, "if you were better versed than
you seem to be in the Holy Scriptures, you would know that this Jehu
died something like two thousand six hundred years ago, and that
consequently he cannot at the present time stop coaches on the
highways."

"Monsieur l'Abbe," replied Roland, who had recognized an ecclesiastic,
"as, in spite of the sharp tone in which you speak, you seem a man of
learning, permit a poor ignoramus to ask you a few details about this
Jehu, dead these two thousand six hundred years, who, nevertheless, is
honored by followers bearing his name."

"Jehu!" replied the churchman, in the same sour tone, "was a King of
Israel anointed by Elisha, on condition that he punish the crimes of the
house of Ahab and Jezbel, and put to death the priests of Baal."

"Monsieur l'Abbe," replied the young man laughing, "I thank you for the
explanation. I don't doubt it is correct, and, above all, very learned.
But I must admit it doesn't tell me much."

"What, citizen!" exclaimed the abbe, "don't you understand that Jehu
is his Majesty Louis XVIII., anointed on condition that he punish the
crimes of the Revolution and put to death all the priests of Baal; that
is to say, all those who had taken any part whatsoever in the abominable
state of things which, for these last seven years, has been called the
republic?"

"Yes, indeed!" exclaimed the young man; "of course I understand. But
among those whom the Companions of Jehu are appointed to fight, do
you reckon the brave soldiers who have repulsed the enemy along the
frontiers of France, and the illustrious generals who have commanded the
armies of the Tyrol, the Sambre-and-Meuse, and of Italy?"

"Why, beyond doubt, those foremost and before all."

The young man's eyes flashed lightning; his nostrils quivered and his
lips tightened. He rose from his chair, but his comrade touched his coat
and forced him to sit down again, while with a single glance he silenced
him. Then he who had thus given proof of his power, speaking for the
first time, addressed the young man of the table d'hote.

"Citizen, excuse two travellers who are just arrived from the end of the
earth, from America, or India as it were. Absent from France these last
two years; we are completely ignorant of all that has occurred here, and
most desirous to obtain information."

"Why, as to that," replied the young man, to whom these words were
addressed, "that is but fair, citizen. Question us and we will answer
you."

"Well," continued the dark young man with the eagle eye, the straight
black hair, and the granite complexion, "now that I know who Jehu is,
and to what end his company was instituted, I should like to know what
his companions do with the money they take."

"Oh! that is very simple, citizen. You know there is much talk of the
restoration of the Bourbon monarchy?"

"No, I did not know it," replied the dark young man, in a tone which he
vainly strove to render artless; "I am but just arrived, as I told you,
from the end of the earth."

"What! you did not know that? Well, six months hence it will be an
accomplished fact."

"Really!"

"I have the honor to tell you so, citizen."

The two soldier-like young men exchanged a glance and a smile, though
the young blond one was apparently chafing under the weight of his
extreme impatience.

Their informant continued: "Lyons is the headquarters of the conspiracy,
if one can call conspiracy a plot which was organized openly. 'The
provisional government' would be a more suitable word."

"Well, then, citizen," said the dark young man with a politeness not
wholly exempt from satire, "let us call it 'provisional government.'"

"This provisional government has its staff and its armies."

"Bah! its staff perhaps--but its armies--"

"Its armies, I repeat."

"Where are they?"

"One is being organized in the mountains of Auvergne, under the orders
of M. de Chardon; another in the Jura Mountains, under M. Teyssonnet;
and, finally, a third is operating most successfully at this time,
in the Vendee, under the orders of Escarboville, Achille Leblond and
Cadoudal."

"Truly, citizen, you render me a real service in telling me this. I
thought the Bourbons completely resigned to their exile. I supposed the
police so organized as to suppress both provisional royalist committees
in the large towns and bandits on the highways. In fact, I believed the
Vendee had been completely pacificated by Hoche."

The young man to whom this reply was addressed burst out laughing.

"Why, where do you come from?" he exclaimed.

"I told you, citizen, from the end of the earth."

"So it seems." Then he continued: "You understand, the Bourbons are
not rich, the emigres whose property was confiscated are ruined. It is
impossible to organize two armies and maintain a third without money.
The royalists faced an embarrassing problem; the republic alone could
pay for its enemies' troops and, it being improbable that she would do
so of her own volition, the shady negotiation was abandoned, and it was
adjudged quicker to take the money without permission than to ask her
for it."

"Ah! I understand at last."

"That's very fortunate."

"Companions of Jehu then are the intermediaries between the Republic and
the Counter-Revolution, the tax-collectors of the royalist generals?"

"Yes. It is not robbery, but a military operation, rather a feat of
arms like any other. So there you are, citizen, and now you are as well
informed on this point as ourselves."

"But," timidly hazarded the wine merchant of Bordeaux, "if the
Companions of Jehu--observe that I say nothing against them--want the
government money--"

"The government money, no other. Individual plunder on their part is
unheard of."

"How does it happen, then, that yesterday, in addition to the government
money, they carried off two hundred louis of mine?"

"My dear sir," replied the young man of the table d'hote, "I have
already told you that there is some mistake. As surely as my name is
Alfred de Barjols, this money will be returned to you some day."

The wine merchant heaved a sigh and shook his head, as if, in spite of
that assurance, he still retained some doubts. But at this moment, as if
the promise given by the young noble, who had just revealed his social
position by telling his name, had stirred the delicacy of those whom he
thus guaranteed, a horse stopped at the entrance, steps were heard in
the corridor, the dining-room door opened, and a masked man, armed to
the teeth, appeared on the threshold.

"Gentlemen," said he, in the profound silence occasioned by his
apparition, "is there a traveller here named Jean Picot, who was in the
diligence that was held up yesterday between Lambesc and Pont-Royal?"

"Yes," said the wine merchant, amazed.

"Are you he?" asked the masked man.

"I am."

"Was anything taken from you?"

"Oh, yes, two hundred louis, which I had intrusted to the conductor."

"And I may add," said the young noble, "that the gentleman was speaking
of it at this very moment. He looked upon it as lost."

"The gentleman was wrong," said the masked unknown, "we war upon
the government and not against individuals. We are partisans and not
robbers. Here are your two hundred Louis, sir, and if a similar mistake
should occur in the future, claim your loss, mentioning the name of
Morgan."

So saying, the masked individual deposited a bag of gold beside the wine
merchant, bowed courteously to the other guests, and went out, leaving
some terrified and others bewildered by such daring.




CHAPTER II. AN ITALIAN PROVERB

Although the two sentiments which we have just indicated were the
dominant ones, they did not manifest themselves to an equal degree
in all present. The shades were graduated according to the sex, age,
character, we may almost say, the social positions of the hearers. The
wine merchant, Jean Picot, the principal personage in the late event,
recognizing at first sight by his dress, weapons, mask, one of the
men who had stopped the coach on the preceding day, was at first sight
stupefied, then little by little, as he grasped the purport of this
mysterious brigand's visit to him, he had passed from stupefaction to
joy, through the intermediate phases separating these two emotions. His
bag of gold was beside him, yet he seemingly dared not touch it; perhaps
he feared that the instant his hand went forth toward it, it would melt
like the dream-gold which vanishes during that period of progressive
lucidity which separates profound slumber from thorough awakening.

The stout gentleman of the diligence and his wife had displayed, like
their travelling companions, the most absolute and complete terror.
Seated to the left of Jean Picot, when the bandit approached the wine
merchant, the husband, in the vain hope of maintaining a respectable
distance between himself and the Companion of Jehu, pushed his chair
back against that of his wife, who, yielding to the pressure, in turn
endeavored to push back hers. But as the next chair was occupied by
citizen Alfred de Barjols, who had no reason to fear these men whom
he had just praised so highly, the chair of the stout man's wife
encountered an obstacle in the immovability of the young noble; so,
as at Marengo, eight or nine months later, when the general in command
judged it time to resume the offensive, the retrograde movement was
arrested.

As for him--we are speaking of the citizen Alfred de Barjols--his
attitude, like that of the abbe who had given the Biblical explanation
about Jehu, King of Israel, and his mission from Elisha, his attitude,
we say, was that of a man who not only experiences no fear, but who even
expects the event in question, however unexpected it may be. His lips
wore a smile as he watched the masked man, and had the guests not been
so preoccupied with the two principal actors in this scene, they might
have remarked the almost imperceptible sign exchanged between the eyes
of the bandit and the young noble, and transmitted instantly by the
latter to the abbe.

The two travellers whom we introduced to the table d'hote, and who as
we have said sat apart at the end of the table, preserved an attitude
conformable to their respective characters. The younger of the two had
instinctively put his hand to his side, as if to seek an absent weapon,
and had risen with a spring, as if to rush at the masked man's throat,
in which purpose he had certainly not failed had he been alone; but
the elder, who seemed to possess not only the habit but the right of
command, contented himself by regrasping his coat, and saying, in an
imperious, almost harsh tone: "Sit down, Roland!" And the young man had
resumed his seat.

But one of the guests had remained, in appearance at least, the most
impassible during this scene. He was a man between thirty-three and
thirty-four years of age, with blond hair, red beard, a calm, handsome
face, with large blue eyes, a fair skin, refined and intelligent lips,
and very tall, whose foreign accent betrayed one born in that island of
which the government was at that time waging bitter war against France.
As far as could be judged by the few words which had escaped him, he
spoke the French language with rare purity, despite the accent we have
just mentioned. At the first word he uttered, in which that English
accent revealed itself, the elder of the two travellers started. Turning
to his companion, he asked with a glance, to which the other seemed
accustomed, how it was that an Englishman should be in France when the
uncompromising war between the two nations had naturally exiled all
Englishmen from France, as it had all Frenchmen from England. No doubt
the explanation seemed impossible to Roland, for he had replied with his
eyes, and a shrug of the shoulders: "I find it quite as extraordinary
as you; but if you, mathematician as you are, can't solve the problem,
don't ask me!"

It was evident to the two young men that the fair man with the
Anglo-Saxon accent was the traveller whose comfortable carriage awaited
him harnessed in the courtyard, and that this traveller hailed from
London, or, at least, from some part of Great Britain.

As to his remarks, they, as we have stated, were infrequent, so laconic,
in reality, that they were mere exclamations rather than speech. But
each time an explanation had been asked concerning the state of France,
the Englishman openly drew out a note-book and requested those about
him, the wine merchant, the abbe, or the young noble to repeat their
remarks; to which each had complied with an amiability equal to the
courteous tone of the request. He had noted down the most important,
extraordinary and, picturesque features of the robbery of the diligence,
the state of Vendee, and the details about the Companions of Jehu,
thanking each informant by voice and gesture with the stiffness peculiar
to our insular cousins, replacing his note-book enriched each time by a
new item in a side pocket of his overcoat.

Finally, like a spectator enjoying an unexpected scene, he had given a
cry of satisfaction at sight of the masked man, had listened with all
his ears, gazed with all his eyes, not losing him from sight until the
door closed behind him. Then drawing his note-book hastily from his
pocket--

"Ah, sir," he said to his neighbor, who was no other than the abbe,
"will you be so kind, should my memory fail me, as to repeat what that
gentleman who has just gone out said?"

He began to write immediately, and the abbe's memory agreeing with
his, he had the satisfaction of transcribing literally and verbatim the
speech made by the Companion of Jehu to citizen Jean Picot. Then, this
conversation written down, he exclaimed with an accent that lent a
singular stamp of originality to his words:

"Of a truth! it is only in France that such things can happen; France
is the most curious country in the world. I am delighted, gentlemen, to
travel in France and become acquainted with Frenchmen."

The last sentence was said with such courtesy that nothing remained save
to thank the speaker from whose serious mouth it issued, though he was
a descendant of the conquerors of Crecy, Poitiers and Agincourt. It was
the younger of the two travellers who acknowledged this politeness in
that heedless and rather caustic manner which seemed habitual to him.

"'Pon my word! I am exactly like you, my lord--I say my lord, because I
presume you are English."

"Yes, sir," replied the gentleman, "I have that honor."

"Well! as I was saying," continued the young man, "I am delighted to
travel in France and see what I am seeing. One must live under the
government of citizens Gohier, Moulins, Roger Ducos, Sieyes and Barras
to witness such roguery. I dare wager than when the tale is told, fifty
years hence, of the highwayman who rode into a city of thirty thousand
inhabitants in broad day, masked and armed with two pistols and a sword
at his belt, to return the two hundred louis which he had stolen the day
previous to the honest merchant who was then deploring their loss, and
when it is added that this occurred at a table d'hote where twenty or
twenty-five people were seated, and that this model bandit was allowed
to depart without one of those twenty or twenty-five people daring to
molest him; I dare wager, I repeat, that whoever has the audacity to
tell the story will be branded as an infamous liar."

And the young man, throwing himself back in his chair, burst into
laughter, so aggressive, so nervous, that every one gazed at him in
wonderment, while his companion's eyes expressed an almost paternal
anxiety.

"Sir," said citizen Alfred de Barjols, who, moved like the others by
this singular outburst, more sad, or rather dolorous, than gay, had
waited for its last echo to subside. "Sir, permit me to point out to you
that the man whom you have just seen is not a highwayman."

"Bah! Frankly, what is he then?"

"He is in all probability a young man of as good a family as yours or
mine."

"Count Horn, whom the Regent ordered broken on the wheel at the Place
de Greve, was also a man of good family, and the proof is that all the
nobility of Paris sent their carriages to his execution."

"Count Horn, if I remember rightly, murdered a Jew to steal a note
of hand which he was unable to meet. No one would dare assert that a
Companion of Jehu had ever so much as harmed the hair of an infant."

"Well, be it so. We will admit that the Company was founded upon a
philanthropic basis, to re-establish the balance of fortunes, redress
the whims of chance and reform the abuses of society. Though he may be
a robber, after the fashion of Karl Moor, your friend Morgan--was it not
Morgan that this honest citizen called himself?"

"Yes," said the Englishman.

"Well, your friend Morgan is none the less a thief."

Citizen Alfred de Barjols turned very pale.

"Citizen Morgan is not my friend," replied the young aristocrat; "but if
he were I should feel honored by his friendship."

"No doubt," replied Roland, laughing. "As Voltaire says: 'The friendship
of a great man is a blessing from the gods.'"

"Roland, Roland!" observed his comrade in a low tone.

"Oh! general," replied the latter, letting his companion's rank escape
him, perhaps intentionally, "I implore you, let me continue this
discussion, which interests me in the highest degree."

His friend shrugged his shoulders.

"But, citizen," continued the young man with strange persistence, "I
stand in need of correction. I left France two years ago, and during my
absence so many things have changed, such as dress, morals, and accents,
that even the language may have changed also. In the language of the day
in France what do you call stopping coaches and taking the money which
they contain?"

"Sir," said the young noble, in the tone of a man determined to sustain
his argument to its end, "I call that war. Here is your companion whom
you have just called general; he as a military man will tell you that,
apart from the pleasure of killing and being killed, the generals of
all ages have never done anything else than what the citizen Morgan is
doing?"

"What!" exclaimed the young man, whose eyes flashed fire. "You dare to
compare--"

"Permit the gentleman to develop his theory, Roland," said the dark
traveller, whose eyes, unlike those of his companion, which dilated as
they flamed, were veiled by long black lashes, thus concealing all that
was passing in his mind.

"Ah!" said the young man in his curt tone, "you see that you, yourself,
are becoming interested in the discussion." Then, turning to the young
noble, whom he seemed to have selected for his antagonist, he said:
"Continue, sir, continue; the general permits it."

The young noble flushed as visibly as he had paled a moment before.
Between clinched teeth, his elbow on the table, his chin on his clinched
hand, as if to draw as close to his adversary as possible, he said with
a Provencal accent, which grew more pronounced as the discussion waxed
hotter: "Since _the general_ permits"--emphasizing the two words--"I
shall have the honor to tell him and you, too, citizen, that I believe
I have read in Plutarch that Alexander the Great, when he started for
India, took with him but eighteen or twenty talents in gold, something
like one hundred or one hundred and twenty thousand francs. Now, do
you suppose that with these eighteen or twenty talents alone he fed his
army, won the battle of Granicus, subdued Asia Minor, conquered Tyre,
Gaza, Syria and Egypt, built Alexandria, penetrated to Lybia, had
himself declared Son of Jupiter by the oracle of Ammon, penetrated
as far as the Hyphases, and, when his soldiers refused to follow him
further, returned to Babylon, where he surpassed in luxury, debauchery
and self-indulgence the most debauched and voluptuous of the kings
of Asia? Did Macedonia furnish his supplies? Do you believe that King
Philip, most indigent of the kings of poverty-stricken Greece, honored
the drafts his son drew upon him? Not so. Alexander did as citizen
Morgan is doing; only, instead of stopping the coaches on the highroads,
he pillaged cities, held kings for ransom, levied contributions from
the conquered countries. Let us turn to Hannibal. You know how he left
Carthage, don't you? He did not have even the eighteen or twenty talents
of his predecessor; and as he needed money, he seized and sacked the
city of Saguntum in the midst of peace, in defiance of the fealty of
treaties. After that he was rich and could begin his campaign. Forgive
me if this time I no longer quote Plutarch, but Cornelius Nepos. I will
spare you the details of his descent from the Pyrenees, how he crossed
the Alps and the three battles which he won, seizing each time the
treasures of the vanquished, and turn to the five or six years he spent
in Campania. Do you believe that he and his army paid the Capuans for
their subsistence, and that the bankers of Carthage, with whom he had
