
Poor unhappy Edwy the Fair! Yet he had been his own worst enemy. Well
has it been written:

"Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment."

Edgar succeeded to the throne, and all England acknowledged him as lord;
while under Dunstan's wise administration the land enjoyed peace and
plenty unexampled in Anglo-Saxon annals. Such was Edgar's power, that
more than three thousand vessels kept the coast in safety, and eight
tributary kings did him homage.

Alfred became in due course Thane of Aescendune, and his widowed mother
lived to rejoice in his filial care many a long year, while the
dependants and serfs blessed his name as they had once blessed that of
his father.

"The boy is the father of the man" it has been well said, and it was not
less true than usual in this case. A bright pure boyhood ushered in a
manhood of healthful vigour and bright intellect.

Children grew up around him after his happy marriage with Alftrude, the
daughter of the thane of Rollrich. The eldest boy was named Elfric, and
was bright and brave as the Elfric of old. Need we say he never went to
court, although Edgar would willingly have numbered him in the royal
household. Truly, indeed, were fulfilled the words which the Elfric of
old had spoken on that Easter eve. To his namesake, and to all that
younger generation, the memory of the uncle they had never seen was
surrounded by a mysterious halo of light and love; and when they said
their prayers around his tomb, it seemed as if he were still one of
themselves--sharing their earthly joys and sorrows.

And here we must leave them--time passing sweetly on, the current of
their lives flowing softly and gently to the mighty ocean of eternity:

"Where the faded flower shall freshen,
Freshen never more to fade;
Where the shaded sky shall brighten,
Brighten never more to shade."
_Bonar_.

THE END.

i For authorities for his various statements the Author
must beg to refer his readers to the notes at the end of the volume.

ii Homilies in the Anglo-Saxon Church

"The mass priest, on Sundays and mass days, shall speak the sense of the
Gospel to the people in English, and of the Paternoster, and of the
Creed, as often as he can, for the inciting of the people to know their
belief, and to retain their Christianity. Let the teacher take heed of
what the prophet says, 'They are dumb dogs, and cannot bark.' We ought
to bark and preach to laymen, lest they should be lost through
ignorance. Christ in His gospel says of unlearned teachers, 'If the
blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditch.' The teacher is
blind that hath no book learning, and he misleads the laity through his
ignorance. Thus are you to be aware of this, as your duty requires."--
23d Canon of Elfric, about A.D. 957.

Elfric was then only a private monk in the abbey of Ahingdon, and
perhaps composed these canons for the use of Wulfstan, Bishop of
Dorchester, with the assistance of the abbot, Ethelwold. They commence
"Aelfricus, humilis frater, venerabili Episcopo Wulfsino, salutem in
Domino." Others think this "Wulfsinus" was the Bishop of Sherborne of
that name. Elfric became eventually Archbishop of Canterbury, A.D.
995-1005, dying at an advanced age. No other English name before the
Conquest is so famous in literature.

iii Services of the Church.

"It concerns mass priests, and all God's servants, to keep their
churches employed with God's service. Let them sing therein the
seven-tide songs that are appointed them, as the Synod earnestly
requires--that is, the uht song (matins); the prime song (seven A.M.);
the undern song (terce, nine A.M.); the midday song (sext); the noon
song (nones, three P.M.); the even song (six P.M.); the seventh or night
song (compline, nine P.M.)"--19th Canon of Elfric.

It is not to be supposed that the laity either were expected to attend,
or could attend, all these services, which were strictly kept in
monastic bodies; but it would appear that mass, and sometimes matins and
evensong, or else compline, were generally frequented. And these latter
would be, as represented in the text, the ordinary services in private
chapels.

iv Battle of Brunanburgh.

In this famous battle, the English, under their warlike king, defeated a
most threatening combination of foes; Anlaf, the Danish prince, having
united his forces to those of Constantine, King of the Scots, and the
Britons, or Welsh of Strathclyde and Cambria. So proud were the English
of the victory, that their writers break into poetry when they come to
that portion of their annals. Such is the case with the writer of the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, from whom the following verses are abridged. They
have been already partially quoted in the text.

Here Athelstane king,
Of earls the lord,
To warriors the ring-giver,
Glory world-long
Had won in the strife,
By edge of the sword,
At Brunanburgh.
The offspring of Edward,
The departed king,
Cleaving the shields.
Struck down the brave.
Such was their valour,
Worthy of their sires,
That oft in the strife
They shielded the land
'Gainst every foe.
The Scottish chieftains,
The warriors of the Danes,
Pierced through their mail,
Lay dead on the field.
The field was red
With warriors' blood,
What time the sun,
Uprising at morn,
The candle of God,
Ran her course through the heavens;
Till red in the west
She sank to her rest.
Through the live-long day
Fought the people of Wessex,
Unshrinking from toil,
While Mercian men,
Hurled darts by their side.
Fated to die
Their ships brought the Danes,
Five kings and seven earls,
All men of renown,
And Scots without number
Lay dead on the field.
Constantine, hoary warrior,
Had small cause to boast.
Young in the fight,
Mangled and torn,
Lay his son on the plain.
Nor Anlaf the Dane
With wreck of his troops,
Could vaunt of the war
Of the clashing of spears.
Or the crossing of swords,
with the offspring of Edward.
The Northmen departed
In their mailed barks,
Sorrowing much;
while the two brothers,
The King and the Etheling,
To Wessex returned,
Leaving behind
The corpses of foes
To the beak of the raven,
The eagle and kite,
And the wolf of the wood.

The Chronicle simply adds, "A.D. 937.--This year King Athelstan, and
the Etheling Edmund, his brother, led a force to Brimanburgh, end there
fought against Anlaf, and, Christ helping them, they slew five kings and
seven earls."

v Murder of Edmund.

A certain robber named Leofa, whom Edmund had banished for his crimes,
returning after six years' absence, totally unexpected, was sitting, on
the feast of St. Augustine, the apostle of the English, and first
Archbishop of Canterbury, among the royal guests at Pucklechurch, for on
this day the English were wont to regale, in commemoration of their
first preacher; by chance, too, he was placed near a nobleman, whom the
king had condescended to make his guest. This, while the others were
eagerly carousing, was perceived by the king alone; when, hurried with
indignation, and impelled by fate, he leaped from the table, caught the
robber by the hair, and dragged him to the floor; but he, secretly
drawing a dagger from its sheath, plunged it with all his force into the
breast of the king as he lay upon him. Dying of the wound, he gave rise
over the whole kingdom to many fictions concerning his decease. The
robber was shortly torn limb from limb by the attendants who rushed in,
though he wounded some of them ere they could accomplish their purpose.
St. Dunstan, at that time Abbot of Glastonbury, had foreseen his ignoble
end, being fully persuaded of it from the gesticulations and insolent
mockery of a devil dancing before him. Wherefore, hastening to court at
full speed, he received intelligence of the transaction on the road. By
common consent, then, it was determined that his body should be brought
to Glastonbury, and there magnificently buried in the northern part of
the tower. That such had been his intention, through his singular regard
for the abbot, was evident from particular circumstances. The village,
also, where he was murdered, was made a offering for the dead, that the
spot, which had witnessed his fall, might ever after minister aid to his
soul,--William of Malmesbury, B, ii. e. 7, Bohn's Edition.

vi A. D. 556--Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.

vii Wulfstan, and the See of Dorchester.

When Athelstane was dead, the Danes, both in Northumberland and Mercia,
revolted against the English rule, and made Anlaf their king. Archbishop
Wulfstan, then of York, sided with them, perhaps being himself of Danish
blood. The kingdom was eventually divided between Edmund and Aulaf,
until the death of the latter. When Edred ascended the throne--after
the murder of Edmund, who had, before his death, repossessed himself of
the whole sovereignty--the wise men of Northumberland, with Wulfstan
at their head, swore submission to him, but in 948 rebelled and chose
for their king Eric of Denmark. Edred marched at once against them, and
subdued the rebellion with great vigour, not to say riqour. He threw the
archbishop into prison at Jedburgh in Bernicia. After a time he was
released, but only upon the condition of banishment from Northumbria,
and he was made Bishop of Dorchester, a place familiar to the tourist on
the Thames, famed for the noble abbey church which still exists, and has
been grandly restored.

Although Dorchester is now only a village, it derives its origin from a
period so remote that it is lost in the mist of ages. It was probably a
British village under the name Cair Dauri, the camp on the waters; and
coins of Cunobelin, or Cassivellaunus, have been found in good
preservation. Bede mentions it as a Roman station, and Richard of
Cirencester marks it as such in the xviii. Iter, under the name Durocina.

Its bishopric was founded by Birinus, the apostle of the West Saxons;
and the present bishoprics of Winchester, Salisbury, Exeter, Bath and
Wells, Worcester and Hereford, were successively taken from it, after
which it still extended from the Thames to the Humber.

Suffering grievously from the ravages of the Danes, it became a small
town, and it suffered again grievously at the Conquest, when the
inhabited houses were reduced by the Norman ravages from 172 to 100, and
perhaps the inhabitants were reduced in proportion. In consequence,
Remigius, the first Norman bishop, removed the see to Lincoln, because
Dorchester, on account of its size and small population, did not suit
his ideas, as John of Brompton observes. From this period its decline
was rapid, in spite of its famous abbey, which Remigius partially
erected with the stones from the bishop's palace.

viii Anglo-Saxon Literature.

In the age of Bede, the eighth century, Britain was distinguished for
its learning; but the Danish invasions caused the rapid decline of its
renown.

The churches and monasteries, where alone learning flourished, and which
were the only libraries and schools, were the first objects of the
hatred of the ferocious pagans; and, in consequence, when Alfred came to
the throne, as he tells us in his own words--"South of the Humber
there were few priests who could understand the meaning of their common
prayers, or translate a line of Latin into English; so few, that in
Wessex there was not one." Alfred set himself diligently to work to
correct this evil. Nearly all the books in existence in England were in
Latin, and it was a "great" library which contained fifty copies of
these. There was a great objection to the use of the vernacular in the
Holy Scriptures, as tending to degrade them by its uncouth jargon; but
the Venerable Bede had rendered the Gospel of St. John into the
Anglo-Saxon, together with other extracts from holy Scripture; and there
were versions of the Psalter in the vulgar tongue, very rude and
uncouth; for ancient translators generally imagined a translation could
only be faithful which placed all the words of the vulgar tongue in the
same relative positions as the corresponding words in the original. An
Anglo-Saxon translation upon this plan is extant.

Alfred had taught himself Latin by translating: there were few
vocabularies, and only the crabbed grammar of old Priscian. Shaking
himself free from the trammels we have enumerated, he invited learned
men from abroad, such as his biographer, Asser, and together they
attempted a complete version of the Bible. Some writers suppose the
project was nearly completed, others, that it was interrupted by his
early death. Still, translations were multiplied of the sacred writings,
and the rubrics show that they were read, as described in the text, upon
the Sundays and festivals. From that time down to the days of Wickliffe,
England can boast of such versions of the sacred Word as can hardly be
paralleled in Europe.

The other works we have mentioned were also translated by or for Alfred.
"The Chronicle of Orosius," a history of the world by a Spaniard of
Seville; "The History of the Venerable Bede;" "The Consolations of
Philosophy," by Boethius; "Narratives from Ancient Mythology;" "The
Confessions of St. Augustine;" "The Pastoral Instructions of St.
Gregory;" and his "Dialogue," form portions of the works of this
greatest of kings, and true father of his people. His "Apologues,"
imitated from Aesop, are unfortunately lost.

ix The Court of Edred.

All the early chroniclers appear to take a similar view of the character
and court of Edred. William of Malmesbury says--"The king devoted his
life to God, and to St. Dunstan, by whose admonition he bore with
patience his frequent bodily pains, prolonged his prayers, and made his
palace altogether the school of virtue." But although pious, he was by
no means wanting in manly energy, as was shown by his vigorous and
successful campaign in Northumbria, on the occasion of the attempt to
set Eric, son of Harold, on the throne of Northumbria. The angelic
apparition to St. Dunstan, mentioned in chapter VII, is told by nearly
all the early historians, but with varying details. According to many,
it occurred while Dunstan was hastening to the aid of Edred. The
exigencies of the tale required a slightly different treatment of the
legend.

x Confession in the Anglo-Saxon Church.

"On the week next before holy night shall every one go to his shrift
(i.e. confessor), and his shrift shall shrive him in such a manner as
his deeds which he hath done require and he shall charge all that belong
to his district that if any of them have discord with any, he make peace
with him; if any one will not be brought to this, then he shall not
shrive him; [but] then he shall inform the bishop, that he may convert
him to what is right, if he he willing to belong to God: then all
contentions and disputes shall cease, and if there be any one of them
that hath taken offence at another, then shall they be reconciled, that
they may the more freely say in the Lord's Prayer, 'Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us,' etc. And
having thus purified their minds, let them enter upon the holy
fast-tide, and cleanse themselves by satisfaction against holy Easter,
for this satisfaction is as it were a second baptism. As in Baptism the
sins before committed are forgiven, so, by satisfaction, are the sins
committed after Baptism." Theodulf's Canons, A.D. 994 (Canon 36).

