

Chapter IV
THE AMPHITHEATRE ONCE MORE.

GLAUCUS and Olinthus had been placed together in that gloomy and narrow
cell in which the criminals of the arena awaited their last and fearful
struggle. Their eyes, of late accustomed to the darkness, scanned the
faces of each other in this awful hour, and by that dim light, the
paleness, which chased away the natural hues from either cheek, assumed
a yet more ashy and ghastly whiteness.  Yet their brows were erect and
dauntless--their limbs did not tremble--their lips were compressed and
rigid.  The religion of the one, the pride of the other, the conscious
innocence of both, and, it may be, the support derived from their mutual
companionship, elevated the victim into the hero.

'Hark! hearest thou that shout They are growling over their human
blood,' said Olinthus.

'I hear; my heart grows sick; but the gods support me.'

'The gods!  O rash young man!  in this hour recognize only the One God.
Have I not taught thee in the dungeon, wept for thee, prayed for
thee?--in my zeal and in my agony, have I not thought more of thy
salvation than my own?'

'Brave friend!' answered Glaucus, solemnly, 'I have listened to thee
with awe, with wonder, and with a secret tendency towards conviction.
Had our lives been spared, I might gradually have weaned myself from the
tenets of my own faith, and inclined to thine; but, in this last hour it
were a craven thing, and a base, to yield to hasty terror what should
only be the result of lengthened meditation.  Were I to embrace thy
creed, and cast down my father's gods, should I not be bribed by thy
promise of heaven, or awed by thy threats of hell? Olinthus, no!  Think
we of each other with equal charity--I honoring thy sincerity--thou
pitying my blindness or my obdurate courage.  As have been my deeds,
such will be my reward; and the Power or Powers above will not judge
harshly of human error, when it is linked with honesty of purpose and
truth of heart.  Speak we no more of this.  Hush! Dost thou hear them
drag yon heavy body through the passage?  Such as that clay will be ours
soon.'

'O Heaven!  O Christ! already I behold ye!' cried the fervent Olinthus,
lifting up his hands; 'I tremble not--I rejoice that the prison-house
shall be soon broken.'

Glaucus bowed his head in silence.  He felt the distinction between his
fortitude and that of his fellow-sufferer.  The heathen did not tremble;
but the Christian exulted.

The door swung gratingly back--the gleam of spears shot along the walls.

'Glaucus the Athenian, thy time has come,' said a loud and clear voice;
'the lion awaits thee.'

'I am ready,' said the Athenian.  'Brother and co-mate, one last
embrace! Bless me--and farewell!'

The Christian opened his arms--he clasped the young heathen to his
breast--he kissed his forehead and cheek--he sobbed aloud--his tears
flowed fast and hot over the features of his new friend.

'Oh! could I have converted thee, I had not wept.  Oh! that I might say
to thee, "We two shall sup this night in Paradise!"'

'It may be so yet,' answered the Greek, with a tremulous voice. 'They
whom death part not, may meet yet beyond the grave: on the earth--on the
beautiful, the beloved earth, farewell for ever!--Worthy officer, I
attend you.'

Glaucus tore himself away; and when he came forth into the air, its
breath, which, though sunless, was hot and arid, smote witheringly upon
him.  His frame, not yet restored from the effects of the deadly
draught, shrank and trembled.  The officers supported him.

'Courage!' said one; 'thou art young, active, well knit.  They give thee
a weapon! despair not, and thou mayst yet conquer.'

Glaucus did not reply; but, ashamed of his infirmity, he made a
desperate and convulsive effort, and regained the firmness of his
nerves.  They anointed his body, completely naked, save by a cincture
round the loins, placed the stilus (vain weapon!) in his hand, and led
him into the arena.

And now when the Greek saw the eyes of thousands and tens of thousands
upon him, he no longer felt that he was mortal.  All evidence of
fear--all fear itself--was gone.  A red and haughty flush spread over
the paleness of his features--he towered aloft to the full of his
glorious stature.  In the elastic beauty of his limbs and form, in his
intent but unfrowning brow, in the high disdain, and in the indomitable
soul, which breathed visibly, which spoke audibly, from his attitude,
his lip, his eye--he seemed the very incarnation, vivid and corporeal,
of the valor of his land--of the divinity of its worship--at once a hero
and a god!

The murmur of hatred and horror at his crime, which had greeted his
entrance, died into the silence of involuntary admiration and
half-compassionate respect; and with a quick and convulsive sigh, that
seemed to move the whole mass of life as if it were one body, the gaze
of the spectators turned from the Athenian to a dark uncouth object in
the centre of the arena.  It was the grated den of the lion!

'By Venus, how warm it is!' said Fulvia; 'yet there is no sun. Would
that those stupid sailors could have fastened up that gap in the
awning!'

'Oh! it is warm, indeed.  I turn sick--I faint!' said the wife of Pansa;
even her experienced stoicism giving way at the struggle about to take
place.

The lion had been kept without food for twenty-four hours, and the
animal had, during the whole morning, testified a singular and restless
uneasiness, which the keeper had attributed to the pangs of hunger.  Yet
its bearing seemed rather that of fear than of rage; its roar was
painful and distressed; it hung its head--snuffed the air through the
bars--then lay down--started again--and again uttered its wild and
far-resounding cries. And now, in its den, it lay utterly dumb and mute,
with distended nostrils forced hard against the grating, and disturbing
with a heaving breath, the sand below on the arena.

The editor's lip quivered, and his cheek grew pale; he looked anxiously
around--hesitated--delayed; the crowd became impatient. Slowly he gave
the sign; the keeper, who was behind the den, cautiously removed the
grating, and the lion leaped forth with a mighty and glad roar of
release.  The keeper hastily retreated through the grated passage
leading from the arena, and left the lord of the forest--and his prey.

Glaucus had bent his limbs so as to give himself the firmest posture at
the expected rush of the lion, with his small and shining weapon raised
on high, in the faint hope that one well-directed thrust (for he knew
that he should have time but for one) might penetrate through the eye to
the brain of his grim foe.

But, to the unutterable astonishment of all, the beast seemed not even
aware of the presence of the criminal.

At the first moment of its release it halted abruptly in the arena,
raised itself half on end, snuffing the upward air with impatient sighs;
then suddenly it sprang forward, but not on the Athenian.  At half-speed
it circled round and round the space, turning its vast head from side to
side with an anxious and perturbed gaze, as if seeking only some avenue
of escape; once or twice it endeavored to leap up the parapet that
divided it from the audience, and, on failing, uttered rather a baffled
howl than its deep-toned and kingly roar.  It evinced no sign, either of
wrath or hunger; its tail drooped along the sand, instead of lashing its
gaunt sides; and its eye, though it wandered at times to Glaucus, rolled
again listlessly from him.  At length, as if tired of attempting to
escape, it crept with a moan into its cage, and once more laid itself
down to rest.

The first surprise of the assembly at the apathy of the lion soon grew
converted into resentment at its cowardice; and the populace already
merged their pity for the fate of Glaucus into angry compassion for
their own disappointment.

The editor called to the keeper.

'How is this?  Take the goad, prick him forth, and then close the door
of the den.'

As the keeper, with some fear, but more astonishment, was preparing to
obey, a loud cry was heard at one of the entrances of the arena; there
was a confusion, a bustle--voices of remonstrance suddenly breaking
forth, and suddenly silenced at the reply.  All eyes turned in wonder at
the interruption, towards the quarter of the disturbance; the crowd gave
way, and suddenly Sallust appeared on the senatorial benches, his hair
disheveled--breathless--heated--half-exhausted.  He cast his eyes
hastily round the ring.  'Remove the Athenian,' he cried; 'haste--he is
innocent! Arrest Arbaces the Egyptian--HE is the murderer of Apaecides!'

'Art thou mad, O Sallust!' said the praetor, rising from his seat. 'What
means this raving?'

'Remove the Athenian!--Quick! or his blood be on your head. Praetor,
delay, and you answer with your own life to the emperor!  I bring with
me the eye-witness to the death of the priest Apaecides. Room
there!--stand back!--give way!  People of Pompeii, fix every eye upon
Arbaces--there he sits!  Room there for the priest Calenus!'

Pale, haggard, fresh from the jaws of famine and of death, his face
fallen, his eyes dull as a vulture's, his broad frame gaunt as a
skeleton--Calenus was supported into the very row in which Arbaces sat.
His releasers had given him sparingly of food; but the chief sustenance
that nerved his feeble limbs was revenge!

'The priest Calenus!--Calenus!' cried the mob.  'Is it he?  No--it is a
dead man?'

'It is the priest Calenus,' said the praetor, gravely.  'What hast thou
to say?'

'Arbaces of Egypt is the murderer of Apaecides, the priest of Isis;
these eyes saw him deal the blow.  It is from the dungeon into which he
plunged me--it is from the darkness and horror of a death by
famine--that the gods have raised me to proclaim his crime!  Release the
Athenian--he is innocent!'

'It is for this, then, that the lion spared him.  A miracle! a miracle!'
cried Pansa.

'A miracle; a miracle!' shouted the people; 'remove the
Athenian--Arbaces to the lion!'

And that shout echoed from hill to vale--from coast to sea--'Arbaces to
the lion!'

Officers, remove the accused Glaucus--remove, but guard him yet,' said
the praetor.  'The gods lavish their wonders upon this day.'

As the praetor gave the word of release, there was a cry of joy--a
female voice--a child's voice--and it was of joy!  It rang through the
heart of the assembly with electric force--it, was touching, it was
holy, that child's voice!  And the populace echoed it back with
sympathizing congratulation!

'Silence!' said the grave praetor--'who is there?'

'The blind girl--Nydia,' answered Sallust; 'it is her hand that has
raised Calenus from the grave, and delivered Glaucus from the lion.'

'Of this hereafter,' said the praetor.  'Calenus, priest of Isis, thou
accusest Arbaces of the murder of Apaecides?'

'I do.'

'Thou didst behold the deed?'

'Praetor--with these eyes...'

'Enough at present--the details must be reserved for more suiting time
and place.  Arbaces of Egypt, thou hearest the charge against thee--thou
hast not yet spoken--what hast thou to say.

The gaze of the crowd had been long riveted on Arbaces: but not until
the confusion which he had betrayed at the first charge of Sallust and
the entrance of Calenus had subsided.  At the shout, 'Arbaces to the
lion!' he had indeed trembled, and the dark bronze of his cheek had
taken a paler hue. But he had soon recovered his haughtiness and
self-control.  Proudly he returned the angry glare of the countless eyes
around him; and replying now to the question of the praetor, he said, in
that accent so peculiarly tranquil and commanding, which characterized
his tones:

'Praetor, this charge is so mad that it scarcely deserves reply. My
first accuser is the noble Sallust--the most intimate friend of Glaucus!
my second is a priest; I revere his garb and calling--but, people of
Pompeii! ye know somewhat of the character of Calenus--he is griping and
gold-thirsty to a proverb; the witness of such men is to be bought!
Praetor, I am innocent!'

'Sallust,' said the magistrate, 'where found you Calenus?'

'In the dungeons of Arbaces.'

'Egyptian,' said the praetor, frowning, 'thou didst, then, dare to
imprison a priest of the gods--and wherefore?'

'Hear me,' answered Arbaces, rising calmly, but with agitation visible
in his face.  'This man came to threaten that he would make against me
the charge he has now made, unless I would purchase his silence with
half my fortune: I remonstrated--in vain.  Peace there--let not the
priest interrupt me!  Noble praetor--and ye, O people!  I was a stranger
in the land--I knew myself innocent of crime--but the witness of a
priest against me might yet destroy me.  In my perplexity I decoyed him
to the cell whence he has been released, on pretence that it was the
coffer-house of my gold.  I resolved to detain him there until the fate
of the true criminal was sealed, and his threats could avail no longer;
but I meant no worse.  I may have erred--but who amongst ye will not
acknowledge the equity of self-preservation?  Were I guilty, why was the
witness of this priest silent at the trial?--then I had not detained or
concealed him.  Why did he not proclaim my guilt when I proclaimed that
of Glaucus? Praetor, this needs an answer.  For the rest, I throw myself
on your laws.  I demand their protection.  Remove hence the accused and
the accuser.  I will willingly meet, and cheerfully abide by, the
decision of the legitimate tribunal.  This is no place for further
parley.'

'He says right,' said the praetor.  'Ho! guards--remove Arbaces--guard
Calenus!  Sallust, we hold you responsible for your accusation. Let the
sports be resumed.'

'What!' cried Calenus, turning round to the people, 'shall Isis be thus
contemned?  Shall the blood of Apaecides yet cry for vengeance? Shall
justice be delayed now, that it may be frustrated hereafter? Shall the
lion be cheated of his lawful prey?  A god! a god!--I feel the god rush
to my lips!  To the lion--to the lion with Arbaces!'

His exhausted frame could support no longer the ferocious malice of the
priest; he sank on the ground in strong convulsions--the foam gathered
to his mouth--he was as a man, indeed, whom a supernatural power had
entered! The people saw and shuddered.

'It is a god that inspires the holy man!  To the lion with the
Egyptian!'

With that cry up sprang--on moved--thousands upon thousands! They rushed
from the heights--they poured down in the direction of the Egyptian.  In
vain did the aedile command--in vain did the praetor lift his voice and
proclaim the law.  The people had been already rendered savage by the
exhibition of blood--they thirsted for more--their superstition was
aided by their ferocity.  Aroused--inflamed by the spectacle of their
victims, they forgot the authority of their rulers.  It was one of those
dread popular convulsions common to crowds wholly ignorant, half free
and half servile; and which the peculiar constitution of the Roman
provinces so frequently exhibited.  The power of the praetor was as a
reed beneath the whirlwind; still, at his word the guards had drawn
themselves along the lower benches, on which the upper classes sat
separate from the vulgar.  They made but a feeble barrier--the waves of
the human sea halted for a moment, to enable Arbaces to count the exact
moment of his doom!  In despair, and in a terror which beat down even
pride, he glanced his eyes over the rolling and rushing crowd--when,
right above them, through the wide chasm which had been left in the
velaria, he beheld a strange and awful apparition--he beheld--and his
craft restored his courage!

He stretched his hand on high; over his lofty brow and royal features
there came an expression of unutterable solemnity and command.

'Behold!' he shouted with a voice of thunder, which stilled the roar of
the crowd; 'behold how the gods protect the guiltless!  The fires of the
avenging Orcus burst forth against the false witness of my accusers!'

The eyes of the crowd followed the gesture of the Egyptian, and beheld,
with ineffable dismay, a vast vapor shooting from the summit of
Vesuvius, in the form of a gigantic pine-tree; the trunk, blackness--the
branches, fire!--a fire that shifted and wavered in its hues with every
moment, now fiercely luminous, now of a dull and dying red, that again
blazed terrifically forth with intolerable glare!

There was a dead, heart-sunken silence--through which there suddenly
broke the roar of the lion, which was echoed back from within the
building by the sharper and fiercer yells of its fellow-beast. Dread
seers were they of the Burden of the Atmosphere, and wild prophets of
the wrath to come!

Then there arose on high the universal shrieks of women; the men stared
at each other, but were dumb.  At that moment they felt the earth shake
beneath their feet; the walls of the theatre trembled: and, beyond in
the distance, they heard the crash of falling roofs; an instant more and
the mountain-cloud seemed to roll towards them, dark and rapid, like a
torrent; at the same time, it cast forth from its bosom a shower of
ashes mixed with vast fragments of burning stone!  Over the crushing
vines--over the desolate streets--over the amphitheatre itself--far and
wide--with many a mighty splash in the agitated sea--fell that awful
shower!

No longer thought the crowd of justice or of Arbaces; safety for
themselves was their sole thought.  Each turned to fly--each dashing,
pressing, crushing, against the other.  Trampling recklessly over the
fallen--amidst groans, and oaths, and prayers, and sudden shrieks, the
enormous crowd vomited itself forth through the numerous passages.
Whither should they fly? Some, anticipating a second earthquake,
hastened to their homes to load themselves with their more costly goods,
and escape while it was yet time; others, dreading the showers of ashes
that now fell fast, torrent upon torrent, over the streets, rushed under
the roofs of the nearest houses, or temples, or sheds--shelter of any
kind--for protection from the terrors of the open air.  But darker, and
larger, and mightier, spread the cloud above them.  It was a sudden and
more ghastly Night rushing upon the realm of Noon!



Chapter V

THE CELL OF THE PRISONER AND THE DEN OF THE DEAD.  GRIEF UNCONSCIOUS OF
HORROR.

STUNNED by his reprieve, doubting that he was awake, Glaucus had been
led by the officers of the arena into a small cell within the walls of
the theatre. They threw a loose robe over his form, and crowded round in
congratulation and wonder.  There was an impatient and fretful cry
without the cell; the throng gave way, and the blind girl, led by some
gentler hand, flung herself at the feet of Glaucus.

'It is I who have saved thee,' she sobbed; now let me die!'

'Nydia, my child!--my preserver!'

'Oh, let me feel thy touch--thy breath!  Yes, yes, thou livest! We are
not too late!  That dread door, methought it would never yield! and
Calenus--oh! his voice was as the dying wind among tombs--we had to
wait--gods! it seemed hours ere food and wine restored to him something
of strength.  But thou livest! thou livest yet! And I--I have saved
thee!'

This affecting scene was soon interrupted by the event just described.

'The mountain! the earthquake!' resounded from side to side.  The
officers fled with the rest; they left Glaucus and Nydia to save
themselves as they might.

As the sense of the dangers around them flashed on the Athenian, his
generous heart recurred to Olinthus.  He, too, was reprieved from the
tiger by the hand of the gods; should he be left to a no less fatal
death in the neighboring cell?  Taking Nydia by the hand, Glaucus
hurried across the passages; he gained the den of the Christian!  He
found Olinthus kneeling and in prayer.

'Arise! arise! my friend,' he cried.  'Save thyself, and fly! See!
Nature is thy dread deliverer!' He led forth the bewildered Christian,
and pointed to a cloud which advanced darker and darker, disgorging
forth showers of ashes and pumice stones--and bade him hearken to the
cries and trampling rush of the scattered crowd.

'This is the hand of God--God be praised!' said Olinthus, devoutly.

'Fly! seek thy brethren!--Concert with them thy escape.  Farewell!'

Olinthus did not answer, neither did he mark the retreating form of his
friend.  High thoughts and solemn absorbed his soul: and in the
enthusiasm of his kindling heart, he exulted in the mercy of God rather
than trembled at the evidence of His power.

At length he roused himself, and hurried on, he scarce knew whither.

The open doors of a dark, desolate cell suddenly appeared on his path;
through the gloom within there flared and flickered a single lamp; and
by its light he saw three grim and naked forms stretched on the earth in
death. His feet were suddenly arrested; for, amidst the terror of that
drear recess--the spoliarium of the arena--he heard a low voice calling
on the name of Christ!

He could not resist lingering at that appeal: he entered the den, and
his feet were dabbled in the slow streams of blood that gushed from the
corpses over the sand.

'Who,' said the Nazarene, 'calls upon the son of God?'

No answer came forth; and turning round, Olinthus beheld, by the light
of the lamp, an old grey-headed man sitting on the floor, and supporting
in his lap the head of one of the dead.  The features of the dead man
were firmly and rigidly locked in the last sleep; but over the lip there
played a fierce smile--not the Christian's smile of hope, but the dark
sneer of hatred and defiance.  Yet on the face still lingered the
beautiful roundness of early youth.  The hair curled thick and glossy
over the unwrinkled brow; and the down of manhood but slightly shaded
the marble of the hueless cheek.  And over this face bent one of such
unutterable sadness--of such yearning tenderness--of such fond and such
deep despair!  The tears of the old man fell fast and hot, but he did
not feel them; and when his lips moved, and he mechanically uttered the
prayer of his benign and hopeful faith, neither his heart nor his sense
responded to the words: it was but the involuntary emotion that broke
from the lethargy of his mind.  His boy was dead, and had died for
him!--and the old man's heart was broken!

'Medon!' said Olinthus, pityingly, 'arise, and fly!  God is forth upon
the wings of the elements!  The New Gomorrah is doomed!--Fly, ere the
fires consume thee!'

'He was ever so full of life!--he cannot be dead!  Come hither!--place
your hand on his heart!--sure it beats yet?'

'Brother, the soul has fled!  We will remember it in our prayers! Thou
canst not reanimate the dumb clay!  Come, come--hark! while I speak, yon
crashing walls!--hark! yon agonizing cries!  Not a moment is to be
lost!--Come!'

'I hear nothing!' said Medon, shaking his grey hair.  'The poor boy, his
love murdered him!'

'Come! come! forgive this friendly force.'

'What!  Who could sever the father from the son?' And Medon clasped the
body tightly in his embrace, and covered it with passionate kisses.
'Go!' said he, lifting up his face for one moment.  'Go!--we must be
alone!'

'Alas!' said the compassionate Nazarene, 'Death hath severed ye
already!'

The old man smiled very calmly.  'No, no, no!' muttered, his voice
growing lower with each word--'Death has been more kind!'

With that his head drooped on His son's breast--his arms relaxed their
grasp.  Olinthus caught him by the hand--the pulse had ceased to beat!
The last words of the father were the words of truth--Death had been
more kind!

Meanwhile Glaucus and Nydia were pacing swiftly up the perilous and
fearful streets.  The Athenian had learned from his preserver that Ione
was yet in the house of Arbaces.  Thither he fled, to release--to save
her!  The few slaves whom the Egyptian had left at his mansion when he
had repaired in long procession to the amphitheatre, had been able to
offer no resistance to the armed band of Sallust; and when afterwards
the volcano broke forth, they had huddled together, stunned and
frightened, in the inmost recesses of the house.  Even the tall
Ethiopian had forsaken his post at the door; and Glaucus (who left Nydia
without--the poor Nydia, jealous once more, even in such an hour!)
passed on through the vast hall without meeting one from whom to learn
the chamber of Ione.  Even as he passed, however, the darkness that
covered the heavens increased so rapidly that it was with difficulty he
could guide his steps.  The flower-wreathed columns seemed to reel and
tremble; and with every instant he heard the ashes fall cranchingly into
the roofless peristyle.  He ascended to the upper rooms--breathless he
paced along, shouting out aloud the name of Ione; and at length he
heard, at the end of a gallery, a voice--her voice, in wondering reply!
To rush forward--to shatter the door--to seize Ione in his arms--to
hurry from the mansion--seemed to him the work of an instant!  Scarce
had he gained the spot where Nydia was, than he heard steps advancing
towards the house, and recognized the voice of Arbaces, who had returned
to seek his wealth and Ione ere he fled from the doomed Pompeii.  But so
dense was already the reeking atmosphere, that the foes saw not each
other, though so near--save that, dimly in the gloom, Glaucus caught the
moving outline of the snowy robes of the Egyptian.

They hastened onward--those three.  Alas! whither?  They now saw not a
step before them--the blackness became utter.  They were encompassed
with doubt and horror!--and the death he had escaped seemed to Glaucus
only to have changed its form and augmented its victims.



Chapter VI

CALENUS AND BURBO.  DIOMED AND CLODIUS.  THE GIRL OF THE AMPHITHEATRE
AND JULIA.

THE sudden catastrophe which had, as it were, riven the very bonds of
society, and left prisoner and jailer alike free, had soon rid Calenus
of the guards to whose care the praetor had consigned him.  And when the
darkness and the crowd separated the priest from his attendants, he
hastened with trembling steps towards the temple of his goddess.  As he
crept along, and ere the darkness was complete, he felt himself suddenly
caught by the robe, and a voice muttered in his ear:

'Hist!--Calenus!--an awful hour!'

'Ay! by my father's head!  Who art thou?--thy face is dim, and thy voice
is strange.

'Not know thy Burbo?--fie!'

'Gods!--how the darkness gathers!  Ho, ho!--by yon terrific mountain,
what sudden blazes of lightning!'--How they dart and quiver! Hades is
loosed on earth!'

'Tush!--thou believest not these things, Calenus!  Now is the time to
make our fortune!'

'Ha!'

'Listen! Thy temple is full of gold and precious mummeries!--let us load
ourselves with them, and then hasten to the sea and embark! None will
ever ask an account of the doings of this day.'

'Burbo, thou art right!  Hush, and follow me into the temple.  Who cares
now--who sees now--whether thou art a priest or not?  Follow, and we
will share.'

In the precincts of the temple were many priests gathered around the
altars, praying, weeping, grovelling in the dust.  Impostors in safety,
they were not the less superstitious in danger!  Calenus passed them,
and entered the chamber yet to be seen in the south side of the court.
Burbo followed him--the priest struck a light.  Wine and viands strewed
the table; the remains of a sacrificial feast.

'A man who has hungered forty-eight hours,' muttered Calenus, 'has an
appetite even in such a time.' He seized on the food, and devoured it
greedily.  Nothing could perhaps, be more unnaturally horrid than the
selfish baseness of these villains; for there is nothing more loathsome
than the valor of avarice.  Plunder and sacrilege while the pillars of
the world tottered to and fro!  What an increase to the terrors of
nature can be made by the vices of man!

'Wilt thou never have done?' said Burbo, impatiently; 'thy face purples
and thine eyes start already.'

'It is not every day one has such a right to be hungry.  Oh, Jupiter!
what sound is that?--the hissing of fiery water!  What! does the cloud
give rain as well as flame!  Ha!--what! shrieks?  And, Burbo, how silent
all is now! Look forth!'

Amidst the other horrors, the mighty mountain now cast up columns of
boiling water.  Blent and kneaded with the half-burning ashes, the
streams fell like seething mud over the streets in frequent intervals.
And full, where the priests of Isis had now cowered around the altars,
on which they had vainly sought to kindle fires and pour incense, one of
the fiercest of those deadly torrents, mingled with immense fragments of
scoria, had poured its rage. Over the bended forms of the priests it
dashed: that cry had been of death--that silence had been of eternity!
The ashes--the pitchy streams--sprinkled the altars, covered the
pavement, and half concealed the quivering corpses of the priests!

'They are dead,' said Burbo, terrified for the first time, and hurrying
back into the cell.  'I thought not the danger was so near and fatal.'
