
Dashing after the flying hart, the hounds made the welkin ring with
their cries. Many lovely damsels were there, but none thought of the
cruelty of the sport--none sympathised with the noble animal they were
running to death. The cries of the hounds--now loud and ringing--now
deep and doling, accompanied by the whooping of the huntsmen, formed a
stirring concert, which found a response in many a gentle bosom. The
whole cavalcade was spread widely about, for none were allowed to ride
near the King. Over the plain they scoured, fleet as the wind, and the
hart seemed making for a fell, forming part of the hill near the
mansion. But ere he reached it, the relays stationed within a covert
burst forth, and, turning him aside, he once more dashed fleetly across
the broad expanse, as if about to return to his old lair. Now he was
seen plunging into some bosky dell; and, after being lost to view for a
moment, bounding up the opposite bank, and stretching across a tract
thickly covered with fern. Here he gained upon the hounds, who were lost
in the green wilderness, and their cries were hushed for a brief
space--but anon they burst forth anew, and the pack were soon again in
full cry, and speeding over the open ground.

At first the cavalcade had kept pretty well together, but on the return
the case was very different; and many of the dames, being unable to keep
up with the hounds, fell off, and, as a natural consequence, many of the
gallants lingered behind, too. Thus only the keenest huntsmen held on.
Amongst these, and about fifty yards behind the King, were Richard and
Nicholas. The squire was right when he predicted that the hart would
show them good sport. Plunging into the wood, the hard-pressed beast
knocked up another stag, and took possession of his lair, but was
speedily roused again by Nicholas and the chief huntsman. Once more he
is crossing the wide plain, with hounds and huntsmen after him--once
more he is turned by a new relay; but this time he shapes his course
towards the woods skirting the Darwen. It is a piteous sight to see him
now; his coat black and glistening with sweat, his mouth embossed with
foam, his eyes dull, big tears coursing down his cheeks, and his noble
head carried low. His end seems nigh--for the hounds, though weary too,
redouble their energies, and the monarch cheers them on. Again the poor
beast erects his head--if he can only reach yon coppice he is safe.
Despair nerves him, and with gigantic bounds he clears the intervening
space, and disappears beneath the branches. Quickly as the hounds come
after him, they are at fault.

"He has taken to the soil, sire," cried Nicholas coming up. "To the
river--to the river! You may see by the broken branches he has gone this
way."

Forcing his way through the wood, James was soon on the banks of the
Darwen, which here ran deep and slow. The hart was nowhere to be seen,
nor was there any slot on the further side to denote that he had gone
forth. It was evident, therefore, that he had swam down the stream. At
this moment a shout was heard a hundred yards lower down, proceeding
from Nicholas; and, riding in the direction of the sound, the King found
the hart at bay on the further side of the stream, and nearly up to his
haunches in the water. The King regarded him for a moment anxiously. The
poor animal was now in his last extremity, but he seemed determined to
sell his life dearly. He stood on a bank projecting into the stream,
round which the water flowed deeply, and could not be approached without
difficulty and danger. He had already gored several hounds, whose
bleeding bodies were swept down the current; and, though the others
bayed round him, they did not dare to approach him, and could not get
behind him, as a high bank arose in his rear.

"Have I your Majesty's permission to despatch him?" asked Nicholas.

"Ay, marry, if you can, sir," replied James. "But 'ware the
tynes!--'ware the tynes!--'If thou be hurt with hart it brings thee to
thy bier,' as the auld ballad hath it, and the adage is true, as we
oursel's have seen."

Nicholas, however, heeded not the caution, but, drawing his wood-knife,
and disencumbering himself of his cloak, he plunged into the stream, and
with one or two strokes reached the bank. The hart watched his approach,
as if divining his purpose, with a look half menacing, half reproachful,
and when he came near, dashed his antlered head at him. Nimbly eluding
the blow, which, if it had taken effect, might have proved serious,
Nicholas plunged his weapon into the poor brute's throat, who instantly
fell with a heavy splash into the water.

"Weel stricken! weel stricken!" shouted James, who had witnessed the
performance from the opposite bank. "But how shall we get the carcase
here?"

"That is easily done, sire," replied Nicholas. And taking hold of the
horns, he guided the body to a low bank, a little below where the King
stood.

As soon as it was dragged ashore by the prickers, James put his bugle to
his lips and blew a mort. A pryse was thrice sounded by Nicholas, and
soon afterwards the whole company came flocking round the spot, whooping
the death-note.

Meanwhile, the hounds had gathered round the fallen hart, and were
allowed to wreak their fury on him by tearing his throat, happily after
sensibility was gone; while Nicholas, again baring his knife, cut off
the right fore-foot, and presented it to the King. While this ceremony
was performed, the varlets of the kennel having cut down a great heap of
green branches, and strewn them on the ground, laid the hart upon them,
on his back, and then bore him to an open space in the wood, where he
was broken up by the King, who prided himself upon his skill in all
matters of woodcraft. While this office was in course of execution a
bowl of wine was poured out for the monarch, which he took, adverting,
as he did so, to the common superstition, that if a huntsman should
break up a deer without drinking, the venison would putrefy. Having
drained the cup, he caused it to be filled again, and gave it to
Nicholas, saying the liquor was needful to him after the drenching he
had undergone. James then proceeded with his task, and just before he
completed it, he was reminded, by a loud croak above him, that a raven
was at hand, and accordingly taking a piece of gristle from the spoon of
the brisket, he cast it on the ground, and the bird immediately pounced
down upon it and carried it off in his huge beak.

After a brief interval, the seek was again winded, another hart was
roused, and after a short but swift chase, pulled down by the hounds,
and dispatched with his own hand by James. Sir Richard Hoghton then
besought the King to follow him, and led the way to a verdant hollow
surrounded by trees, in which shady and delicious retreat preparations
had been made for a slight silvan repast. Upon a mossy bank beneath a
tree, a cushion was placed for the King, and before it on the sward was
laid a cloth spread with many dainties, including

          "Neats' tongues powder'd well, and jambons of the hog,
           With sausages and savoury knacks to set men's minds agog"--

cold capons, and pigeon pies. Close at hand was a clear cold spring, in
which numerous flasks of wine were immersed. A few embers, too, had been
lighted, on which carbonadoes of venison were prepared.

No great form or ceremony was observed at the entertainment. Sir John
Finett and Sir Thomas Hoghton were in close attendance upon the monarch,
and ministered to his wants; but several of the nobles and gentlemen
stretched themselves on the sward, and addressed themselves to the
viands set before them by the pages. None of the dames dismounted, and
few could be prevailed upon to take any refreshment. Besides the flasks
of wine, there were two barrels of ale in a small cart, drawn by a mule,
both of which were broached. The whole scene was picturesque and
pleasing, and well calculated to gratify one so fond of silvan sports as
the monarch for whom it was provided.

In the midst of all this tranquillity and enjoyment an incident occurred
which interrupted it as completely as if a thunder-storm had suddenly
come on. Just when the mirth was at the highest, and when the flowing
cup was at many a lip, a tremendous bellowing, followed by the crashing
of branches, was heard in the adjoining thicket. All started to their
feet at the appalling sound, and the King himself turned pale.

"What in Heaven's name can it be, Sir Richard?" he inquired. "It must be
a drove of wild cattle," replied the baronet, trembling.

"Wild cattle!" ejaculated James, in great alarm; "and sae near us.
Zounds! we shall be trampled and gored to death by these bulls of Basan.
Sir Richard, ye are a fause traitor thus to endanger the safety o' your
sovereign, and ye shall answer for it, if harm come o' it."

"I am unable to account for it, sire," stammered the frightened baronet.
"I gave special directions to the prickers to drive the beasts away."

"Ye shouldna keep sic deevils i' your park, man," cried the monarch.
"Eh! what's that?"

Amidst all this consternation and confusion the bellowing was redoubled,
and the crashing of branches drew nearer and nearer, and Nicholas
Assheton rushed forward with the King's horse, saying, "Mount, sire;
mount, and away!"

But James was so much alarmed that his limbs refused to perform their
office, and he was unable to put foot in the stirrup. Seeing his
condition, Nicholas cried out, "Pardon, my liege; but at a moment of
peril like the present, one must not stand on ceremony."

So saying, he took the King round the waist, and placed him on his
steed.

At this juncture, a loud cry was heard, and a man in extremity of terror
issued from the wood, and dashed towards the hollow. Close on his heels
came the drove of wild cattle, and, just as he gained the very verge of
the descent, the foremost of the herd overtook him, and lowering his
curled head, caught him on the points of his horns, and threw him
forwards to such a distance that he alighted with a heavy crash almost
at the King's feet. Satisfied, apparently, with their vengeance, or
alarmed by the numerous assemblage, the drove instantly turned tail and
were pursued into the depths of the forest by the prickers.

Having recovered his composure, James bade some of the attendants raise
the poor wretch, who was lying groaning upon the ground, evidently so
much injured as to be unable to move without assistance. His garb was
that of a forester, and his bulk--for he was stoutly and squarely
built--had contributed, no doubt, to the severity of the fall. When he
was lifted from the ground, Nicholas instantly recognised in his
blackened and distorted features those of Christopher Demdike.

"What?" he exclaimed, rushing towards him. "Is it thou, villain?"

The sufferer only replied by a look of intense malignity.

"Eh! what--d'ye ken wha it is?" demanded James. "By my saul! I fear the
puir fellow has maist of his banes broken."

"No great matter if they be," replied Nicholas, "and it may save the
application of torture in case your Majesty desires to put any question
to him. Chance has most strangely thrown into your hands one of the most
heinous offenders in the kingdom, who has long escaped justice, but who
will at length meet the punishment of his crimes. The villain is
Christopher Demdike, son of the foul hag who perished in the flames on
the summit of Pendle Hill, and captain of a band of robbers."

"What! is the knave a warlock and a riever?" demanded James, regarding
Demdike with abhorrence, mingled with alarm.

"Both, sire," replied Nicholas, "and an assassin to boot. He is a
diabolical villain."

"Let him be taken to Hoghton Tower, and kept in some strong and secure
place till we have leisure to examine him," said James,--"and see that
he be visited by some skilful chirurgeon, for we wadna hae him dee, and
sae rob the woodie."

Demdike, who appeared to be in great agony, now forced himself to speak.

"I can make important disclosures to your Majesty," he said, in hoarse
and broken tones, "if you will hear them. I am not the only offender who
has escaped from justice," he added, glancing vindictively at
Nicholas--"there is another, a notorious witch and murderess, who is
still screened from justice. I can reveal her hiding-place."

"Your Majesty will not give heed to such a villain's fabrications?" said
Nicholas.

"Are they fabrications, sir?" rejoined James, somewhat sharply. "We maun
hear and judge. The snake, though scotched, will still bite, it seems.
We hae hangit a Highland cateran without trial afore this, and we may be
tempted to tak the law into our ain hands again. Bear the villain hence.
See he be disposed of as already directed, and take good care he is
strictly guarded. And now gie us a crossbow, Sir Richard Hoghton, and
bid the prickers drive the deer afore us, for we wad try our skill as a
marksman."

And while Demdike was placed on the litter of green boughs which had
recently sustained a nobler burthen in the fallen hart, and in this sort
was conveyed to Hoghton Tower, James rode with his retinue towards a
long glade, where, receiving a crossbow from the huntsman, he took up a
favourable position behind a large oak, and several herds of deer being
driven before him, he selected his quarries, and deliberately took aim
at them, contriving in the course of an hour to bring down four fat
bucks, and to maim as many others, which were pulled down by the hounds.
And with this slaughter he was content.

Sir Richard Hoghton then informed his Majesty that a huge boar, which,
in sporting phrase, had left the sounder five years, had broken into the
park the night before, and had been routing amongst the fern. The age
and size of the animal were known by the print of the feet, the toes
being round and thick, the edge of the hoof worn and blunt, the heel
large, and the guards, or dew-claws, great and open, from all which
appearances it was adjudged by the baronet to be "a great old boar, not
to be refused."

James at once agreed to hunt him, and the hounds being taken away, six
couples of magnificent mastiffs, of the Lancashire breed, were brought
forward, and the monarch, under the guidance of Sir Richard Hoghton and
the chief huntsman, repaired to an adjoining thicket, in which the boar
fed and couched.

On arriving near his den, a boar-spear was given to the King, and the
prickers advancing into the wood, presently afterwards reared the
enormous brute. Sallying forth, and freaming furiously, he was instantly
assailed by the mastiffs; but, notwithstanding the number of his
assailants, he made light of them, shaking them from his bristly hide,
crushing them beneath his horny feet, thrusting at them with his
sharpened tusks, and committing terrible devastation among them.

Repeated charges were made upon the savage animal by James, but it was
next to impossible to get a blow at him for some time; and when at
length the monarch made the attempt, he struck too low, and hit him on
the snout, upon which the infuriated boar, finding himself wounded,
sprang towards the horse, and ripped him open with his tusks.

The noble charger instantly rolled over on his side, exposing the royal
huntsman to the fury of his merciless assailant, whose tusks must have
ploughed his flesh, if at this moment a young man had not ridden
forward, and at the greatest personal risk approached the boar, and,
striking straight downwards, cleft the heart of the fierce brute with
his spear.

Meanwhile, the King, having been disengaged by the prickers from his
wounded steed, which was instantly put out of its agony by the sword of
the chief huntsman, looked for his deliverer, and, discovering him to be
Richard Assheton, was loud in his expressions of gratitude.

"Faith! ye maun claim a boon at our hands," said James. "It maun never
be said the King is ungrateful. What can we do for you, lad?"

"For myself nothing, sire," replied Richard.

"But for another meikle--is that what ye wad hae us infer?" cried the
King, with a smile. "Aweel, the lassie shall hae strict justice done
her; but for your ain sake we maun inquire into the matter. Meantime,
wear this," he added, taking a magnificent sapphire ring from his
finger, "and, if you should ever need our aid, send it to us as a
token."

Richard took the gift, and knelt to kiss the hand so graciously
extended to him.

By this time another horse had been provided for the monarch, and the
enormous boar, with his feet upwards and tied together, was suspended
upon a pole, and borne on the shoulders of four stout varlets as the
grand trophy of the chase.

When the royal company issued from the wood a strike of nine was blown
by the chief huntsman, and such of the cavalcade as still remained on
the field being collected together, the party crossed the chase, and
took the direction of Hoghton Tower.




CHAPTER IX.--THE BANQUET.


On the King's return to Hoghton Tower, orders were given by Sir Richard
for the immediate service of the banquet; it being the hospitable
baronet's desire that festivities should succeed each other so rapidly
as to allow of no tedium.

The _coup-d'oeil_ of the banquet hall on the monarch's entrance was
magnificent. Panelled with black lustrous oak, and lighted by mullion
windows, filled with stained glass and emblazoned with the armorial
bearings of the family, the vast and lofty hall was hung with banners,
and decorated with panoplies and trophies of the chase. Three long
tables ran down it, each containing a hundred covers. At the lower end
were stationed the heralds, the pursuivants, and a band of yeomen of the
guard, with the royal badge, a demi-rose crowned, impaled with a
demi-thistle, woven in gold on their doublets, and having fringed
pole-axes over their shoulders. Behind them was a richly carved oak
screen, concealing the passages leading to the buttery and kitchens, in
which the clerk of the kitchen, the pantlers, and the yeomen of the
cellar and ewery, were hurrying to and fro. Above the screen was a
gallery, occupied by the trumpeters and minstrels; and over all was a
noble rafter roof. The tables were profusely spread, and glittered with
silver dishes of extraordinary size and splendour, as well as with
flagons and goblets of the same material, and rare design. The guests,
all of whom were assembled, were outnumbered by the prodigious array of
serving-men, pages, and yeomen waiters in the yellow and red liveries of
the Stuart.

Flourishes of trumpets announced the coming of the monarch, who was
preceded by Sir Richard Hoghton, bearing a white wand, and ushered with
much ceremony to his place. At the upper end of the hall was a raised
floor, and on either side of it an oriel window, glowing with painted
glass. On this dais the King's table was placed, underneath a canopy of
state, embroidered with the royal arms, and bearing James's kindly
motto, "_Beati Pacifici_." Seats were reserved at it for the Dukes of
Buckingham and Richmond, the Earls of Pembroke and Nottingham, the
Lords Howard of Effingham and Grey of Groby, Sir Gilbert Hoghton, and
the Bishop of Chester. These constituted the favoured guests. Grace
having been said by the bishop, the whole company took their seats, and
the general stillness hitherto prevailing throughout the vast hall was
broken instantaneously by the clatter of trenchers.

A famous feast it was, and worthy of commemoration. Masters Morris and
Miller, the two cooks who contrived it, as well as the labourers for the
ranges, for the pastries, for the boiled meats, and for the pullets,
performed their respective parts to admiration. The result was all that
could be desired. The fare was solid and substantial, consisting of
dishes which could be cut and come to again. Amongst the roast meats
were chines of beef, haunches of venison, gigots of mutton, fatted
geese, capons, turkeys, and sucking pigs; amongst the boiled, pullets,
lamb, and veal; but baked meats chiefly abounded, and amongst them were
to be found red-deer pasty, hare-pie, gammon-of-bacon pie, and baked
wild-boar. With the salads, which were nothing more than what would,
now-a-days be termed "vegetables," were mixed all kinds of soused fish,
arranged according to the sewer's directions--"the salads spread about
the tables, the fricassees mixed with them, the boiled meats among the
fricassees, roast meats amongst the boiled, baked meats amongst the
roast, and carbonadoes amongst the baked." This was the first course
merely. In the second were all kinds of game and wild-fowl, roast herons
three in a dish, bitterns, cranes, bustards, curlews, dotterels, and
pewits. Besides these there were lumbar pies, marrow pies, quince pies,
artichoke pies, florentines, and innumerable other good things. Some
dishes were specially reserved for the King's table, as a baked swan, a
roast peacock, and the jowl of a sturgeon soused. These and a piece of
roast beef formed the principal dishes.

The attendants at the royal table comprised such gentlemen as wore Sir
Richard Hoghton's liveries, and amongst these, of course, were Nicholas
Assheton and Sherborne. On seeing the former, the King immediately
inquired about his deliverer, and on hearing he was at the lower tables,
desired he might be sent for, and, as Richard soon afterwards appeared,
having on his return from the chase changed his sombre apparel for gayer
attire, James smiled graciously upon him, and more than once, as a mark
of especial favour, took the wine-cup from his hands.

The King did ample justice to the good things before him, and especially
to the beef, which he found so excellent, that the carver had to help
him for the second time. Sir Richard Hoghton ventured to express his
gratification that his Majesty found the meat good--"Indeed, it is
generally admitted," he said, "that our Lancashire beef is well fed, and
well flavoured."

"Weel flavoured!" exclaimed James, as he swallowed the last juicy
morsel; "it is delicious! Finer beef nae man ever put teeth into, an I
only wish a' my loving subjects had as gude a dinner as I hae this day
eaten. What joint do ye ca' it, Sir Richard?" he asked, with eyes
evidently twinkling with a premeditated jest. "This dish," replied the
host, somewhat surprised "this, sire, is a loin of beef."

"A loin!" exclaimed James, taking the carving-knife from the sewer, who
stood by, "by my faith that is not title honourable enough for joint sae
worthy. It wants a dignity, and it shall hae it. Henceforth," he added,
touching the meat with the flat of the long blade, as if placing the
sword on the back of a knight expectant, "henceforth, it shall be
SIR-LOIN, an see ye ca' it sae. Give me a cup of wine, Master Richard
Assheton."

All the nobles at the table laughed loudly at the monarch's jest, and as
it was soon past down to those at the lower table, the hall resounded
with laughter, in which page and attendant of every degree joined, to
the great satisfaction of the good-natured originator of the
merriment.[4]

"My dear dad and gossip appears in unwonted good spirits to-day,"
observed the Duke of Buckingham.

"An wi' gude reason, Steenie," replied the King, "for we dinna mind when
we hae had better sport--always excepting the boar-hunt, when we should
hae been rippit up by the cursed creature's tusks but for this braw
laddie," he added, pointing to Richard. "Ye maun see what can be done
for him, Steenie. We maun hae him at court."

"Your Majesty's wishes have only to be expressed to be fulfilled,"
replied Buckingham, somewhat drily.

"Were I the lad I wadna place ower meikle dependence on the Duke's
promises," remarked Archie Armstrong, in a low tone, to Nicholas.

"Has your Majesty made any further inquiries about the girl suspected of
witchcraft?" inquired Buckingham, renewing the conversation.

"Whist, Steenie, whist!" cried James. "Didna ye see her yoursel' this
morning?" he added, in a low tone. "Ah! I recollect ye werena at the
chase. Aweel, I hae conferred wi' her, an am sair perplexed i' the
matter. She is a well-faur'd lassie as ony i' the realm, and answers
decorously and doucely. Sooth to say, her looks and manners are mightily
in her favour."

"Then you mean to dismiss the matter without further investigation?"
observed Buckingham. "I always thought your Majesty delighted to
exercise your sagacity in detecting the illusions practised by Satan and
his worshippers."

"An sae we do," replied James. "But bend your bonnie head this way till
we whisper in your ear. We hae a device for finding it a' out, which
canna fail; and when you ken it you will applaud your dear dad's wisdom,
and perfit maistery o' the haill science o' kingcraft."

"I would your Majesty would make me acquainted with this notable
scheme," replied Buckingham, with ill-concealed contempt. "I might make
it more certain of success."

"Na--na--we shanna let the cat out of the bag just yet," returned the
King. "We mean it as a surprise to ye a'."

"Then, whatever be the result, it is certain to answer the effect
intended," observed the Duke.

"Gae wa'! ye are ever sceptical, Steenie--ever misdoubting your ain dear
dad and gossip," rejoined James; "but ye shall find we haena earned the
title o' the British Solomon for naething."

Soon after this the King arose, and was ushered to his apartments by Sir
Richard Hoghton with the same ceremony as had been observed on his
entrance. He was followed by all the nobles; and Nicholas and the
others, being released from their duties, repaired to the lower end of
the hall to dine. The revel was now sufficiently boisterous; for, as the
dames had departed at the same time as the monarch, all restraint was
cast aside. The wine-cup flowed freely, and the rafters rang with
laughter. Under ordinary circumstances Richard would have shrunk from
such a scene; but he had now a part to play, and therefore essayed to
laugh at each jest, and to appear as reckless as his neighbours. He was
glad, however, when the signal for general dispersion was given; for
though Sir Richard Hoghton was unwilling to stint his guests, he was
fearful, if they sat too long over their wine, some disturbances might
ensue; and indeed, when the revellers came forth and dispersed within
the base court, their flushed cheeks, loud voices, and unsteady gait,
showed that their potations had already been deep enough.

Meanwhile, quite as much mirth was taking place out of doors as had
occurred within the banqueting-hall. As soon as the King sat down to
dinner, according to promise the gates were thrown open, and the crowd
outside admitted. The huge roast was then taken down, carved, and
distributed among them; the only difficulty experienced being in regard
to trenchers, and various and extraordinary were the contrivances
resorted to to supply the deficiency. This circumstance, however, served
to heighten the fun, and, as several casks of stout ale were broached at
the same time, universal hilarity prevailed. Still, in the midst of so
vast a concourse, many component parts of which had now began to
experience the effects of the potent liquor, some little manifestation
of disorder might naturally be expected; but all such was speedily
quelled by the yeomen of the guard, and other officials appointed for
the purpose, and, amidst the uproar and confusion, harmony generally
prevailed.

While elbowing his way through the crowd, Nicholas felt his sleeve
plucked, and turning, perceived Nance Redferne, who signed him to follow
her, and there was something in her manner that left him no alternative
but compliance. Nance passed on rapidly, and entered the doorway of a
building, where it might be supposed they would be free from
interruption.

"What do you want with me, Nance?" asked the squire, somewhat
impatiently. "I must beg to observe that I cannot be troubled further on
your account, and am greatly afraid aspersions may be thrown on my
character, if I am seen talking with you."

"A few words wi' me winna injure your character, squire," rejoined
Nance, "an it's on your account an naw on my own that ey ha' brought you
here. Ey ha' important information to gie ye. What win yo say when ey
tell yo that Jem Device, Elizabeth Device, an' her dowter Jennet are
here--aw breedin mischief agen yo, Ruchot Assheton, and Alizon?"

"The devil!" ejaculated Nicholas.

"Eigh, yo'n find it the devil, ey con promise ye, onless their plans be
frustrated," said Nance.

"That can be easily done," replied Nicholas. "I'll cause them to be
arrested at once."

"Nah, nah--that canna be," rejoined Nance--"Yo mun bide your time."

"What! and allow such miscreants to go at large, and work any malice
they please against me and my friends!" replied Nicholas. "Show me where
they are, Nance, or I must make you a prisoner."

"Nah! yo winna do that, squire," she replied in a tone of good-humoured
defiance. "Ye winna do it for two good reasons: first, becose yo'd be
harming a freend who wants to sarve yo, and _win_ do so, if yo'n let
her; and secondly, becose if yo wur to raise a finger agen me, ey'd
deprive yo of speech an motion. When the reet moment comes yo shan
strike--boh it's nah come yet. The fruit is nah ripe eneugh to gather.
Ey am os anxious os you con be, that the whole o' the Demdike brood
should be swept away--an it shan be, if yo'n leave it to me."

"Well, I commit the matter entirely to you," said Nicholas. "Apparently,
it cannot be in better hands. But are you aware that Christopher Demdike
is a prisoner here in Hoghton Tower? He was taken this morning in the
park."

"Ey knoa it," replied Nance; "an ey knoa also why he went there, an it
wur my intention to ha' revealed his black design to yo. However, it has
bin ordert differently. Boh in respect to t'others, wait till I gie yo
the signal. They are disguised; boh even if ye see 'em, an recognise
'em, dunna let it appear till ey gie the word, or yo'n spoil aw."

"Your injunctions shall be obeyed implicitly, Nance," rejoined,
Nicholas. "I have now perfect reliance upon you. But when shall I see
you again?"

"That depends upon circumstances," she replied. "To-neet, may be--may be
to-morrow neet. My plans maun be guided by those of others. Boh when
next yo see me you win ha' to act."

And, without waiting an answer, she rushed out of the doorway, and,
mingling with the crowd, was instantly lost to view; while Nicholas,
full of the intelligence he had received, betook himself slowly to his
lodgings.

Scarcely were they gone when a door, which had been standing ajar, near
them, was opened wide, and disclosed the keen visage of Master Potts.

"Here's a pretty plot hatching--here's a nice discovery I have made!"
soliloquised the attorney. "The whole Demdike family, with the exception
of the old witch herself, whom I saw burnt on Pendle Hill, are at
Hoghton Tower. This shall be made known to the King. I'll have Nicholas
Assheton arrested at once, and the woman with him, whom I recognise as
Nance Redferne. It will be a wonderful stroke, and will raise me highly
in his Majesty's estimation. Yet stay! Will not this interfere with my
other plans with Jennet? Let me reflect. I must go cautiously to work.
Besides, if I cause Nicholas to be arrested, Nance will escape, and then
I shall have no clue to the others. No--no; I must watch Nicholas
closely, and take upon myself all the credit of the discovery. Perhaps
through Jennet I may be able to detect their disguises. At all events, I
will keep a sharp look-out. Affairs are now drawing to a close, and I
have only, like a wary and experienced fowler, to lay my nets cleverly
to catch the whole covey."

And with these ruminations, he likewise went forth into the base court.

The rest of the day was one round of festivity and enjoyment, in which
all classes participated. There were trials of skill and strength,
running, wrestling, and cudgeling-matches, with an infinite variety of
country games and shows.

Towards five o'clock a rush-cart, decked with flowers and ribbons, and
bestridden by men bearing garlands, was drawn up in front of the central
building of the tower, in an open window of which sat James--a
well-pleased spectator of the different pastimes going forward; and
several lively dances were executed by a troop of male and female
morris-dancers, accompanied by a tabor and pipe. But though this show
was sufficiently attractive, it lacked the spirit of that performed at
Whalley; while the character of Maid Marian, which then found so
charming a representative in Alizon, was now personated by a man--and if
Nicholas Assheton, who was amongst the bystanders, was not deceived,
that man was Jem Device. Enraged by this discovery, the squire was
about to seize the ruffian; but, calling to mind Nance's counsel, he
refrained, and Jem (if it indeed were he) retired with a largess,
bestowed by the royal hand as a reward for his uncouth gambols.

The rush-cart and morris-dancers having disappeared, another drollery
was exhibited, called the "Fool and his Five Sons," the names of the
hopeful offspring of the sapient sire being Pickle Herring, Blue Hose,
Pepper Hose, Ginger Hose, and Jack Allspice. The humour of this piece,
though not particularly refined, seemed to be appreciated by the
audience generally, as well as by the monarch, who laughed heartily at
its coarse buffoonery.

Next followed "The Plough and Sword Dance;" the principal actors being a
number of grotesque figures armed with swords, some of whom were yoked
to a plough, on which sat a piper, playing lustily while dragged along.
The plough was guided by a man clothed in a bear-skin, with a fur cap on
his head, and a long tail, like that of a lion, dangling behind him. In
this hirsute personage, who was intended to represent the wood-demon,
Hobthurst, Nicholas again detected Jem Device, and again was strongly
tempted to disobey Nance's injunctions, and denounce him--the rather
that he recognised in an attendant female, in a fantastic dress, the
ruffian's mother, Elizabeth; but he once more desisted.

As soon as the mummers arrived in front of the King, the dance began.
With their swords held upright, the party took hands and wheeled rapidly
round the plough, keeping time to a merry measure played by the piper,
who still maintained his seat. Suddenly the ring was enlarged to double
its former size, each man extending his sword to his neighbour, who took
hold of the point; after which an hexagonal figure was formed, all the
blades being brought together. The swords were then quickly withdrawn,
flashing like sunbeams, and a four square figure was presented, the
dancers vaulting actively over each other's heads. Other variations
succeeded, not necessary to be specified--and the sport concluded by a
general clashing of swords, intended to represent a melee.

Meanwhile, Nicholas had been joined by Richard Assheton, and the latter
was not long in detecting the two Devices through their disguises. On
making this discovery he mentioned it to the squire, and was surprised
to find him already aware of the circumstance, and not less astonished
when he was advised to let them alone; the squire adding he was unable
at that time to give his reasons for such counsel, but, being good and
conclusive, Richard would be satisfied of their propriety hereafter. The
young man, however, thought otherwise, and, notwithstanding his
relative's attempts to dissuade him, announced his intention of causing
the parties to be arrested at once; and with this design he went in
search of an officer of the guard, that the capture might be effected
without disturbance. But the throng was so close round the dancers that
he could not pierce it, and being compelled to return and take another
course, he got nearer to the mazy ring, and was unceremoniously pushed
aside by the mummers. At this moment both his arms were forcibly
grasped, and a deep voice on the right whispered in his ear--"Meddle not
with us, and we will not meddle with you," while similar counsel was
given him in other equally menacing tones, though in a different key, on
the left. Richard would have shaken off his assailants, and seized them
in his turn, but power to do so was wanting to him. For the moment he
was deprived of speech and motion; but while thus situated he felt that
the sapphire ring given him by the King was snatched from his finger by
the first speaker, whom he knew to be Jem Device, while a fearful spell
was muttered over him by Elizabeth.

As this occurred at the time when the rattling of the swords engaged the
whole attention of the spectators, no one noticed what was going forward
except Nicholas, and, before he could get up to the young man, the two
miscreants were gone, nor could any one tell what had become of them.

"Have the wretches done you a mischief?" asked the squire, in a low
tone, of Richard.

"They have stolen the King's ring, which I meant to use in Alizon's
behalf," replied the young man, who by this time had recovered his
speech.

"That is unlucky, indeed," said Nicholas. "But we can defeat any ill
design they may intend, by acquainting Sir John Finett with the
circumstance."

"Let them be," said a voice in his ear. "The time is not yet come." The
squire did not look round, for he well knew that the caution proceeded
from Nance Redferne.

And, accordingly, he observed to Richard--"Tarry awhile, and you will be
amply avenged."

And with this assurance the young man was fain to be content.

Just then a trumpet was sounded, and a herald stationed on the summit of
the broad flight of steps leading to the great hall, proclaimed in a
loud voice that a tilting-match was about to take place between Archie
Armstrong, jester to his most gracious Majesty, and Davy Droman, who
filled the same honourable office to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham,
and that a pair of gilt-heel'd chopines would be the reward of the
successful combatant. This announcement was received with cheers, and
preparations were instantly made for the mock tourney. A large circle
being formed by the yeomen of the guard, with an alley leading to it on
either side, the two combatants, mounted on gaudy-caparisoned
hobby-horses, rode into the ring. Both were armed to the teeth, each
having a dish-cover braced around him in lieu of a breastplate, a
newly-scoured brass porringer on his head, a large pewter platter
instead of a buckler, and a spit with a bung at the point, to prevent
mischief, in place of a lance. The Duke's jester was an obese little
fellow, and his appearance in this warlike gear was so eminently
ridiculous, that it provoked roars of laughter, while Archie was
scarcely less ridiculous. After curveting round the arena in imitation
of knights of chivalry, and performing "their careers, their prankers,
their false trots, their smooth ambles, and Canterbury paces," the two
champions took up a position opposite each other, with difficulty, as it
seemed, reining in their pawing chargers, and awaiting the signal of
attack to be given by Sir John Finett, the judge of the tournament. This
was not long delayed, and the "laissez aller" being pronounced, the
preux chevaliers started forward with so much fury, and so little
discretion, that meeting half-way with a tremendous shock, and butting
against each other like two rams, both were thrown violently backwards,
exhibiting, amid the shouts of the spectators, their heels, no longer
hidden by the trappings of their steeds, kicking in the air. Encumbered
as they were, some little time elapsed before they could regain their
feet, and their lances having been removed in the mean time, by order of
Sir John Finett, as being weapons of too dangerous a description for
such truculent combatants, they attacked each other with their broad
lathen daggers, dealing sounding blows upon helm, habergeon, and shield,
but doing little personal mischief. The strife raged furiously for some
time, and, as the champions appeared pretty well matched, it was not
easy to say how it would terminate, when chance seemed to decide in
favour of Davy Droman; for, in dealing a heavier blow than usual,
Archie's dagger snapped in twain, leaving him at the mercy of his
opponent. On this the doughty Davy, crowing lustily like chanticleer,
called upon him to yield; but Archie was so wroth at his misadventure,
that, instead of complying, he sprang forward, and with the hilt of his
broken weapon dealt his elated opponent a severe blow on the side of the
head, not only knocking off the porringer, but stretching him on the
ground beside it. The punishment he had received was enough for poor
Davy. He made no attempt to rise, and Archie, crowing in his turn,
trampling upon the body of his prostrate foe, and then capering joyously
round it, was declared the victor, and received the gilt chopines from
the judge, amidst the laughter and acclamations of the beholders.

With this the public sports concluded; and, as evening was drawing on
apace, such of the guests as were not invited to pass the night within
the Tower, took their departure; while shortly afterwards, supper being
served in the banqueting-hall on a scale of profusion and magnificence
quite equal to the earlier repast, the King and the whole of his train
sat down to it.




CHAPTER X.--EVENING ENTERTAINMENTS.


Other amusements were reserved for the evening. While revelry was again
held in the great hall; while the tables groaned, for the third time
since morning, with good cheer, and the ruby wine, which seemed to gush
from inexhaustible fountains, mantled in the silver flagons; while
seneschal, sewer, and pantler, with the yeomen of the buttery and
kitchen, were again actively engaged in their vocations; while of the
three hundred guests more than half, as if insatiate, again vied with
each other in prowess with the trencher and the goblet; while in the
words of old Taylor, the water poet, but who was no water-drinker--and
who thus sang of the hospitality of the men of Manchester, in the early
part of the seventeenth century--they had

          "Roast, boil'd, bak'd, too, too much, white, claret, sack.
           Nothing they thought too heavy or too hot,
           Can follow'd can, and pot succeeded pot."

--during this time preparations were making for fresh entertainments out
of doors.

The gardens at Hoghton Tower, though necessarily confined in space,
owing to their situation on the brow of a hill, were beautifully laid
out, and commanded from their balustred terraces magnificent views of
the surrounding country. Below them lay the well-wooded park, skirted by
the silvery Darwen, with the fair village of Walton-le-Dale immediately
beyond it, the proud town of Preston further on, and the single-coned
Nese Point rising majestically in the distance. The principal garden
constituted a square, and was divided with mathematical precision,
according to the formal taste of the time, into smaller squares, with a
broad well-kept gravel walk at each angle. These plots were arranged in
various figures and devices--such as the cinq-foil, the flower-de-luce,
the trefoil, the lozenge, the fret, the diamond, the crossbow, and the
oval--all very elaborate and intricate in design. Besides these knots,
as they were termed, there were labyrinths, and clipped yew-tree walks,
and that indispensable requisite to a garden at the period, a maze. In
the centre was a grassy eminence, surmounted by a pavilion, in front of
which spread a grass-plot of smoothest turf, ordinarily used as a
bowling-green. At the lower end of this a temporary stage was erected,
for the masque about to be represented before the King. Torches were
kindled, and numerous lamps burned in the branches of the adjoining
trees; but they were scarcely needed, for the moon being at the full,
the glorious effulgence shed by her upon the scene rendered all other
light pale and ineffectual.

After supper, at which the drinking was deeper than at dinner, the whole
of the revellers repaired to the garden, full of frolic and merriment,
and well-disposed for any diversion in store for them. The King was
conducted to the bowling-green by his host, preceded by a crowd of
attendants bearing odoriferous torches; but the royal gait being
somewhat unsteady, the aid of Sir Gilbert Hoghton's arm was required to
keep the monarch from stumbling. The rest of the bacchanalians followed,
and, elated as they were, it will not be wondered that they put very
little restraint upon themselves, but shouted, sang, danced, and
indulged in all kinds of licence.

Opposite the stage prepared for the masquers a platform had been reared,
in front of which was a chair for the King, with seats for the nobles
and principal guests behind it. The sides were hung with curtains of
crimson velvet fringed with gold; the roof decorated like a canopy; so
that it had a very magnificent effect. James lolled back in his chair,
and jested loudly and rather indecorously with the various personages as
they took their places around him. In less than five minutes the whole
of the green was filled with revellers, and great was the pushing and
jostling, the laughing and screaming, that ensued among them. Silence
was then enjoined by Sir John Finett, who had stationed himself on the
steps of the stage, and at this command the assemblage became
comparatively quiet, though now and then a half-suppressed titter or a
smothered scream would break out. Amid this silence the King's voice
could be distinctly heard, and his coarse jests reached the ears of all
the astonished audience, provoking many a severe comment from the
elders, and much secret laughter from the juniors.

The masque began. Two tutelar deities appeared on the stage. They were
followed by a band of foresters clad in Lincoln green, with bows at
their backs. The first deity wore a white linen tunic, with
flesh-coloured hose and red buskins, and had a purple taffeta mantle
over his shoulders. In his hand he held a palm branch, and a garland of
the same leaves was woven round his brow. The second household god was a
big brawny varlet, wild and shaggy in appearance, being clothed in the
skins of beasts, with sandals of untanned cowhide. On his head was a
garland of oak leaves; and from his neck hung a horn. He was armed with
a hunting-spear and wood-knife, and attended by a large Lancashire
mastiff. Advancing to the front of the stage, the foremost personage
thus addressed the Monarch--

          "This day--great King for government admired!
           Which these thy subjects have so much desired--
           Shall be kept holy in their heart's best treasure,
           And vow'd to JAMES as is this month to Caesar.
           And now the landlord of this ancient Tower,
           Thrice fortunate to see this happy hour,
           Whose trembling heart thy presence sets on fire,
           Unto this house--the heart of all our shire--
           Does bid thee cordial welcome, and would speak it
           In higher notes, but extreme joy doth break it.
           He makes his guests most welcome, in his eyes
           Love tears do sit, not he that shouts and cries.
           And we the antique guardians of this place,--
           I of this house--he of the fruitful chase,--
           Since the bold Hoghtons from this hill took name,
           Who with the stiff, unbridled Saxons came,
           And so have flourish'd in this fairer clime
           Successively from that to this our time,
           Still offering up to our immortal powers
           Sweet incense, wine, and odoriferous flowers;
           While sacred Vesta, in her virgin tire,
           With vows and wishes tends the hallow'd fire.
           Now seeing that thy Majesty is thus
           Greater than household deities like us,
           We render up to thy more powerful guard,
           This Tower. This knight is thine--he is thy ward,
           For by thy helping and auspicious hand,
           He and his home shall ever, ever stand
           And flourish, in despite of envious fate;
           And then live, like Augustus, fortunate.
           And long, long mayst thou live!--To which both men
           And guardian angels cry--"Amen! amen!"

James, who had demeaned himself critically during the delivery of the
address, observed at its close to Sir Richard Hoghton, who was standing
immediately behind his chair, "We cannot say meikle for the rhymes,
which are but indifferently strung together, but the sentiments are leal
and gude, and that is a' we care for."

On this the second tutelar divinity advanced, and throwing himself into
an attitude, as if bewildered by the august presence in which he stood,
exclaimed--

          "Thou greatest of mortals!"--

And then stopped, as if utterly confounded.

The King looked at him for a moment, and then roared out--"Weel,
gudeman, your commencement is pertinent and true enough; and though we
be 'the greatest of mortals,' as ye style us, dinna fash yoursel' about
