   Pollux. Her inquiry is a natural one, and her self-reproach
   naturally suggests her own disgrace as the cause of their not
   appearing among the other commanders. The two lines in which the
   poet mentions their death are simple and touching.--FELTON.

15. Homer here gives the whole ceremonial of the solemn oath, as it
   was then observed by the nations of whom he writes.

16. It must be borne in mind that sacrificing was the most solemn act
   of religion, and that kings were also chief-priests.

17. The armor of both Greeks and Trojans consisted of six portions,
   and was always put on in the order here given. The greaves were for
   the defence of the legs. They were made of some kind of metal, and
   probably lined with cloth or felt. The cuirass or corselet for the
   body, was made of horn cut in thin pieces and fastened upon linen
   cloth, one piece overlapping another. The sword hung on the left
   side by means of a belt which passed over the right shoulder. The
   large round shield, sometimes made of osiers twisted together and
   covered with several ox-hides, and bound round the edge with metal.
   In the Homeric times it was supported by a belt; subsequently a
   band was placed across the inner side, in which the left arm was
   inserted, and a strong leather strap fastened near the edge at
   certain distances, which was grasped by the hand. The helmet, made
   of metal and lined with felt. Lastly the spear, and in many cases
   two. The heavy-armed soldiery were distinguished from the light.
   The covering of the latter consisted of skins, and instead of the
   sword and lance, they fought with darts, bows and arrows, or
   slings, and were generally attached in a subordinate capacity to
   the heavy-armed soldiery.

18. Homer puts a prayer in the mouth of Menelaues, but none in that of
   Paris. Menelaues is injured and innocent, and may therefore ask for
   justice; but Paris, who is the criminal, remains silent.

19. [Because the hide of a beast that dies in health is tougher and
   fitter for use than of another that dies diseased.]


Footnotes for Book IV:
1. The goddess of youth is made an attendant at the banquets of the
   gods, to show that they enjoyed a perpetual youth, and endless
   felicity.

2. [A town of that name in Boeotia, where Pallas was particularly
   worshipped.--TR.]

3. [{Boopis}, constant description of Juno, but not susceptible of
   literal translation.]

4. Homer does not make the gods use all persons indiscriminately as
   their agents, but each according to his powers. When Minerva would
   persuade the Greeks, she seeks Ulysses; when she would break the
   truce, for Pandarus; and when she would conquer, for Diomede. The
   goddess went not to the Trojans, because they hated Paris, and
   looks among the allies, where she finds Pandarus, who was of a
   nation noted for perfidiousness, and who, from his avarice, was
   capable of engaging in this treachery for the hope of a reward from
   Paris.

5. A city of Asia Minor.

6. This description, so full of circumstantial detail, is remarkably
   beautiful. 1. The history of the bow, giving in a few words the
   picture of a hunter, lying in ambush and slaying his victim.
   2. Then the process of making the bow. 3. The anxious preparation
   for discharging the arrow with certainty, which was destined to
   break off the truce and precipitate the battle. 4. The hurried
   prayer and vow to Apollo, after which the string is drawn, the cord
   twangs, the arrow "leaps forth." The whole is described with such
   graphic truth, that we see, and hear, and wait in breathless
   suspense to know the result.--FELTON.

7. This is one of those humble comparisons with which Homer sometimes
   diversifies his subject, but a very exact one of its kind, and
   corresponding in all its parts. The care of the goddess, the
   unsuspecting security of Menelaus, the ease with which she diverts
   the danger, and the danger itself, are all included in these few
   words. To which may be added, that if the providence of heavenly
   powers to their creatures is expressed by the love of a mother to
   her child, if men in regard to them are but as sleeping infants,
   and the dangers that seem so great to us, as easily warded off as
   the simile implies, the conception appears sublime, however
   insignificant the image may at first seem in regard to a hero.

8. From this we learn that the Lydians and Carians were famous for
   their skill in dying purple, and that their women excelled in works
   of ivory; and also that there were certain ornaments that only
   kings and princes were privileged to wear.

9. This speech of Agamemnon over his wounded brother, is full of noble
   power and touching eloquence. The Trojans have violated a truce
   sanctioned by a solemn sacrifice to the gods. The reflection that
   such perjury cannot pass with impunity, but that Jove will, sooner
   or later, punish it, occurs first to the mind of the warrior. In
   the excitement of the moment, he predicts that the day will surely
   come when sacred Troy shall fall. From this impetuous feeling his
   mind suddenly returns to the condition of his brother, and imagines
   with much pathos, the consequences that will follow from his death,
   and ends with the wish, that the earth may open before him when
   that time shall come.--FELTON.

10. The poet here changes the narration, and apostrophises the reader.
   Critics commend this figure, as the reader then becomes a
   spectator, and his mind is kept fixed on the action.

11. In the following review of the army, we see the skill of an
   accomplished general as well as the characters of the leaders whom
   Agamemnon addresses. He begins with an address to the army in
   general, and then turns to individuals. To the brave he urges their
   secure hopes of conquest, since the gods must punish perjury; to
   the timid, their inevitable destruction if the enemy should burn
   their ships. After this he flies from rank to rank, skilfully
   addressing each ally, and presents a lively picture of a great mind
   in the highest emotion.

12. The ancients usually in their feasts divided to the guests in
   equal portions, except they took particular occasion to show
   distinction. It was then considered the highest mark of honor to be
   allotted the best portion of meat and wine, and to be allowed an
   exemption from the laws of the feast in drinking wine unmingled and
   without measure. This custom was much more ancient than the time of
   the Trojan war, and we find it practised in the banquet given by
   Joseph to his brethren.

13. [Diverse interpretations are given of this passage. I have adopted
   that which to me appeared most plausible. It seems to be a caution
   against the mischiefs that might ensue, should the horses be put
   under the management of a driver with whom they were
   unacquainted.--The scholium by Villoisson much countenances this
   solution.--TR.]

14. [Here Nestor only mentions the name of Ereuthalion, knowing the
   present to be an improper time for story-telling; in the seventh
   book he relates his fight and victory at length. This passage may
   serve to confute those who charge Nestor with indiscriminate
   loquacity.--TR.]

15. The first Theban war, previously alluded to, took place
   twenty-seven years before the war of Troy. Sthenelus here speaks of
   the second, which happened ten years after the first. For an
   account of these wars see Grecian and Roman Mythology.

16. This is a most animated description. The onset, the clashing of
   spears, the shield pressed to shield, the tumult of the battle, the
   shouts and groans of the slayer and the dying--all are described in
   words, the very sound of which conveys the terrible meaning. Then
   come the exploits performed by individual heroes. The student must
   bear in mind, that the battles of the heroic age depended in a
   great measure upon the prowess of single chieftains. Hence the
   appropriateness of the following enumeration.--FELTON.

17. So called from the river Simois, near which he was born. It was an
   eastern custom to name children from the most remarkable accident
   of their birth. The Scriptures furnish many examples. In the Old
   Testament princes were also compared to trees, and Simoeisius is
   here resembled to a poplar.

18. Homer occasionally puts his readers in mind of Achilles, and finds
   occasion to celebrate his valor with the highest praise. Apollo
   here tells the Trojans they have nothing to fear, since Achilles
   fights not.

19. [{Akrokomoi}. They wore only a lock of hair on the crown of the
   head.]


Footnotes for Book V:
1. In each battle there is one prominent person who may be called the
   hero of the day. This arrangement preserves unity, and helps to fix
   the attention of the reader. The gods sometimes favor one hero, and
   sometimes another. In this book we have the exploits of Diomede.
   Assisted by Minerva, he is eminent both for prudence and valor.

2. Sirius. This comparison, among many others, shows how constantly
   the poet's attention was directed to the phenomena of
   nature.--FELTON.

3. {Eioenti}.

4. The chariots were probably very low. We frequently find in the
   Iliad that a person standing in a chariot is killed (and sometimes
   by a stroke on the head) by a foot soldier with a sword. This may
   farther appear from the ease with which they mount or alight, to
   facilitate which, the chariots were made open behind. That the
   wheels were small, may be supposed from their custom of taking them
   off and putting them on. Hebe puts on the wheels of Juno's chariot,
   when he called for it in battle. It may be in allusion to the same
   custom, that it is said in Ex., ch. xiv.: "The Lord took off their
   chariot wheels, so that they drove them heavily." That it was very
   small and light, is evident from a passage in the tenth Il., where
   Diomede debates whether he shall draw the chariot of Rhesus out of
   the way, or carry it on his shoulders to a place of safety.

5. [Meges, son of Phyleus.]

6. This whole passage is considered by critics as very beautiful. It
   describes the hero carried by an enthusiastic valor into the midst
   of his enemies, and mingling in the ranks indiscriminately. The
   simile thoroughly illustrates this fury, proceeding as it did from
   an extraordinary infusion of courage from Heaven.

7. [Apollo.]

8. The deities are often invoked because of the agency ascribed to
   them and not from any particular religious usage. And just as often
   the heroes are protected by the gods who are worshipped by their
   own tribes and families--MULLER.

9. This fiction of Homer, says Dacier, is founded upon an important
   truth of religion, not unknown to the Pagans: viz. that God only
   can open the eyes of men, and enable them to see what they cannot
   otherwise discover. The Old Testament furnishes examples. God opens
   the eyes of Hagar, that she may see the fountain. "The Lord opened
   the eyes of Baalam, and he saw the angel," etc. This power of sight
   was given to Diomede only for the present occasion. In the 6th
   Book, on meeting Glaucus, he is ignorant whether he is a god, a
   hero, or a man.

10. [Or collar-bone.]

11. The belief of those times, in regard to the peace and happiness of
   the soul after death, made the protection of the body a matter of
   great importance. For a full account of these rites, see the
   articles Charon and Pluto, Gr. & Rom. Mythology.

12. The physician of the gods. Homer says nothing of his origin. He
   seems to be considered as distinct from Apollo, though perhaps
   originally identical with him.

13. From the fact that so few mystical myths are introduced in the
   Iliad, Mueller infers that the mystical element of religion could
   not have predominated among the Grecian people for whom Homer sang.
   Otherwise, his poems in which that element is but little regarded,
   would not have afforded universal pleasure and satisfaction. He
   therefore takes but a passing notice of Demeter. Mueller also
   remarks, that in this we cannot but admire the artistic skill of
   Homer, and the feeling for what is right and fitting that was
   innate with the Greeks.

14. [Vide Samson to Harapha in the Agonistes. There the word is used
   in the same sense.--TR.]

15. [This is a construction of {leuk elephanti} given by some of the
   best commentators, and that seems the most probable.--TR.]

16. This slow and orderly retreat of the Greeks, with their front
   constantly turned to the enemy, is a fine encomium on their courage
   and discipline. This manner of retreating was customary among the
   Lacedaemonians, as were many other martial customs described by
   Homer. The practice arose from the apprehension of being killed by
   a wound in the back, which was not only punished with infamy, but a
   person bearing the mark was denied the rites of burial.

17. [This, according to Porphyrius as quoted by Clarke, is the true
   meaning of {aiolomitres}.--TR.]

18. The chariots of the gods were formed of various metals, and drawn
   through the air, or upon the surface of the sea, by horses of
   celestial breed. These chariots were used by the deities only on
   occasion of a long journey, or when they wished to appear with
   state and magnificence. Ordinarily they were transported from place
   to place by the aid of their golden sandals, with the exception of
   the "silver-footed Thetis," to whom they seem to have been
   superfluous. When at home, the gods were barefoot, according to the
   custom of the age, as we see from various representations of
   antique art.

19. [These which I have called crescents, were a kind of hook of a
   semicircular form, to which the reins were occasionally
   fastened.--TR.]

20. The Greeks borrowed the vest and shield of Minerva from the
   Lybians, only with this difference: the Lybian shield was fringed
   with thongs of leather, and the Grecian with serpents.--HERODOTUS.

21. This expression (the gates of Heaven) is in the eastern manner,
   and common in the Scriptures.

22. [{Area tonde}.]

23. Every thing that enters the dark empire of Hades disappears, and
   is seen no more; hence the figurative expression, to put on Pluto's
   helmet; that is to become invisible.


Footnotes for Book VI:
1. The Simois and Xanthus were two rivers of the Troad, which form a
   junction before they reached the Hellespont. The Simois rose in Mt.
   Ida, and the Xanthus had its origin near Troy.--FELTON.

2. Ajax commences his exploits immediately on the departure of the
   gods from the battle. It is observed of this hero, that he is never
   assisted by the deities.

3. Axylus was distinguished for his hospitality. This trait was
   characteristic of the Oriental nations, and is often alluded to by
   ancient writers. The rite of hospitality often united families
   belonging to different and hostile nations, and was even
   transmitted from father to son. This description is a fine tribute
   to the generosity of Axylus.--FELTON

4. [Euryalus.]

5. Agamemnon's taking the life of the Trojan whom Menelaus had
   pardoned, was according to the custom of the times. The historical
   books of the Old Testament abound in instances of the like cruelty
   to conquered enemies.

6. This important maxim of war is very naturally introduced, upon
   Menelaus being ready to spare an enemy for the sake of a ransom.
   According to Dacier, it was for such lessons as these that
   Alexander so much esteemed Homer and studied his poem.

7. The custom of making donations to the gods is found among the
   ancients, from the earliest times of which we have any record down
   to the introduction of Christianity; and even after that period it
   was observed by the Christians during the middle ages. Its origin
   seems to have been the same as that of sacrifices: viz. the belief
   that the gods were susceptible of influence in their conduct
   towards men. These gifts were sometimes very costly, but often
   nothing more than locks of hair cut from the head of the votary.

8. Diomede had knowingly wounded and insulted the deities; he
   therefore met Glaucus with a superstitious fear that he might be
   some deity in human shape. This feeling brought to his mind the
   story of Lycurgus.

9. It is said that Lycurgus caused most of the vines of his country to
   be rooted up, so that his subjects were obliged to mix their wine
   with water, as it became less plentiful. Hence the fable that
   Thetis received Bacchus into her bosom.

10. This style of language was according to the manners of the times.
   Thus Goliath to David, "Approach, and I will give thy flesh to the
   fowls of the air and the beasts of the field." The Orientals still
   speak in the same manner.

11. Though this comparison may be justly admired for its beauty in the
   obvious application to the mortality and succession of human life,
   it seems designed by the poet, in this place, as a proper emblem of
   the transitory state of families which, by their misfortune or
   folly, have fallen and decayed, and again appear, in a happier
   season, to revive and flourish in the fame and virtues of their
   posterity. In this sense it is a direct answer to the question of
   Diomede, as well as a proper preface to what Glaticus relates of
   his own family, which, having become extinct in Corinth, recovers
   new life in Lycia.

12. The same as Corinth.

13. Some suppose that alphabetical writing was unknown in the Homeric
   age, and consequently that these signs must have been
   hieroglyphical marks. The question is a difficult one, and the most
   distinguished scholars are divided in opinion. We can hardly
   imagine that a poem of the length and general excellence of the
   Iliad, could be composed without the aid of writing; and yet, we
   are told, there are well-authenticated examples of such works being
   preserved and handed down by traditional memory. However this may
   be, we know that the Oriental nations were in possession of the art
   of alphabetical writing it a very early period, and before the
   Trojan war. It cannot, then, seem very improbable, that the authors
   of the Iliad should also have been acquainted with it.--FELTON.

14. The Solymi were an ancient nation inhabiting the mountainous parts
   of Asia Minor, between Lycia and Pisidia. Pliny mentions them as
   having become extinct in his time.

15. It was the custom in ancient times, upon the performance of any
   signal service by kings or great men, for the public to grant them
   a tract of land as a reward. When Sarpedon, in the 12th Book,
   exhorts Glaucus to behave valiantly, he reminds him of these
   possessions granted by his countrymen.

16. The laws of hospitality were considered so sacred, that a
   friendship contracted under their observance was preferred to the
   ties of consanguinity and alliance, and regarded as obligatory even
   to the third and fourth generation. Diomede and Glaucus here became
   friends, on the ground of their grandfathers having been mutual
   guests. The presents made on these occasions were preserved by
   families, as it was considered obligatory to transmit them as
   memorials to their children.

17. [{Xeinoi patroioi}.]

18. The Scaean gate opened to the field of battle, and was the one
   through which the Trojans made their excursions. Close to this
   stood the beech tree sacred to Jupiter, and often mentioned in
   connection with it.

19. There is a mournfulness in the interview between the hero and his
   mother which is deeply interesting. Her urging him to take wine and
   his refusal were natural and simple incidents, which heighten the
   effect of the scene.--FELTON.

20. The custom that prohibits persons polluted with blood from
   performing any offices of divine worship before purification, is so
   ancient and universal, that it may be considered a precept of
   natural religion, tending to inspire a horror of bloodshed. In
   Euripides, Iphigenia argues the impossibility of human sacrifices
   being acceptable to the gods, since they do not permit any one
   defiled with blood, or even polluted with the touch of a dead body,
   to come near their altars.

21. Paris surprised the King of Phoenecia by night, and carried off
   many of his treasures and captives, among whom probably were these
   Sidonian women. Tyre and Sidon were famous for works in gold,
   embroidery, etc., and for whatever pertained to magnificence and
   luxury.

22. This gesture is the only one described by Homer as being used by
   the ancients in their invocations of the gods.

23. [{dia theaon}.]

24. The employment in which Hector finds Paris engaged, is extremely
   characteristic.--FELTON.

25. This address of Helen is in fine keeping with her
   character.--FELTON.

26. [The bulk of his heroes is a circumstance of which Homer
   frequently reminds us by the use of the word {megas}--and which
   ought, therefore, by no means to be suppressed.--TR.]

27. Love of his country is a prominent characteristic of Hector, and
   is here beautifully displayed in his discharging the duties that
   the public welfare required, before seeking his wife and child.
   Then finding that she had gone to the tower, he retraces his steps
   to "the Scaean gate, whence he must seek the field." Here his wife,
   on her return home, accidentally meets him.

28.  [The name signifies, the _Chief of the city_.--TR.]

29. It was the custom to plant about tombs only such trees as elms,
   alders, etc., that bear no fruit, as being most appropriate to the
   dead.

30. In this recapitulation, Homer acquaints us with some of the great
   achievements of Achilles, which preceded the opening of the poem--a
   happy manner of exalting his hero, and exciting our expectation as
   to what he is yet to accomplish. His greatest enemies never upbraid
   him, but confess his glory. When Apollo encourages the Trojans to
   fight, it is by telling them Achilles fights no more. When Juno
   animates the Greeks, she reminds them how their enemies fear
   Achilles; and when Andromache trembles for Hector, it is with the
   remembrance of his resistless force.

31. Drawing water was considered the most servile employment.

32. [The Scholiast in Villoisson calls it {physikon tina kai metrion
   gelota} a natural and moderate laughter.--TR.]

33. According to the ancient belief, the fatal period of life is
   appointed to all men at the time of their birth, which no
   precaution can avoid and no danger hasten.

34. This scene, for true and unaffected pathos, delicate touches of
   nature, and a profound knowledge of the human heart, has rarely
   been equalled, and never surpassed, among all the efforts of genius
   during the three thousand years that have gone by since it was
   conceived and composed.--FELTON.


Footnotes for Book VII:
1. Holding the spear in this manner was, in ancient warfare,
   understood as a signal to discontinue the fight.

2. The challenge of Hector and the consternation of the Greeks,
   presents much the same scene as the challenge of Goliath, 1 Samuel,
   ch. 17: "And he stood and cried to the armies of Israel;--Choose
   you a man for you, and let him come down to me. If he be able to
   fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants.--When
   Saul and all Israel heard the words of the Philistine, they were
   dismayed and greatly afraid."

3. It was an ancient custom for warriors to dedicate trophies of this
   kind to the temples of their tutelary deities.

4. [The club-bearer.]

5. [It is a word used by Dryden.]

6. Homer refers every thing, even the chance of the lots, to the
   disposition of the gods.

7. [Agamemnon.]

8. The lot was merely a piece of wood or shell, or any thing of the
   kind that was at hand. Probably it had some private mark, and not
   the name, as it was only recognized by the owner.

9. This reply is supposed to allude to some gesture made by Ajax in
   approaching Hector.

10. The heralds were considered as sacred persons, the delegates of
   Mercury, and inviolable by the laws of nations. Ancient history
   furnishes examples of the severity exercised upon those who were
   guilty of any outrage upon them. Their office was, to assist in the
   sacrifices and councils, to proclaim war or peace, to command
   silence at ceremonies or single combats, to part the combatants and
   declare the conqueror.

11. This word I have taken leave to coin. The Latins have both
   substantive and adjective. _Purpura--Purpureus._ We make purple
   serve both uses; but it seems a poverty to which we have no need to
   submit, at least in poetry.--TR.

12. A particular mark of honor and respect, as this part of the victim
   belonged to the king. In the simplicity of the times, the reward
   offered a victorious warrior of the best portion of the sacrifice
   at supper, a more capacious bowl, or an upper seat at table, was a
   recompense for the greatest actions.

   It is worthy of observation, that beef, mutton, or kid, was the
   food of the heroes of Homer and the patriarchs and warriors of the
   Old Testament. Fishing and fowling were then the arts of more
   luxurious nations.

13. [The word is here used in the Latin sense of it. Virgil,
   describing the entertainment given by Evander to the Trojans, says
   that he regaled them

     Perpetui _tergo bovis et lustralibus extis._
                                   AEN. viii.

   It means, the whole.--TR.]


Footnotes for Book VIII:
1. An epithet of Aurora, supposed to designate an early hour.

2. Many have explained this as an allegorical expression for one of
   the great laws of nature--gravity or the attraction of the sun.
   There is not the slightest probability that any such meaning is
   intended.--FELTON.

3. A part of Mt. Ida. This place was celebrated, in subsequent times,
   for the worship of Jupiter. Several years ago, Dr. E.D. Clarke
   deposited, in the vestibule of the public library in Cambridge,
   England, a marble bust of Juno, taken from the ruins of this temple
   of Jupiter, at the base of Mt. Ida.--FELTON

4. [In the repetition of this expression, the translator follows the
   original.]

5. Sacred, because that part of the day was appropriate to sacrifice
   and religious worship.

6. This figure is first used in the Scriptures. Job prays to be
   weighed in an even balance, that God may know his integrity. Daniel
   says to Belshazzar, "thou art weighed in the balances, and found
   wanting," etc.

7. Jupiter's declaring against the Greeks by thunder and lightning, is
   drawn (says Dacier) from truth itself. 1 Sam. ch. vii.: "And as
   Samuel was offering up the burnt-offering, the Philistines drew
   near to battle against Israel; but the Lord thundered on that day
   upon the Philistines and discomfited them."

8. Nothing can be more spirited than the enthusiasm of Hector, who, in
   the transport of his joy, breaks out in the following apostrophe to
   his horses. He has, in imagination, already forced the Grecian
   entrenchments, set the fleet in flames, and destroyed the whole
   army.

9. From this speech, it may be gathered that women were accustomed to
   loosen the horses from the chariot, on their return from battle,
   and feed them; and from line 214, unless it is spurious, it seems
   that the provender was sometimes mixed with wine. It is most
   probable, however, that the line is not genuine.--FELTON.

   Homer describes a princess so tender in her love to her husband,
   that she meets him on his return from every battle, and, in the joy
   of seeing him again, feeds his horses with bread and wine, as an
   acknowledgment to them for bringing him back.--DACIER.

10: These were the arms that Diomede had received from Glaucus.

11. [None daring to keep the field, and all striving to enter the
   gates together, they obstructed their own passage, and were, of
   course, compelled into the narrow interval between the foss and
   rampart.

   But there are different opinions about the space intended. See
   Villoisson.--TR.]

12 [To Jove, the source of all oracular information.]

13. Jupiter, in answer to the prayer of Agamemnon, sends an omen to
   encourage the Greeks. The application of it is obvious: The eagle
   signified Hector, the fawn denoted the fear and flight of the
   Greeks, and being dropped at the altar of Jupiter, indicated that
   they would be saved by the protection of that god.

14. This simile is very beautiful, and exactly represents the manner
   of Gorgythion's death. There is so much truth in the comparison,
   that we pity the fall of the youth and almost feel his wound.

15. [{Eniklan}.--The word is here metaphorical, and expresses, in its
   primary use, the breaking of a spear against a shield.--TR.]

16. [The following lines, to the end of this paragraph, are a
   translation of some which Barnes has here inserted from the second
   Alcibiades of Plato.]

17. The simile is the most magnificent that can be conceived. The
   stars come forth brightly, the whole heaven is cloudless and
   serene, the moon is in the sky, the heights, and promontories, and
   forests stand forth distinctly in the light, _and the shepherd
   rejoices in his heart_. This last simple and natural circumstance
   is inexpressibly beautiful, and heightens the effect of the visible
   scene, by associating it, in the most direct and poetical manner,
   with the inward emotion that such a scene must produce.--FELTON.


Footnotes for Book IX:
1. [In the original the word is--{melanydros}--dark-watered; and it is
   rendered--_deep_--by the best interpreters, because deep waters
   have a blackish appearance. {Dnopheron ydor} is properly water that
   runs with rapidity; water--{meta doneseos pheromenon}--See
   Villoisson.]--TR.

2. This is the language of a brave man, boldly to affirm that courage
   is above crowns and sceptres. In former times they were not
   hereditary, but the recompense of valor.

3. [The observation seems made with a view to prevent such a reply
   from Agamemnon to Diomede as might give birth to new dissensions,
   while it reminds him indirectly of the mischiefs that had already
   attended his quarrel with Achilles.]--TR.

4. This speech of Nestor is happily conceived. It belonged to him as
   the aged counsellor to begin the debate, by laying the subject
   before the assembly, especially as it was necessary to impale the
   blame of the present unfortunate condition of the army to
   Agamemnon. It would have been presumptuous in any other, and it was
   a matter of difficulty and delicacy even for Nestor.--FELTON.

5. In the heroic age, the bridegroom, before marriage, was obliged to
   make two presents, one to his betrothed wife, and one to his
   father-in-law. This was also an ancient custom of the Hebrews.
   Abraham's servant gave presents to Rebekah: Gen. xxiv. 22. Shechem
   promised a dowry and gift to Jacob for his daughter: Gen. xxiv. 12.
   And in after times, Saul said he desired no dowry for Michal:
   1 Sam. xviii. 25.

6. One of the religious ceremonies previous to any important
   enterprise. Then followed the order for silence and reverent
   attention; then the libation, &c.--FELTON.

7. Achilles having retired from action in displeasure to Agamemnon,
   quieted himself by singing to his lyre the achievements of
   demi-gods and heroes. Nothing was better suited to the martial
   disposition of this hero, than these heroic songs. Celebrating the
   actions of the valiant prepared him for his own great exploits.
   Such was the music of the ancients, and to such purposes was it
   applied. When the lyre of Paris was offered to Alexander, he
   replied that he had little value for it, but much desired that of
   Achilles, on which he sung the actions of heroes in former
   times.--PLUTARCH.

8. The manners of the Iliad are the manners of the patriarchal and
   early ages of the East. The chief differences arise from a
   different religion and a more maritime situation. Very far removed
   from the savage state on the one hand, and equally distant from the
   artificial state of an extended commerce and a manufacturing
   population on the other, the spirit and habitudes of the two modes
   of society are almost identical. The hero and the Patriarch are
   substantially coeval; but the first wanders in twilight, the last
   stands in the eye of Heaven. When three men appeared to Abraham in
   the plains of Mamre, he ran to meet them from the tent door,
   brought them in, directed Sarah to make bread, fetched from the
   herd himself a calf tender and good, dressed it, and set it before
   them. When Ajax, Ulysses, and Phoenix stand before Achilles, he
   rushes forth to greet them, brings them into the tent, directs
   Patroclus to mix the wine, cuts up the meat, dresses it, and sets
   it before the ambassadors.  *  *  *  *

   Instances of this sort might be multiplied to any extent, but the
   student will find it a pleasing and useful task to discover them
   for himself; and these will amply suffice to demonstrate the
   existence of that correspondence of spirit and manners between the
   Homeric and the early ages of the Bible history, to which I have
   adverted. It is real and important; it affords a standard of the
   feelings with which we ought to read the Iliad, if we mean to read
   it as it deserves; and it explains and sets in the true point of
   view numberless passages, which the ignorance or frivolity of
   after-times has charged with obscurity, meanness or error. The Old
   Testament and the Iliad reflect light mutually on each other; and
   both in respect of poetry and morals (for the whole of Homer's
   poetry is a praise of virtue, and every thing in him tends to this
   point, except that which is merely superfluous and for ornament) it
   may with great truth be said, that he who has the longest studied,
   and the most deeply imbibed, the spirit of the Hebrew Bible, will
   the best understand and the most lastingly appreciate the tale of
   Troy divine.--H.N. COLERIDGE.

9. [I have given this sense to the word {Zoroteron}--on the authority
   of the Venetian Scholium, though some contend that it should be
   translated--_quickly_. Achilles, who had reproached Agamemnon with
   intemperate drinking, was, himself, more addicted to music than to
   wine.]--TR.

10. [It is not without authority that I have thus rendered {kreion
   mega}. Homer's banquets are never stewed or boiled; it cannot
   therefore signify a kettle. It was probably a kitchen-table,
   dresser, or tray, on which the meat was prepared for the spit.
   Accordingly we find that this very meat was spitted afterward.--See
   Schaufelbergerus.]--TR.

11. There are no speeches in the Iliad better placed, better timed, or
   that give a greater idea of Homer's genius than these of the
   ambassadors to Achilles. They are not only demanded by the
   occasion, but skilfully arranged, and in a manner that gives
   pleasure to the reader.

12 [Dacier observes, that he pluralizes the one wife of Menelaus,
   through the impetuosity of his spirit.]--TR.

13. According to some ancient writers, Achilles was but twelve years
   of age when he went to the wars of Troy. And from what is here
   related of his education under Phoenix, it may be inferred, that
   the fable of his having been taught by Chiron is an invention of a
   later age and unknown to Homer.

14. The ancients gave the name of Jupiter not only to the God of
   heaven, but also to the God of hell, as is seen here; and to the
   God of the sea, as appears from AEschylus. They meant thereby to
   show that one sole deity governed the world. To teach this truth,
   statues were made of Jupiter which had three eyes. Priam had one in
   the court of his palace, which, in sharing the booty of the war of
   Troy, fell to the lot of Sthenelus, who carried it to
   Greece.--DACIER.

15. So called because Jove protects those who implore his aid.

16. [Wrinkled--because the countenance of a man driven to prayer by a
   consciousness of guilt is sorrowful and dejected. Lame--because it
   is a remedy to which men recur late, and with reluctance. And
   slant-eyed--either because, in that state of humiliation they
   fear to lift their eyes to heaven, or are employed in taking a
   retrospect of their past misconduct.

   The whole allegory, considering _when_ and _where_ it was composed,
   forms a very striking passage.]--TR.

17. [She had five brothers: Iphiclus, Polyphontes, Phanes, Eurypylus,
   Plexippus.]--TR.

18: It was the custom for the murderer to go into banishment for one
   year. But if the relations of the murdered person were willing, the
   criminal, by paying a certain fine, might buy off the exile and
   remain at home. Ajax sums up this argument with great strength: We
   see, says he, a brother forgive the murder of his brother, a father
   that of his son; but Achilles will not forgive the injury offered
   him by taking away one captive woman.

19. The character of Achilles is well sustained in all his speeches.
   To Ulysses he returns a flat denial, and threatens to leave the
   Trojan shore in the morning. To Phoenix his answer is more gentle.
   After Ajax has spoken, he seems determined not to depart, but yet
   refuses to bear arms, except in defence of his own squadron.


Footnotes for Book X:
1. With slight alteration, Homer here repeats the verses that open the
   2d Book, and ascribes to Agamemnon the same watchfulness over men
   that Jupiter had over the gods.

2. Menelaus starts a design, which is afterwards proposed by Nestor in
   council. The poet knew that the project would come with greater
   weight from the age of the one than from the youth of the other,
   and that the valiant would be ready to engage in the enterprise
   suggested by so venerable a counsellor.

3. Agamemnon is uniformly represented as an example of brotherly
   affection, and at all times defends Menelaus.

4. [{Sauroter}--seems to have been a hollow iron with a point, fitted
   to the obtuse end of the spear, for the purpose of planting that
   end of it in the ground. It might probably be taken off at
   pleasure.]--TR.

5. The dogs represent the watch, the flocks the Greeks, the fold their
