be able to embark before day, it would require so much labor, and that
as soon as daylight appears, a good vedette placed outside the grotto
would be necessary, indispensable even, to watch the maneuvers of the
lighters or the cruisers that are upon the look-out for us."

"Yes, yes, Yves, your reasons are good; we will go by the beach."

And the three robust Bretons went to the boat, and were beginning to
place their rollers underneath it to put it in motion, when the distant
barking of dogs was heard, proceeding from the interior.

Aramis darted out of the grotto, followed by Porthos. Dawn just dinted
with purple and white the waves and the plain; through the dim light the
young melancholy firs waved their tender branches over the pebbles, and
long flights of crows were skimming with their black wings over the thin
fields of buckwheat. In a quarter of an hour it would be clear daylight;
the awakened birds joyously announced it to all nature. The barkings
which had been heard, which had stopped the three fishermen engaged in
moving the boat, and had brought Aramis and Porthos out of the cavern,
were prolonged in a deep gorge within about a league of the grotto.

"It is a pack of hounds," said Porthos; "the dogs are upon a scent."

"Who can be hunting at such a moment as this?" said Aramis.

"And this way, particularly," continued Porthos, "this way, where they
may expect the army of the royalists."

"The noise comes nearer. Yes, you are right, Porthos, the dogs are on a
scent. But, Yves!" cried Aramis, "come here! come here!"

Yves ran toward him, letting fall the cylinder which he was about to
place under the boat when the bishop's call interrupted him.

"What is the meaning of this hunt, patron?" said Porthos.

"Eh! monseigneur, I cannot understand it," replied the Breton. "It is
not at such a moment that the Seigneur de Locmaria would hunt. No, and
yet the dogs--"

"Unless they have escaped from the kennel."

"No," said Goenne, "they are not the Seigneur de Locmaria's hounds."

"In common prudence," said Aramis, "let us go back into the grotto; the
voices evidently draw nearer, we shall soon know what we have to trust
to."

They re-entered, but had scarcely proceeded a hundred steps in the
darkness, when a noise like the hoarse sigh of a creature in distress
resounded through the cavern, and breathless, rapid, terrified, a fox
passed like a flash of lightning before the fugitives, leaped over the
boat and disappeared, leaving behind it its sour scent, which was
perceptible for several seconds under the low vaults of the cave.

"The fox!" cried the Bretons, with the joyous surprise of hunters.

"Accursed chance!" cried the bishop, "our retreat is discovered."

"How so?" said Porthos, "are we afraid of a fox?"

"Eh! my friend, what do you mean by that, and why do you name the fox?
It is not the fox alone, pardieu! But don't you know, Porthos, that
after the fox come hounds, and after the hounds men?"

Porthos hung his head. As if to confirm the words of Aramis, they heard
the yelping pack come with frightful swiftness upon the trail of the
animal. Six foxhounds burst out at once upon the little heath, with a
cry resembling the noise of a triumph.

"There are the dogs plain enough!" said Aramis, posted on the look-out,
behind a chink, between two rocks; "now, who are the huntsmen?"

"If it is the Seigneur de Locmaria's," replied the patron, "he will
leave the dogs to hunt the grotto, for he knows them, and will not enter
in himself, being quite sure that the fox will come out at the other
side; it is there he will go and wait for him."

"It is not the Seigneur de Locmaria who is hunting," replied Aramis,
turning pale, in spite of his efforts to maintain a good countenance.

"Who is it, then?" said Porthos.

"Look!"

Porthos applied his eye to the slit, and saw at the summit of a hillock
a dozen horsemen urging on their horses in the track of the dogs,
shouting "Taiaut! taiaut!"

"The guards!" said he.

"Yes, my friend, the king's guards."

"The king's guards! do you say, monseigneur!" cried the Bretons,
becoming pale in their turns.

"And Biscarrat at their head, mounted upon my gray horse," continued
Aramis.

The hounds at the same moment rushed into the grotto like an avalanche,
and the depths of the cavern were filled with their deafening cries.

"Ah! the devil!" said Aramis, resuming all his coolness at the sight of
this certain, inevitable danger. "I am perfectly satisfied we are lost,
but we have at least one chance left. If the guards who follow their
hounds happen to discover there is an issue to the grotto, there is no
more help for us, for on entering they must see both us and our boat.
The dogs must not go out of the cavern. The masters must not enter."

"That is clear," said Porthos.

"You understand," added Aramis, with the rapid precision of command;
"there are six dogs which will be forced to stop at the great stone
under which the fox has glided--but at the too narrow opening of which
they shall be themselves stopped and killed."

The Bretons sprang forward, knife in hand. In a few minutes there was a
lamentable concert of growls, and mortal howlings--and then, nothing.

"That's well!" said Aramis, coolly; "now for the masters!"

"What is to be done with them?" said Porthos.

"Wait their arrival, conceal ourselves, and kill them."

"Kill them!" replied Porthos.

"There are sixteen," said Aramis, "at least, up at present."

"And well armed," added Porthos, with a smile of consolation.

"It will last about ten minutes," said Aramis. "To work!"

And with a resolute air he took up a musket, and placed his
hunting-knife between his teeth.

"Yves, Goenne, and his son," continued Aramis, "will pass the muskets to
us. You, Porthos, will fire when they are close. We shall have brought
down eight before the others are aware of anything--that is certain;
then all, there are five of us, we will dispatch the other eight, knife
in hand."

"And poor Biscarrat?" said Porthos.

Aramis reflected a moment. "Biscarrat the first," replied he, coolly;
"he knows us."




CHAPTER CXXII.

THE GROTTO.


In spite of the sort of divination which was the remarkable side of the
character of Aramis, the event, subject to the chances of things over
which uncertainty presides, did not fall out exactly as the bishop of
Vannes had foreseen. Biscarrat, better mounted than his companions,
arrived the first at the opening of the grotto, and comprehended that
the fox and the dogs were all engulfed in it. Only struck by that
superstitious terror which every dark and subterraneous way naturally
impresses upon the mind of man, he stopped at the outside of the grotto,
and waited till his companions should have assembled round him.

"Well!" asked the young men, coming up out of breath, and unable to
understand the meaning of his inaction.

"Well! I cannot hear the dogs; they and the fox must be all engulfed in
this cavern."

"They were too close up," said one of the guards, "to have lost scent
all at once. Besides, we should hear them from one side or another. They
must, as Biscarrat says, be in this grotto."

"But then," said one of the young men, "why don't they give tongue?"

"It is strange!" said another.

"Well, but," said a fourth, "let us go into this grotto. Does it happen
to be forbidden that we should enter it?"

"No," replied Biscarrat. "Only as it looks as dark as a wolf's mouth,
we might break our necks in it."

"Witness the dogs," said a guard, "who seem to have broken theirs."

"What the devil can have become of them?" asked the young men in chorus.
And every master called his dog by his name, whistled to him in his
favorite note, without a single one replying to either the call or the
whistle.

"It is perhaps an enchanted grotto," said Biscarrat; "let us see." And
jumping from his horse, he made a step into the grotto.

"Stop! stop! I will accompany you," said one of the guards, on seeing
Biscarrat disappear in the shade of the cavern's mouth.

"No," replied Biscarrat, "there must be something extraordinary in the
place--don't let us risk ourselves all at once. If in ten minutes you do
not hear of me, you can come in, but not all at once."

"Be it so," said the young men, who, besides, did not see that Biscarrat
ran much risk in the enterprise, "we will wait for you." And without
dismounting from their horses, they formed a circle round the grotto.

Biscarrat entered then alone, and advanced through the darkness till he
came in contact with the muzzle of Porthos' musket. The resistance which
his chest met with astonished him; he naturally raised his hand and laid
hold of the icy barrel. At the same instant Yves lifted a knife against
the young man, which was about to fall upon him with all the force of a
Breton's arm, when the iron wrist of Porthos stopped it half way. Then,
like low muttering thunder, his voice growled in the darkness, "I will
not have him killed!"

Biscarrat found himself between a protection and a threat, the one
almost as terrible as the other. However brave the young man might be,
he could not prevent a cry escaping him, which Aramis immediately
suppressed by placing a handkerchief over his mouth. "Monsieur de
Biscarrat," said he in a low voice, "we mean you no harm, and you must
know that, if you have recognized us; but, at the first word, the first
sigh, or the first breath, we shall be forced to kill you as we have
killed your dogs."

"Yes, I recognize you, gentlemen," said the officer, in a low voice.
"But why are you here--what are you doing here? Unfortunate men! I
thought you were in the fort."

"And you, monsieur, you were to obtain conditions for us, I think?"

"I did all I was able, messieurs, but--"

"But what?"

"But there are positive orders."

"To kill us?" Biscarrat made no reply. It would have cost him too much
to speak of the cord to gentlemen. Aramis understood the silence of his
prisoner.

"M. Biscarrat," said he, "you would be already dead if we had not had
regard for your youth and our ancient association with your father; but
you may yet escape from the place by swearing that you will not tell
your companions what you have seen."

"I will not only swear that I will not speak of it," said Biscarrat,
"but I still further swear that I will do everything in the world to
prevent my companions from setting foot in the grotto."

"Biscarrat! Biscarrat!" cried several voices from the outside, coming
like a whirlwind into the cave.

"Reply," said Aramis.

"Here am I!" cried Biscarrat.

"Now, begone; we depend upon your loyalty." And he left his hold of the
young man, who hastily returned toward the light.

"Biscarrat! Biscarrat!" cried the voices, still nearer. And the shadows
of several human forms projected into the interior of the grotto.

Biscarrat rushed to meet his friends in order to stop them, and met them
just as they were adventuring into the cave. Aramis and Porthos listened
with the intense attention of men whose life depends upon a breath of
air.

"Oh! oh!" exclaimed one of the guards, as he came to the light, "how
pale you are!"

"Pale!" cried another, "you ought to say livid."

"I!" said the young man, endeavoring to collect his faculties.

"In the name of Heaven! what has happened to you?" exclaimed all voices.

"You have not a drop of blood in your veins, my poor friend," said one
of them, laughing.

"Messieurs, it is serious," said another, "he is going to faint; does
any one of you happen to have any salts?" And they all laughed.

All these interpellations, all these jokes crossed each other round
Biscarrat as the balls cross each other in the fire of a _melee_. He
recovered himself amid a deluge of interrogations.

"What do you suppose I have seen?" asked he. "I was too hot when I
entered the grotto, and I have been struck with the cold; that is all."

"But the dogs, the dogs, have you seen them again--did you see anything
of them--do you know anything about them?"

"I suppose they have gone out by another way."

"Messieurs," said one of the young men, "there is in that which is going
on, in the paleness and silence of our friend, a mystery which Biscarrat
will not, or cannot reveal. Only, and that is a certainty, Biscarrat has
seen something in the grotto.

"Well, for my part, I am very curious to see what it is, even if it were
the devil! To the grotto! messieurs, to the grotto!"

"To the grotto!" repeated all the voices. And the echo of the cavern
carried like a menace to Porthos and Aramis. "To the grotto! to the
grotto!"

Biscarrat threw himself before his companions. "Messieurs! messieurs!"
cried he, "in the name of Heaven! do not go in!"

"Why, what is there so terrific in the cavern?" asked several at once.
"Come, speak, Biscarrat."

"Decidedly, it is the devil he has seen," repeated he who had before
advanced that hypothesis.

"Well!" said another; "if he has seen him, he need not be selfish: he
may as well let us have a look at him in our turns."

"Messieurs! messieurs! I beseech you," urged Biscarrat.

"Nonsense!--Let us pass!"

"Messieurs, I implore you not to enter!"

"Why, you went in yourself."

Then one of the officers who--of a riper age than the others--had, till
this time, remained behind, and had said nothing, advanced, "Messieurs,"
said he, with a calmness which contrasted with the animation of the
young men, "there is in this some person, or something, that is not the
devil; but which, whatever it may be, has had sufficient power to
silence our dogs. We must know who this some one is, or what this
something is."

Biscarrat made a last effort to stop his friends, but it was useless. In
vain he threw himself before the most rash; in vain he clung to the
rocks to bar the passage; the crowd of young men rushed into the cave,
in the steps of the officer who had spoken last, but who had sprung in
first, sword in hand, to face the unknown danger. Biscarrat, repulsed by
his friends, not able to accompany them, without passing in the eyes of
Porthos and Aramis for a traitor and a perjurer, with painfully
attentive ear and still supplicating hands leaned against the rough side
of a rock which he thought must be exposed to the fire of the
musketeers. As to the guards, they penetrated further and further, with
cries that grew weaker as they advanced. All at once, a discharge of
musketry, growling like thunder, exploded beneath the vault. Two or
three balls were flattened against the rock where Biscarrat was leaning.
At the same instant cries, howlings, and imprecations burst forth, and
the little troop of gentlemen reappeared--some pale, some bleeding--all
enveloped in a cloud of smoke, which the outward air seemed to draw from
the depths of the cavern. "Biscarrat! Biscarrat!" cried the fugitives,
"you knew there was an ambuscade in that cavern, and you have not warned
us! Biscarrat, you are the cause that four of us have been killed! Woe
be to you, Biscarrat!"

"You are the cause of my being wounded to death," said one of the
young men, gathering his blood in his hand, and casting it into the face
of Biscarrat. "My blood be upon your head!" And he rolled in agony at
the feet of the young man.

"But, at least, tell us who is there?" cried several furious voices.

Biscarrat remained silent. "Tell us, or die!" cried the wounded man,
raising himself upon one knee, and lifting toward his companion an arm
bearing a useless sword. Biscarrat rushed toward him, opening his breast
for the blow, but the wounded man fell back not to rise again--uttering
a groan which was his last. Biscarrat, with hair on end, haggard eyes,
and bewildered head, advanced toward the interior of the cavern, saying,
"You are right. Death to me, who have allowed my companions to be
assassinated. I am a base wretch!" And throwing away his sword, for he
wished to die without defending himself, he rushed head foremost into
the cavern. The others followed him. The eleven who remained out of
sixteen imitated his example; but they did not go farther than the
first. A second discharge laid five upon the icy sand; and, as it was
impossible to see whence this murderous thunder issued, the others fell
back with a terror that can be better imagined than expressed. But, far
from flying, as the others had done, Biscarrat remained safe and sound,
seated on a fragment of rock, and waited. There were only six gentlemen
left.

"Seriously," said one of the survivors, "is it the devil?"

"Ma foi! it is much worse," said another.

"Ask Biscarrat, he knows."

"Where is Biscarrat?" The young men looked round them and saw that
Biscarrat did not answer.

"He is dead!" said two or three voices.

"Oh! no," replied another; "I saw him through the smoke, sitting quietly
on a rock. He is in the cavern; he is waiting for us."

"He must know who is there."

"And how should he know them?"

"He was taken prisoner by the rebels."

"That is true. Well! let us call him, and learn from him whom we have
to deal with." And all voices shouted, "Biscarrat! Biscarrat!" But
Biscarrat did not answer.

"Good!" said the officer who had shown so much coolness in the affair.
"We have no longer any need of him; here are re-enforcements coming."

In fact, a company of the guards, left in the rear by their officers,
whom the ardor of the chase had carried away--from seventy-five to
eighty men--arrived in good order, led by their captain and the first
lieutenant. The five officers hastened to meet their soldiers; and, in a
language, the eloquence of which may be easily imagined, they related
the adventure, and asked for aid. The captain interrupted them. "Where
are your companions?" demanded he.

"Dead!"

"But there were sixteen of you!"

"Ten are dead. Biscarrat is in the cavern, and we are five."

"Biscarrat is then a prisoner?"

"Probably."

"No; for here he is--look." In fact, Biscarrat appeared at the opening
of the grotto.

"He makes us a sign to come on," said the officer. "Come on!"

"Come on!" cried all the troop. And they advanced to meet Biscarrat.

"Monsieur," said the captain, addressing Biscarrat, "I am assured that
you know who the men are in that grotto, and who make such a desperate
defense. In the king's name I command you to declare what you know."

"Captain," said Biscarrat, "you have no need to command me; my word has
been restored to me this very instant; and I come in the name of these
men."

"To tell me who they are?"

"To tell you they are determined to defend themselves to the death,
unless you grant them good terms."

"How many are there of them, then?"

"There are two," said Biscarrat.

"There are two--and want to impose conditions upon us?"

"There are two, and they have already killed ten of our men."

"What sort of people are they--giants?"

"Better than that. Do you remember the history of the bastion Saint
Gervais, captain?"

"Yes; where four musketeers held out against an army."

"Well, these two men were of those musketeers."

"And their names?"

"At that period they were called Porthos and Aramis. Now, they are
styled M. d'Herblay and M. de Valon."

"And what interest have they in all this?"

"It is they who held Belle-Isle for M. Fouquet!"

A murmur ran through the ranks of the soldiers on hearing the two words
"Porthos and Aramis." "The musketeers! the musketeers!" repeated they.
And among all these brave men, the idea that they were going to have a
struggle against two of the oldest glories of the French army, made a
shiver, half enthusiasm, half terror, run through them. In fact, those
four names--D'Artagnan, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis--were venerated among
all who wore a sword: as, in antiquity, the names of Hercules, Theseus,
Castor, and Pollux, were venerated.

"Two men--and they have killed ten in two discharges! That is
impossible, Monsieur Biscarrat!"

"Eh! captain," replied the latter, "I do not tell you that they have not
with them two or three men, as the musketeers of the bastion
Saint-Gervais had two or three lackeys; but, believe me, captain, I have
seen these men, I have been taken prisoner by them--I know they
themselves alone could suffice to destroy an army."

"That we shall see," said the captain, "and that in a moment too.
Gentlemen, attention!"

At this reply, no one stirred, and all prepared to obey. Biscarrat alone
risked a last attempt. "Monsieur," said he, in a low voice, "believe me;
let us pass on our way. Those two men, those two lions you are going to
attack, will defend themselves to the death. They have already killed
ten of our men; they will kill double the number, and end by killing
themselves rather than surrender. What shall we gain by fighting them?"

"We shall gain the consciousness, monsieur, of not having made eighty of
the king's guards retire before two rebels. If I listened to your
advice, monsieur, I should be a dishonored man; and by dishonoring
myself I should dishonor the army. Forward, men!"

And he marched first as far as the opening of the grotto. There he
halted. The object of this halt was to give to Biscarrat and his
companions time to describe to him the interior of the grotto. Then,
when he believed he had a sufficient acquaintance with the places, he
divided his company into three bodies, which were to enter successively,
keeping up a sustained fire in all directions. No doubt, in this attack
they should lose five more men, perhaps ten; but, certainly, they must
end by taking the rebels, since there was no issue; and, at any rate,
two men could not kill eighty.

"Captain," said Biscarrat, "I beg to be allowed to march at the head of
the first platoon."

"So be it," replied the captain; "you have all the honor of it. That is
a present I make you."

"Thanks!" replied the young man, with all the firmness of his race.

"Take your sword, then."

"I shall go as I am, captain," said Biscarrat, "for I do not go to kill.
I go to be killed."

And placing himself at the head of the first platoon, with his head
uncovered and his arms crossed--"March, gentlemen!" said he.




CHAPTER CXXIII.

AN HOMERIC SONG.


It is time to pass into the other camp, and to describe at once the
combatants and the field of battle. Aramis and Porthos had gone to the
grotto of Locmaria with the expectation of finding there their canoe
ready armed, as well as the three Bretons, their assistants; and they at
first hoped to make the bark pass through the little issue of the
cavern, concealing, in that fashion, both their labors and their flight.
The arrival of the fox and the dogs had obliged them to remain
concealed. The grotto extended the space of about a hundred toises, to
that little slope dominating a creek. Formerly, a temple of the Celtic
divinities, when Belle-Isle was still called Colonese, this grotto had
seen more than one human sacrifice accomplished in its mysterious
depths. The first entrance to the cavern was by a moderate descent,
above which heaped-up rocks formed a low arcade; the interior, very
unequal as to the ground, dangerous from the rocky inequalities of the
vault, was subdivided into several compartments which commanded each
other and joined each other by means of several rough broken steps,
fixed right and left, in enormous natural pillars. At the third
compartment, the vault was so low, the passage so narrow, that the bark
would scarcely have passed without touching the two sides; nevertheless,
in a moment of despair, wood softens and stone becomes compliant under
the breath of human will. Such was the thought of Aramis, when, after
having fought the fight, he decided upon flight--a flight certainly
dangerous, since all the assailants were not dead; and that, admitting
the possibility of putting the bark to sea, they would have to fly in
open day, before the conquered, so interested on recognizing their small
number, in pursuing their conquerors. When the two discharges had killed
ten men, Aramis, habituated to the windings of the cavern, went to
reconnoiter them one by one--counted them, for the smoke prevented
seeing outside; and he immediately commanded that the canoe should be
rolled as far as the great stone, the closure of the liberating issue.
Porthos collected all his strength, took the canoe up in his arms, and
raised it up, while the Bretons made it run rapidly along the rollers.
They had descended into the third compartment; they had arrived at the
stone which walled up the outlet. Porthos seized this gigantic stone at
its base, applied to it his robust shoulder, and gave a heave which made
this wall crack.

A cloud of dust fell from the vault with the ashes of ten thousand
generations of sea birds, whose nests stuck like cement to the rock. At
the third shock the stone gave way; it oscillated for a minute. Porthos,
placing his back against the neighboring rock, made an arch with his
foot, which drove the block out of the calcareous masses which served
for hinges and cramps. The stone fell, and daylight was visible,
brilliant, radiant, which rushed into the cavern by the opening, and the
blue sea appeared to the delighted Bretons. They then began to lift the
bark over the barricade. Twenty more toises, and it might glide into the
ocean. It was during this time that the company arrived, was drawn up by
the captain, and disposed for either an escalade or an assault. Aramis
watched over everything, to favor the labors of his friends. He saw the
re-enforcements, he counted the men, he convinced himself at a single
glance of the insurmountable peril to which a fresh combat would expose
them. To escape by sea, at the moment the cavern was about to be
invaded, was impossible. In fact, the daylight which had just been
admitted to the two last compartments had exposed to the soldiers the
bark being rolled toward the sea, the two rebels within musket shot, and
one of their discharges would riddle the boat if it did not kill the
five navigators. Besides, supposing everything--if the bark escaped with
the men on board of it, how could the alarm be suppressed--how could
notice to the royal lighters be prevented? What could hinder the poor
canoe, followed by sea, and watched from the shore, from succumbing
before the end of the day? Aramis, digging his hands into his gray hair
with rage, invoked the assistance of God, and the assistance of the
demon. Calling to Porthos, who was working alone more than all the
rollers--whether of flesh or of wood--"My friend," said he, "our
adversaries have just received a re-enforcement."

"Ah! ah!" said Porthos, quietly, "what is to be done, then?"

"To recommence the combat," said Aramis, "is hazardous."

"Yes," said Porthos, "for it is difficult to suppose that out of two one
should not be killed, and certainly, if one of us were killed, the other
would get himself killed also." Porthos spoke these words with that
heroic nature, which, with him, grew greater with all the phases of
matter.

Aramis felt it like a spur to his heart. "We shall neither of us be
killed if you do what I tell you, friend Porthos."

"Tell me what?"

"These people are coming down into the grotto."

"Yes."

"We could kill about fifteen of them, but not more."

"How many are there in all?" asked Porthos.

"They have received a re-enforcement of seventy-five men."

"Seventy-five and five, eighty. Ah! ah!" said Porthos.

"If they fire all at once they will riddle us with balls."

"Certainly they will."

"Without reckoning," added Aramis, "that the detonations might occasion
fallings in of the cavern."

"Aye," said Porthos, "a piece of falling rock just now grazed my
shoulder a little."

"You see, then!"

"Oh! it is nothing."

"We must determine upon something quickly. Our Bretons are going to
continue to roll the canoe toward the sea."

"Very well."

"We two will keep the powder, the balls, and muskets here."

"But only two, my dear Aramis--we shall never fire three shots
together," said Porthos, innocently, "the defense by musketry is a bad
one."

"Find a better, then."

"I have found one," said the giant, eagerly; "I will place myself in
ambuscade behind the pillar with this iron bar, and invisible,
unattackable, if they come in in floods, I can let my bar fall upon
their skulls, thirty times in a minute. Hein! what do you think of the
project? You smile."

"Excellent, dear friend, perfect! I approve it greatly; only you will
frighten them, and half of them will remain outside to take us by
famine. What we want, my good friend, is the entire destruction of the
troop; a single man left standing ruins us."

"You are right, my friend, but how can we attract them, pray?"

"By not stirring, my good Porthos."

"Well! we won't stir, then; but when they shall be all together--"

"Then leave it to me, I have an idea."

"If it is thus, and your idea be a good one--and your idea is most
likely to be good--I am satisfied."

"To your ambuscade, Porthos, and count how many enter."

"But you, what will you do?"

"Don't trouble yourself about me; I have a task to perform."

"I think I can hear cries."

"It is they! To your post. Keep within reach of my voice and hand."

Porthos took refuge in the second compartment, which was absolutely
black with darkness. Aramis glided into the third; the giant held in his
hand an iron bar of about fifty pounds' weight. Porthos handled this
lever, which had been used in rolling the bark, with marvelous facility.
During this time, the Bretons had pushed the bark to the beach. In the
enlightened compartment, Aramis, stooping and concealed, was busied in
some mysterious maneuver. A command was given in a loud voice. It was
the last order of the captain commandant. Twenty-five men jumped from
the upper rocks into the first compartment of the grotto, and having
taken their ground, began to fire. The echoes growled, the hissing of
the balls cut the air, an opaque smoke filled the vault.

"To the left! to the left!" cried Biscarrat, who, in his first assault,
had seen the passage to the second chamber, and who, animated by the
smell of powder, wished to guide his soldiers in that direction. The
troop accordingly precipitated themselves to the left--the passage
gradually growing narrower. Biscarrat, with his hands stretched forward,
devoted to death, marched in advance of the muskets. "Come on! come on!"
exclaimed he, "I see daylight!"

"Strike, Porthos!" cried the sepulchral voice of Aramis.

Porthos breathed a heavy sigh--but he obeyed. The iron bar fell full and
direct upon the head of Biscarrat, who was dead before he had ended his
cry. Then the formidable lever rose ten times in ten seconds, and made
ten corpses. The soldiers could see nothing; they heard sighs and
groans; they stumbled over dead bodies, but as they had no conception of
the cause of all this, they came forward jostling each other. The
implacable bar, still falling, annihilated the first platoon, without a
single sound having warned the second, which was quietly advancing, only
this second platoon, commanded by the captain, had broken a thin fir,
growing on the shore, and, with its resinous branches twisted together,
the captain had made a flambeau. On arriving at the compartment where
Porthos, like the exterminating angel, had destroyed all he touched, the
first rank drew back in terror. No firing had replied to that of the
guards, and yet their way was stopped by a heap of dead bodies--they
literally walked in blood. Porthos was still behind his pillar. The
captain, on enlightening with the trembling flame of the fir this
frightful carnage, of which he in vain sought the cause, drew back
toward the pillar, behind which Porthos was concealed. Then a gigantic
hand issued from the shade, and fastened on the throat of the captain,
who uttered a stifled rattle; his stretched out arms beating the air,
the torch fell and was extinguished in blood. A second after, the corpse
of the captain fell close to the extinguished torch, and added another
body to the heap of dead which blocked up the passage. All this was
effected as mysteriously as if by magic. At hearing the rattling in the
throat of the captain, the soldiers who accompanied him had turned
round: they had caught a glimpse of his extended arms, his eyes starting
from their sockets, and then the torch fell and they were left in
darkness. From an unreflective, instinctive, mechanical feeling, the
lieutenant cried--"Fire!"

Immediately a volley of musketry flamed, thundered, roared in the
cavern, bringing down enormous fragments from the vaults. The cavern was
lighted for an instant by this discharge, and then immediately returned
to a darkness rendered still thicker by the smoke. To this succeeded a
profound silence, broken only by the steps of the third brigade, now
entering the cavern.




CHAPTER CXXIV.

THE DEATH OF A TITAN.


At the moment when Porthos, more accustomed to the darkness than all
these men coming from open daylight, was looking round him to see if in
this night Aramis were not making him some signal, he felt his arm
gently touched, and a voice low as a breath murmured in his ear, "Come."

"Oh!" said Porthos.

"Hush!" said Aramis, if possible, still more softly.

And amid the noise of the third brigade, which continued to advance,
amid the imprecations of the guards left alive, of the dying, rattling
their last sigh, Aramis and Porthos glided imperceptibly along the
granite walls of the cavern. Aramis led Porthos into the last but one
compartment, and showed him, in a hollow of the rocky wall, a barrel of
powder weighing from seventy to eighty pounds, to which he had just
attached a match. "My friend," said he to Porthos, "you will take this
barrel, the match of which I am going to set fire to, and throw it amid
our enemies; can you do so?"

"Parbleu!" replied Porthos; and he lifted the barrel with one hand.
"Light it!"

"Stop," said Aramis, "till they are all massed together, and then, my
Jupiter, hurl your thunderbolt among-them."

"Light it," repeated Porthos.

"On my part," continued Aramis, "I will join our Bretons, and help them
to get the canoe to the sea. I will wait for you on the shore; launch it
strongly, and hasten to us."

"Light it," said Porthos a third time.

"But do you understand me?"

"Parbleu!" said Porthos again, with laughter that he did not even
attempt to restrain; "when a thing is explained to me I understand it;
begone, and give me the light."

Aramis gave the burning match to Porthos, who held out his arm to him,
his hands being engaged. Aramis pressed the arm of Porthos with both his
hands, and fell back to the outlet of the cavern where the three rowers
awaited him.

Porthos, left alone, applied the spark bravely to the match. The
spark--a feeble spark, first principle of a conflagration--shone in the
darkness like a fire-fly, then was deadened against the match which it
inflamed. Porthos enlivened the flame with his breath. The smoke was a
little dispersed, and by the light of the sparkling match objects might,
for two seconds, be distinguished. It was a short but a splendid
spectacle, that of this giant, pale, bloody, his countenance lighted by
the fire of the match burning in surrounding darkness! The soldiers saw
him--they saw the barrel he held in his hand--they at once understood
what was going to happen. Then, these men, already filled with terror at
the sight of what had been accomplished--filled with terror at thinking
of what was going to be accomplished--threw forth together one shriek of
agony. Some endeavored to fly, but they encountered the third brigade
which barred their passage; others mechanically took aim and attempted
to fire their discharged muskets; others fell upon their knees. Two or
three officers cried out to Porthos to promise him his liberty if he
would spare their lives. The lieutenant of the third brigade commanded
his men to fire; but the guards had before them their terrified
companions, who served as a living rampart for Porthos. We have said
that the light produced by the spark and the match did not last more
than two seconds; but during these two seconds this is what it
illumined--in the first place, the giant, enlarged in the darkness;
then, at ten paces from him, a heap of bleeding bodies, crushed,
mutilated, in the midst of whom still lived some last struggle of agony,
which lifted the mass as a last respiration raises the sides of a
shapeless monster expiring in the night. Every breath of Porthos, while
enlivening the match, sent toward this heap of bodies a sulphureous hue
mingled with streaks of purple. In addition to this principal group,
scattered about the grotto, as the chance of death or the surprise of
the blow had stretched them, some isolated bodies seemed to threaten by
their gaping wounds. Above the ground, soaked by pools of blood, rose,
heavy and sparkling, the short, thick pillars of the cavern, of which
the strongly marked shades threw out the luminous particles. And all
this was seen by the tremulous light of a match attached to a barrel of
powder, that is to say, a torch which, while throwing a light upon the
dead past, showed the death to come.

As I have said, this spectacle did not last above two seconds. During
this short space of time, an officer of the third brigade got together
eight men armed with muskets, and, through an opening, ordered them to
fire upon Porthos. But they who received the order to fire trembled so
that three guards fell by the discharge, and the five other balls went
hissing to splinter the vault, plow the ground, or indent the sides of
the cavern.

A burst of laughter replied to this volley; then the arm of the giant
swung round; then was seen to pass through the air, like a falling star,
the train of fire. The barrel, hurled a distance of thirty feet, cleared
the barricade of the dead bodies, and fell amid a group of shrieking
soldiers, who threw themselves on their faces. The officer had followed
the brilliant train in the air; he endeavored to precipitate himself
upon the barrel and tear out the match before it reached the powder it
contained. Useless devotedness! The air had made the flame attached to
the conductor more active; the match, which at rest might have burned
five minutes, was consumed in thirty seconds, and the infernal work
exploded. Furious vortices, hissings of sulphur and niter, devouring
ravages of the fire which caught to objects, the terrible thunder of the
explosion, this is what the second which followed the two seconds we
have described, disclosed in that cavern, equal in horrors to a cavern
of demons. The rock split like planks of deal under the ax. A jet of
fire, smoke, and debris sprang up from the middle of the grotto,
enlarging as it mounted. The large walls of silex tottered and fell upon
the sand, and the sand itself, an instrument of pain when launched from
its hardened bed, riddled the face with its myriads of cutting atoms.
Cries, howlings, imprecations, and existences--all were extinguished in
one immense crash.

The three first compartments became a gulf into which fell back again,
according to its weight, every vegetable, mineral, or human fragment.
Then the lighter sand and ashes fell in their turns, stretching like a
gray winding-sheet and smoking over these dismal funerals. And now seek
in this burning tomb, in this subterraneous volcano, seek for the king's
guards with their blue coats laced with silver. Seek for the officers
brilliant in gold; seek for the arms upon which they depended for their
defense; seek for the stones that have killed them, the ground that has
borne them. One single man has made of all this a chaos more confused,
more shapeless, more terrible than the chaos which existed an hour
before God had created the world. There remained nothing of the three
compartments--nothing by which God could have known His own work. As to
Porthos, after having hurled the barrel of powder amid his enemies, he
had fled as Aramis had directed him to do, and had gained the last
apartment, into which air, light, and sunshine penetrated through the
opening. Therefore, scarcely had he turned the angle which separated the
third compartment from the fourth, than he perceived at a hundred paces
from him the bark dancing on the waves; there were his friends, there
was liberty, there was life after victory. Six more of his formidable
strides, and he would be out of the vault; out of the vault! two or
three vigorous springs, and he would reach the canoe. Suddenly he felt
his knees give way; his knees appeared powerless, his legs to yield
under him.

"Oh! oh!" murmured he, "there is my fatigue seizing me again! I can walk
no further! What is this!"

Aramis perceived him through the opening, and unable to conceive what
could induce him to stop thus, "Come on, Porthos! come on," cried he;
"come quickly!"

"Oh!" replied the giant, making an effort which acted upon every muscle
of his body, "oh! but I cannot!" While saying these words he fell upon
his knees, but with his robust hands he clung to the rocks, and raised
himself up again.

"Quick! quick!" repeated Aramis, bending forward toward the shore, as if
to draw Porthos toward him with his arms.

"Here I am," stammered Porthos, collecting all his strength to make one
step more.

"In the name of Heaven, Porthos, make haste! the barrel will blow up!"

"Make haste, monseigneur!" shouted the Bretons to Porthos, who was
floundering as in a dream.

But there was no longer time; the explosion resounded, the earth gaped,
the smoke which rushed through the large fissures obscured the sky; the
sea flowed back as if driven by the blast of fire which darted from the
grotto as if from the jaws of a gigantic chimera; the reflux carried the
bark out twenty toises; the rocks cracked to their base, and separated
like blocks beneath the operation of wedges; a portion of the vault was
carried up toward heaven, as if by rapid currents; the rose-colored and
green fire of the sulphur, the black lava of the argillaceous
liquefactions clashed and combated for an instant beneath a majestic
dome of smoke; then, at first oscillated, then declined, then fell
successively the long angles of rock which the violence of the explosion
had not been able to uproot from their bed of ages; they bowed to each
other like grave and slow old men, then prostrating themselves, embedded
forever in their dusty tomb.

This frightful shock seemed to restore to Porthos the strength he had
lost: he arose, himself a giant among these giants. But at the moment he
was flying between the double hedge of granite phantoms, these latter,
which were no longer supported by the corresponding links, began to roll
with a crash around this Titan, who looked as if precipitated from
heaven amid rocks which he had just been launching at it. Porthos felt
the earth beneath his feet shaken by this long rending. He extended his
vast hands to the right and left to repulse the falling rocks. A
gigantic block was held back by each of his extended hands; he bent his
head, and a third granite mass sank between his two shoulders. For an
instant the arms of Porthos had given way, but the Hercules united all
his forces, and the two walls of the prison in which he was buried fell
back slowly and gave him place. For an instant he appeared in this frame
of granite like the ancient angel of chaos, but in pushing back the
lateral rocks, he lost his point of support for the monolith which
weighed upon his strong shoulders, and the monolith, lying upon him with
all its weight, brought the giant down upon his knees. The lateral
rocks, for an instant pushed back, drew together again, and added their
weight to the primitive weight which would have been sufficient to crush
ten men. The giant fell without crying for help; he fell while answering
Aramis with words of encouragement and hope, for, thanks to the powerful
arch of his hands, for an instant, he might believe that, like
Enceladus, he should shake off the triple load. But, by degrees, Aramis
saw the block sink: the hands strung for an instant, the arms stiffened
for a last effort, gave way, the extended shoulders sank wounded and
torn, and the rock continued to lower gradually.

"Porthos! Porthos!" cried Aramis, tearing his hair. "Porthos! where are
you? Speak!"

"There, there!" murmured Porthos, with a voice growing evidently weaker,
"patience! patience!"

Scarcely had he pronounced these words, when the impulse of the fall
augmented the weight; the enormous rock sank down, pressed by the two
others which sank in from the sides, and, as it were, swallowed up
Porthos in a sepulcher of broken stones. On hearing the dying voice of
his friend, Aramis had sprung to land. Two of the Bretons followed him,
with each a lever in his hand--one being sufficient to take care of the
bark. The last rattles of the valiant struggler guided them amid the
ruins. Aramis, animated, active, and young as at twenty, sprang toward
the triple mass, and with his hands, delicate as those of a woman,
raised by a miracle of vigor a corner of the immense sepulcher of
granite. Then he caught a glimpse, in the darkness of that grave, of the
still brilliant eye of his friend, to whom the momentary lifting of the
mass restored that moment of respiration. The two men came rushing up,
grasped their iron levers, united their triple strength, not merely to
raise it, but to sustain it. All was useless. The three men slowly gave
way with cries of grief, and the rough voice of Porthos, seeing them
exhaust themselves in a useless struggle, murmured in a jeering tone
those supreme words which came to his lips with the last respiration,
"Too heavy!"

After which the eye darkened and closed, the face became pale, the hand
whitened, and the Titan sank quite down, breathing his last sigh. With
him sank the rock, which, even in his agony, he had still held up. The
three men dropped the levers, which rolled upon the tumulary stone.
Then, breathless, pale, his brow covered with sweat, Aramis listened,
his breast oppressed, his heart ready to break.

Nothing more! The giant slept the eternal sleep, in the sepulcher which
God had made to his measure.




CHAPTER CXXV.

THE EPITAPH OF PORTHOS.


Aramis, silent, icy, trembling like a timid child, arose
shivering from the stone. A Christian does not walk upon tombs. But
though capable of standing, he was not capable of walking. It might be
said that something of dead Porthos had just died within him. His
Bretons surrounded him: Aramis yielded to their kind exertions, and the
three sailors, lifting him up, carried him into the canoe. Then, having
laid him down upon the bench near the rudder, they took to their oars,
preferring to get off by rowing to hoisting a sail, which might betray
them.

Of all that leveled surface of the ancient grotto of Locmaria, of all
that flattened shore, one single little hillock attracted their eyes.
Aramis never removed his from it; and, at a distance out in the sea, in
proportion as the shore receded, the menacing and proud mass of rock
seemed to draw itself up, as formerly Porthos used to draw himself up,
and raise a smiling and invincible head toward heaven, like that of the
honest and valiant friend, the strongest of the four, and yet the first
dead. Strange destiny of these men of brass! The most simple of heart
allied to the most crafty; strength of body guided by subtlety of mind;
and in the decisive moment, when vigor alone could save mind and body, a
stone, a rock, a vile and material weight, triumphed over vigor, and
falling upon the body, drove out the mind.

Worthy Porthos! born to help other men, always ready to sacrifice
himself for the safety of the weak, as if God had only given him
strength for that purpose: when dying he only thought he was carrying
out the conditions of his compact with Aramis, a compact, however, which
Aramis alone had drawn up, and which Porthos had only known to suffer by
its terrible solidarity. Noble Porthos! of what good are the chateaux
overflowing with sumptuous furniture, the forests overflowing with game,
the lakes overflowing with fish, the cellars overflowing with wealth! Of
what good are the lackeys in brilliant liveries, and in the midst of
them Mousqueton, proud of the power delegated by thee! Oh! noble
Porthos! careful heaper up of treasures, was it worth while to labor to
sweeten and gild life, to come upon a desert shore, to the cries of sea
birds, and lay thyself, with broken bones, beneath a cold stone! Was it
worth while, in short, noble Porthos, to heap so much gold, and not have
even the distich of a poor poet engraven upon thy monument! Valiant
Porthos! He still, without doubt, sleeps, lost, forgotten, beneath the
rock which the shepherds of the heath take for the gigantic abode of a
dolmen. And so many twining branches, so many mosses, caressed by the
bitter wind of the ocean, so many vivacious lichens have soldered the
sepulcher to the earth, that the passenger will never imagine that such
a block of granite can ever have been supported by the shoulders of one
man.

Aramis, still pale, still icy, his heart upon his lips, Aramis looked,
even till, with the last ray of daylight, the shore faded on the
horizon. Not a word escaped his lips, not a sigh rose from his deep
breast. The superstitious Bretons looked at him trembling. The silence
was not of a man, it was of a statue. In the meantime, with the first
gray lines that descended from the heavens, the canoe had hoisted its
little sail, which swelling with the kisses of the breeze, and carrying
them rapidly from the coast, made brave way with its head toward Spain,
across the terrible gulf of Gascony, so rife with tempests. But scarcely
half an hour after the sail had been hoisted, the rowers became
inactive, reclining upon their benches, and making an eye-shade with
their hands, pointed out to each other a white spot which appeared on
the horizon, as motionless as is in appearance a gull rocked by the
insensible respiration of the waves. But that which might have appeared
motionless to the ordinary eyes was moving at a quick rate to the
experienced eye of the sailor; that which appeared stationary on the
ocean was cutting a rapid way through it. For some time, seeing the
profound torpor in which their master was plunged, they did not dare to
rouse him, and satisfied themselves with exchanging their conjectures in
a low, disturbed voice. Aramis, in fact, so vigilant, so active--Aramis,
whose eye, like that of a lynx, watched without ceasing, and saw better
by night than by day--Aramis seemed to sleep in the despair of his soul.
An hour passed thus, during which daylight gradually disappeared, but
during which also the sail in view gained so swiftly on the bark that
Goenne, one of the three sailors, ventured to say aloud:

"Monseigneur, we are being chased!"

Aramis made no reply; the ship still gained upon them. Then, of their
own accord, two of the sailors, by the direction of the patron Yves,
lowered the sail, in order that that single point, which appeared above
the surface of the waters, should cease to be a guide to the eye of the
enemy who was pursuing them. On the part of the ship in sight, on the
contrary, two more small sails were run up at the extremities of the
masts. Unfortunately, it was the time of the finest and longest days of
the year, and the moon, in all her brilliancy, succeeded to this
inauspicious daylight. The balancelle, which was pursuing the little
bark before the wind, had then still half an hour of twilight, and a
whole night almost as light as day.

"Monseigneur! monseigneur! we are lost!" said the patron; "look! they
see us although we have lowered our sail."

"That is not to be wondered at," murmured one of the sailors, "since
they say that, by the aid of the devil, the people of the cities have
fabricated instruments with which they see as well at a distance as
near, by night as well as by day."

Aramis took a telescope from the bottom of the boat, arranged it
silently, and passing it to the sailor: "Here," said he, "look!" The
sailor hesitated.

"Don't be alarmed," said the bishop, "there is no sin in it; and if
there is any sin, I will take it upon myself."

The sailor lifted the glass to his eye and uttered a cry. He believed
that the vessel, which appeared to be distant about cannon-shot, had
suddenly and at a single bound cleared the distance. But, on withdrawing
the instrument from his eye, he saw that, except the way which the
balancelle had been able to make during that short instant, it was still
at the same distance.

"So," murmured the sailor, "they can see us as we see them."

"They see us," said Aramis, and sank again into his impassibility.

"How--they see us!" said the patron Yves, "impossible!"

"Well, patron, look yourself," said the sailor. And he passed to him the
glass.

"Monseigneur assures me that the devil has nothing to do with this?"
asked the patron.

Aramis shrugged his shoulders.

The patron lifted the glass to his eye. "Oh! monseigneur," said he, "it
is a miracle--they are there; it seems as if I were going to touch them.
Twenty-five men at least! Ah! I see the captain forward. He holds a
glass like this, and is looking at us. Ah! he turns round, and gives an
order; they are rolling a piece of cannon forward--they are charging
it--they are pointing it.--Misericorde! they are firing at us!"

And by a mechanical movement, the patron took the glass off, and the
objects, sent back to the horizon, appeared again in their true aspect.
The vessel was still at the distance of nearly a league, but the
maneuver announced by the patron was not less real. A light cloud of
smoke appeared under the sails, more blue than they, and spreading like
a flower opening; then, at about a mile from the little canoe, they saw
the ball take the crown off two or three waves, dig a white furrow in
the sea, and disappear at the end of that furrow, as inoffensive as the
stone with which, at play, a boy makes ducks and drakes. That was at
once a menace and a warning.

"What is to be done?" asked the patron.

"They will sink us!" said Goenne, "give us absolution, monseigneur!" And
the sailors fell on their knees before him.

"You forget that they can see you," said he.

"That is true!" said the sailors, ashamed of their weakness. "Give us
your orders, monseigneur, we are ready to die for you."

"Let us wait," said Aramis.

"How--let us wait?"

"Yes; do you not see, as you just now said, that if we endeavor to fly
they will sink us?"

"But, perhaps," the patron ventured to say, "perhaps, by the favor of
the night we could escape them."

"Oh!" said Aramis, "they have, little doubt, some Greek fire to lighten
their own course and ours likewise."

At the same moment, as if the little vessel wished to reply to the
appeal of Aramis, a second cloud of smoke mounted slowly to the heavens,
and from the bosom of that cloud sparkled an arrow of flame, which
described its parabola like a rainbow, and fell into the sea, where it
continued to burn, illuminating a space of a quarter of a league in
diameter.

The Bretons looked at each other in terror. "You see plainly," said
Aramis, "it will be better to wait for them."

The oars dropped from the hands of the sailors, and the bark, ceasing to
make way, rocked motionless on the summits of the waves. Night came on,
but the vessel still approached nearer. It might be said it redoubled
its speed with the darkness. From time to time, as a bloody-necked
vulture rears its head out of its nest, the formidable Greek fire darted
from its sides, and cast its flame into the ocean like an incandescent
snow. At last it came within musket-shot. All the men were on deck, arms
in hand; the cannoneers were at their guns, the matches were burning. It
might be thought they were about to board a frigate and to combat a crew
superior in number to their own, and not to take a canoe manned by four
people.

"Surrender!" cried the commander of the balancelle, with the aid of his
speaking trumpet.

The sailors looked at Aramis. Aramis made a sign with his head. The
patron Yves waved a white cloth at the end of a gaff. This was like
striking their flag. The vessel came on like a racehorse. It launched a
fresh Greek fire which fell within twenty paces of the little canoe, and
threw a stronger light upon them than the most ardent ray of the sun
could have done.

"At the first sign of resistance," cried the commander of the
balancelle, "fire!" And the soldiers brought their muskets to the
present.

"Did not we say we surrendered?" said the patron Yves.

"Living! living! captain!" cried some highly exalted soldiers, "they
must be taken living!"

"Well, yes--living," said the captain. Then turning toward the Bretons,
"Your lives are all safe, my friends!" cried he, "except the Chevalier
d'Herblay."

Aramis started imperceptibly. For an instant his eye was fixed upon the
depths of the ocean enlightened by the last flashes of the Greek fire,
flashes which ran along the sides of the waves, played upon their crests
like plumes, and rendered still more dark, more mysterious and more
terrible the abysses they covered.

"Do you hear, monseigneur?" said the sailors.

"Yes."

"What are your orders?"

"Accept!"

"But you, monseigneur?"

Aramis leaned still more forward, and played with the ends of his long
white fingers with the green water of the sea, to which he turned
smiling as to a friend.

"Accept!" repeated he.

"We accept," repeated the sailors; "but what security have we?"

"The word of a gentleman," said the officer. "By my rank and by my name
I swear, that all but M. le Chevalier d'Herblay shall have their lives
spared. I am lieutenant of the king's frigate the _Pomona_, and my name
is Louis Constant de Pressigny."

With a rapid gesture, Aramis--already bent over the side of the bark
toward the sea--with a rapid gesture, Aramis raised his head, drew
himself up, and with a flashing eye, and a smile upon his lips--"Throw
out the ladder, messieurs," said he, as if the command had belonged to
him. He was obeyed. Then Aramis, seizing the rope-ladder, instead of the
terror which was expected to be displayed upon his countenance, the
surprise of the sailors of the balancelle was great, when they saw him
walk straight up to the commander, with a firm step, look at him
earnestly, make a sign to him with his hand, a mysterious and unknown
sign, at the sight of which the officer turned pale, trembled, and bowed
his head. Without saving a word, Aramis then raised his hand close to
the eyes of the commander, and showed him the collet of a ring which he
wore on the ring-finger of his left hand. And while making this sign,
Aramis, draped in cold, silent, and haughty majesty, had the air of an
emperor giving his hand to be kissed. The commandant, who for a moment
had raised his head, bowed a second time with marks of the most profound
respect. Then stretching his hand out, in his turn toward the poop, that
is to say, toward his own cabin, he drew back to allow Aramis to go
first. The three Bretons, who had come on board after their bishop,
looked at each other, stupefied. The crew were struck with silence. Five
minutes after, the commander called the second lieutenant, who returned
immediately, ordering the head to be put toward Corunna. While the given
order was being executed, Aramis reappeared upon the deck, and took a
seat near the _bastingage_. The night had fallen, the moon had not yet
risen, and yet Aramis looked incessantly toward Belle-Isle. Yves then
approached the captain, who had returned to take his post in the stern,
and said, in a low and humble voice, "What course are we to follow,
captain?"

"We take what course monseigneur pleases," replied the officer.

Aramis passed the night leaning upon the _bastingage_. Yves, on
approaching him the next morning, remarked, that "the night must have
been very humid, for the wood upon which the bishop's head had rested
was soaked with dew." Who knows!--that dew was, perhaps, the first tears
that had ever fallen from the eyes of Aramis!

What epitaph would have been worth that? Good Porthos!




CHAPTER CXXVI.

THE ROUND OF M. DE GESVRES.


D'Artagnan was not accustomed to resistances like that he had just
experienced. He returned, profoundly irritated, to Nantes. Irritation
with this vigorous man vented itself in an impetuous attack, which, few
people, hitherto, were they king, were they giants, had been able to
resist. D'Artagnan, trembling with rage, went straight to the castle,
and asked to speak to the king. It might be about seven o'clock in the
morning, and, since his arrival at Nantes, the king had been an early
riser. But, on arriving at the little corridor with which we are
acquainted, D'Artagnan found M. de Gesvres, who stopped him very
politely, telling him not to speak too loud and disturb the king. "Is
the king asleep?" said D'Artagnan--"well, I will let him sleep. But
about what o'clock do you suppose he will rise?"

"Oh! in about two hours; the king has been up all night."

D'Artagnan took his hat again, bowed to M. de Gesvres, and returned to
his own apartments. He came back at half-past nine, and was told that
the king was at breakfast. "That will just suit me," said D'Artagnan, "I
will talk to the king while he is eating."

M. de Brienne reminded D'Artagnan that the king would not receive any
one during his repasts.

"But," said D'Artagnan, looking askant at Brienne, "you do not know
perhaps, monsieur, that I have the privilege of entree anywhere, and at
any hour."

Brienne took the hand of the captain kindly, and said, "Not at Nantes,
dear Monsieur d'Artagnan. The king in this journey has changed
everything."

D'Artagnan, a little softened, asked about what o'clock the king would
have finished his breakfast.

"We don't know."

"How!--don't know! What does that mean? You don't know how much time the
king devotes to eating? It is generally an hour; and, if we admit that
the air of the Loire gives an additional appetite, we will extend it to
an hour and a half; that is enough, I think. I will wait where I am."

"Oh! dear Monsieur d'Artagnan, the order is, not to allow any person to
remain in this corridor; I am on guard for that purpose."

D'Artagnan felt his anger mounting a second time to his brain. He went
out quickly, for fear of complicating the affair by a display of
ill-humor. As soon as he was out he began to reflect. "The king," said
he, "will not receive me, that is evident. The young man is angry; he is
afraid of the words I may speak to him. Yes; but in the meantime,
Belle-Isle is besieged, and my two friends are taken or killed. Poor
Porthos! As to Master Aramis, he is always full of resources, and I am
quite easy on his account. But, no, no; Porthos is not yet an invalid,
and Aramis is not yet in his dotage. The one with his arm, the other
with his imagination, will find work for his majesty's soldiers. Who
knows if these brave men may not get up for the edification of his Most
Christian Majesty a little bastion of Saint-Gervais! I don't despair of
it. They have cannon and a garrison. And yet," continued D'Artagnan, "I
don't know whether it would not be better to stop the combat. For myself
alone, I will not put up with either surly looks, or treason, on the
part of the king; but for my friends, rebuffs, insults, I have a right
to receive everything. Shall I go to M. Colbert? Now there is a man,
whom I must acquire the habit of terrifying. I will go to M. Colbert."
And D'Artagnan set forward bravely to find M. Colbert, but he was told
he was working with the king, at the castle of Nantes. "Good!" cried he,
"the times are returned in which I measured my steps from M. de
Treville to the cardinal, from the cardinal to the queen, from the
queen to Louis XIII. Truly is it said that men, in growing old, become
children again!--To the castle, then!" He returned thither. M. de Lyonne
was coming out. He gave D'Artagnan both hands, but told him that the
king had been busy all the preceding evening and all night, and that
orders had been given that no one should be admitted.

"Not even the captain who takes the order?" cried D'Artagnan. "I think
that he is rather too strong."

"Not even he," said M. de Lyonne.

"Since that is the case," replied D'Artagnan, wounded to the heart;
"since the captain of the musketeers, who has always entered the king's
chamber, is no longer allowed to enter it, his cabinet, or his
_salle-a-manger_; either the king is dead, or his captain is in
disgrace. In either case, he can no longer want him. Do me the favor,
then, M. de Lyonne, who are in favor, to return and tell the king
plainly, I send him my resignation."

"D'Artagnan, beware of what you are doing!"

"For friendship's sake, go!" and he pushed him gently toward the
cabinet.

"Well, I will go," said Lyonne.

D'Artagnan waited, walking about the corridor in no enviable mood.
Lyonne returned. "Well, what did the king say?" exclaimed D'Artagnan.

"He simply answered, 'That is well,'" replied Lyonne.

"That that was well!" said the captain, with an explosion. "That is to
say, that he accepts it? Good! Now, then, I am free! I am only a plain
citizen, M. de Lyonne. I have the pleasure of bidding you good-by!
Farewell, castle, corridor, antechamber! a _bourgeois_, about to breathe
at liberty, takes his farewell of you."

And without waiting longer, the captain sprang from the terrace down the
staircase, where he had picked up the fragments of Gourville's letter.
Five minutes after, he was at the hostelry, where, according to the
custom of all great officers who have lodgings at the castle, he had
taken what was called his city chamber. But when arrived there, instead
of throwing off his sword and cloak, he took his pistols, put his money
into a large leather purse, sent for his horses from the castle stables,
and gave orders for reaching Vannes during the night. Everything went on
according to his wishes. At eight o'clock in the evening, he was putting
his foot in the stirrup, when M. de Gesvres appeared, at the head of
twelve guards, in front of the hostelry. D'Artagnan saw all from the
corner of his eye; he could not fail seeing thirteen men and thirteen
horses. But he feigned not to observe anything, and was about to put his
horse in motion. Gesvres rode up to him. "Monsieur d'Artagnan!" said he
aloud.

"Ah, Monsieur de Gesvres! good-evening!"

"One would say you were getting on horseback."

"More than that--I am mounted, as you see."

"It is fortunate I have met with you."

"Were you looking for me, then?"

"Mon Dieu! yes."

"On the part of the king, I will wager?"

"Yes."

"As I, three days ago, went in search of M. Fouquet?"

"Oh!"

"Nonsense! It is of no use being delicate with me; that is all labor
lost. Tell me at once you are come to arrest me."

"To arrest you--good heavens! no."

"Why do you come to accost me with twelve horsemen at your heels, then?"

"I am making my round."

"That isn't bad! And so you pick me up in your round, eh?"

"I don't pick you up; I meet with you, and I beg you to come with me."

"Where?"

"To the king."

"Good!" said D'Artagnan, with a bantering air; "the king has nothing to
do at last!"

"For Heaven's sake, captain," said M. de Gesvres, in a low voice to the
musketeer, "do not compromise yourself! these men hear you."

D'Artagnan laughed aloud, and replied, "March! People who are arrested
are placed between the six first guards and the six last."

"But as I do not arrest you," said M. de Gesvres, "you will march behind
with me, if you please."

"Well," said D'Artagnan, "that is very polite, duc, and you are right in
being so; for if ever I had had to make my rounds near your
_chambre-de-ville_, I should have been courteous to you, I assure you,
by the faith of a gentleman! Now, one favor more: what does the king
want with me?"

"Oh, the king is furious!"

"Very well! the king, who has thought it worth while to be furious, may
take the trouble of getting calm again; that is all that. I shan't die
of that, I will swear."

"No, but--"

"But--I shall be sent to keep company with poor M. Fouquet. Mordioux!
That is a gallant man, a worthy man! We shall live very sociably
together, I will be bound."

"Here we are at our place of destination," said the duc. "Captain, for
Heaven's sake be calm with the king!"

"Ah, ah! you are playing the brave man with me, duc!" said D'Artagnan,
throwing one of his defiant glances over De Gesvres. "I have been told
that you are ambitious of uniting your guards with my musketeers. This
strikes me as a capital opportunity."

"I will take devilish good care not to avail myself of it, captain."

"And why not?"

"Oh, for many reasons--in the first place, for this: If I were to
succeed you in the musketeers, after having arrested you--"

"Ah! then, you admit you have arrested me?"

"No, I don't."

"Say, met me, then. So you were saying, _if_ you were to succeed me,
after having arrested me?"

"Your musketeers, at the first exercise with ball cartridges, would all
fire toward me, by mistake."

"Ah! as to that I won't say; for the fellows do love me a little."

Gesvres made D'Artagnan pass in first, and took him straight to the
cabinet where the king was waiting for his captain of the musketeers,
and placed himself behind his colleague in the antechamber. The king
could be heard distinctly, speaking aloud to Colbert, in the same
cabinet where Colbert might have heard, a few days before, the king
speaking aloud with M. d'Artagnan. The guards remained as a mounted
piquet before the principal gate; and the report was quickly spread
through the city that monsieur le capitaine of the musketeers had just
been arrested by order of the king. Then, these men were seen to be in
motion, as, in the good old times of Louis XIII., and M. de Treville;
groups were formed, the staircases were filled; vague murmurs, issuing
from the courts below, came rolling up to the upper stories, like the
hoarse moanings of the tide-waves. M. de Gesvres became very uneasy. He
looked at his guards, who, after being interrogated by the musketeers
who had just got among their ranks, began to shun them with a
manifestation of uneasiness. D'Artagnan was certainly less disturbed
than M. de Gesvres, the captain of the guards, was. As soon as he
entered, he had seated himself on the ledge of a window, whence, with
his eagle glance, he saw all that was going on, without the least
emotion. None of the progress of the fermentation which had manifested
itself at the report of his arrest had escaped him. He foresaw the
moment when the explosion would take place, and we know that his
previsions were pretty correct.

"It would be very whimsical," thought he, "if, this evening, my
praetorians should make me king of France. How I should laugh!"

But, at the height, all was stopped. Guards, musketeers, officers,
soldiers, murmurs and uneasinesses, all dispersed, vanished, died away;
no more tempest, no more menace, no more sedition. One word had calmed
all the waves. The king had desired Brienne to say, "Hush, messieurs!
you disturb the king."

D'Artagnan sighed. "All is over!" said he; "the musketeers of the
present day are not those of his majesty Louis XIII. All is over!"

"M. d'Artagnan to the king's apartment," cried an usher.




CHAPTER CXXVII.

KING LOUIS XIV.


The king was seated in his cabinet, with his back turned toward the door
of entrance. In front of him was a mirror, in which, while turning over
his papers, he could see with a glance those who came in. He did not
take any notice of the entrance of D'Artagnan, but laid over his letters
and plans the large silk cloth which he made use of to conceal his
secrets from the importunate. D'Artagnan understood his play, and kept
in the background; so that, at the end of a minute, the king, who heard
nothing, and saw nothing but with the corner of his eye, was obliged to
cry, "Is not M. D'Artagnan there?"

"I am here, sire," replied the musketeer, advancing.

"Well, monsieur," said the king, fixing his clear eye upon D'Artagnan,
"what have you to say to me?"

"I, sire!" replied the latter, who watched the first blow of his
adversary to make a good retort; "I have nothing to say to your majesty,
unless it be that you have caused me to be arrested, and here I am."

The king was going to reply that he had not had D'Artagnan arrested, but
the sentence appeared too much like an excuse, and he was silent.
D'Artagnan likewise preserved an obstinate silence.

"Monsieur," at length resumed the king, "what did I charge you to go and
do at Belle-Isle? Tell me, if you please."

The king, while speaking these words, looked fixedly at his captain.
Here D'Artagnan was too fortunate; the king seemed to place the game in
his hands.

"I believe," replied he, "that your majesty does me the honor to ask
what I went to Belle-Isle to do?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"Well! sire, I know nothing about it; it is not of me that question
should be asked, but of that infinite number of officers of all kinds to
whom have been given an infinite number of orders of all kinds, while to
me, head of the expedition, nothing precise was ordered."

The king was wounded; he showed it by his reply. "Monsieur," said he,
"orders have only been given to such as were judged faithful."

"And, therefore, I have been astonished, sire," retorted the musketeer,
"that a captain like myself, who rank with a marechal of France, should
have found himself under the orders of five or six lieutenants or
majors, good to make spies of, possibly, but not at all fit to conduct
warlike expeditions. It was upon this subject I came to demand an
explanation of your majesty, when I found the door closed against me,
which, the last insult offered to a brave man, has led me to quit your
majesty's service."

"Monsieur," replied the king, "you still believe you are living in an
age when kings were, as you complain of having been, under the orders
and at the discretion of their inferiors. You appear too much to forget
that a king owes an account of his actions to none but God."

"I forget nothing at all, sire," said the musketeer, wounded by this
lesson. "Besides, I do not see in what an honest man, when he asks of
his king how he has ill served him, offends him."

"You have ill served me, monsieur, by taking part with my enemies
against me."

"Who are your enemies, sire?"

"The men I sent you to fight with."

"Two men the enemies of the whole of your majesty's army! That is
incredible."

"You have no power to judge of my will."
