on Dermid's arm, her head thrown back, her features bearing an
expression scarce to be defined. The horses' hoofs, mingled with the
clang of armor, rung sharp and clear on the stones of the courtyard.
They halted: the pommel of a sword was struck against the oaken door,
and a night's lodging courteously demanded. The terror of the owners of
the house subsided, for the voice they heard was Scotch.

The door was thrown open, the request granted, with the same hospitality
as had been extended to the minstrel and the page. On the instant there
was a confused sound of warriors dismounting, of horses eager for
stabling and forage; and one tall and stately figure, clad from head to
foot in mail, entered the house, and removing his helmet, addressed some
words of courteous greeting and acknowledgment to its inmates. A loud
exclamation burst from the minstrel's lips; but Agnes uttered no sound,
she made one bound forward, and dropped senseless at the warrior's feet.




CHAPTER XXVII.


It was on a cool evening, near the end of September, 1311, that a troop,
consisting of about thirty horse, and as many on foot, were leisurely
traversing the mountain passes between the counties of Dumfries and
Lanark. Their arms were well burnished; their buff coats and half-armor
in good trim; their banner waved proudly from its staff, as bright and
gay as if it had not even neared a scene of strife; and there was an air
of hilarity and gallantry about them that argued well for success, if
about to commence an expedition, or if returning, told with equal
emphasis they had been successful. That the latter was the case was
speedily evident, from the gay converse passing between them; their
allusions to some late gallant achievement of their patriot sovereign;
their joyous comparisons between good King Robert and his weak opponent,
Edward II. of England, marvelling how so wavering and indolent a son
could have sprung from so brave and determined a sire; for, Scotsmen as
they were, they were now FREE, and could thus afford to allow
the "hammer" of their country some knightly qualities, despite the stern
and cruel tyranny which to them had ever marked his conduct. They spoke
in laughing scorn of the second Edward's efforts to lay his father's
yoke anew upon their necks; they said a just heaven had interfered and
urged him to waste the decisive moment of action in indolence and folly,
in the flatteries of his favorite, to the utter exclusion of those wiser
lords, whose counsels, if followed on the instant, might have shaken
even the wise and patriot Bruce. Yet they were so devoted to their
sovereign, they idolized him alike as a warrior and a man too deeply, to
allow that to the weak and vacillating conduct of Edward they owed the
preservation of their country. It was easy to perceive by the springy
step, the flashing eye, the ringing, tone with which that magic name,
the Bruce, was spoken, how deeply it was written on the heart; the joy
it was to recall his deeds, and feel it was through him that they were
free! Their converse easily betrayed them to be one of those
well-ordered though straggling parties into which King Robert's invading
armies generally dispersed at his command, when returning to their own
fastnesses, after a successful expedition to the English border.

The laugh and jest resounded, as we have said, amongst both officers and
men; but their leader, who was riding about a stone's throw ahead, gave
no evidence of sharing their mirth. He was clad from head to foot in
chain armor, of a hue so dark as to be mistaken for black, and from his
wearing a surcoat of the same color, unenlivened by any device, gave him
altogether a somewhat sombre appearance, although it could not detract
in the smallest degree from the peculiar gracefulness and easy dignity
of his form, which was remarkable both on horseback and on foot. He was
evidently very tall, and by his firm seat in the saddle, had been early
accustomed to equestrian exercises; but his limbs were slight almost to
delicacy, and though completely ensheathed in mail, there was an
appearance of extreme youth about him, that perhaps rendered the absence
of all gayety the more striking. Yet on the battle-field he gave no
evidence of inexperience as a warrior, no sign that he was merely a
scholar in the art of war; there only did men believe he must be older
than he seemed; there only his wonted depression gave place to an
energy, a fire, second to none amongst the Scottish patriots, not even
to the Bruce himself; then only was the naturally melancholy music of
his voice lost in accents of thrilling power, of imperative command, and
the oldest warriors followed him as if under the influence of some
spell. But of his appearance on the field we must elsewhere speak. He
now led his men through the mountain defiles mechanically, as if buried
in meditation, and that meditation not of the most pleasing nature. His
vizor was closed, but short clustering curls, of a raven blackness,
escaped beneath the helmet, and almost concealed the white linen and
finely embroidered collar which lay over his gorget, and was secured in
front by a ruby clasp; a thick plume of black feathers floated from his
helmet, rivalling in color the mane of his gallant charger, which pawed
the ground, and held his head aloft as if proud of the charge he bore. A
shield was slung round the warrior's neck, and its device and motto
seemed in melancholy accordance with the rest of his attire. On a field
argent lay the branch of a tree proper, blasted and jagged, with the
words "_Ni nom ni paren, je suis seul_," rudely engraved in Norman
French beneath; his helmet bore no crest, nor did his war-cry on the
field, "Amiot for the Bruce and freedom," offer any clue to the curious
as to his history, for that there was some history attached to him all
chose to believe, though the age was too full of excitement to allow
much of wonderment or curiosity to be expended upon him. His golden
spurs gave sufficient evidence that he was a knight; his prowess on the
field proclaimed whoever had given him that honor had not bestowed it on
the undeserving. His deeds of daring, unequalled even in that age,
obtained him favor in the eyes of every soldier; and if there were some
in the court and camp of Bruce who were not quite satisfied, and loved
not the mystery which surrounded him, it mattered not, Sir Amiot of the
Branch, or the Lonely Chevalier, as he was generally called, went on his
way unquestioned.

"Said not Sir Edward Bruce he would meet us hereabouts at set of sun?"
were the first words spoken by the knight, as, on issuing from the
mountains, they found themselves on a broad plain to the east of Lanark,
bearing sad tokens of a devastating war, in the ruined and blackened
huts which were the only vestiges of human habitations near. The answer
was in the affirmative; and the knight, after glancing in the direction
of the sun, which wanted about an hour to its setting, commanded a halt,
and desired that, while waiting the arrival of their comrades, they
should take their evening meal.

On the instant the joyous sounds of dismounting, leading horses to
picquet, unclasping helmets, throwing aside the more easily displaced
portions of their armor, shields, and spears, took the place of the
steady tramp and well-ordered march. Flinging themselves in various
attitudes on the greensward, provender was speedily laid before them,
and rare wines and other choice liquors, fruits of their late campaign,
passed gayly round. An esquire had, at the knight's sign, assisted him
to remove his helmet, shield, and gauntlets; but though this removal
displayed a beautifully formed head, thickly covered with dark hair, his
features were still concealed by a species of black mask, the mouth,
chin, and eyes being alone visible, and therefore his identity was
effectually hidden. The mouth and chin were both small and delicately
formed; the slight appearance of beard and moustache seeming to denote
his age as some one-and-twenty years. His eyes, glancing through the
opening in the mask, were large and very dark, often flashing brightly,
when his outward bearing was so calm and quiet as to afford little
evidence of emotion. Some there were, indeed, who believed the eye the
truer index of the man than aught else about him, and to fancy there was
far more in that sad and lonely knight than was revealed.

It was evident, however, that to the men now with him his remaining so
closely masked was no subject of surprise, that they regarded it as an
ordinary thing, which in consequence had lost its strangeness. They were
eager and respectful in their manner towards him, offering to raise him
a seat of turf at some little distance from their noisy comrades; but
acknowledging their attention with kindness and courtesy, he refused it,
and rousing himself with some difficulty from his desponding thoughts,
threw himself on the sward beside his men, and joined in their mirth and
jest.

"Hast thou naught to tell to while away this tedious hour, good
Murdoch?" he asked, after a while, addressing a gray-headed veteran.

"Aye, aye, a tale, a tale; thou hast seen more of the Bruce than all of
us together," repeated many eager voices, "and knowest yet more of his
deeds than we do; a tale an thou wilt, but of no other hero than the
Bruce."

"The Bruce!" echoed the veteran; "see ye not his deeds yourselves, need
ye more of them?" but there was a sly twinkle in his eye that betrayed
his love to speak was as great as his comrades to hear him. "Have ye not
heard, aye, and many of you seen his adventures and escapes in Carrick,
hunted even as he was by bloodhounds; his guarding that mountain pass,
one man against sixty, aye, absolutely alone against the Galwegian host
of men and bloodhounds; Glen Fruin, Loudun Hill, Aberdeen; the harrying
of Buchan; charging the treacherous foe, when they had to bear him from
his litter to his horse, aye, and support him there; springing up from
his couch of pain, and suffering, and depression, agonizing to witness,
to hurl vengeance on the fell traitors; aye, and he did it, and brought
back health to his own heart and frame; and Forfar, Lorn,
Dunstaffnage--know ye not all these things? Nay, have ye not seen,
shared in them all--what would ye more?"

"The harrying of Buchan, tell us of that," loudly exclaimed many voices;
while some others shouted, "the landing of the Bruce--tell us of his
landing, and the spirit fire at Turnberry Head; the strange woman that
addressed him."

"Now which am I to tell, good my masters?" laughingly answered the old
man, when the tumult in a degree subsided. "A part of one, and part of
the other, and leave ye to work out the rest yourselves; truly, a
pleasant occupation. Say, shall it be thus? yet stay, what says Sir
Amiot?"

"As you will, my friends," answered the knight, cheerily; "but decide
quickly, or we shall hear neither. I am for the tale of Buchan," there
was a peculiarly thrilling emphasis in his tone as he pronounced the
word, "for I was not in Scotland at the time, and have heard but
disjointed rumors of the expedition."

The veteran looked round on his eager comrades with an air of
satisfaction, then clearing his voice, and drawing more to the centre of
the group; "Your worship knows," he began, addressing Sir Amiot, who,
stretched at full length on the sward, had fixed his eyes upon him,
though their eagle glance was partly shaded by his hand, "that our good
King Robert the Bruce, determined on the reduction of the north of his
kingdom, advanced thereto in the spring of 1308, accompanied by his
brother, Lord Edward, that right noble gentleman the Earl of Lennox, Sir
Gilbert Hay, Sir Robert Boyd, and others, with a goodly show of men and
arms, for his successes at Glen Fruin and Loudun Hill had brought him a
vast accession of loyal subjects. And they were needed, your worship, of
a truth, for the traitorous Comyns had almost entire possession of the
castles and forts of the north, and thence were wont to pour down their
ravaging hordes upon the true Scotsmen, and menace the king, till he
scarcely knew which side to turn to first. Your worship coming, I have
heard, from the low country, can scarcely know all the haunts and
lurking-places for treason the highlands of our country present; how
hordes of traitors may be trained and armed in these remote districts,
without the smallest suspicion being attached to them till it is
well-nigh too late, and the mischief is done. Well, to drive out these
black villains, to free his kingdom, not alone from the yoke of an
English Edward, but a Scottish Comyn, good King Robert was resolved--and
even as he resolved he did. Inverness, the citadel of treason and
disloyalty, fell before him; her defences, and walls, and turrets, and
towers, all dismantled and levelled, so as to prevent all further
harborage of treason; her garrison marched out, the ringleaders sent
into secure quarters, and all who hastened to offer homage and swear
fidelity, received with a courtesy and majesty which I dare to say did
more for the cause of our true king than a Comyn could ever do against
it. Other castles followed the fate of Inverness, till at length the
north, even as the south, acknowledged the Bruce, not alone as their
king, but as their deliverer and savior.

"It was while rejoicing over these glorious successes, the lords and
knights about the person of their sovereign began to note with great
alarm that his strength seemed waning, his brow often knit as with
inward pain, his eye would grow dim, and his limbs fail him, without a
moment's warning; and that extreme depression would steal over his manly
spirit even in the very moment of success. They watched in alarm, but
silently; and when they saw the renewed earnestness and activity with
which, on hearing of the approach of Comyn of Buchan, Sir John de
Mowbray, and that worst of traitors, his own nephew, Sir David of
Brechin, he rallied his forces, advanced to meet them, and compelled
them to retreat confusedly to Aberdeen, they hoped they had been
deceived, and all was well.

"But the fell disease gained ground; at first he could not guide his
charger's reins, and then he could not mount at all; his voice failed,
his sight passed; they were compelled to lay him in a litter, and bear
him in the midst of them, and they felt as if the void left by their
sovereign's absence from their head was filled with the dim shadow of
death. Nobly and gallantly did Lord Edward endeavor to remedy this fatal
evil; Lennox, Hay, even the two Frasers, who had so lately joined the
king, seemed as if paralyzed by this new grief, and hung over the
Bruce's litter as if their strength waned with his. Sternly, nay, at
such a moment it seemed almost harshly, Lord Edward rebuked this
weakness, and, conducting them to Slenath, formed some strong
entrenchments, of which the Bruce's pavilion was the centre, intending
there to wait his brother's recovery. Ah, my masters, if ye were not
with good King Robert then, ye have escaped the bitterest trial. Ye know
not what it was to behold him--the savior of his country, the darling of
his people, the noblest knight and bravest warrior who ever girded on a
sword--lie there, so pale, so faint, with scarce a voice or passing sigh
to say he breathed. The hand which grasped the weal of Scotland, the arm
that held her shield, lay nerveless as the dead; the brain which thought
so well and wisely for his fettered land, lay powerless and still; the
thrilling voice was hushed, the flashing eye was closed. The foes were
close around him, and true friends in tears and woe beside his couch,
were all alike unknown. Ah! then was the time for warrior's tears, for
men of iron frame and rugged mood to soften into woman's woe, and weep.
Men term Lord Edward Bruce so harsh and stern, one whom naught of grief
for others or himself can move; they saw him not as I have. It was mine
to watch my sovereign, when others sought their rest; and I have seen
that rugged chieftain stand beside his brother's couch alone, unmarked,
and struggle with his spirit till his brow hath knit, his lip become
convulsed, and then as if 'twere vain, all vain, sink on his knee, clasp
his sovereign's hand, and bow his head and weep. 'Tis passed and over
now, kind heaven be praised! yet I cannot recall that scene, unbind the
folds of memory, unmoved."

The old man passed his rough hand across his eyes, and for a brief
moment paused; his comrades, themselves affected, sought not to disturb
him, and quickly he resumed.

"Days passed, and still King Robert gave no sign of amendment, except,
indeed, there were intervals when his eyes wandered to the countenances
of his leaders, as if he knew them, and would fain have addressed them
as his wont. Then it was our men were annoyed by an incessant discharge
from Buchan's archers, which, though they could do perhaps no great
evil, yet wounded many of our men, and roused Lord Edward's spirit to
resent the insult. His determination to leave the entrenchments and
retreat to Strathbogie, appeared at first an act of such unparalleled
daring as to startle all his brother leaders, and they hesitated; but
there never was any long resisting Sir Edward's plans; he bears a spell
no spirit with a spark of gallantry about him can resist. The retreat
was in consequence determined on, to the great glee of our men, who were
tired of inaction, and imagined they should feel their sovereign's
sufferings less if engaged hand to hand with, the foe, in his service,
than watching him as they had lately done, and dreading yet greater
evils.

"Ye have heard of this daring retreat, my friends; it was in the mouth
of every Scotsman, aye, and of Englishman too, for King Robert himself
never accomplished a deed of greater skill. The king's litter was placed
in the centre of a square, which presented on either side such an
impenetrable fence of spears and shields, that though Buchan and De
Mowbray mustered more than double our number, they never ventured an
attack, and a retreat, apparently threatening total destruction, from
its varied dangers, was accomplished without the loss of a single man.
At Strathbogie we halted but a short space, for finding no obstruction
in our path, we hastened southward, in the direction of Inverury; there
we pitched the tent for the king, and, taking advantage of a natural
fortification, dispersed our men around it, still in a compact square.
Soon after this had been accomplished, news was received that our foes
were concentrating their numerous forces at Old Meldrum, scarcely two
miles from us, and consequently we must hold ourselves in constant
readiness to receive their attack.

"Well, the news that the enemy was so near us might not perhaps have
been particularly pleasing, had they not been more than balanced by the
conviction--far more precious than a large reinforcement, for in itself
it was a host--the king was recovering. Yes, scarcely as we dared hope,
much less believe it, the disease, which had fairly baffled all the
leech's art, which had hung over our idolized monarch so long, at length
showed symptoms of giving way, and there was as great rejoicing in the
camp as if neither danger nor misfortune could assail us more; a new
spirit sparkled in every eye, as if the awakening lustre in the Bruce's
glance, the still faint, yet thrilling accents of a voice we had feared
was hushed forever, had lighted on every heart, and kindled anew their
slumbering fire. One day, Lord Edward, the Earl of Lennox, and a gallant
party, were absent scouring the country about half a mile round our
entrenchments, and in consequence, one side of our square was more than
usually open, but we did not think it signified, for there wore no
tidings of the enemy; well, this day the king had called me to him, and
bade me relate the particulars of the retreat, which I was proud enough
to do, my masters, and which of you would not be, speaking as I did with
our gallant sovereign as friend with friend?"

"Aye, and does he not make us all feel this?" burst simultaneously from
many voices; "does he not speak, and treat us all as if we were his
friends, and not his subjects only? Thine was a proud task, good
Murdoch, but which of us has good King Robert not addressed with kindly
words and proffered hand?"

"Right! right!" joyously responded the old man; "still I say that hour
was one of the proudest in my life, and an eventful one too for Scotland
ere it closed. King Robert heard me with flashing eye and kindling
cheek, and his voice, as he burst forth in high praise and love for his
daring brother, sounded almost as strong and thrilling as was its wont
in health; just then a struggle was heard without the tent, a scuffle,
as of a skirmish, confused voices, clashing of weapons, and war-cries.
Up started the king, with eagle glance and eager tone. 'My arms,' he
cried, 'bring me my arms! Ha hear ye that?' and sure enough, 'St. David
for De Brechin, and down with the Bruce!' resounded so close, that it
seemed as if but the curtain separated the traitor from his kinsman and
his king. Never saw I the Bruce so fearfully aroused, the rage of the
lion was upon him. 'Hear ye that?' he repeated, as, despite my
remonstrances, and these of the officers who rushed into the tent, he
sprang from the couch, and, with the rapidity of light, assumed his
long-neglected armor. 'The traitorous villain! would he beard me to my
teeth? By the heaven above us, he shall rue this insolence! Bring me my
charger. Beaten off, say ye? I doubt it not, my gallant friends; but it
is now the Bruce's turn, his kindred traitors are not far off, and we
would try their mettle now. Nay, restrain me not, these folk will work a
cure for me--there, I am a man again!' and as he stood upright, sheathed
in his glittering mail, his drawn sword in his gauntleted hand, a wild
shout of irrepressible joy burst from us all, and, caught up by the
soldiers without the tent, echoed and re-echoed through the camp. The
sudden appearance of the Bruce's charger, caparisoned for battle,
standing before his master's tent, the drums rolling for the muster, the
lightning speed with which Sir Edward Bruce, Lennox, and Hay, after
dispersing De Brechin's troop, as dust on the plain, galloped to the
royal pavilion, themselves equally at a loss to understand the bustle
there, all prepared the men-at-arms for what was to come. Eagerly did
the gallant knights remonstrate with their sovereign, conjure him to
follow the battle in his litter, rather than attempt to mount his
charger; they besought him to think what his life, his safety was to
them, and not so rashly risk it. Lord Edward did entreat him to reserve
his strength till there was more need; the field was then clear, the
foes had not appeared; but all in vain their eloquence, the king
combated it all. 'We will go seek them, brother,' cheerily answered the
king; 'we will go tell them insult to the Bruce passes not unanswered.
On, on, gallant knights, our men wax impatient.' Hastening from the
tent, he stood one moment in the sight of all his men: removing his
helmet, he smiled a gladsome greeting. Oh, what a shout rung forth from
those iron ranks! There was that noble face, pale, attenuated indeed,
but beaming on them in all its wonted animation, confidence, and love;
there was that majestic form towering again in its princely dignity,
seeming the nobler from being so long unseen. Again and again that shout
arose, till the wild birds rose screaming over our heads, in untuned,
yet exciting chorus. Nor did the fact that the king, strengthened as he
was by his own glorious soul, had in reality not bodily force enough to
mount his horse without support, take from the enthusiasm of his men,
nay, it was heightened and excited to the wildest pitch. 'For Scotland
and freedom!' shouted the king, as for one moment he rose in his
stirrups and waved his bright blade above his head. 'For Bruce and
Scotland!' swelled the answering shout. We formed, we gathered in
compact array around our leaders, loudly clashed our swords against our
shields; we marched a brief while slowly and majestically along the
plain; we neared the foe, who, with its multitude in terrible array,
awaited our coming; we saw, we hurled defiance in a shout which rent the
very air. Quicker and yet quicker we advanced; on, on--we scoured the
dusty plain, we pressed, we flew, we rushed upon the foe; the Bruce was
at our head, and with him victory. We burst through their ranks; we
compelled them, at the sword's point, to turn and fight even to the
death; we followed them foot to foot, and hand to hand, disputing every
inch of ground; they sought to retreat, to fly--but no! Five miles of
Scottish ground, five good broad miles, was that battle-field; the enemy
lay dead in heaps upon the field, the remainder fled."

"And the king!" exclaimed the knight of the mask, half springing up in
the excitement the old man's tale had aroused. "How bore he this day's
wondrous deed--was not his strength exhausted anew?"

"Aye, what of the king?" repeated many of the soldiers, who had held
their very breath while the veteran spoke, and clenched their swords, as
if they were joining in the strife he so energetically described.

"The king, my masters," replied Murdoch, "why, if it could be, he looked
yet more the mighty warrior at the close than at the commencement of the
work. We had seen him the first in the charge, in the pursuit; we had
marked his white plume waving above all others, where the strife waxed
hottest; and when we gathered round him, when the fight was done, he
was seated on the ground in truth, and there was the dew of extreme
fatigue on his brow--he had flung aside his helmet--and his cheek was
hotly flushed, and his voice, as he thanked us for our gallant conduct,
and bade us return thanks to heaven for this great victory, was somewhat
quivering; but for all that, my masters, he looked still the warrior and
the king, and his voice grew firmer and louder as he bade us have no
fears for him. He dismissed us with our hearts as full of joy and love
for him as of triumph on our humbled foes."

"No doubt," responded many voices; "but Buchan, Mowbray, De
Brechin--what came of them--were they left on the field?"

"They fled, loving their lives better than their honor; they fled, like
cowards as they were. The two first slackened not their speed till they
stood on English ground. De Brechin, ye know, held out Angus as long as
he could, and was finally made captive."

"Aye, and treated with far greater lenity than the villain deserved. He
will never be a Randolph."

"A Randolph! Not a footboy in Randolph's train but is more Randolph than
he. But thou sayest Buchan slackened not rein till he reached English
ground; he lingered long enough for yet blacker treachery, if rumor
speaks aright. Was it not said the king's life was attempted by his
orders, and by one of the Comyn's own followers?"

"Ha!" escaped Sir Amiot's lips. "Say they this?" but he evidently had
spoken involuntarily, for the momentary agitation which had accompanied
the words was instantly and forcibly suppressed.

"Aye, your worship, and it is true," replied the veteran "It was two
nights after the battle. All the camp was at rest; I was occupied as
usual, by my honored watch in my sovereign's tent. The king was sleeping
soundly, and a strange drowsiness appeared creeping over me too,
confusing all my thoughts. At first I imagined the wind was agitating a
certain corner of the tent, and my eyes, half asleep and half wakeful,
became fascinated upon it; presently, what seemed a bale of carpets,
only doubled up in an extraordinary small space, appeared within the
drapery. It moved; my senses were instantly aroused. Slowly and
cautiously the bale grew taller, then the unfolding carpet fell, and a
short, well-knit, muscular form appeared. He was clothed in those
padded jerkins and hose, plaited with steel, which are usual to those of
his rank; the steel, however, this night was covered with thin, black
stuff, evidently to assist concealment. He looked cautiously around him.
I had creeped noiselessly, and on all fours, within the shadow of the
king's couch, where I could observe the villain's movements myself
unseen. I saw a gleam of triumph twinkle in his eye, so sure he seemed
of his intended victim. He advanced; his dagger flashed above the Bruce.
With one bound, one shout, I sprang on the murderous wretch, wrenched
the dagger from his grasp, and dashed him to the earth. He struggled,
but in vain; the king started from that deep slumber, one moment gazed
around him bewildered, the next was on his feet, and by my side. The
soldiers rushed into the tent, and confusion for the moment waxed loud
and warm; but the king quelled it with a word. The villain was raised,
pinioned, brought before the Bruce, who sternly demanded what was his
intent, and who was his employer. Awhile the miscreant paused, but then,
as if spell-bound by the flashing orb upon him, confessed the whole,
aye, and more; that his master, the Earl of Buchan, had sworn a deep and
deadly oath to relax not in his hot pursuit till the life-blood of the
Bruce had avenged the death of the Red Comyn, and that, though he had
escaped now, he must fall at length, for the whole race of Comyn had
joined hands upon their chieftain's oath. The brow of the king grew
dark, terrible wrath beamed from his eyes, and it seemed for the moment
as if he would deliver up the murderous villain into the hands that
yearned to tear him piecemeal. There was a struggle, brief yet terrible,
then he spoke, and calmly, yet with a bitter stinging scorn.

"'And this is Buchan's oath,' he said. 'Ha! doth he not bravely, my
friends, to fly the battle-field, to shun us there, that hireling hands
may do a deed he dares not? For this poor fool, what shall we do with
him?'

"'Death, death--torture and death! what else befits the sacrilegious
traitor?' burst from many voices, pressing forward to seize and bear him
from the tent; but the king signed them to forbear, and oh, what a smile
took the place of his previous scorn!

"'And I say neither torture nor death, my friends,' he tried. 'What, are
we sunk so low, as to revenge this insult on a mere tool, the
instrument of a villainous master? No, no! let him go free, and tell his
