Few words were spoken among the prisoners. Their arms were free,
but their legs firmly secured with ropes; and ten armed Aztecs kept
watch over them, to see that they made no attempt to unfasten their
bonds.

One of the prisoners Roger saw, to his regret, was his friend Juan.
He was severely wounded in several places; as indeed was Roger
himself, although in the excitement of the battle he had scarce
noticed it.

"Well, lad!" the old soldier said. "This is a bad ending of our
gold seeking. Who would have thought that it was to be one's lot,
first to be murdered on the altars of a hideous god, and then to
furnish a meal to a race of savages?"

"The furnishing the meal does not trouble me," Roger replied.
"Whether one is drowned and eaten by fishes, or killed and eaten by
Aztecs, makes, as far as I can see, but little difference to one.
However, I don't quite make up my mind to the worst yet, Juan. They
must have captured a great number of us, for I saw many carried off
who are not here; besides a multitude of Tlascalans and our other
allies. I do not suppose they will sacrifice us all at once, but
are likely to take so many a day. In that case, we may have the
luck to be among the last; and before our turn comes, the Spaniards
may be masters of the town."

Juan shook his head.

"It is just as well to hope, lad; but I think the chances are next
to nothing. Even if Cortez himself gets out safe, and the troops
draw off without much further loss, it will be some days before
they will attack again, after such a maiming as we got, this time.
Even then their chances of success will be no better than they were
today; worse, in fact, for we have lost something like a sixth of
our force, beside what may have fallen in the attack from the other
side; put it at a quarter, altogether. Our natives will be
dispirited by their defeat today, and the Aztecs will have gained
in confidence.

"By Saint James, but those fellows fight well! Who would have
thought, when we saw them bowing and smiling when we first arrived
in the city, and submitting so meekly to everything, that they
could fight like fiends? Never did I see men so reckless of life.

"Pedro has fallen. I loved him as a son. But far better dead than
here."

"I am sorry, indeed, to hear that he has fallen, Juan. I feared
that he had, for he would not have let you be captured, had he been
alive.

"I don't give up all hope for ourselves. The Mexicans fight like
heroes, but in the end we must win, in spite of their valor. Even
if we do not take the town by storm, which I don't think we ever
should do, if it were provisioned, we shall take it by hunger. They
must be well-nigh starving now. In another month there will not be
a soul alive in the city.

"You do not think there is any chance of our making our escape?"

"Not unless wings could sprout out from our shoulders," Juan said,
"and we could fly through the air. You may be sure these fellows
will keep too sharp a lookout upon us to give us the shadow of a
chance; besides, if we were to get out, we could not go on foot
without being detected.

"You might manage, lad, with a dark night to hide your color, and
with the aid of a native dress, for you can speak their tongue; but
as for me, the idea is hopeless, and not to be thought of. No, no,
lad, I do not delude myself. My time has come; and I shall bear it,
I hope, like a man, and a Christian."

From time to time, Aztecs came in to see that the prisoners were
safe. From their conversation with the guards, Roger gathered that
the attack had everywhere failed, and that the Spaniards had
retired to their camps.

Late in the afternoon some priests entered. Two of the prisoners
were selected by them, their bonds cut, and they were taken away.
Soon afterwards, the sound of the great war drum reverberated
through the city.

The Spaniards in their camps started to arms, on hearing the sound;
but they were not long in understanding its meaning, for from their
camps they beheld a great procession winding up the principal
pyramid. Alvarado's camp, which was the nearest to the city, was a
short mile away from the temple; and in the clear evening air the
troops could see that there were five or six white figures among
them.

As usual, the victims were decorated with plumes of feathers, to do
honor to their own sacrifice. They were driven along with blows
and, when they reached the summit of the temple, were seized and
thrown, one by one, upon their backs upon the sacrificial stone,
which was convex, so as to give a curve to their bodies. The
principal priest then, with a sharp stone knife, cut through the
skin and flesh between two of the ribs and, plunging his hand into
the orifice, dragged out the heart, which he presented to the
figure of the god.

The sight, distant as it was, excited the Spaniards to the verge of
madness; and if it had not been for their officers, they would have
seized their weapons and rushed forward again to the attack, to
avenge the murder of their comrades.

The feelings of the captives, as they heard the sound of the drums,
the shouts of the natives, and once or twice caught the scream of
agony of their comrades, were terrible. This was the fate that
they, too, were to undergo; and men who had, a hundred times,
looked death in battle in the face, shuddered and trembled at their
approaching doom.

Each day two of their number were taken, and the same terrible
scene was gone through. Roger was rather surprised that he himself
was not one of the first selected, as his height and figure made
him specially conspicuous among his comrades; but he supposed that
he was being one of those reserved for some special festival.
Whatever the famine might be in the city, the captives were well
fed; for it was a point of honor, among the Aztecs, that all
victims offered to the gods should be in good health and condition.

The guards were changed every six hours, and on the third day, in
the officer over the relief, Roger recognized, to his surprise and
delight, his friend Bathalda. The latter, as he entered, made a
significant motion to Roger, as he caught his eye, to make no sign
that he recognized him.

The Aztecs, as usual, sat down in groups, chatting. They had no
fear whatever of the prisoners attempting to escape in the daytime,
and it was only at night that they exercised any special vigilance
in seeing that they did not attempt to unloose their bonds.
Bathalda presently sauntered up into the corner in which Roger was
sitting.

"How are my friends?" the latter asked, in a low voice.

"Well," Bathalda replied. "Cuitcatl explained to the young emperor
the circumstances under which he came to know and assist you, and
was at once restored to favor, and now commands a large body of
troops here. I have not seen the princess. She is at the palace.
Cuitcatl bade me tell you that they are working for you, and will
rescue you before the time comes for your sacrifice; but at present
the watch is too strict."

"But I may be chosen, any day," Roger said.

Bathalda shook his head.

"Cuitcatl has bribed the priests who choose the victims to leave
you until the last; so you need not feel uneasiness on that score.
Be patient and watchful. If any of your guard approach you and say,
'The time is at hand,' you will know that he is a friend. Act as he
tells you. I dare not say more, now."

Ten days passed. Juan had gone, and Roger had been much moved at
parting with him--more so, indeed, than the old soldier himself,
who had kept up firmly, and was prepared to meet his fate with
contempt for his enemies, in the assurance that his death would be
terribly avenged.

Bathalda had not reappeared. As the number of prisoners had
decreased, the guard had been diminished; and as there now only
remained Roger and one other, and both were still bound, a single
Aztec relieved the two who had, the night before, kept guard.

He stood, indifferently gazing through the loophole, until Roger's
companion fell asleep. Then he approached him and said:

"The time is at hand. Tomorrow the other will be taken. The number
will be made up from the other prisons. At night Cuitcatl will be
outside. The door here will not be bolted. You will have but one
man to watch you; but we know not whom he may be, and may not be
able to arrange with him. If we do, he will give you the password.
If not, you must deal with him. The man who will follow me is in
the secret. You must unfasten your ropes while he is here, and he
will aid you to do them up again, so that, while to the eye they
will seem secure, they can be shaken off instantly.

"Bathalda and another will accompany you. I do not know who the
other is; but I was told that you would understand."

That other Roger felt sure must be Amenche; and his heart beat
hotly, at the thought that his dear princess would share his
flight.

The hours passed quickly. The next day the last Spaniard was taken;
and no sooner had he been forced, struggling and resisting, from
the chamber; than the guard who, since he had taken up his post
four hours before, had made no sign to Roger, gave the password
agreed upon. The latter rose to his feet and, with the aid of the
native, unfastened the cords that bound his ankles together.

For half an hour he paced up and down the chamber, to restore the
circulation to his feet. Then the guard replaced the cords, but did
it in such a way that, though they seemed as tight and secure as
before, they would at a slight effort fall off, and leave him free.

At eight o'clock in the evening the guard was relieved. He had told
Roger that he was to listen for the cry of an owl outside, twice
repeated; and that upon hearing this, he would know that his
friends were without. Roger listened anxiously for the password
from his new guard; but as it did not come, he concluded that
Cuitcatl had not been able to bribe him, and that he must himself
overpower the man.

The Aztec placed himself at the loophole, and stood looking out;
turning, from time to time, to see by the light of the torch, which
was fixed close to where Roger was lying, that he was making no
attempt to release himself from his bonds.

It was not until nearly midnight that Roger heard the expected
signal. No sooner was the second call given, than he pulled the
knot which kept the cords together, raised himself noiselessly to
his feet, and sprang upon the Aztec. Taken by surprise, the man was
no more than a child in Roger's strong grasp. In a moment he was
thrown down, his cloth was twisted round his mouth, so as to
prevent any cry from escaping him, and his arms were bound behind
him with Roger's rope.

Roger then took his sword and javelin, and went to the door. As he
had been told would be the case, the outer bolts were unfastened.
Passing along a passage, he came to the outside gate. This was
securely fastened, but Roger had no difficulty in scaling the roof
of a building leaning against the outer wall; and on reaching this,
he pulled himself up and dropped down into the street beyond.

Three persons were standing at the gate, and he at once made
towards them. One ran forward with a little cry, and threw herself
into his arms. The others were, as he had expected, Cuitcatl and
Bathalda. The former saluted him warmly.

"Thank the gods you are free, Roger," he said. "I have a canoe
close at hand for you. Bathalda will accompany you and the
princess. I cannot leave. I am an Aztec, and shall fight until the
last, with our brave young emperor."

"I hope, Cuitcatl, that when the resistance is over--as it must be
before long, for I know from the talk of the guards that famine is
among you, and that hundreds are dying daily--I hope that I may be
able to aid you, as you are aiding me."

"I care not to live," Cuitcatl said. "The empire is lost."

"But there is no dishonor in that," Roger replied. "No men could
defend themselves more bravely than you have done, and there is no
disgrace in being vanquished by superior arms. I trust that you may
live, and be happy, yet."

"Let us not stand here talking," the young cazique said. "It is not
as it was before. Then you might walk through the city at midnight,
without meeting with a single person. We sleep no longer now, but
make nightly attacks on the Spaniards; and at any moment bodies of
troops may come along."

The little party moved forward, and in a minute descended the
steps. Bathalda took his place in a small canoe lying there.

"Here is a weapon which will suit you better than that sword and
javelin," he said, handing him a war club, a heavy weapon, with
pieces of sharp-pointed obsidian fixed in it.

Roger helped Amenche into the canoe, wrung Cuitcatl warmly by the
hand, and then stepped in.

"Go," the latter exclaimed. "I can hear troops approaching."

So saying, he bounded swiftly away. Bathalda sat listening for a
moment, to discover the direction from which the troops were
coming. As soon as he made out the soft tread of the shoeless feet,
he dipped his paddle in the water, and the boat glided noiselessly
away.

It was not long before they emerged from the narrow water way on to
the lake; and then the boat's head was turned in the direction in
which lay the Tlacopan causeway. Presently Amenche, who had been
sitting nestled close to Roger--too happy even to speak--sat up and
said:

"Hush!"

Bathalda ceased rowing.

"There is a large canoe coming up behind us," he said, listening
intently. "I can hear others on the lake, beyond us."

"We had better make into the shore again," Roger said, "and let
them pass us."

The canoe, however, was not very far behind; and those on board
caught sight of the little craft, as she rowed in towards shore. It
was unusual to see so small a boat at night. The idea that it might
contain a spy occurred to them, and they shouted to them to stop.

Bathalda exerted himself to the utmost, but the canoe came rapidly
up to them. As the command to stop was again disregarded, a volley
of javelins was discharged.

"We cannot escape," Bathalda said. "They will be upon us, before we
can land."

"Cease rowing," Roger said.

"Amenche, lie still, dear, at the bottom of the boat. I will deal
with them."

Seeing that the oarsmen had stopped paddling, the volley of
javelins ceased; and the canoe, which contained some twenty men,
ran alongside.

As she did so, Roger sprang on board her. Three or four of the
natives were struck down in an instant, with his terrible weapon.
The others, as soon as they recovered from their astonishment, rose
from their seats and attacked him. Their numbers were but of slight
avail. Standing in the bow of the boat, and swinging his weapon
round his head, Roger kept them off; beating down one, each time
his weapon fell. In vain they tried to close with him. His great
size, and the suddenness with which he had attacked them, acted
upon their superstitious fears. They knew not what sort of being it
was with whom they had to deal, and the terrible strength
displayed, and the instant fate that fell on all who approached
him, appalled them.

Roger soon took the offensive and, making his way along the boat,
drove them back before him. At last, when more than half their
number had fallen, the rest sprang overboard and swam to the shore.
Roger had been wounded by three or four spear thrusts, but these
had been too hastily given to penetrate very deeply.

"I am unhurt, Amenche," he said, making his way forward again, and
stepping into the canoe.

There was no reply. He stooped over, as she lay quietly there.

"She has fainted," he said.

"Row on, Bathalda. You had best give me the other paddle. I can
hear boats coming in this direction. No doubt they heard the yells.

"Skirt along the shore. We shall be unseen, close in; and if they
approach us, can take refuge in a canal."

But they passed along unnoticed. When they caught sight of the
causeway, stretching away dimly in front of them, they again rowed
out into the lake and, making a long circuit to avoid the canoes
attacking Xoloc, the guns of which were firing hotly, came down on
the causeway again in its rear.

They were hailed as they approached, for the Spaniards were all
under arms. Roger shouted that he was a friend, who had escaped
from the prison; and the Spaniards, in return, gave a shout of
welcome. In another two minutes, the canoe lay alongside the
causeway.

Bathalda sprang on shore, and held the canoe while Roger lifted
Amenche up, and stepped out. A dozen hands were held out to assist
him to climb the slippery bank.

His figure was known by them all. Many exclamations of welcome
greeted him, and many were the inquiries as to the other captives.

"I will tell you all about it, directly. Bring the torch a little
closer. I have a lady here who has fainted. We were attacked as we
came out. The fight was a sharp one, and has scared her."

A soldier brought a torch and, as he did so, Roger uttered a loud
cry. Amenche's face was bloodless, and her eyes were closed. But it
was not this that had caused Roger's cry. There was a dark stain on
her white dress, and in its center the feathered head of an arrow.
While Bathalda and Roger had escaped the missiles, with which those
in the boat heralded their attack; an arrow had struck Amenche, as
she turned, when Roger sprang on board.

So great was Roger's horror that he reeled, and would have fallen,
had not the soldiers standing round supported him.

"I think that she has but fainted from loss of blood," Bathalda
said; and Roger, refusing all assistance, carried Amenche to the
fort through the ranks of the Spaniards, who were engaged hotly
with their assailants in the canoes.

He bore her, at once, to the chamber occupied by Marina. She was up
and dressed, for the attack was a hot one, and there was no sleep
in Xoloc. She uttered a cry of welcome, and gladness, as Roger
entered.

"I have escaped, Malinche," he said; "but I fear that she has died
in saving me. I have brought her to you, as you are the only woman
here."

Marina took the girl tenderly, and laid her on a couch.

"I will see to her," she said, softly. "Leave her to me, Roger."

As Roger, blinded with tears, left the room, an officer met him at
the door, and told him that Cortez had just heard of his arrival,
and desired his presence. The general received him with great
kindness.

"It is something to see one of my comrades back again, Sancho," he
said. "I hear how sad a misfortune has befallen you; for I suppose
the lady you brought ashore was she of whom Marina spoke to me. She
told me that she did not give up all hope that you might return;
for that the princess whom you loved was in the city, and would,
she was sure, do all that she could to save your life."

"She did so, General," Roger said; "and I fear at the cost of her
own--she and a noble young cazique, who was a brother to me, when I
was living at Tezcuco."

"I will not trouble you now with questions," Cortez said; "but tell
me--do you know whether any of the other prisoners are alive? Every
evening we have marked that terrible procession to the summit of
the temple. Fifty-eight have been sacrificed, but we know not
exactly how many more remain; being ignorant which of our comrades
fell, and which were captured."

"I cannot tell," Roger replied. "I was the only one left, out of
twenty who were in prison together. If they were taken in the same
proportion from the other prisons, there can be but a few remaining
now. I was set aside until the last, because the priest who had
daily chosen out the victims had been bribed by my friend
Cuitcatl."

Roger hastened away, as soon as Cortez dismissed him, and hurried
back to Malinche's apartment. Her Mexican attendant, who was
standing outside the door, opened it when she saw him approaching;
and as she came up Malinche stole out, with her finger on her lips.

"We have taken out the arrow," she said. "She is still insensible;
but the leech thinks that it is from loss of blood, and hopes that
no vital point has been injured. More than that he cannot say, at
present.

"You had best have your own wounds attended to, now. I will have a
pile of rugs laid for you, in this little room to the left; and
will let you know if any change takes place."

"Do you think that there is any hope, Malinche?"

Malinche shook her head.

"I know not, Roger. I have already sent off to the mainland, to
fetch a leech famous for his skill in the use of herbs. Our people
have many simples of which you know nothing in Europe, and they are
very skillful in the treatment of wounds--much more so, I think,
than the white men."



Chapter 22: Home.


After having had his wounds dressed, Roger threw himself down upon
the bed that had been prepared for him, and lay tossing for hours.
Hitherto he had believed, and had often reproached himself for it,
that he had not loved Amenche as she had loved him. She had loved
him with the passion and devotion of the people of her race, and it
was no figure of speech when she said that she was ready to give
her life for him.

Roger knew that, until lately, his love had been poor by the side
of hers. From the time he had sailed from England, to his first
meeting with her, he had pictured to himself that some day, when he
came to command a ship of his own, he would marry his cousin, if
she had borne him in mind since he parted with her on Plymouth Hoe.
This dream had faded away, from the time he had first met Amenche;
and when Cacama had proposed the marriage to him, he had accepted
the offer gladly. His chance of ever leaving the country, at that
time, seemed slight; and he felt sure that he should be happy with
Amenche. Since that time, the girl's frank expression of her love
for him, her tender devotion, and her willingness to sacrifice
country, and people, and all, to throw in her lot with him, had
greatly heightened the feeling he had towards her; and he had come
to love her truly; but still, perhaps, rather with the calm earnest
affection of a brother, than the passionate devotion of a lover.

But now he knew that she had his whole heart. If she died, it
seemed of little consequence to him what became of his life. It was
for his sake that she had risked everything, had left all--friends
and home and country--and he felt that he would gladly die with
her.

Morning was breaking before Malinche came into his room.

"She is sensible," she said, "and my countryman, who is with her,
thinks that she will live."

The relief was so great that Roger burst into tears.

"Come with me," Malinche said, taking his hand. "We do not think
she knows what has happened, but she looks anxiously about the
room. She is very, very weak; but the leech thinks that if she sees
you, and knows that you are safe and well, it will rouse her and
put her in the way of recovery. You must not talk to her, or excite
her in any way."

Roger followed Malinche into her room. Amenche was lying, without a
vestige of color on her face, and with her eyes closed and her
breathing so faint that Roger, as he looked at her, thought that
she was dead.

"Take her hand and kneel down beside her," Malinche whispered.

Roger took the girl's hand. As he did so, a slight tremor ran
through her, as if she recognized his touch. Then her eyes opened.

"Amenche, my darling, do you know me?" Roger said, as he stooped
his face close to hers.

Her face brightened suddenly, and a look of intense happiness came
into her eyes.

"O Roger!" she whispered; "I dreamed that they had killed you."

"I am safe and well, as you see," he said. "They have hurt you,
darling; but you will get better, and we shall be happy together.
You must not talk, but I may stay by you, if you will keep quiet.

"Drink this first," and he handed to her a cup that the Mexican
doctor held out to him; and placing his arm under Amenche's head,
raised it and poured the liquid between her lips.

Then he laid her head down again on the pillow and, kneeling beside
her, held her hand in his.

She lay looking up into his face, with an expression of quiet
happiness, occasionally murmuring, "Dear Roger."

Presently her eyelids drooped, and in a few minutes her regular
breathing showed that she was asleep.

The Mexican doctor placed another cup of medicine within Roger's
reach, and murmured in his ear, "I think that she will do now. Give
