which she left the room conveyed the sense of an irrevocable resolution.
Lost in thought, hugging her insults, too proud to show the slightest
suffering, she went to the guard-room at the Porte Saint-Leonard and
asked where the commandant lived. She had hardly left her house when
Corentin entered it.

"Oh, Monsieur Corentin," cried Francine, "if you are interested in this
young man, save him; Mademoiselle has gone to give him up because of
this wretched letter."

Corentin took the letter carelessly and asked,--

"Which way did she go?"

"I don't know."

"Yes," he said, "I will save her from her own despair."

He disappeared, taking the letter with him. When he reached the street
he said to Galope-Chopine's boy, whom he had stationed to watch the
door, "Which way did a lady go who left the house just now?"

The boy went with him a little way and showed him the steep street which
led to the Porte Saint-Leonard. "That way," he said.

At this moment four men entered Mademoiselle de Verneuil's house, unseen
by either the boy or Corentin.

"Return to your watch," said the latter. "Play with the handles of the
blinds and see what you can inside; look about you everywhere, even on
the roof."

Corentin darted rapidly in the direction given him, and thought he
recognized Mademoiselle de Verneuil through the fog; he did, in fact,
overtake her just as she reached the guard-house.

"Where are you going?" he said; "you are pale--what has happened? Is it
right for you to be out alone? Take my arm."

"Where is the commandant?" she asked.

Hardly had the words left her lips when she heard the movement of troops
beyond the Porte Saint-Leonard and distinguished Hulot's gruff voice in
the tumult.

"God's thunder!" he cried, "I never saw such fog as this for a
reconnaissance! The Gars must have ordered the weather."

"What are you complaining of?" said Mademoiselle de Verneuil, grasping
his arm. "The fog will cover vengeance as well as perfidy. Commandant,"
she added, in a low voice, "you must take measures at once so that the
Gars may not escape us."

"Is he at your house?" he asked, in a tone which showed his amazement.

"Not yet," she replied; "but give me a safe man and I will send him to
you when the marquis comes."

"That's a mistake," said Corentin; "a soldier will alarm him, but a boy,
and I can find one, will not."

"Commandant," said Mademoiselle de Verneuil, "thanks to this fog which
you are cursing, you can surround my house. Put soldiers everywhere.
Place a guard in the church to command the esplanade on which the
windows of my salon open. Post men on the Promenade; for though the
windows of my bedroom are twenty feet above the ground, despair does
sometimes give a man the power to jump even greater distances safely.
Listen to what I say. I shall probably send this gentleman out of the
door of my house; therefore see that only brave men are there to meet
him; for," she added, with a sigh, "no one denies him courage; he will
assuredly defend himself."

"Gudin!" called the commandant. "Listen, my lad," he continued in a low
voice when the young man joined him, "this devil of a girl is betraying
the Gars to us--I am sure I don't know why, but that's no matter. Take
ten men and place yourself so as to hold the cul-de-sac in which the
house stands; be careful that no one sees either you or your men."

"Yes, commandant, I know the ground."

"Very good," said Hulot. "I'll send Beau-Pied to let you know when
to play your sabres. Try to meet the marquis yourself, and if you can
manage to kill him, so that I sha'n't have to shoot him judicially, you
shall be a lieutenant in a fortnight or my name's not Hulot."

Gudin departed with a dozen soldiers.

"Do you know what you have done?" said Corentin to Mademoiselle de
Verneuil, in a low voice.

She made no answer, but looked with a sort of satisfaction at the
men who were starting, under command of the sub-lieutenant, for the
Promenade, while others, following the next orders given by Hulot, were
to post themselves in the shadows of the church of Saint-Leonard.

"There are houses adjoining mine," she said; "you had better surround
them all. Don't lay up regrets by neglecting a single precaution."

"She is mad," thought Hulot.

"Was I not a prophet?" asked Corentin in his ear. "As for the boy
I shall send with her, he is the little gars with a bloody foot;
therefore--"

He did not finish his sentence, for Mademoiselle de Verneuil by a sudden
movement darted in the direction of her house, whither he followed her,
whistling like a man supremely satisfied. When he overtook her she was
already at the door of her house, where Galope-Chopine's little boy was
on the watch.

"Mademoiselle," said Corentin, "take the lad with you; you cannot have
a more innocent or active emissary. Boy," he added, "when you have seen
the Gars enter the house come to me, no matter who stops you; you'll
find me at the guard-house and I'll give you something that will make
you eat cake for the rest of your days."

At these words, breathed rather than said in the child's ear, Corentin
felt his hand squeezed by that of the little Breton, who followed
Mademoiselle de Verneuil into the house.

"Now, my good friends, you can come to an explanation as soon as you
like," cried Corentin when the door was closed. "If you make love, my
little marquis, it will be on your winding-sheet."

But Corentin could not bring himself to let that fatal house completely
out of sight, and he went to the Promenade, where he found the
commandant giving his last orders. By this time it was night. Two hours
went by; but the sentinels posted at intervals noticed nothing that
led them to suppose the marquis had evaded the triple line of men
who surrounded the three sides by which the tower of Papegaut was
accessible. Twenty times had Corentin gone from the Promenade to the
guard-room, always to find that his little emissary had not appeared.
Sunk in thought, the spy paced the Promenade slowly, enduring the
martyrdom to which three passions, terrible in their clashing, subject
a man,--love, avarice, and ambition. Eight o'clock struck from all the
towers in the town. The moon rose late. Fog and darkness wrapped in
impenetrable gloom the places where the drama planned by this man
was coming to its climax. He was able to silence the struggle of his
passions as he walked up and down, his arms crossed, and his eyes fixed
on the windows which rose like the luminous eyes of a phantom above the
rampart. The deep silence was broken only by the rippling of the Nancon,
by the regular and lugubrious tolling from the belfries, by the heavy
steps of the sentinels or the rattle of arms as the guard was hourly
relieved.

"The night's as thick as a wolf's jaw," said the voice of Pille-Miche.

"Go on," growled Marche-a-Terre, "and don't talk more than a dead dog."

"I'm hardly breathing," said the Chouan.

"If the man who made that stone roll down wants his heart to serve as
the scabbard for my knife he'll do it again," said Marche-a-Terre, in a
low voice scarcely heard above the flowing of the river.

"It was I," said Pille-Miche.

"Well, then, old money-bag, down on your stomach," said the other, "and
wriggle like a snake through a hedge, or we shall leave our carcasses
behind us sooner than we need."

"Hey, Marche-a-Terre," said the incorrigible Pille-Miche, who was using
his hands to drag himself along on his stomach, and had reached the
level of his comrade's ear. "If the Grande-Garce is to be believed
there'll be a fine booty to-day. Will you go shares with me?"

"Look here, Pille-Miche," said Marche-a-Terre stopping short on the flat
of his stomach. The other Chouans, who were accompanying the two men,
did the same, so wearied were they with the difficulties they had met
with in climbing the precipice. "I know you," continued Marche-a-Terre,
"for a Jack Grab-All who would rather give blows than receive them when
there's nothing else to be done. We have not come here to grab dead
men's shoes; we are devils against devils, and sorrow to those whose
claws are too short. The Grande-Garce has sent us here to save the
Gars. He is up there; lift your dog's nose and see that window above the
tower."

Midnight was striking. The moon rose, giving the appearance of white
smoke to the fog. Pille-Miche squeezed Marche-a-Terre's arm and silently
showed him on the terrace just above them, the triangular iron of
several shining bayonets.

"The Blues are there already," said Pille-Miche; "we sha'n't gain
anything by force."

"Patience," replied Marche-a-Terre; "if I examined right this morning,
we must be at the foot of the Papegaut tower between the ramparts and
the Promenade,--that place where they put the manure; it is like a
feather-bed to fall on."

"If Saint-Labre," remarked Pille-Miche, "would only change into cider
the blood we shall shed to-night the citizens might lay in a good stock
to-morrow."

Marche-a-Terre laid his large hand over his friend's mouth; then an
order muttered by him went from rank to rank of the Chouans suspended
as they were in mid-air among the brambles of the slate rocks. Corentin,
walking up and down the esplanade had too practiced an ear not to hear
the rustling of the shrubs and the light sound of pebbles rolling down
the sides of the precipice. Marche-a-Terre, who seemed to possess the
gift of seeing in darkness, and whose senses, continually in action,
were acute as those of a savage, saw Corentin; like a trained dog he had
scented him. Fouche's diplomatist listened but heard nothing; he looked
at the natural wall of rock and saw no signs. If the confusing gleam of
the fog enabled him to see, here and there, a crouching Chouan, he took
him, no doubt, for a fragment of rock, for these human bodies had all
the appearance of inert nature. This danger to the invaders was of short
duration. Corentin's attention was diverted by a very distinct noise
coming from the other end of the Promenade, where the rock wall ended
and a steep descent leading down to the Queen's Staircase began. When
Corentin reached the spot he saw a figure gliding past it as if by
magic. Putting out his hand to grasp this real or fantastic being, who
was there, he supposed, with no good intentions, he encountered the soft
and rounded figure of a woman.

"The devil take you!" he exclaimed, "if any one else had met you, you'd
have had a ball through your head. What are you doing, and where are you
going, at this time of night? Are you dumb? It certainly is a woman," he
said to himself.

The silence was suspicious, but the stranger broke it by saying, in a
voice which suggested extreme fright, "Ah, my good man, I'm on my way
back from a wake."

"It is the pretended mother of the marquis," thought Corentin. "I'll see
what she's about. Well, go that way, old woman," he replied, feigning
not to recognize her. "Keep to the left if you don't want to be shot."

He stood quite still; then observing that Madame du Gua was making
for the Papegaut tower, he followed her at a distance with diabolical
caution. During this fatal encounter the Chouans had posted themselves
on the manure towards which Marche-a-Terre had guided them.

"There's the Grande-Garce!" thought Marche-a-Terre, as he rose to his
feet against the tower wall like a bear.

"We are here," he said to her in a low voice.

"Good," she replied, "there's a ladder in the garden of that house about
six feet above the manure; find it, and the Gars is saved. Do you see
that small window up there? It is in the dressing-room; you must get to
it. This side of the tower is the only one not watched. The horses are
ready; if you can hold the passage over the Nancon, a quarter of an hour
will put him out of danger--in spite of his folly. But if that woman
tries to follow him, stab her."

Corentin now saw several of the forms he had hitherto supposed to be
stones moving cautiously but swiftly. He went at once to the guard-room
at the Porte Saint-Leonard, where he found the commandant fully dressed
and sound asleep on a camp bed.

"Let him alone," said Beau-Pied, roughly, "he has only just lain down."

"The Chouans are here!" cried Corentin, in Hulot's ear.

"Impossible! but so much the better," cried the old soldier, still half
asleep; "then he can fight."

When Hulot reached the Promenade Corentin pointed out to him the
singular position taken by the Chouans.

"They must have deceived or strangled the sentries I placed between the
castle and the Queen's Staircase. Ah! what a devil of a fog! However,
patience! I'll send a squad of men under a lieutenant to the foot of the
rock. There is no use attacking them where they are, for those animals
are so hard they'd let themselves roll down the precipice without
breaking a limb."

The cracked clock of the belfry was ringing two when the commandant
got back to the Promenade after giving these orders and taking every
military precaution to seize the Chouans. The sentries were doubled and
Mademoiselle de Verneuil's house became the centre of a little army.
Hulot found Corentin absorbed in contemplation of the window which
overlooked the tower.

"Citizen," said the commandant, "I think the _ci-devant_ has fooled us;
there's nothing stirring."

"He is there," cried Corentin, pointing to the window. "I have seen a
man's shadow on the curtain. But I can't think what has become of that
boy. They must have killed him or locked him up. There! commandant,
don't you see that? there's a man's shadow; come, come on!"

"I sha'n't seize him in bed; thunder of God! He will come out if he
went in; Gudin won't miss him," cried Hulot, who had his own reasons for
waiting till the Gars could defend himself.

"Commandant, I enjoin you, in the name of the law to proceed at once
into that house."

"You're a fine scoundrel to try to make me do that."

Without showing any resentment at the commandant's language, Corentin
said coolly: "You will obey me. Here is an order in good form, signed
by the minister of war, which will force you to do so." He drew a paper
from his pocket and held it out. "Do you suppose we are such fools as
to leave that girl to do as she likes? We are endeavoring to suppress a
civil war, and the grandeur of the purpose covers the pettiness of the
means."

"I take the liberty, citizen, of sending you to--you understand me?
Enough. To the right-about, march! Let me alone, or it will be the worse
for you."

"But read that," persisted Corentin.

"Don't bother me with your functions," cried Hulot, furious at receiving
orders from a man he regarded as contemptible.

At this instant Galope-Chopine's boy suddenly appeared among them like a
rat from a hole.

"The Gars has started!" he cried.

"Which way?"

"The rue Saint-Leonard."

"Beau-Pied," said Hulot in a whisper to the corporal who was near him,
"go and tell your lieutenant to draw in closer round the house, and make
ready to fire. Left wheel, forward on the tower, the rest of you!" he
shouted.

To understand the conclusion of this fatal drama we must re-enter
the house with Mademoiselle de Verneuil when she returned to it after
denouncing the marquis to the commandant.

When passions reach their crisis they bring us under the dominion of far
greater intoxication than the petty excitements of wine or opium. The
lucidity then given to ideas, the delicacy of the high-wrought senses,
produce the most singular and unexpected effects. Some persons when
they find themselves under the tyranny of a single thought can see with
extraordinary distinctness objects scarcely visible to others, while at
the same time the most palpable things become to them almost as if they
did not exist. When Mademoiselle de Verneuil hurried, after reading
the marquis's letter, to prepare the way for vengeance just as she had
lately been preparing all for love, she was in that stage of mental
intoxication which makes real life like the life of a somnambulist. But
when she saw her house surrounded, by her own orders, with a triple line
of bayonets a sudden flash of light illuminated her soul. She judged her
conduct and saw with horror that she had committed a crime. Under the
first shock of this conviction she sprang to the threshold of the door
and stood there irresolute, striving to think, yet unable to follow out
her reasoning. She knew so vaguely what had happened that she tried in
vain to remember why she was in the antechamber, and why she was leading
a strange child by the hand. A million of stars were floating in the air
before her like tongues of fire. She began to walk about, striving to
shake off the horrible torpor which laid hold of her; but, like one
asleep, no object appeared to her under its natural form or in its
own colors. She grasped the hand of the little boy with a violence not
natural to her, dragging him along with such precipitate steps that she
seemed to have the motions of a madwoman. She saw neither persons nor
things in the salon as she crossed it, and yet she was saluted by three
men who made way to let her pass.

"That must be she," said one of them.

"She is very handsome," exclaimed another, who was a priest.

"Yes," replied the first; "but how pale and agitated--"

"And beside herself," said the third; "she did not even see us."

At the door of her own room Mademoiselle de Verneuil saw the smiling
face of Francine, who whispered to her: "He is here, Marie."

Mademoiselle de Verneuil awoke, reflected, looked at the child whose
hand she held, remembered all, and replied to the girl: "Shut up that
boy; if you wish me to live do not let him escape you."

As she slowly said the words her eyes were fixed on the door of her
bedroom, and there they continued fastened with so dreadful a fixedness
that it seemed as if she saw her victim through the wooden panels. Then
she gently opened it, passed through and closed it behind her without
turning round, for she saw the marquis standing before the fireplace.
His dress, without being too choice, had the look of careful arrangement
which adds so much to the admiration which a woman feels for her lover.
All her self-possession came back to her at the sight of him. Her lips,
rigid, although half-open, showed the enamel of her white teeth and
formed a smile that was fixed and terrible rather than voluptuous. She
walked with slow steps toward the young man and pointed with her finger
to the clock.

"A man who is worthy of love is worth waiting for," she said with
deceptive gaiety.

Then, overcome with the violence of her emotions, she dropped upon the
sofa which was near the fireplace.

"Dear Marie, you are so charming when you are angry," said the marquis,
sitting down beside her and taking her hand, which she let him take, and
entreating a look, which she refused him. "I hope," he continued, in a
tender, caressing voice, "that my wife will not long refuse a glance to
her loving husband."

Hearing the words she turned abruptly and looked into his eyes.

"What is the meaning of that dreadful look?" he said, laughing. "But
your hand is burning! oh, my love, what is it?"

"Your love!" she repeated, in a dull, changed voice.

"Yes," he said, throwing himself on his knees beside her and taking her
two hands which he covered with kisses. "Yes, my love--I am thine for
life."

She pushed him violently away from her and rose. Her features
contracted, she laughed as mad people laugh, and then she said to him:
"You do not mean one word of all you are saying, base man--baser than
the lowest villain." She sprang to the dagger which was lying beside
a flower-vase, and let it sparkle before the eyes of the amazed young
marquis. "Bah!" she said, flinging it away from her, "I do not respect
