
Indeed, the levying of blackmail was, before 1745, practised by several
chiefs of very high rank, who, in doing so, contended that they were
lending the laws the assistance of their arms and swords, and affording
a protection which could not be obtained from the magistracy in
the disturbed state of the country. The author has seen a memoir of
Mac-Pherson of Cluny, chief of that ancient clan, from which it appears
that he levied protection-money to a very large amount, which was
willingly paid even by some of his most powerful neighbours. A gentleman
of this clan hearing a clergyman hold forth to his congregation on the
crime of theft, interrupted the preacher to assure him, he might leave
the enforcement of such doctrines to Cluny Mac-Pherson, whose broadsword
would put a stop to theft sooner than all the sermons of all the
ministers of the synod.


NOTE 11.--ROB ROY

An adventure, very similar to what is here stated, actually befell
the late Mr. Abercromby of Tullibody, grandfather of the present Lord
Abercromby, and father of the celebrated Sir Ralph. When this
gentlemen, who lived to a very advanced period of life, first settled in
Stirlingshire, his cattle were repeatedly driven off by the celebrated
Rob Roy, or some of his gang; and at length he was obliged, after
obtaining a proper safe-conduct, to make the Cateran such a visit as
that of Waverley to Bean Lean in the text. Rob received him with much
courtesy, and made many apologies for the accident, which must have
happened, he said, through some mistake. Mr. Abercromby was regaled with
collops from two of his own cattle, which were hung up by the heels in
the cavern, and was dismissed in perfect safety, after having agreed to
pay in future a small sum of blackmail, in consideration of which Rob
Roy not only undertook to forbear his herds in future, but to replace
any that should be stolen from him by other freebooters. Mr. Abercromby
said, Rob Roy affected to consider him as a friend to the Jacobite
interest, and a sincere enemy to the Union. Neither of these
circumstances were true; but the laird thought it quite unnecessary
to undeceive his Highland host at the risk of bringing on a political
dispute in such a situation. This anecdote I received many years since
(about 1792) from the mouth of the venerable gentleman who was concerned
in it.


NOTE 12.--KIND GALLOWS OF CRIEFF

This celebrated gibbet was, in the memory of the last generation, still
standing at the western end of the town of Crieff, in Perthshire. Why
it was called the kind gallows, we are unable to inform the reader with
certainty; but it is alleged that the Highlanders used to touch their
bonnets as they passed a place which had been fatal to many of their
countrymen, with the ejaculation--'God bless her nain sell, and the Teil
tamn you!' It may therefore have been called kind, as being a sort
of native or kindred place of doom to those who suffered there, as in
fulfilment of a natural destiny.


NOTE 13.--CATERANS

The story of the bridegroom carried off by Caterans on his bridal-day
is taken from one which was told to the author by the late Laird of
Mac-Nab, many years since. To carry off persons from the Lowlands, and
to put them to ransom, was a common practice with the wild Highlanders,
as it is said to be at the present day with the banditti in the south of
Italy. Upon the occasion alluded to, a party of Caterans carried off
the bridegroom, and secreted him in some cave near the mountain of
Schehallion. The young man caught the small-pox before his ransom could
be agreed on; and whether it was the fine cool air of the place, or the
want of medical attendance, Mac-Nab did not pretend to be positive; but
so it was, that the prisoner recovered, his ransom was paid, and he was
restored to his friends and bride, but always considered the Highland
robbers as having saved his life by their treatment of his malady.


NOTE 14.--RE-PURCHASE OF FORFEITED ESTATES

This happened on many occasions. Indeed, it was not till after the total
destruction of the clan influence, after 1745, that purchasers could be
found who offered a fair price for the estates forfeited in 1715,
which were then brought to sale by the creditors of the York-Buildings
Company, who had purchased the whole, or greater part, from Government
at a very small price. Even so late as the period first mentioned,
the prejudices of the public in favour of the heirs of the forfeited
families threw various impediments in the way of intending purchasers of
such property.


NOTE 15.--HIGHLAND POLICY

This sort of political game ascribed to Mac-Ivor was in reality played
by several Highland chiefs, the celebrated Lord Lovat in particular, who
used that kind of finesse to the uttermost. The Laird of Mac-- was also
captain of an independent company, but valued the sweets of present pay
too well to incur the risk of losing them in the Jacobite cause. His
martial consort raised his clan, and headed it in 1745. But the chief
himself would have nothing to do with king-making, declaring himself for
that monarch, and no other, who gave the Laird of Mac-- 'half a guinea
the day, and half a guinea the morn.'


NOTE 16.--HIGHLAND DISCIPLINE

In explanation of the military exercise observed at the Castle of
Glennaquoich, the author begs to remark, that the Highlanders were not
only well practised in the use of the broadsword, firelock, and most of
the manly sports and trials of strength common throughout Scotland, but
also used a peculiar sort of drill, suited to their own dress and mode
of warfare. There were, for instance, different modes of disposing
the plaid,--one when on a peaceful journey, another when danger was
apprehended; one way of enveloping themselves in it when expecting
undisturbed repose, and another which enabled them to start up with
sword and pistol in hand on the slightest alarm.

Previous to 1720, or thereabouts, the belted plaid was universally worn,
in which the portion which surrounded the middle of the wearer, and
that which was flung around his shoulders, were all of the same piece of
tartan. In a desperate onset, all was thrown away, and the clan charged
bare beneath the doublet, save for an artificial arrangement of the
shirt, which, like that of the Irish, was always ample, and for the
sporran-mollach, or goat's-skin purse.

The manner of handling the pistol and dirk was also part of the Highland
manual exercise, which the author has seen gone through by men who had
learned it in their youth.


NOTE 17.--HIGHLAND ABHORRENCE OF PORK

Pork, or swine's flesh, in any shape, was, till of late years, much
abominated by the Scotch, nor is it yet a favourite food amongst them.
King Jamie carried this prejudice to England, and is known to have
abhorred pork almost as much as he did tobacco. Ben Jonson has recorded
this peculiarity, where the gipsy in a masque, examining the king's
hand, says,--

--'you should, by this line, Love a horse, and a hound, but no part of a
swine.'--THE GYPSIES METAMORPHOSED.

James's own proposed banquet for the devil was a loin of pork and a poll
of ling, with a pipe of tobacco for digestion.


NOTE 18.--A HIGHLAND CHIEF'S DINNER-TABLE

In the number of persons of all ranks who assembled at the same table,
though by no means to discuss the same fare, the Highland Chiefs
only retained a custom which had been formerly universally observed
throughout Scotland. 'I myself,' says the traveller Fynes Morrison,
in the end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, the scene being the Lowlands of
Scotland, 'was at a knight's house, who had many servants to attend him,
that brought in his meat with their heads covered with blue caps, the
table being more than half furnished with great platters of porridge
each having a little piece of sodden meat. And when the table was
served, the servants did sit down with us; but the upper mess, instead
of porridge, had a pullet, with some prunes in the broth.'--TRAVELS, p.
155.

Till within this last century, the farmers, even of a respectable
condition, dined with their work-people. The difference betwixt those of
high degree was ascertained by the place of the party above or below
the salt, or, sometimes, by a line drawn with chalk on the dining-table.
Lord Lovat, who knew well how to feed the vanity and restrain the
appetites of his clansmen, allowed each sturdy Fraser, who had the
slightest pretension to be a Duinhe-wassel, the full honour of the
sitting, but, at the same time, took care that his young kinsmen did not
acquire at his table any taste for outlandish luxuries. His Lordship was
always ready with some honourable apology, why foreign wines and French
brandy--delicacies which he conceived might sap the hardy habits of his
cousins--should not circulate past an assigned point on the table.


NOTE 19.--CONAN THE JESTER

In the Irish ballads relating to Fion (the Fingal of Mac-Pherson), there
occurs, as in the primitive poetry of most nations, a cycle of heroes,
each of whom has some distinguishing attribute: upon these qualities,
and the adventures of those possessing them, many proverbs are formed
which are still current in the Highlands. Among other characters, Conan
is distinguished as in some respects a kind of Thersites, but brave and
daring even to rashness. He had made a vow that he would never take a
blow without returning it; and having, like other heroes of antiquity,
descended to the infernal regions, he received a cuff from the
Arch-fiend; who presided there, which he instantly returned, using the
expression in the text. Sometimes the proverb is worded thus:--'Claw
for claw, and the devil take the shortest nails, as Conan said to the
devil.'


NOTE 20.--WATERFALL

The description of the waterfall mentioned in this chapter is taken from
that of Ledeard, at the farm so called on the northern side of Lochard,
and near the head of the Lake, four or five miles from Aberfoyle. It is
upon a small scale, but otherwise one of the most exquisite cascades
it is possible to behold. The appearance of Flora with the harp, as
described, has been justly censured as too theatrical and affected for
the ladylike simplicity of her character. But something may be allowed
to her French education, in which point and striking effect always make
a considerable object.


NOTE 21.--MAC-FARLANE'S LANTERN

The clan of Mac-Farlane, occupying the fastnesses of the western side
of Loch Lomond, were great depredators on the Low Country; and as their
excursions were made usually by night, the moon was proverbially called
their lantern. Their celebrated pibroch of HOGGIL NAM BO, which is the
name of their gathering tune, intimates similar practices,--the sense
being--

     We are bound to drive the bullocks,
     All by hollows, hirsts, and hillocks,
     Through the sleet and through the rain;
     When the moon is beaming low
     On frozen lake and hills of snow,
     Bold and heartily we go;
     And all for little gain.


NOTE 22.--CASTLE OF DOUNE

This noble ruin is dear to my recollection, from associations which have
been long and painfully broken. It holds a commanding station on the
banks of the river Teith, and has been one of the largest castles in
Scotland. Murdock, Duke of Albany, the founder of this stately pile,
was beheaded on the Castle-hill of Stirling, from which he might see the
towers of Doune, the monument of his fallen greatness.

In 1745-6, as stated in the text, a garrison on the part of the
Chevalier was put into the castle, then less ruinous than at present. It
was commanded by Mr. Stewart of Balloch, as governor for Prince Charles
he was a man of property near Callander. This castle became at that time
the actual scene of a romantic escape made by John Home, the author of
Douglas, and some other prisoners, who, having been taken at the battle
of Falkirk, were confined there by the insurgents. The poet, who had in
his own mind a large stock of that romantic and enthusiastic spirit of
adventure, which he has described as animating the youthful hero of his
drama, devised and undertook the perilous enterprise of escaping from
his prison. He inspired his companions with his sentiments and when
every attempt at open force was deemed hopeless, they resolved to twist
their bed-clothes into ropes, and thus to descend. Four persons, with
Home himself, reached the ground in safety. But the rope broke with the
fifth, who was a tall lusty man. The sixth was Thomas Barrow, a brave
young Englishman, a particular friend of Home's. Determined to take the
risk, even in such unfavourable circumstances, Barrow committed himself
to the broken rope, slid down on it as far as it could assist him, and
then let himself drop. His friends beneath succeeded in breaking his
fall. Nevertheless, he dislocated his ankle, and had several of his ribs
broken. His companions, however, were able to bear him off in safety.

The Highlanders next morning sought for their prisoners with great
activity. An old gentleman told the author he remembered seeing the
commander Stewart,

Bloody with spurring, fiery red with haste,

riding furiously through the country in quest of the fugitives.


NOTE 23.--JACOBITE SENTIMENTS

The Jacobite sentiments were general among the western counties, and in
Wales. But although the great families of the Wynnes, the Wyndhams, and
others, had come under an actual obligation to join Prince Charles if
he should land, they had done so under the express stipulation, that he
should be assisted by an auxiliary army of French, without which they
foresaw the enterprise would be desperate. Wishing well to his cause,
therefore, and watching an opportunity to join him, they did not,
nevertheless, think themselves bound in honour to do so, as he was only
supported by a body of wild mountaineers, speaking an uncouth dialect,
and wearing a singular dress. The race up to Derby struck them with more
dread than admiration. But it was difficult to say what the effect might
have been, had either the battle of Preston or Falkirk been fought and
won during the advance into England.


NOTE 24.--THE CHEVALIER'S IRISH OFFICERS

Divisions early showed themselves in the Chevalier's little army, not
only amongst the independent chieftains, who were far too proud to brook
subjection to each other, but betwixt the Scotch and Charles's governor
O'Sullivan, an Irishman by birth, who, with some of his countrymen
bred in the Irish Brigade in the service of the King of France, had an
influence with the Adventurer much resented by the Highlanders, who
were sensible that their own clans made the chief, or rather the only
strength of his enterprise. There was a feud, also, between Lord George
Murray, and James Murray of Broughton, the Prince's secretary, whose
disunion greatly embarrassed the affairs of the Adventurer. In general,
a thousand different pretensions divided their little army, and finally
contributed in no small degree to its overthrow.


NOTE 25.--FIELD-PIECE IN THE HIGHLAND ARMY

This circumstance, which is historical, as well as the description that
precedes it, will remind the reader of the war of La Vendee, in which
the royalists, consisting chiefly of insurgent peasantry, attached a
prodigious and even superstitious interest to the possession of a piece
of brass ordnance, which they called Marie Jeanne.

The Highlanders of an early period were afraid of cannon, with the noise
and effect of which they were totally unacquainted. It was by means
of three or four small pieces of artillery that the Earl of Huntly and
Errol, in James VI's time, gained a great victory at Glenlivat, over a
numerous Highland army, commanded by the Earl of Argyle. At the battle
of the Bridge of Dee, General Middleton obtained by his artillery a
similar success, the Highlanders not being able to stand the discharge
of MUSKET'S-MOTHER, which was the name they bestowed on great guns. In
an old ballad on the battle of the Bridge of Dee, these verses occur:--

     The Highlandmen are pretty men
     For handling sword and shield,
     But yet they are but simple men
     To stand a stricken field.

     The Highlandmen are pretty men
     For target and claymore,
     But yet they are but naked men
     To face the cannon's roar.

     For the cannons roar on a summer night
     Like thunder in the air;
     Was never man in Highland garb
     Would face the cannon fair.

But the Highlanders of 1745 had got far beyond the simplicity of their
forefathers, and showed throughout the whole war how little they dreaded
artillery, although the common people still attached some consequence to
the possession of the field-piece which led to this disquisition.


NOTE 26.--ANDERSON OF WHITBURGH

The faithful friend who pointed out the pass by which the Highlanders
moved from Tranent to Seaton, was Robert Anderson, Junior, of Whitburgh,
a gentleman of property in East Lothian. He had been interrogated by the
Lord George Murray concerning the possibility of crossing the uncouth
and marshy piece of ground which divided the armies, and which he
described as impracticable. When dismissed, he recollected that there
was a circuitous path leading eastward through the marsh into the
plain, by which the Highlanders might turn the flank of Sir John Cope's
position, without being exposed to the enemy's fire. Having mentioned
his opinion to Mr. Hepburn of Keith, who instantly saw its importance,
he was encouraged by that gentleman to awake Lord George Murray, and
communicate the idea to him. Lord George received the information with
grateful thanks, and instantly awakened Prince Charles, who was sleeping
in the field with a bunch of peas under his head. The Adventurer
received with alacrity the news that there was a possibility of bringing
an excellently provided army to a decisive battle with his own irregular
forces. His joy on the occasion was not very consistent with the charge
of cowardice brought against him by Chevalier Johnstone, a discontented
follower, whose Memoirs possess at least as much of a romantic as a
historical character. Even by the account of the Chevalier himself, the
Prince was at the head of the second line of the Highland army during
the battle, of which he says, 'It was gained with such rapidity, that in
the second line, where I was still by the side of the Prince, we saw no
other enemy than those who were lying on the ground killed and wounded,
THOUGH WE WERE NOT MORE THAN FIFTY PACES BEHIND OUR FIRST LINE, RUNNING
ALWAYS AS FAST AS WE COULD TO OVERTAKE THEM.'

This passage in the Chevalier's Memoirs places the Prince within fifty
paces of the best of the battle, a position which would never have been
the choice of one unwilling to take a share of its dangers. Indeed,
unless the chiefs had complied with the young Adventurer's proposal
to lead the van in person, it does not appear that he could have been
deeper in the action.


NOTE 27.--DEATH OF COLONEL GARDINER

The death of this good Christian and gallant man is thus given by
his affectionate biographer Dr. Doddridge, from the evidence of
eye-witnesses:--

'He continued all night under arms, wrapped up in his cloak, and
generally sheltered under a rick of barley, which happened to be in the
field. About three in the morning he called-his domestic servants to
him, of which there were four in waiting. He dismissed three of them
with most affectionate Christian advice, and such solemn charges
relating to the performance of their duty and the care of their souls,
as seemed plainly to intimate that he apprehended it was at least very
probable he was taking his last farewell of them. There is great reason
to believe that he spent the little remainder of the time, which could
not be much above an hour, in those devout exercises of soul which had
been so long habitual to him and to which so many circumstances did then
concur to call him. The army was alarmed, by break of day, by the noise
of the rebels' approach, and the attack was made before sunrise, yet
when it was light enough to discern what passed. As soon as the enemy
came within gunshot they made a furious fire; and it is said that the
dragoons which constituted the left wing immediately fled. The Colonel,
at the beginning of the onset, which in the whole lasted but a few
minutes, received a wound by a bullet in his left breast, which made him
give a sudden spring in his saddle upon which his servant, who led the
horse, would have persuaded him to retreat, but he said it was only a
wound in the flesh, and fought on, though he presently after received a
shot in his right thigh. In the meantime, it was discerned that some
of the enemy fell by him, and particularly one man, who had made him a
treacherous visit but a few days before, with great profession of zeal
for the present establishment.

'Events of this kind pass in less time than the description of them can
be written, or than it can be read. The Colonel was for a few
moments supported by his men, and particularly by that worthy person
Lieutenant-Colonel Whitney, who was shot through the arm here, and a
few months after fell nobly at the battle of Falkirk, and by Lieutenant
West, a man of distinguished bravery, as also by about fifteen dragoons,
who stood by him to the last. But after a faint fire, the regiment in
general was seized with a panic; and though their Colonel and some other
gallant officers did what they could to rally them once or twice, they
at last took a precipitate flight. And just in the moment when Colonel
Gardiner seemed to be making a pause to deliberate what duty required
him to do in such circumstances, an accident happened, which must, I
think, in the judgement of every worthy and generous man, be allowed a
sufficient apology for exposing his life to so great hazard, when his
regiment had left him. He saw a party of the foot, who were then bravely
fighting near him, and whom he was ordered to support, had no officer to
head them; upon which he said eagerly, in the hearing of the person from
whom I had this account, "These brave fellows will be cut to pieces
for want of a commander," or words to that effect; which while he was
speaking, he rode up to them and cried out, "Fire on, my lads, and fear
nothing." But just as the words were out of his mouth, a Highlander
advanced towards him with a scythe fastened to a long pole, with which
he gave him so dreadful a wound on his right arm, that his sword dropped
out of his hand; and at the same time several others coming about him
while he was thus dreadfully entangled with that cruel weapon, he was
dragged off from his horse. The moment he fell, another Highlander, who,
if the king's evidence at Carlisle may be credited (as I know not why
they should not, though the unhappy creature died denying it), was
one Mac-Naught, who was executed about a year after, gave him a stroke
either with a broadsword or a Lochaber-axe (for my informant could
not exactly distinguish) on the hinder part of his head, which was the
mortal blow. All that his faithful attendant saw further at this time
was, that, as his hat was falling off, he took it in his left hand, and
waved it as a signal to him to retreat, and added what were the last
words he ever heard him speak, "Take care of yourself," upon which the
servant retired.'--SOME REMARKABLE PASSAGES IN THE LIFE OF COLONEL JAMES
GARDINER, BY P. DODDRIDGE, D.D., London, 1747, p. 187.

I may remark on this extract, that it confirms the account given in
the text of the resistance offered by some of the English infantry.
Surprised by a force of a peculiar and unusual description, their
opposition could not be long or formidable, especially as they
were deserted by the cavalry, and those who undertook to manage the
artillery. But although the affair was soon decided, I have always
understood that many of the infantry showed an inclination to do their
duty.


NOTE 28.-THE LAIRD OF BALMAWHAPPLE

It is scarcely necessary to say that the character of this brutal
young Laird is entirely imaginary. A gentleman, however, who resembled
Balmawhapple in the article of courage only, fell at Preston in
the manner described. A Perthshire gentleman of high honour and
respectability, one of the handful of cavalry who followed the fortunes
of Charles Edward, pursued the fugitive dragoons almost alone till
near St. Clement's Wells, where the efforts of some of the officers had
prevailed on a few of them to make a momentary stand. Perceiving at this
moment that they were pursued by only one man and a couple of servants,
they turned upon him and cut him down with their swords. I remember,
when a child, sitting on his grave, where the grass long grew rank and
green, distinguishing it from the rest of the field. A female of the
family then residing at St. Clement's Wells used to tell me the tragedy,
of which she had been an eye-witness, and showed me in evidence one of
the silver clasps of the unfortunate gentleman's waistcoat.


NOTE 29.--ANDREA DE FERRARA

The name of Andrea de Ferrara is inscribed on all the Scottish
broadswords which are accounted of peculiar excellence. Who this artist
was, what were his fortunes, and when he flourished, have hitherto
defied the research of antiquaries; only it is in general believed that
Andrea de Ferrara was a Spanish or Italian artificer, brought over by
James IV or V to instruct the Scots in the manufacture of sword blades.
Most barbarous nations excel in the fabrication of arms; and the Scots
had attained great proficiency in forging swords, so early as the field
of Pinkie; at which period the historian Patten describes them as 'all
notably broad and thin, universally made to slice, and of such exceeding
good temper, that as I never saw any so good, so I think it hard to
devise better.' ACCOUNT OF SOMERSET'S EXPEDITION.

It may be observed, that the best and most genuine Andrea Ferraras have
a crown marked on the blades.


NOTE 30.--MISS NAIRNE

The incident here said to have happened to Flora, Mac-Ivor, actually
befell Miss Nairne, a lady with whom the author had the pleasure of
being acquainted. As the Highland army rushed into Edinburgh, Miss
Nairne, like other ladies who approved of their cause, stood waving her
handkerchief from a balcony, when a ball from a Highlander's musket,
which was discharged by accident, grazed her forehead. 'Thank God' said
she, the instant she recovered, 'that the accident happened to me, whose
principles are known. Had it befallen a Whig, they would have said it
was done on purpose.'


NOTE 31.--PRINCE CHARLES EDWARD

The Author of Waverley has been charged with painting the young
Adventurer in colours more amiable than his character deserved. But
having known many individuals who were near his person, he has been
described according to the light in which those eye-witnesses saw his
temper and qualifications. Something must be allowed, no doubt, to
the natural exaggerations of those who remembered him as the bold and
adventurous Prince, in whose cause they had braved death and ruin; but
is their evidence to give place entirely to that of a single malcontent?

I have already noticed the imputations thrown by the Chevalier Johnstone
on the Prince's courage. But some part at least of that gentleman's tale
is purely romantic. It would not, for instance, be supposed, that at
the time he is favouring us with the highly-wrought account of his amour
with the adorable Peggie, the Chevalier Johnstone was a married man,
whose grandchild is now alive, or that the whole circumstantial story
concerning the outrageous vengeance taken by Gordon of Abbachie on a
Presbyterian clergyman, is entirely apocryphal. At the same time it may
be admitted, that the Prince, like others of his family, did not esteem
the services done him by his adherents so highly as he ought. Educated
in high ideas of his hereditary right, he has been supposed to have held
every exertion and sacrifice made in his cause as too much the duty of
the person making it, to merit extravagant gratitude on his part.
Dr. King's evidence (which his leaving the Jacobite interest renders
somewhat doubtful) goes to strengthen this opinion.

The ingenious editor of Johnstone's MEMOIRS has quoted a story said
to be told by Helvetius, stating that Prince Charles Edward, far from
voluntarily embarking on his daring expedition, was literally bound hand
and foot, and to which he seems disposed to yield credit. Now, it being
a fact as well known as any in his history, and, so far as I know,
entirely undisputed, that the Prince's personal entreaties and urgency
positively forced Boisdale and Lochiel into insurrection, when they
were earnestly desirous that he would put off his attempt until he could
obtain a sufficient force from France, it will be very difficult to
reconcile his alleged reluctance to undertake the expedition, with his
desperately insisting on carrying the rising into effect, against the
advice and entreaty of his most powerful and most sage partisans. Surely
a man who had been carried bound on board the vessel which brought him
to so desperate an enterprise, would have taken the opportunity afforded
by the reluctance of his partisans, to return to France in safety.

It is averred in Johnstone's Memoirs, that Charles Edward left the field
of Culloden without doing the utmost to dispute the victory; and,
to give the evidence on both sides, there is in existence the more
trustworthy testimony of Lord Elcho, who states, that he himself
earnestly exhorted the Prince to charge at the head of the left wing,
which was entire, and retrieve the day, or die with honour. And on
his counsel being declined, Lord Elcho took leave of him with a bitter
execration, swearing he would never look on his face again, and kept his
word.

On the other hand, it seems to have been the opinion of almost all the
other officers, that the day was irretrievably lost, one wing of the
Highlanders being entirely routed, the rest of the army out-numbered,
out-flanked, and in a condition totally hopeless. In this situation of
things, the Irish officers who surrounded Charles's person interfered
to force him off the field. A cornet who was close to the Prince, left
a strong attestation, that he had seen Sir Thomas Sheridan seize the
bridle of his horse, and turn him round. There is some discrepancy of
evidence; but the opinion of Lord Elcho, a man of fiery temper, and
desperate at the ruin which he beheld impending, cannot fairly be taken
in prejudice of a character for courage which is intimated by the nature
of the enterprise itself, by the Prince's eagerness to fight on all
occasions, by his determination to advance from Derby to London, and by
the presence of mind which he manifested during the romantic perils of
his escape. The author is far from claiming for this unfortunate person
the praise due to splendid talents; but he continues to be of opinion,
that at the period of his enterprise, he had a mind capable of facing
danger and aspiring to fame.

That Charles Edward had the advantages of a graceful presence, courtesy,
and an address and manner becoming his station, the author never heard
disputed by any who approached his person, nor does he conceive that
these qualities are overcharged in the present attempt to sketch his
portrait. The following extracts, corroborative of the general opinion
respecting the Prince's amiable disposition, are taken from a manuscript
account of his romantic expedition, by James Maxwell of Kirkconnel,
of which I possess a copy, by the friendship of J. Menzies, Esq.,
of Pitfoddells. The author, though partial to the Prince, whom he
faithfully followed, seems to have been a fair and candid man, and well
acquainted with the intrigues among the Adventurer's council:--

'Everybody was mightily taken with the Prince's figure and personal
behaviour. There was but one voice about them. Those whom interest or
prejudice made a runaway to his cause, could not help acknowledging that
they wished him well in all other respects, and could hardly blame him
for his present undertaking. Sundry things had concurred to raise his
character to the highest pitch, besides the greatness of the enterprise,
and the conduct that had hitherto appeared in the execution of it. There
were several instances of good nature and humanity that had made a great
impression on people's minds, I shall confine myself to two or three.
Immediately after the battle, as the Prince was riding along the ground
that Cope's army had occupied a few minutes before, one of the officers
came up to congratulate him, and said, pointing to the killed, "Sir,
there are your enemies at your feet." The Prince, far from exulting,
expressed a great deal of compassion for his father's deluded subjects,
whom he declared he was heartily sorry to see in that posture. Next day,
while the Prince was at Pinkie-house, a citizen of Edinburgh came to
make some representation to Secretary Murray about the tents that city
was ordered to furnish against a certain day. Murray happened to be out
of the way, which the Prince hearing of, called to have the gentleman
brought to him, saying, he would rather dispatch the business, whatever
it was, himself, than have the gentleman wait, which he did, by granting
everything that was asked. So much affability in a young prince, flushed
with victory, drew encomiums even from his enemies. But what gave the
people the highest idea of him, was the negative he gave to a thing that
very nearly concerned his interest, and upon which the success of
his enterprise perhaps depended. It was proposed to send one of the
prisoners to London, to demand of that court a cartel for the exchange
of prisoners taken, and to be taken, during this war, and to intimate
that a refusal would be looked upon as a resolution on their part to
give no quarter. It was visible a cartel would be of great advantage to
the Prince's affairs; his friends would be more ready to declare for him
if they had nothing to fear but the chance of war in the field; and
if the court of London refused to settle a cartel, the Prince was
authorized to treat his prisoners in the same manner the Elector of
Hanover was determined to treat such of the Prince's friends as might
fall into his hands: it was urged that a few examples would compel the
court of London to comply. It was to be presumed that the officers of
the English army would make a point of it. They had never engaged in the
service but upon such terms as are in use among all civilized nations,
and it could be no stain upon their honour to lay down their commissions
if these terms were not observed, and that owing to the obstinacy of
their own Prince. Though this scheme was plausible, and represented as
very important, the Prince could never be brought into it: it was below
him, he said, to make empty threats, and he would never put such as
those into execution; he would never in cold blood take away lives which
he had saved in heat of action, at the peril of his own. These were not
the only proofs of good nature the Prince gave about this time. Every
day produced something new of this kind. These things softened the
rigour of a military government, which was only imputed to the necessity
of his affairs, and which he endeavoured to make as gentle and easy as
possible.'

It has been said, that the Prince sometimes exacted more state and
ceremonial than seemed to suit his condition; but, on the other hand
some strictness of etiquette was altogether indispensable where he must
otherwise have been exposed to general intrusion. He could also endure,
with a good grace, the retorts which his affectation of ceremony
sometimes exposed him to. It is said, for example, that Grant of
Glenmoriston having made a hasty march to join Charles, at the head
of his clan, rushed into the Prince's presence at Holyrood with
unceremonious haste, without having attended to the duties of the
toilet. The Prince received him kindly, but not without a hint that
a previous interview with the barber might not have been wholly
unnecessary. 'It is not beardless boys,' answered the displeased Chief,
'who are to do your Royal Highness's turn.' The Chevalier took the
rebuke in good part.

On the whole, if Prince Charles had concluded his life soon after his
miraculous escape, his character in history must have stood very high.
As it was, his station is amongst those, a certain brilliant portion of
whose life forms a remarkable contrast to all which precedes, and all
which follows it.


NOTE 32.--THE SKIRMISH AT CLIFTON

