go to market at the next town.--I hired a country lad for a footman, the
hind's daughter was my house-maid, and my wife had brought a cook-maid
from London.

'Such was my family when I began house-keeping in this place, with three
hundred pounds in my pocket, raised from the sale of my superfluous
furniture.--I knew we should find occupation enough through the day to
employ our time; but I dreaded the long winter evenings; yet, for those
too we found a remedy: The curate, who was a single man, soon became so
naturalized to the family, that he generally lay in the house; and his
company was equally agreeable and useful. He was a modest man, a good
scholar, and perfectly well qualified to instruct me in such country
matters as I wanted to know.--Mr Wilson brought his wife to see us, and
she became so fond of Mrs Dennison, that she said she was never so happy
as when she enjoyed the benefit of her conversation.--She was then a
fine buxom country lass, exceedingly docile, and as good-natured as her
husband Jack Wilson; so that a friendship ensued among the women, which
hath continued to this day.

'As for Jack, he hath been my constant companion, counsellor, and
commissary.--I would not for a hundred pounds you should leave my house
without seeing him.--Jack is an universal genius--his talents are really
astonishing:--He is an excellent carpenter, joiner, and turner, and
a cunning artist in iron and brass.--He not only superintended my
oeconomy, but also presided over my pastimes--He taught me to brew
beer, to make cyder, perry, mead, usquebaugh, and plague-water; to cook
several outlandish delicacies, such as ollas, pepper-pots, pillaws,
corys, chabobs, and stufatas.--He understands all manner of games from
chess down to chuck-farthing, sings a good song, plays upon the violin,
and dances a hornpipe with surprising agility.--He and I walked, and
rode, and hunted, and fished together, without minding the vicissitudes
of the weather; and I am persuaded, that in a raw, moist climate, like
this of England, continual exercise is as necessary as food to the
preservation of the individual.--In the course of two and twenty
years, there has not been one hour's interruption or abatement in the
friendship subsisting between Wilson's family and mine; and, what is
a rare instance of good fortune, that friendship is continued to our
children.--His son and mine are nearly of the same age and the same
disposition; they have been bred up together at the same school and
college, and love each other with the warmest affection.

'By Wilson's means, I likewise formed an acquaintance with a sensible
physician, who lives in the next market-town; and his sister, an
agreeable old maiden, passed the Christmas holidays at our house. Mean
while I began my farming with great eagerness, and that very winter
planted these groves that please you so much.--As for the neighbouring
gentry, I had no trouble from that quarter during my first campaign;
they were all gone to town before I settled in the country; and by the
summer I had taken measures to defend myself from their attacks.--When a
gay equipage came to my gates, I was never at home; those who visited
me in a modest way, I received; and according to the remarks I made on
their characters and conversation, either rejected their advances, or
returned their civility--I was in general despised among the fashionable
company, as a low fellow, both in breeding and circumstances;
nevertheless, I found a few individuals of moderate fortune, who gladly
adopted my stile of living; and many others would have acceded to our
society, had they not been prevented by the pride, envy, and ambition of
their wives and daughters.--Those, in times of luxury and dissipation,
are the rocks upon which all the small estates in the country are
wrecked.

'I reserved in my own hands, some acres of ground adjacent to the house,
for making experiments in agriculture, according to the directions of
Lyle, Tull, Hart, Duhamel, and others who have written on this subject;
and qualified their theory with the practical observations of farmer
Bland, who was my great master in the art of husbandry.--In short, I
became enamoured of a country life; and my success greatly exceeded my
expectation--I drained bogs, burned heath, grubbed up furze and fern;
I planted copse and willows where nothing else would grow; I gradually
inclosed all my farms, and made such improvements that my estate now
yields me clear twelve hundred pounds a year--All this time my wife
and I have enjoyed uninterrupted health, and a regular flow of spirits,
except on a very few occasions, when our cheerfulness was invaded by
such accidents as are inseparable from the condition of life. I lost
two children in their infancy, by the small-pox, so that I have one son
only, in whom all our hopes are centered.--He went yesterday to visit
a friend, with whom he has stayed all night, but he will be here to
dinner.--I shall this day have the pleasure of presenting him to you
and your family; and I flatter myself you will find him not altogether
unworthy of our affection.

'The truth is, either I am blinded by the partiality of a parent, or
he is a boy of very amiable character; and yet his conduct has given us
unspeakable disquiet.--You must know, we had projected a match between
him and a gentleman's daughter in the next county, who will in all
probability be heiress of a considerable fortune; but, it seems, he had
a personal disgust to the alliance. He was then at Cambridge, and tried
to gain time on various pretences; but being pressed in letters by his
mother and me to give a definitive answer, he fairly gave his tutor the
slip, and disappeared about eight months ago.--Before he took this rash
step, he wrote me a letter, explaining his objections to the match,
and declaring, that he would keep himself concealed until he should
understand that his parents would dispense with his contracting an
engagement that must make him miserable for life, and he prescribed
the form of advertising in a certain newspaper, by which he might be
apprized of our sentiments on this subject.

'You may easily conceive how much we were alarmed and afflicted by this
elopement, which he had made without dropping the least hint to his
companion Charles Wilson, who belonged to the same college.--We resolved
to punish him with the appearance of neglect, in hopes that he would
return of his own accord; but he maintained his purpose till the young
lady chose a partner for herself; then he produced himself, and made his
peace by the mediation of Wilson.--Suppose we should unite our families
by joining him with your niece, who is one of the most lovely creatures
I ever beheld.--My wife is already as fond of her as if she were her own
child, and I have a presentiment that my son will be captivated by her
at first sight.' 'Nothing could be more agreeable to all our family
(said I) than such an alliance; but, my dear friend, candour obliges
me to tell you, that I am afraid Liddy's heart is not wholly
disengaged--there is a cursed obstacle'--'You mean the young stroller
at Gloucester (said he)--You are surprised that I should know this
circumstance; but you will be more surprised when I tell you that
stroller is no other than my son George Dennison--That was the character
he assumed in his eclipse.' 'I am, indeed, astonished and overjoyed
(cried I), and shall be happy beyond expression to see your proposal
take effect.'

He then gave me to understand that the young gentleman, at his emerging
from concealment, had disclosed his passion for Miss Melford, the niece
of Mr Bramble, of Monmouthshire. Though Mr Dennison little dreamed that
this was his old friend Matthew Loyd, he nevertheless furnished his son
with proper credentials, and he had been at Bath, London, and many other
places in quest of us, to make himself and his pretensions known.

The bad success of his enquiry had such an effect upon his spirits, that
immediately at his return he was seized with a dangerous fever, which
overwhelmed his parents with terror and affliction; but he was now
happily recovered, though still weak and disconsolate. My nephew joining
us in our walk, I informed him of these circumstances, with which he
was wonderfully pleased. He declared he would promote the match to the
utmost of his power, and that he longed to embrace young Mr Dennison as
his friend and brother.--Mean while, the father went to desire his wife
to communicate this discovery gradually to Liddy, that her delicate
nerves might not suffer too sudden a shock; and I imparted the
particulars to my sister Tabby, who expressed some surprize, not
altogether unmixed, I believe, with an emotion of envy; for, though
she could have no objection to an alliance at once so honourable and
advantageous, she hesitated in giving her consent on pretence of
the youth and inexperience of the parties: at length, however, she
acquiesced, in consequence of having consulted with captain Lismahago.

Mr Dennison took care to be in the way when his son arrived at the gate,
and, without giving him time or opportunity to make any enquiry about
the strangers, brought him up stairs to be presented to Mr Loyd and his
family--The first person he saw when he entered the room, was Liddy,
who, notwithstanding all her preparation, stood trembling in the utmost
confusion--At sight of this object he was fixed motionless to the floor,
and, gazing at her with the utmost eagerness of astonishment, exclaimed,
'Sacred heaven! what is this!--ha! wherefore--' Here his speech failing,
he stood straining his eyes, in the most emphatic silence 'George (said
his father), this is my friend Mr Loyd.' Roused at this intimation, he
turned and received my salute, when I said, 'Young gentleman, if you had
trusted me with your secret at our last meeting, we should have parted
upon better terms.' Before he could make any answer, Jery came round
and stood before him with open arms.--At first, he started and changed
colour; but after a short pause, he rushed into his embrace, and they
hugged one another as if they had been intimate friends from their
infancy: then he payed his respects to Mrs Tabitha, and advancing to
Liddy, 'Is it possible, (cried he), that my senses do not play me false!
that I see Miss Melford under my father's roof--that I am permitted
to speak to her without giving offence--and that her relations have
honoured me with their countenance and protection.' Liddy blushed,
and trembled, and faltered--'To be sure, sir (said she), it is a very
surprising circumstance--a great--a providential--I really know not what
I say--but I beg you will think I have said what's agreeable.'

Mrs Dennison interposing said, 'Compose yourselves, my dear
children.--Your mutual happiness shall be our peculiar care.' The son
going up to his mother, kissed one hand; my niece bathed the other with
her tears; and the good old lady pressed them both in their turns to
her breast.--The lovers were too much affected to get rid of their
embarrassment for one day; but the scene was much enlivened by the
arrival of Jack Wilson, who brought, as usual, some game of his own
killing--His honest countenance was a good letter of recommendation. I
received him like a dear friend after a long separation; and I could
not help wondering to see him shake Jery by the hand as an old
acquaintance--They had, indeed, been acquainted some days, in
consequence of a diverting incident, which I shall explain at meeting.
That same night a consultation was held upon the concerns of the lovers,
when the match was formally agreed to, and all the marriage articles
were settled without the least dispute.--My nephew and I promised to
make Liddy's fortune five thousand pounds. Mr Dennison declared, he
would make over one half of his estate immediately to his son, and
that his daughter-in-law should be secured in a jointure of four
hundred--Tabby proposed, that, considering their youth, they should
undergo one year at least, of probation before the indissoluble knot
should be tied; but the young gentleman being very impatient and
importunate, and the scheme implying that the young couple should live
in the house, under the wings of his parents, we resolved to make them
happy without further delay.

As the law requires that the parties should be some weeks resident
in the parish, we shall stay here till the ceremony is performed.--Mr
Lismahago requests that he may take the benefit of the same occasion; so
that next Sunday the banns will be published for all four together.--I
doubt I shall not be able to pass my Christmas with you at
Brambleton-hall.--Indeed, I am so agreeably situated in this place, that
I have no desire to shift my quarters; and I foresee, that when the day
of separation comes, there will be abundance of sorrow on all sides.--In
the mean time, we must make the most of those blessings which Heaven
bestows.--Considering how you are tethered by your profession, I cannot
hope to see you so far from home; yet the distance does not exceed a
summer-day's journey, and Charles Dennison, who desires to be remembered
to you, would be rejoiced to see his old compotator; but as I am now
stationary, I expect regular answers to the epistles of

Yours invariably, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 11.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

Every day is now big with incident and discovery--Young Mr Dennison
proves to be no other than that identical person whom I have execrated
so long, under the name of Wilson--He had eloped from college at
Cambridge, to avoid a match that he detested, and acted in different
parts of the country as a stroller, until the lady in question made
choice of a husband for herself; then he returned to his father, and
disclosed his passion for Liddy, which met with the approbation of his
parents, though the father little imagined that Mr Bramble was his old
companion Matthew Loyd. The young gentleman, being impowered to make
honourable proposals to my uncle and me, had been in search of us all
over England, without effect; and he it was whom I had seen pass on
horseback by the window of the inn, where I stood with my sister, but
he little dreamed that we were in the house--As for the real Mr Wilson,
whom I called forth to combat, by mistake, he is the neighbour and
intimate friend of old Mr Dennison, and this connexion had suggested to
the son the idea of taking that name while he remained in obscurity.

You may easily conceive what pleasure I must have felt on discovering
that the honour of our family was in no danger from the conduct of a
sister whom I love with uncommon affection; that, instead of debasing
her sentiments and views to a wretched stroller, she had really
captivated the heart of a gentleman, her equal in rank and superior in
fortune; and that, as his parents approved of his attachment, I was on
the eve of acquiring a brother-in-law so worthy of my friendship and
esteem. George Dennison is, without all question, one of the most
accomplished young fellows in England. His person is at once elegant
and manly, and his understanding highly cultivated. Tho' his spirit
is lofty, his heart is kind; and his manner so engaging, as to command
veneration and love, even from malice and indifference. When I weigh
my own character with his, I am ashamed to find myself so light in the
balance; but the comparison excites no envy--I propose him as a model
for imitation--I have endeavoured to recommend myself to his friendship,
and hope I have already found a place in his affection. I am, however,
mortified to reflect what flagrant injustice we every day commit, and
what absurd judgment we form, in viewing objects through the falsifying
mediums of prejudice and passion. Had you asked me a few days ago, the
picture of Wilson the player, I should have drawn a portrait very unlike
the real person and character of George Dennison. Without all doubt, the
greatest advantage acquired in travelling and perusing mankind in the
original, is that of dispelling those shameful clouds that darken the
faculties of the mind, preventing it from judging with candour and
precision.

The real Wilson is a great original, and the best tempered,
companionable man I ever knew--I question if ever he was angry or
low-spirited in his life. He makes no pretensions to letters; but he is
an adept in every thing else that can be either useful or entertaining.
Among other qualifications, he is a complete sportsman, and counted the
best shot in the county. He and Dennison, and Lismahago and I, attended
by Clinker, went a-shooting yesterday, and made a great havock among the
partridges--To-morrow we shall take the field against the woodcocks and
snipes. In the evening we dance and sing, or play at commerce, loo, and
quadrille.

Mr Dennison is an elegant poet, and has written some detached pieces on
the subject of his passion for Liddy, which must be very flattering
to the vanity of a young woman--Perhaps he is one of the greatest
theatrical geniuses that ever appeared. He sometimes entertains us with
reciting favourite speeches from our best plays. We are resolved to
convert the great hall into a theatre, and get up the Beaux Stratagem
without delay--I think I shall make no contemptible figure in the
character of Scrub; and Lismahago will be very great in Captain Gibbet.
Wilson undertakes to entertain the country people with Harlequin
Skeleton, for which he has got a jacket ready painted with his own hand.

Our society is really enchanting. Even the severity of Lismahago
relaxes, and the vinegar of Mrs Tabby is remarkably dulcified, ever
since it was agreed that she should take precedency of her niece in
being first noosed: for, you must know, the day is fixed for Liddy's
marriage; and the banns for both couples have been already once
published in the parish church. The Captain earnestly begged that
one trouble might serve for all, and Tabitha assented with a vile
affectation of reluctance. Her inamorato, who came hither very slenderly
equipt, has sent for his baggage to London, which, in all probability,
will not arrive in time for the wedding; but it is of no great
consequence, as every thing is to be transacted with the utmost
privacy--Meanwhile, directions are given for making out the contracts
of marriage, which are very favourable for both females; Liddy will be
secured in a good jointure; and her aunt will remain mistress of her own
fortune, except one half of the interest, which her husband shall have
a right to enjoy for his natural life: I think this is as little in
conscience as can be done for a man who yokes with such a partner for
life.

These expectants seem to be so happy, that if Mr Dennison had an
agreeable daughter, I believe I should be for making the third couple
in this country dance. The humour seems to be infectious; for Clinker,
alias Loyd, has a month's mind to play the fool, in the same fashion,
with Mrs Winifred Jenkins. He has even sounded me on the subject; but I
have given him no encouragement to prosecute this scheme--I told him
I thought he might do better, as there was no engagement nor promise
subsisting; that I did not know what designs my uncle might have formed
for his advantage; but I was of opinion, that he should not, at present,
run the risque of disobliging him by any premature application of this
nature--Honest Humphry protested he would suffer death sooner than do or
say any thing that should give offence to the 'squire: but he owned he
had a kindness for the young woman, and had reason to think she
looked upon him with a favourable eye; that he considered this mutual
manifestation of good will, as an engagement understood, which ought to
be binding to the conscience of an honest man; and he hoped the 'squire
and I would be of the same opinion, when we should be at leisure to
bestow any thought about the matter--I believe he is in the right; and
we shall find time to take his case into consideration--You see we are
fixed for some weeks at least, and as you have had a long respite, I
hope you will begin immediately to discharge the arrears due to

Your affectionate, J. MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR, DEAR LETTY,

Never did I sit down to write in such agitation as I now feel--In
the course of a few days, we have met with a number of incidents so
wonderful and interesting, that all my ideas are thrown into confusion
and perplexity--You must not expect either method or coherence in what
I am going to relate--my dearest Willis. Since my last, the aspect of
affairs is totally changed!--and so changed! but I would fain give you
a regular detail--In passing a river about eight days ago, our coach was
overturned, and some of us narrowly escaped with life--My uncle had well
nigh perished. O Heaven, I cannot reflect upon that circumstance without
horror--I should have lost my best friend, my father and protector, but
for the resolution and activity of his servant Humphry Clinker, whom
Providence really seems to have placed near him for the necessity of
this occasion.--I would not be thought superstitious; but surely he
acted from a stronger impulse than common fidelity. Was it not the
voice of nature that loudly called upon him to save the life of his
own father? for, 0 Letty, it was discovered that Humphry Clinker was my
uncle's natural son.

Almost at the same instant, a gentleman, who came to offer us his
assistance, and invite us to his house, turned out to be a very old
friend of Mr Bramble.--His name is Mr Dennison, one of the worthiest men
living; and his lady is a perfect saint upon earth. They have an only
son--who do you think is this only son?--O Letty!--O gracious heaven!
how my heart palpitates, when I tell you that this only son of Mr
Dennison's, is that very identical youth who, under the name of Wilson,
has made such ravage in my heart!--Yes, my dear friend! Wilson and I are
now lodged in the same house, and converse together freely--His father
approves of his sentiments in my favour; his mother loves me with all
the tenderness of a parent; my uncle, my aunt and my brother, no longer
oppose my inclinations--On the contrary, they have agreed to make us
happy without delay; and in three weeks or a month, if no unforeseen
accident intervenes, your friend Lydia Melford, will have changed her
name and condition--I say, if no accident intervenes, because such a
torrent of success makes me tremble!--I wish there may not be something
treacherous in this sudden reconciliation of fortune--I have no merit--I
have no title to such felicity. Far from enjoying the prospect that
lies before me, my mind is harrassed with a continued tumult, made up of
hopes and wishes, doubts and apprehensions--I can neither eat nor sleep,
and my spirits are in perpetual flutter.--I more than ever feel that
vacancy in my heart, which your presence alone can fill.--The mind, in
every disquiet, seeks to repose itself on the bosom of a friend; and
this is such a trial as I really know not how to support without your
company and counsel--I must, therefore, dear Letty, put your friendship
to the test--I must beg you will come and do the last offices of
maidenhood to your companion Lydia Melford.

This letter goes inclosed in one to our worthy governess, from Mrs
Dennison, entreating her to interpose with your mamma, that you may be
allowed to favour us with your company on this occasion; and I flatter
myself that no material objection can be made to our request. The
distance from hence to Gloucester, does not exceed one hundred miles,
and the roads are good.--Mr Clinker, alias Loyd, shall be sent over to
attend your motions--If you step into the post-chaise, with your maid
Betty Barker, at seven in the morning, you will arrive by four in the
afternoon at the half-way house, where there is good accommodation.
There you shall be met by my brother and myself, who will next day
conduct you to this place, where, I am sure, you will find yourself
perfectly at your case in the midst of an agreeable society.--Dear
Letty, I will take no refusal--if you have any friendship--any
humanity--you will come.--I desire that immediate application may be
made to your mamma; and that the moment her permission is obtained, you
will apprise

Your ever faithful, LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Mrs JERMYN, at her house in Gloucester.

DEAR MADAM,

Though I was not so fortunate as to be favoured with an answer to the
letter with which I troubled you in the spring, I still flatter myself
that you retain some regard for me and my concerns. I am sure the care
and tenderness with which I was treated, under your roof and tuition,
demand the warmest returns of gratitude and affection on my part, and
these sentiments, I hope, I shall cherish to my dying day--At present,
I think it my duty to make you acquainted with the happy issue of that
indiscretion by which I incurred your displeasure.--Ah! madam, the
slighted Wilson is metamorphosed into George Dennison, only son and heir
of a gentleman, whose character is second to none in England, as you may
understand upon inquiry. My guardian, my brother and I, are now in his
house; and an immediate union of the two families is to take place in
the persons of the young gentleman and your poor Lydia Melford.--You
will easily conceive how embarrassing this situation must be to a young
inexperienced creature like me, of weak nerves and strong apprehensions;
and how much the presence of a friend and confidant would encourage and
support me on this occasion. You know, that of all the young ladies,
Miss Willis was she that possessed the greatest share of my confidence
and affection; and, therefore, I fervently wish to have the happiness of
her company at this interesting crisis.

Mrs Dennison, who is the object of universal love and esteem, has, at
my request, written to you on this subject, and I now beg leave to
reinforce her sollicitations.--My dear Mrs Jermyn! my ever honoured
governess! let me conjure you by that fondness which once distinguished
your favourite Lydia! by that benevolence of heart, which disposes you
to promote the happiness of your fellow-creatures in general! lend
a favourable ear to my petition, and use your influence with Letty's
mamma, that my most earnest desire may be gratified. Should I be
indulged in this particular, I will engage to return her safe, and even
to accompany her to Gloucester, where, if you will give me leave, I will
present to you, under another name,

Dear Madam, Your most affectionate Humble servant, And penitent, LYDIA
MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

O MARY JONES! MARY JONES!

I have met with so many axidents, suprisals, and terrifications, that
I am in a pafeck fantigo, and I believe I shall never be my own self
again. Last week I was dragged out of a river like a drowned rat, and
lost a bran-new night-cap, with a sulfer stayhook, that cost me a good
half-a-crown, and an odd shoe of green gallow monkey; besides wetting my
cloaths and taring my smuck, and an ugly gash made in the back part of
my thy, by the stump of a tree--To be sure Mr Clinker tuck me out of the
cox; but he left me on my back in the water, to go to the 'squire; and I
mought have had a watry grave, if a millar had not brought me to the dry
land--But, O! what choppings and changes girl--The player man that came
after Miss Liddy, and frightened me with a beard at Bristol Well, is now
matthew-murphy'd into a fine young gentleman, son and hare of 'squire
Dollison--We are all together in the same house, and all parties have
agreed to the match, and in a fortnite the surrymony will be performed.

But this is not the only wedding we are to have--Mistriss is resolved
to have the same frolick, in the naam of God! Last Sunday in the parish
crutch, if my own ars may be trusted, the clerk called the banes of
marridge betwixt Opaniah Lashmeheygo, and Tapitha Brample, spinster; he
mought as well have called her inkle-weaver, for she never spun and hank
of yarn in her life--Young 'squire Dollison and Miss Liddy make the
second kipple; and there might have been a turd, but times are changed
with Mr Clinker--O Molly! what do'st think? Mr Clinker is found to be a
