and exhaust their powers of persuasion, as to induce the Christians who
are brought before them to renounce their faith. So desirous are they
of this, that they have caused, in many instances, those who were no
Christians to be presented at their tribunals, who have then, after
being threatened with torture and death, renounced a faith which they
never professed. Once and again has this farce been acted before the
Roman people. Their real triumphs of this sort have as yet been very
few; and the sensation which they produced was swallowed up and lost in
the glory--in the eyes even of the strangers who are in Rome--which has
crowned us in the steadfast courage with which our people have remained
quietly in their homes, throughout all this dreadful preparation, and
then, when the hour of trial drew nigh, and they were placed at the bar
of the judge, and were accused of their religion, confessed the charge,
boasted of it, and then took their way to the prison, from which, they
well knew, death only would deliver them.

       *       *       *       *       *

That, Fausta, which we have long feared and looked for, has come to
pass, and Probus, our more than friend, our benefactor, and almost our
parent, is, by the Emperor, condemned to death; not, as from the words
of Varus it might be supposed, to the same torments as those to which
Macer was made subject; but to be thrown to the beasts in the Flavian, a
death more merciful than that, but yet full of horror. How is it that,
in the Roman, mercy seems dead, and the human nature, which he received
from the gods, changed to that of the most savage beast!

Livia has been with us; and here, with us, would she now gladly remain.
It is impossible, she says, for us to conceive the height of the frenzy
to which Aurelian is now wrought up against the Christians. In his
impatience, he can scarce restrain himself from setting his Legions in
the neighboring camp at once to the work of slaughter. But he is,
strange as it may seem, in this held back and calmed by the more
bloody-minded, but yet more politic, Fronto. Fronto would have the work
thoroughly accomplished; and that it may be so, he adheres to a certain
system of order and apparent moderation, from which Aurelian would
willingly break away and at once flood the streets of Rome in a new
deluge of blood. Livia is now miserable and sad, as she was, but a few
months ago, gay and happy. At the palace, she tells us, she hears no
sounds but the harsh and grating voice of Fronto, or the smooth and
silvery tones of Varus. As soon, she says, as Aurelian shall have
departed for the East, shall she dwell either with us, or fly to the
quiet retreat of Zenobia, at Tibur.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day appointed for the death of Probus has arrived, and never did the
sun shine upon a fairer one in Rome. It seems as if some high festival
were come, for all Rome is afoot. Heralds parade the streets,
proclaiming the death of Probus, Felix, and other Christians, in the
Flavian, at the hour of noon. At the corner of every street, and at all
the public places, the name of "Probus the Christian, condemned to the
beasts," meets the eye. Long before the time of the sacrifice had come,
the avenues leading to the theatre, and all the neighborhood of it, were
crowded with the excited thousands of those who desired to witness the
spectacle. There was little of beauty, wealth, fashion, or nobility in
Rome that was not represented in the dense multitude that filled the
seats of the boundless amphitheatre. Probus had said to me, at my last
interview with him, 'Piso, you may think it a weakness in me, but I
would that one at least, whose faith is mine, and whose heart beats as
mine, might be with me at the final hour. I would, at that hour, meet
one eye that can return the glance of friendship. It will be a source of
strength to me, and I know not how much I may need it.' I readily
promised what he asked, though, as you may believe, Fausta, I would
willingly have been spared the trial. So that making part of that tide
pouring toward the centre, I found myself borne along at the appointed
hour to the scene of suffering and death.

As I was about to pass beneath the arched-way which leads to the winding
passages within, I heard myself saluted by a well-known voice, and,
turning to the quarter whence it came, beheld Isaac, but without his
pack, and in a costume so different from that which he usually wears,
that at first I doubted the report of my eyes. But the sound of his
voice, as he again addressed me, assured me it could be no other than
he.

'Did I not tell thee, Piso,' said he, 'that, when the Christian was in
his straits, there thou wouldst see the Jew, looking on, and taking his
sport? This is for Probus the very end I looked for. And how should it
be otherwise? Is he to live and prosper, who aims at the life of that to
which God has given being and authority? Shall he flourish in pride and
glory who hath helped to pull down what God built up? Not so, Piso. 'Tis
no wonder that the Christians are now in this plight. It could be no
otherwise. And in every corner of this huge fabric wilt thou behold
some of my tribe looking on upon this sight, or helping at the
sacrifice. Yet, as thou knowest, I am not among them. There is no hope
for Probus, Piso?'

'None, Isaac. All Rome could not save him.'

'Truly,' rejoined the Jew, 'he is in the lion's den. Yet as the prophet
Daniel was delivered, so may it be to him. God is over all.'

'God is, indeed, over all,' I said; 'but he leaves us with our natural
passions, affections, and reason, to work out our own way through the
world. We are the better for it.'

'Doubtless,' said Isaac. 'Yet at times, when we look not for it, and
from a quarter we dream not of, deliverance comes. So was it to Abraham,
when he thought that by his own hand Isaac his son must be slain. But
why to a Christian should I speak of these? Dost thou witness the
sacrifice, Piso?'

'Yes, at the earnest entreaty of Probus himself.'

'I, too, shall be there. We shall both then see what shall come to
pass.'

So saying, he moved away toward the lower vaults, where are the cages of
the beasts, and I passed on and ascended the flight of steps leading to
that part of the interior where it is the custom of Aurelian to sit. The
Emperor was not as yet arrived, but the amphitheatre, in every part of
it, was already filled with its countless thousands. All were seated
idly conversing, or gazing about as at the ordinary sports of the place.
The hum of so many voices struck the ear like the distant roar of the
ocean. How few of those thousands--not one perhaps--knew for what it was
that Probus and his companions were now about to suffer a most cruel
and abhorred death! They knew that their name was Christian, and that
Christian was of the same meaning as enemy of the gods and of the
empire; but what it was which made the Christian so willing to die, why
it was he was so ready to come to that place of horror and give up his
body to the beasts--this they knew not. It was to them a riddle they
could not read. And they sat and looked on with the same vacant
unconcern, or with the same expectation of pleasure, as if they were to
witness the destruction of murderers and assassins. This would not have
been so, had that class of the citizens of Rome, or any of them, been
present, who, regarding us with favor, and hoping that somewhat might
yet come of our religion advantageous to the world, maintain a neutral
position. These were not there; owing, both to their disinclination to
witness scenes so brutalizing, and to apprehensions lest they should be
betrayed into words or acts of sympathy, that might lead to their being
confounded with the obnoxious tribe, and exposed to the like dangers.
All, therefore, within the embrace of those wide-spreading walls were of
one heart and one mind.

While I sat waiting the coming of the Emperor, and surrounded by those
whom I knew not nor had ever seen, one who occupied a part of the same
seat, accompanied by his wife and daughters, said to me,

''Tis to be hoped, sir, that so terrible an example as this will have
its effect in deterring others from joining this dangerous superstition,
and not only that, but strike so wholesome a terror into those who
already profess it, that they shall at once abandon it, and so the
general massacre of them not be necessary; which, indeed, I should be
loth to witness in the streets of Rome.'

'If you knew,' I replied, 'for what it is these people are condemned to
such sufferings, you would not, I am sure, express yourself in that
manner. You know, I may presume, only what common report has brought to
your ears.'

'Nothing else, I admit,' he replied. 'My affairs confine me from morning
till night. I am a secretary, sir, in the office of the public mint. I
have no time to inform myself of the exact truth of any thing but
columns of figures. I am not afraid to say there is not a better
accountant within the walls of Rome. But as for other things, especially
as to the truth in matters of this sort, I know nothing, and can learn
nothing. I follow on as the world leads.'

'I dare say,' I replied, 'you have spoken the truth. And every one here
present, were he to speak, would make very much the same declaration. So
here are eighty thousand citizens of Rome assembled to witness the
destruction of men, of whose crime they know nothing, yet rejoicing in
their death as if they were murderers or robbers! Were you charged with
a false enumeration of your columns, would not you hold it basest
injustice to suffer punishment before pains were taken to learn the
exact truth in the case? But are you not acting the same unjust and
cruel part--with all who are here--in looking on and approving the
destruction of these men, about whose offence you know nothing, and have
taken no pains to inquire?'

'By the gods!' exclaimed his wife, who seemed the sharper spirit of the
two, 'I believe we have a Christian here! But however that may be, we
should be prettily set to work, whenever some entertainment is in
prospect, to puzzle ourselves about the right and the wrong in the
matter. If we are to believe you, sir, whenever a poor wretch is to be
thrown to the beasts, before we can be in at the sport we must settle
the question--under the law I suppose--whether the condemnation be just
or not! Ha! ha! Our life were in that case most light and agreeable! The
Prefect himself would not have before him a more engaging task. Gods!
Cornelia dear, see what a pair of eyes!'

'Where, mother?'

'There! in that old man's head. They burn and twinkle like coals of
fire. I should think he must be a Christian.'

I was not sorry that a new object had attracted the attention of this
lady of the secretary; and looking where she pointed, I saw Isaac
planted below us and near the arena. At the same moment the long peal of
trumpets, and the shouts of the people without, gave note of the
approach and entrance of the Emperor. In a moment more, with his swift
step, he entered the amphitheatre, and strode to the place set apart for
him, the whole multitude rising and saluting him with a burst of welcome
that might have been heard beyond the walls of Rome. The Emperor
acknowledged the salutation by rising from his seat and lifting the
crown from his head. He was instantly seated again, and at a sign from
him the herald made proclamation of the entertainments which were to
follow. He who was named as the first to suffer was Probus.

When I heard his name pronounced, with the punishment which awaited
him, my resolution to remain forsook me, and I turned to rush from the
theatre. But my recollection of Probus's earnest entreaties that I would
be there, restrained me and I returned to my seat. I considered, that as
I would attend the dying bed of a friend, so I was clearly bound to
remain where I was, and wait for the last moments of this my more than
Christian friend; and the circumstance that his death was to be shocking
and harrowing to the friendly heart was not enough to absolve me from
the heavy obligation. I therefore kept my place, and awaited with
patience the event.

I had waited not long when, from beneath that extremity of the theatre
where I was sitting, Probus was led forth and conducted to the centre of
the arena, where was a short pillar to which it was customary to bind
the sufferers. Probus, as he entered, seemed rather like one who came to
witness what was there than to be himself the victim, so free was his
step, so erect his form. In his face there might indeed be seen an
expression, that could only dwell on the countenance of one whose spirit
was already gone beyond the earth, and holding converse with things
unseen. There is always much of this in the serene, uplifted face of
this remarkable man; but it was now there written in lines so bold and
deep, that there could have been few in that vast assembly but must have
been impressed by it, as never before by aught human. It must have been
this, which brought so deep a silence upon that great multitude--not the
mere fact that an individual was about to be torn by lions--that is an
almost daily pastime. For it was so, that when he first made his
appearance, and as he moved toward the centre, turned and looked round
upon the crowded seats rising to the heavens, the people neither moved
nor spoke, but kept their eyes fastened upon him as by some spell which
they could not break.

When he had reached the pillar, and he who had conducted him was about
to bind him to it, it was plain, by what at that distance we could
observe, that Probus was entreating him to desist and leave him at
liberty; in which he at length succeeded, for that person returned,
leaving him alone and unbound. O sight of misery!--he who for the
humblest there present would have performed any office of love, by which
the least good should redound to them, left alone and defenceless, they
looking on and scarcely pitying his cruel fate!

When now he had stood there not many minutes, one of the doors of the
vivaria was suddenly thrown back, and bounding forth with a roar, that
seemed to shake the walls of the theatre, a lion of huge dimensions
leaped upon the arena. Majesty and power were inscribed upon his lordly
limbs; and as he stood there where he had first sprung, and looked round
upon the multitude, how did his gentle eye and noble carriage, with
which no one for a moment could associate meanness, or cruelty, or
revenge, cast shame upon the human monsters assembled to behold a
solitary, unarmed man torn limb from limb! When he had in this way
looked upon that cloud of faces, he then turned and moved round the
arena through its whole circumference, still looking upwards upon those
who filled the seats--not till he had come again to the point from which
he started, so much as noticing him who stood, his victim, in the
midst. Then--as if apparently for the first time becoming conscious of
his presence--he caught the form of Probus; and moving slowly towards
him, looked steadfastly up-upon him, receiving in return the settled
gaze of the Christian. Standing there, still, awhile--each looking upon
the other--he then walked round him, then approached nearer, making,
suddenly and for a moment, those motions which indicate the roused
appetite; but as it were in the spirit of self-rebuke, he immediately
retreated a few paces and lay down in the sand, stretching out his head
toward Probus, and closing his eyes as if for sleep.

The people, who had watched in silence, and with the interest of those
who wait for their entertainment, were both amazed and vexed, at what
now appeared to be the dulness and stupidity of the beast. When however
he moved not from his place, but seemed as if he were indeed about to
fall into a quiet sleep, those who occupied the lower seats began both
to cry out to him and shake at him their caps, and toss about their arms
in the hope to rouse him. But it was all in vain; and at the command of
the Emperor he was driven back to his den.

Again a door of the vivaria was thrown open, and another of equal size,
but of a more alert and rapid step, broke forth, and, as if delighted
with his sudden liberty and the ample range, coursed round and round the
arena, wholly regardless both of the people and of Probus, intent only
as it seemed upon his own amusement. And when at length he discovered
Probus standing in his place, it was but to bound toward him as in
frolic, and then wheel away in pursuit of a pleasure he esteemed more
highly than the satisfying of his hunger.

At this, the people were not a little astonished, and many who were near
me hesitated not to say, "that there might be some design of the gods in
this." Others said plainly, but not with raised voices, "An omen! an
omen!" At the same time Isaac turned and looked at me with an expression
of countenance which I could not interpret. Aurelian meanwhile exhibited
many signs of impatience; and when it was evident the animal could not
be wrought up, either by the cries of the people, or of the keepers, to
any act of violence, he too was taken away. But when a third had been
let loose, and with no better effect, nay, with less--for he, when he
had at length approached Probus, fawned upon him, and laid himself at
his feet--the people, superstitious as you know beyond any others, now
cried out aloud, "An omen! an omen!" and made the sign that Probus
should be spared and removed.

Aurelian himself seemed almost of the same mind, and I can hardly doubt
would have ordered him to be released, but that Fronto at that moment
approached him, and by a few of those words, which, coming from him, are
received by Aurelian as messages from Heaven, put within him a new and
different mind; for rising quickly from his seat he ordered the keeper
of the vivaria to be brought before him. When he appeared below upon the
sands, Aurelian cried out to him,

'Why, knave, dost thou weary out our patience thus--letting forth beasts
already over-fed? Do thus again, and thou thyself shall be thrown to
them. Art thou too a Christian?'

'Great Emperor,' replied the keeper, 'than those I have now let loose,
there are not larger nor fiercer in the imperial dens, and since the
sixth hour of yesterday they have tasted nor food nor drink. Why they
have thus put off their nature 'tis hard to guess, unless the general
cry be taken for the truth, "that the gods have touched them."

Aurelian was again seen to waver, when a voice from the benches cried
out,

'It is, O Emperor, but another Christian device! Forget not the voice
from the temple! The Christians, who claim powers over demons, bidding
them go and come at pleasure, may well be thought capable to change, by
the magic imputed to them, the nature of a beast.'

'I doubt not,' said the Emperor, 'but it is so. Slave! throw up now the
doors of all thy vaults, and let us see whether both lions and tigers be
not too much for this new necromancy. If it be the gods who interpose,
they can shut the mouths of thousands as of one.

At those cruel words, the doors of the vivaria were at once flung open,
and an hundred of their fierce tenants, maddened both by hunger and the
goads that had been applied, rushed forth, and in the fury with which in
a single mass they fell upon Probus--then kneeling upon the sands--and
burying him beneath them, no one could behold his fate, nor, when that
dark troop separated and ran howling about the arena in search of other
victims, could the eye discover the least vestige of that holy man.----
I then fled from the theatre as one who flies from that which is worse
than death.

Felix was next offered up, as I have learned, and after him more than
fourscore of the Christians of Rome.

Rome continues the same scene of violence, cruelty and blood. Each
moment are the miserable Christians dragged through the streets either
to the tribunals of the judges, or thence, having received their doom,
to the prisons.

Seeing, Fausta, that the Emperor is resolved that we shall not be among
the sufferers, and that he is also resolved upon the total destruction
of all within the walls of Rome, from which purpose no human power can
now divert him, we feel ourselves no longer bound to this spot, and are
determined to withdraw from it, either to Tibur or else to you. Were
there any office of protection or humanity, which it were in our power
to perform toward the accused or the condemned, you may believe that we
should remain fixed to the post of duty. But the fearful sweep which is
making, and yet to be made, of every living soul in Rome, leaves nothing
for us to do but to stand idle and horror-struck witnesses of sufferings
and wrongs, which we can do nothing to avert or relieve. Portia shares
our sorrows, and earnestly entreats us to depart, consenting herself to
accompany us.

       *       *       *       *       *

After seeing Zenobia at Tibur, and conversing with her and Livia, whom I
found there, we have resolved upon Palmyra, and already have I engaged a
vessel bound to Berytus. A brief interval will alone be needful for our
preparations. Portia goes with us.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the midst of these preparations, news is brought us by Milo that
Aurelian, hastened by accounts of disturbances in the army, has suddenly
started for Thrace. But I see not that this can interfere with our
movements, unless indeed.... What can mean this sudden uproar in the
streets?--and now within the house itself.... My fears are true....

       *       *       *       *       *

Fausta, I am a prisoner in the hands of Fronto. I now write in chains,
and Julia stands at my side bound also. I have obtained with difficulty
this grace, to seal my letter, and bid you farewell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus were Piso and Julia at length in the grasp of the cruel and
relentless Fronto. Aurelian's sudden departure from Rome placed the
whole conduct of the enterprise he had undertaken in the hands of Varus
and the priest, who were left by the Emperor with full powers to carry
on and complete the work which he had begun. It was his purpose however,
so soon as the difficulties in the army should be composed, himself
immediately to return, and remain till the task were ended--the great
duty done. But, as many causes might conspire to prevent this, they were
clothed with sovereign authority to do all that the welfare of the city
and the defence and security of religion might require. I will not
charge Aurelian with an unnecessary absence at this juncture, that so he
might turn over to his tools a work, at which his own humanity and
conscience, hardened as they were, revolted--or rather that they,
voluntarily, and moved only by their own superstitious and malignant
minds might then be free to do what they might feel safe in believing
would be an acceptable service to their great master. I will still
believe, that, had he intended the destruction of Piso and Julia, he
would, with that courage which is natural to him, have fearlessly and
unshrinkingly done the deed himself. I will rather suppose that his
ministers, without warrant from him, and prompted by their own hate
alone, ventured upon that dark attempt, trusting, when it should have
once been accomplished, easily to obtain the pardon of him, who, however
he might affect or feel displeasure for a moment, would secretly applaud
and thank them for the deed.

However this may be, Aurelian suddenly departed from Rome, and Fronto
and Varus filled his place; and their first act of authority was the
seizure of Piso and the Princess. At Tibur we knew nothing of these
events till they were passed; we caring not to hear of the daily horrors
that were acted in the city, and feeling as secure of the safety of Piso
and Julia as of our own.

It was on a gloomy winter evening when they were borne away from their
home upon the Coelian to the dark vaults beneath the Temple of the
Sun, Fronto's own province. But here again let Piso speak for himself,
as I find recorded in the fragment of a letter.

       *       *       *       *       *

* * * The darkness of the night scarce permitted me to see, he says,
whither we were borne, but when the guard stopped and required us to
alight from the carriage in which we had been placed, I perceived that
we were at the steps of the temple--victims therefore in his own regions
of a man, as much more savage than Aurelian, as he than a beast of the
forest. We were denied the happiness of being confined in the same
place, but were thrust into separate dungeons, divided by walls of solid
rock. Here, when wearied out by watching, I fell asleep. How long this
lasted I cannot tell; I was wakened by the withdrawing of the bolts of
my door. One, bearing a dim light, slowly opening the door, entered.
Forgetting my condition I essayed to rise, but my heavy chains bound me
to the floor. Soon as the noise of my motion caught the ear of the
person who had entered, he said,

'So; all is safe. I am not thy keeper, sir Piso, but 'tis my province to
keep the keeper--that is--visit thee every hour to see that thou art
here. Yet, by the gods! if you Christians have that power of magic,
which is commonly reported of you, I see not of what use it were to
watch you thus. How is it with thee, most noble Piso?'

'That is of little moment; but tell me, if there is anything human in
thee, where is the Princess Julia, and what is her fate?'

'Be not too much concerned,' he replied. 'She is safe, I warrant you.
None but Fronto deals with her.'

'Fronto!' I could only say.

'Yes, Fronto. Fear not, he is an honorable man and a holy priest.'

'Fronto!' I was about to add more, but held my peace; knowing well that
what I might say could avail nothing for us, and might be turned against
us. I only asked, 'why there was such delay in examining and condemning
us?'

'That is a question truly,' he replied; 'but not so easy to be
answered. Few know the reason, that I can say. But what is there in the
heart of Pronto that is kept from Curio? Are thy chains easy, Piso?'

'I would that they might be lengthened. Here am I bound to the floor
without so much as the power to stand upright. This is useless
suffering.'

'Twas so ordered by Fronto; but then if there is one in Rome who can
take a liberty with him, I know well who he is. So hold thou the lamp,
Piso, and I will ease thee;' and, like one accustomed to the art, he
soon struck apart the chain, and again uniting it left me room, both to
stand and move.

'There,' said he, as he took again the lamp, 'for one who hates a
Christian as he does death, that's a merciful deed. But I can tell thee
one thing, that it will not ease thee long.'

'That I can believe. But why, once more, is there this delay?'

'I know not, Piso, whether I should tell thee, but as I doubt not Fronto
would, were he here, I surely may do the same, for if there are two men
in Rome, Piso, whose humors are the same and jump together, I and Fronto
are they. There is a dispute then, noble Piso, between Varus and Fronto
about the lady Julia--' and without heeding my cries the wretch turned
and left the vault, closing after him the heavy door.

How many days, in the torture of a suspense and ignorance worse than
death, I lay here, I cannot tell. Curio came as often as he said to see
that all was safe, but there was little said by either; he would examine
my chain and then depart. On the night--the last night I passed in that
agony--preceding my examination by Varus and Fronto, I was disturbed
from my slumbers by the entrance of Curio. He advanced with as it seemed
