speaking them.  He began to understand that to bury himself in an Italian
university and dive into Aristotle's sayings, to heap up his own memory
with the stores of thought he loved, or to plunge into the mazes of
mathematics, philosophy, and music, while his brethren in his own country
were tearing one another to pieces for lack of any good influence to
teach or show them better things, would be a storing of treasure for
himself on earth, a pursuit of the light of knowledge indeed, but not a
wooing of the light of Wisdom, the true Light of the World, as seen in
Him who went about doing good.  To complete his present course was, he
knew, necessary.  He had seen enough of really learned scholars to know
the depths of his own ignorance, and to be aware that certain books must
be read under guidance, and certain studies gone through, before his
cultivation would be on a level with the standard of the best working
clergy of the English Church--such as Chicheley, Waynflete, or the like.
He would therefore remain at Oxford, he thought, long enough to take his
Master of Arts degree, and then, though to his own perceptions only the
one-eyed among the blind, he would make the real sacrifice of himself in
the rude and cruel world of Scotland.

He knew that his king was well satisfied with Patrick, and also that a
man of sound heart and prompt, hard hand was far fitter to rule as a
secular lord than his own more fine-drawn mature could ever be; but as a
priest, with the influence that his birth and the King's friendship would
give him, he already saw chances of raising the tone of the clergy, and
thus improving the wild and lawless people.

A deep purpose of self-devotion was growing up in his soul, but without
saddening him, only rendering him more energetic and cheerful than his
sister had ever known him.

As they walked together over the long stretches of moor, many were Lily's
questions; and Malcolm beguiled the way with many a story of camp and
court, told both for his own satisfaction in her sympathy, and with the
desire to make the Scottish lassie see what was the life and what the
thoughts of ladies of her own degree in other lands, so that the Lady of
Glenuskie might be awake to somewhat of the high purpose of virtuous home
government to which Alice of Salisbury had been trained.

As to the Flemish heiress, no representation would induce Lilias to love
her.  Reject Malcolm for a convent's sake!  It was unpardonable; and as
to a bedeswoman, working uncloistered in the streets, Lily viewed that as
neither the one thing nor the other, neither religious nor secular; and
she was persuaded that a little exertion on the part of the brother, whom
she viewed as a paladin, would overcome all coyness on the lady's part.

Malcolm found it vain to try to show his sister his sense of his own
deserts, and equally so to declare that if the maiden should so yield,
she would indeed be the Demoiselle de Luxemburg to whom he was pledged,
but not the Esclairmonde whom his better part adored.  So he let the
matter pass by, and both enjoyed their masquing in one another's company
as a holiday such as they could never have again.

They had no serious alarms; the pursuit must have been disconcerted, and
the two young scholars were not worth the attention of freebooters.  Their
winsomeness of manner won them kindness wherever they harboured; and
thus, after many days, without molestation they came to the walls of
Berwick.  And now, while Malcolm thought his difficulties at an end, a
horror of bashfulness fell upon Lilias.  She had been Clerk Davie merrily
enough while there was no one to suspect her, but the transmutation into
her proper self filled her with shame.

She hung back, and could be hardly dragged forward to the embattled
gateway of the bridge by her brother--who, as the guards, jealously
cautious even in this time of peace, called out to him to stand, showed
his ring bearing the royal arms, and desired to speak within the captain
of the garrison, who was commanding in the name of the Earl of
Northumberland, Governor of Berwick and Warden of the Marches, and who
had entertained him on his way north, and would have been warned by
Patrick of his probable return in this guise.

Instead of the stalwart form of the veteran sub-governor, however, a
quick step came hurrying to the gateway, and the light figure of a young
knight stood before him, with outstretched hands, crying: 'Welcome to the
good town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, dear comrade!'  And he added in a lower
tone: 'So you have succeeded in your quest--if, as I trow, this fairest
of clerks be your lady sister.  May I--'

'Hold!' softly said Malcolm.  'She is so shamefast that she cannot brook
a word;' and in fact Lilias had pulled her hood over her face, and shrunk
behind him, at the first approach of the young gentleman.

'We will to my mother,' said Ralf, aloud.  'She has always a soft corner
in her heart for a young clerk or a wanderer.'

And so saying, without even looking at the disguised figure, he gave the
pass-word, and holding Malcolm by the arm, led him, followed by Lilias,
through the defences and into the court of the castle, then to a side-
door, where, bounding up several steps at once of a stone stair, he
opened a sort of anteroom door, and bade the two strangers wait there
while he fetched his mother.

'That is well!  Who would have looked to see him here!' cried Malcolm,
joyously.  'What, you knew him not?  It was Ralf Percy, my dear old
companion!'

'Ralf Percy! he that was so bold and daring?' cried Lilias.  'Nay, but
how can it be, he was as meek and shamefast--'

'As yourself,' smiled Malcolm.  'Ah, sister, you have much to learn of
the ways of an English gentleman among ladies.'

Before many further words could be exchanged, there entered a fair and
matronly dame in the widow's veil she had worn ever since the fatal day
of Shrewsbury--that eager, loving, yet almost childish woman whom we know
so well as Hotspur's gentle Kate (only that unfortunately her name was
Elizabeth); fondling, teasing, being fondled and teased in return, and
then with all her pretty puerilities scorched away when she upbraids
Northumberland with his fatal delay.  Could Malcolm and Lilias have known
her as we do in Shakespeare, they would have been the more gratified by
her welcome, whereas they only saw her kind face and the courtly sweep of
her curtsey, as, going straight up to the disguised girl, blushing and
trembling now more than ever, she said: 'Poor child, come with me, and we
will soon have you yourself again, ere any other eye see you;' and then
moved away again, holding Lily by the hand, while Ralf, who had followed
close behind her, again grasped Malcolm's hand.

'Well done, Glenuskie; you have all the adventures!  They seek you, I
believe!  So you have borne off your damosel errant, and are just in time
to receive your king.'

'Is he wedded then?'

'Ay, and you find us all here in full state, prepared to banquet him and
lodge him and his bride for a night, and then I fancy my brother is to go
through some ceremony, ere giving him up to his own subjects.  We are
watching for him every day.  Come to my chamber, and I'll apparel you.'

'Nay, but what brings you here, Ralf?--you, whom I thought in France.'

''Twas a Scottish bill that brought me,' answered Ralf.  'What, are you
too lost in parchment at Oxford to hear of us poor soldiers, or knew you
not how we fought at Crevant?'

'I heard of the battle, and that you were hurt, but that was months ago,
and I deemed you long since in the field again.  Was it so sore a
matter?'

'Chiefly sore for that it hindered me from taking the old rogue Douglas,
and meriting my spurs as befitted a Percy.  I was knighted while the
trumpet was sounding, and I did think that I was on the way to prowess,
for fully in the _melee_ I saw a fellow with the Douglas banner.  I made
at it, thinking of my father's and of Otterburn; and, Malcolm, this very
hand was on the staff, when what must a big Scot do but chop at me with
his bill like a butcher's axe.  Had it fallen on mine arm it would have
been lopped off like a bough of a tree, but, by St. George's grace, it
lit here, between my neck and shoulder, and stuck fast as I went down,
and the fellow was swept away from me.  'Twas so fixed in the very bone,
that they had much ado to wrench it out, when there was time after the
fight to look after us who had come by the worse.  And what d'ye think
they found, Malcolm?  Why, those honest Yorkshiremen, Trenton and Kitson,
stark dead, both of them.  Trenton must have gone down first, with a
lance-thrust in the throat; and there was Kitson over him, his shield
over his head, and his own cleft open with an axe!  They laid them side
by side--so I was told--in their grave; and sure 'twas as strange and as
true a brotherhood as ever was between two brave men.'

'The good fellows!' cried Malcolm.  'Nay, after what I saw I can hardly
grieve.  I went to Kitson's home, where they knew as little as I did of
his death, and verily his place had closed up behind him, so that I
scarce think his mother even cared to see him more, and the whole of them
seemed more concerned at his amity with Trenton than proud of his feats
of arms.  I was marvelling if their friendship would be allowed to
subsist at home, even when they, poor fellows, were lying side by side in
their French grave.'

'We warriors should never come home,' said Percy; 'we are spoilt for
aught but our French camp.  I am wearying to get back once more, but so
long as I cannot swing my sword-arm I must play the idler here.'

'It must have been a fearsome wound,' said Malcolm.  'The marvel is your
overgetting it.'

'So say they all; and truly it has lasted no small time.  They shipped me
off home so soon as I could leave my bed, and bade me rest.  Nay, and my
mother herself came even to London, when my brother was summoned to
Parliament,--she who had never been there since the first year after she
was wedded!'

'You can scarce complain of such kin as that,' said Malcolm.

''Tis not the kin, but this petty Border life, that frets me.  Here we
move from castle to castle, and now and then come tidings of a cattle
lifting, and Harry dons his helm and rides forth, but nine times out of
ten 'tis a false alarm, or if it be true, the thieves have made off, and
being time of peace, he, as Warden, cannot make a raid in return.  I'm
sick of the life, after the only warfare fit for a knight, with French
nobles instead of Border thieves; and back I will.  If my right arm will
not serve me, the left shall.  I can use a lance indifferent well
already.'

As Sir Ralf Percy spoke, a bugle-call rang through the castle.  He
started.  'Hark! that's the warder's horn,' and flying to the door, he
soon returned crying--'Your king is in sight, Malcolm!'

'How soon will he be here?'

'In less than half an hour.  There's time to array yourself.  I'll take
you to my chamber.'

'Thanks,' said Malcolm; 'but this gown is no disguise to me.  I had
rather meet the King thus, for it is my fitting garb.  Only I would
remove the soil of the journey, and then take my sister by the hand.'

For this there was ample time, and Malcolm had arranged his hair, and
brushed away the dust from his gown, washed his face and hands, and made
himself look more like an Oxford bachelor, and less like a begging clerk,
than he had of late judged it prudent to appear, ere Ralf took him to the
great hall, where he found Lord Northumberland and the chief gentlemen of
his household, with his mother, Lady Percy, and his young wife, together
with their ladies, assembling for the reception of their royal guests.

Malcolm was presented to, and kindly greeted by, each of the principal
personages, and then the Earl, Sir Ralf, and their officers went forth to
meet the King at the gateway.  Malcolm, however, at his sister's
entreaty, remained with her, for in the doubt whether Patrick were really
at hand, and a fond unreasonable vexation that he had had no part in her
liberation, her colour was coming and going, and she looked as if she
might almost faint in her intense excitement.

But when, marshalled by the two Percies, King James and Queen Joan had
entered the hall, and the blare of trumpets without and rejoicings
within, and had been welcomed with deep reverences by the two ladies,
Ralf said: 'Sir, methinks you have here what you may be glad to see.'

And standing aside, he made way for the two figures to stand forth, one
in the plain black gown and hood, the other in the rich robes of a high-
born maiden, her dark eyes on the ground, her fair face quivering within
emotion, as both she and her brother bent the knee before their royal
master.

'Ha!' cried James, 'this is well indeed.  Thou hast her, then, lad?  See,
Patrick!  Where is he?  Nay, but, fair wife, I must present thee the
first kinswoman of mine thou hast seen.  How didst bring her off,
Malcolm?'  And he embraced Malcolm with the ardour of a happy man, as he
added, 'This is all that was wanting.'

Truly James looked as if nothing were wanting to his joy, as there he
stood after his years of waiting, a bridegroom, free, and on the borders
of his native land.  His eyes shone with joy, and there was a bright
energy and alacrity in his bearing that, when Malcolm bethought him of
those former grave movements, and the quiet demeanour as though only
interested by an effort, marked the change from the captive to the free
man.  And beautiful Joan, lovelier than ever, took on her her queenly
dignity with all her wonted grace and graciousness.

She warmly embraced Lilias, hailing her as cousin, and auguring joyously
of the future from the sight of this first Stewart maiden whom she had
seen; and the next moment Patrick Drummond, hurrying forward, fell on his
knee before his lady, grasped, kissed, fondled her hand, and struggled
and stammered between his rejoicing over her liberation and despair that
he had no part in it.

'Yea,' said the King 'it was well-nigh a madman whom you sent home to me,
Malcolm.  He was neither to have nor to hold; and what he would have had
me do, or have let him do, I'll not say, nor doth he know either.  I must
hear your story ere I sleep, Malcolm.'

The King did not ask for it then: he would not brook the exposure of the
disunion and violence of Scotland to the English, especially the Percies;
and it was not till he could see Malcolm alone that he listened to his
history.

'Cousin,' he said, 'you have done both bravely and discreetly.  Methinks
you have redeemed my pledge to your good guardian that in the south you
should be trained to true manhood; though I am free to own that 'twas not
under my charge that you had the best training.  How is it to be,
Malcolm?  Patrick tells me you saw the Lady of Light.'

'Ay, Sir, but neither her purpose nor mine is shaken.  My lord, I believe
I see how best to serve God and yourself.  If you will consent, I will
finish my first course at Oxford, and then offer myself for the
priesthood.'

'Not hide thyself in cloister or school--that is well!' exclaimed the
King.

'No, Sir.  Methinks I could serve yonder rude people best if I were among
them as a priest.'

James considered, then said: 'I pledged myself not to withstand your
conscience, Malcolm; and though I grieve that the lady should be lost,
she has never wavered, and cannot be balked of her will.  Godly and
learned priests will indeed be needed; and between you and James Kennedy,
when both are come to elder years, we may perchance lift our poor
Scottish Church to some clearer sense of what a church should be.
Meanwhile--'  The King stopped and considered.  'Study in England!  Ay!
You see, Malcolm, I must take my seat, and have the reins of my unruly
steed firm in my hand, ere I take cognizance of these offences.  The
caitiff Walter--mansworn that he is--he shall abye it; but that can
scarce be as yet, and methinks it were not well that I entered Scotland
with you and your sister at my side, for then must I seem to have
overlooked an offence that, by this holy relic, I will never pardon.  So,
Malcolm, instead of entering Scotland with me--bonnie land, how sweet its
air blows from the north!--ye must e'en turn south!  But how to dispose
of your sister?  Some nunnery--'

'Poor Lily, she is weary of convents,' said Malcolm 'but if Lady Montagu
would let her be with her and the Lady Esclairmonde, then would she learn
somewhat of the ways of a well-ordered English noble house.  And I could
well provide for her being there as befits her station.'

'Well thought of!  The gentle Lady Alice will no doubt welcome her,' said
the King; 'and Patrick must endure.'

Thus then was it fixed.  The King and Queen, stately and beautiful,
royally robed, and mounted on splendid steeds, were escorted the next
morning to the Scottish gate of Berwick by Lord Northumberland and his
retinue, and they were met by an imposing band of Scottish nobles, with
the white-haired Earl of Lennox at their head.  To these the captive was
formally surrendered by Northumberland; and James, flinging himself from
his horse, kissed his native soil, and gave thanks aloud to God, ere he
stood up and received the homage of his subjects, to most of whom he was
a total stranger.

Malcolm and Lilias on the walls could see all, but could not hear, and
finally beheld the glittering troop wind their way over the hills to make
ready for the coronation of James and Joan as king and queen of Scotland.




CHAPTER XIX: THE LION'S WRATH


It was the 24th of May, 1425, when in the vaulted hall of the Castle of
Stirling the nobles of Scotland were convened to try, as the peers of the
realm, men of rank--no less than Murdoch, Duke of Albany, his sons Walter
and Alexander, the Earl of Lennox, and twenty-two other nobles, most of
whom had been arraigned in the Parliament of Perth two months previously,
and had been shut up in different castles.  Robert Stewart had escaped to
the Highlands; and Walter--who had neither been at the Coronation of
Scone, nor at the Parliament of Perth, nor indeed had ever bowed his
pride so as to present himself to the King at all--had been separately
arrested, and shut up for two months in the strong castle on the Bass
Rock.

The charge was termed treason and violence; and assuredly there had been
perpetual acts of spoil and barbarous infractions of the law by men who
deemed themselves above all law.  The only curiosity was, for which of
these acts they were to be tried, and this affected many of their judges
likewise; for there was hardly a man in that court who was not conscious
of some deed that would not exactly bear to be set beside the code of
Scotland, and who had not been in the habit of regarding those laws as
all very well for burghers, but not meant for gentlemen.

There, on seats behind the throne, sat the twenty-one jurors, Earl
Douglas among them--a new earl, for the grim old Archibald had died in
the battle of Verneuil some months before.  Angus, March, and Mar, and
all the most powerful names in Scotland, were there; and upon his throne,
in regal robes of crimson and ermine, the crown upon his brow, the
sceptre in his hand, the sword of state held before him, sat King James,
the most magnificent-looking king then reigning in Europe, but with the
sternest, saddest, most resolute of countenances, as one unalterably
fixed upon the terrible duty of not bearing the sword in vain.  Something
of Henry's avenging-angel look seemed to have passed into his face, but
with far more of melancholy weight.

Walter Stewart was led into the court.  He too was a man of lofty stature
and princely bearing, and his grand Stewart features were set in an
expression of easy nonchalance and scorn; aware as he was that of
whatever he might be accused, there were few of his judges that did not
share the guilt, and moreover persuaded that this was a mere ceremony,
and that the King would never dare to go beyond this futile attempt to
overawe him.  He stood alone--his father and the others were reserved for
another trial; and as, richly arrayed, he stood opposite to the jury,
gazing fixedly first at one, then at the other, as though challenging
their right to sit in judgment on him, one eye after another fell beneath
his gaze.

'Walter Stewart of Albany, Earl of Fife,' proclaimed the crier's voice.
'You stand here arraigned of murder and of robbery.'

'At whose suit?' demanded Walter, undaunted.

'At the suit of Malcolm and Lilias Stewart of Glenuskie; and of Patrick
Drummond of the Braes,' returned the crier, an ecclesiastic, as were all
lawyers; and at the same moment three figures came forward, namely, a
tall knightly gentleman with gold chain and spurs, a lady whose veil
disclosed a blushing dark-eyed face, and a slender youth of deep and
earnest countenance.  'At the suit of these here present you stand
arraigned, Sir Walter Stewart of Albany, for having feloniously, and of
malice aforethought, on the Eve of the Annunciation of our Lady, of the
year of grace 1421, set upon the said Malcolm and Lilias Stewart, Sir
David Drummond of the Braes, Tutor of Glenuskie, and divers other
persons, on the muir of Hetherfield; and having there cruelly and
maliciously wounded the said David of the Braes to the death; and of
having forcibly stolen and abducted the person of the said Lilias
