you--a young soldier, or next-door to it--refuse my offer?  Do I
understand you aright?' said I.

'My dear fellow!' he wailed, 'of course you can twist my words, if you
like.  You _say_ it was an affair of honour.  Well, I can't, of course,
tell you that--I can't--I mean, you must see that that's just the point!
Was it?  I don't know.'

'I have the honour to inform you,' said I.

'Well, other people say the reverse, you see!'

'They lie, Ronald, and I will prove it in time.'

'The short and the long of it is, that any man who is so unfortunate as
to have such things said about him is not the man to be my
brother-in-law!' he cried.

'Do you know who will be my first witness at the court?  Arthur
Chevenix!' said I.

'I don't care!' he cried, rising from his chair and beginning to pace
outrageously about the room.  'What do you mean, St. Ives?  What is this
about?  It's like a dream, I declare!  You made an offer, and I have
refused it.  I don't like it, I don't want it; and whatever I did, or
didn't, wouldn't matter--my aunt wouldn't bear of it anyway!  Can't you
take your answer, man?'

'You must remember, Ronald, that we are playing with edged tools,' said
I.  'An offer of marriage is a delicate subject to handle.  You have
refused, and you have justified your refusal by several statements:
first, that I was an impostor; second, that our countries were at war;
and third-- No, I will speak,' said I; 'you can answer when I have
done,--and third, that I had dishonourably killed--or was said to have
done so--the man Goguelat.  Now, my dear fellow, these are very awkward
grounds to be taking.  From any one else's lips I need scarce tell you
how I should resent them; but my hands are tied.  I have so much
gratitude to you, without talking of the love I bear your sister, that
you insult me, when you do so, under the cover of a complete impunity.  I
must feel the pain--and I do feel it acutely--I can do nothing to protect
myself.'  He had been anxious enough to interrupt me in the beginning;
but now, and after I had ceased, he stood a long while silent.

'St. Ives,' he said at last, 'I think I had better go away.  This has
been very irritating.  I never at all meant to say anything of the kind,
and I apologise to you.  I have all the esteem for you that one gentleman
should have for another.  I only meant to tell you--to show you what had
influenced my mind; and that, in short, the thing was impossible.  One
thing you may be quite sure of: I shall do nothing against you.  Will you
shake hands before I go away?' he blurted out.

'Yes,' said I, 'I agree with you--the interview has been irritating.  Let
bygones be bygones.  Good-bye, Ronald.'

'Good-bye, St. Ives!' he returned.  'I'm heartily sorry.'

And with that he was gone.

The windows of my own sitting-room looked towards the north; but the
entrance passage drew its light from the direction of the square.  Hence
I was able to observe Ronald's departure, his very disheartened gait, and
the fact that he was joined, about half-way, by no less a man than Major
Chevenix.  At this, I could scarce keep from smiling; so unpalatable an
interview must be before the pair of them, and I could hear their voices,
clashing like crossed swords, in that eternal antiphony of 'I told you,'
and 'I told you not.'  Without doubt, they had gained very little by
their visit; but then I had gained less than nothing, and had been
bitterly dispirited into the bargain.  Ronald had stuck to his guns and
refused me to the last.  It was no news; but, on the other hand, it could
not be contorted into good news.  I was now certain that during my
temporary absence in France, all irons would be put into the fire, and
the world turned upside down, to make Flora disown the obtrusive
Frenchman and accept Chevenix.  Without doubt she would resist these
instances: but the thought of them did not please me, and I felt she
should be warned and prepared for the battle.

It was no use to try and see her now, but I promised myself early that
evening to return to Swanston.  In the meantime I had to make all my
preparations, and look the coming journey in the face.  Here in Edinburgh
I was within four miles of the sea, yet the business of approaching
random fishermen with my hat in the one hand and a knife in the other,
appeared so desperate, that I saw nothing for it but to retrace my steps
over the northern counties, and knock a second time at the doors of
Birchell Fenn.  To do this, money would be necessary; and after leaving
my paper in the hands of Flora I had still a balance of about fifteen
hundred pounds.  Or rather I may say I had them and I had them not; for
after my luncheon with Mr. Robbie I had placed the amount, all but thirty
pounds of change, in a bank in George Street, on a deposit receipt in the
name of Mr. Rowley.  This I had designed to be my gift to him, in case I
must suddenly depart.  But now, thinking better of the arrangement, I
despatched my little man, cockade and all, to lift the fifteen hundred.

He was not long gone, and returned with a flushed face, and the deposit
receipt still in his hand.

'No go, Mr. Anne,' says he.

'How's that?' I inquired,

'Well, sir, I found the place all right, and no mistake,' said he.  'But
I tell you what gave me a blue fright!  There was a customer standing by
the door, and I reckonised him!  Who do you think it was, Mr. Anne?  W'y,
that same Red-Breast--him I had breakfast with near Aylesbury.'

'You are sure you are not mistaken?' I asked.

'Certain sure,' he replied.  'Not Mr. Lavender, I don't mean, sir; I mean
the other party.  "Wot's he doing here?' says I.  It don't look right."'

'Not by any means,' I agreed.

I walked to and fro in the apartment reflecting.  This particular Bow
Street runner might be here by accident; but it was to imagine a singular
play of coincidence that he, who had met Rowley and spoken with him in
the 'Green Dragon,' hard by Aylesbury, should be now in Scotland, where
he could have no legitimate business, and by the doors of the bank where
Rowley kept his account.

'Rowley,' said I, 'he didn't see you, did he?'

'Never a fear,' quoth Rowley.  'W'y Mr. Anne, sir, if he 'ad, you
wouldn't have seen _me_ any more!  I ain't a hass, sir!'

'Well, my boy, you can put that receipt in your pocket.  You'll have no
more use for it till you're quite clear of me.  Don't lose it, though;
it's your share of the Christmas-box: fifteen hundred pounds all for
yourself.'

'Begging your pardon, Mr. Anne, sir, but wot for!' said Rowley.

'To set up a public-house upon,' said I.

'If you'll excuse me, sir, I ain't got any call to set up a public-house,
sir,' he replied stoutly.  'And I tell you wot, sir, it seems to me I'm
reether young for the billet.  I'm your body servant, Mr. Anne, or else
I'm nothink.'

'Well, Rowley,' I said, 'I'll tell you what it's for.  It's for the good
service you have done me, of which I don't care--and don't dare--to
speak.  It's for your loyalty and cheerfulness, my dear boy.  I had meant
it for you; but to tell you the truth, it's past mending now--it has to
be yours.  Since that man is waiting by the bank, the money can't be
touched until I'm gone.'

'Until you're gone, sir?' re-echoed Rowley.  'You don't go anywheres
without me, I can tell you that, Mr. Anne, sir!'

'Yes, my boy,' said I, 'we are going to part very soon now; probably
to-morrow.  And it's for my sake, Rowley!  Depend upon it, if there was
any reason at all for that Bow Street man being at the bank, he was not
there to look out for you.  How they could have found out about the
account so early is more than I can fathom; some strange coincidence must
have played me false!  But there the fact is; and Rowley, I'll not only
have to say farewell to you presently, I'll have to ask you to stay
indoors until I can say it.  Remember, my boy, it's only so that you can
serve me now.'

'W'y, sir, you say the word, and of course I'll do it!' he cried.
'"Nothink by 'alves," is my motto!  I'm your man, through thick and thin,
live or die, I am!'

In the meantime there was nothing to be done till towards sunset.  My
only chance now was to come again as quickly as possible to speech of
Flora, who was my only practicable banker; and not before evening was it
worth while to think of that.  I might compose myself as well as I was
able over the _Caledonian Mercury_, with its ill news of the campaign of
France and belated documents about the retreat from Russia; and, as I sat
there by the fire, I was sometimes all awake with anger and mortification
at what I was reading, and sometimes again I would be three parts asleep
as I dozed over the barren items of home intelligence.  'Lately
arrived'--this is what I suddenly stumbled on--'at Dumbreck's Hotel, the
Viscount of Saint-Yves.'

'Rowley,' said I.

'If you please, Mr. Anne, sir,' answered the obsequious, lowering his
pipe.

'Come and look at this, my boy,' said I, holding out the paper.

'My crikey!' said he.  'That's 'im, sir, sure enough!'

'Sure enough, Rowley,' said I.  'He's on the trail.  He has fairly caught
up with us.  He and this Bow Street man have come together, I would
swear.  And now here is the whole field, quarry, hounds and hunters, all
together in this city of Edinburgh.'

'And wot are you goin' to do now, sir?  Tell you wot, let me take it in
'and, please!  Gimme a minute, and I'll disguise myself, and go out to
this Dum--- to this hotel, leastways, sir--and see wot he's up to.  You
put your trust in me, Mr. Anne: I'm fly, don't you make no mistake about
it.  I'm all a-growing and a-blowing, I am.'

'Not one foot of you,' said I.  'You are a prisoner, Rowley, and make up
your mind to that.  So am I, or next door to it.  I showed it you for a
caution; if you go on the streets, it spells death to me, Rowley.'

'If you please, sir,' says Rowley.

'Come to think of it,' I continued, 'you must take a cold, or something.
No good of awakening Mrs. McRankine's suspicions.'

'A cold?' he cried, recovering immediately from his depression.  'I can
do it, Mr. Anne.'

And he proceeded to sneeze and cough and blow his nose, till I could not
restrain myself from smiling.

'Oh, I tell you, I know a lot of them dodges,' he observed proudly.

'Well, they come in very handy,' said I.

'I'd better go at once and show it to the old gal, 'adn't I?' he asked.

I told him, by all means; and he was gone upon the instant, gleeful as
though to a game of football.

I took up the paper and read carelessly on, my thoughts engaged with my
immediate danger, till I struck on the next paragraph:--

    'In connection with the recent horrid murder in the Castle, we are
    desired to make public the following intelligence.  The soldier,
    Champdivers, is supposed to be in the neighbourhood of this city.  He
    is about the middle height or rather under, of a pleasing appearance
    and highly genteel address.  When last heard of he wore a fashionable
    suit of pearl-grey, and boots with fawn-coloured tops.  He is
    accompanied by a servant about sixteen years of age, speaks English
    without any accent, and passed under the _alias_ of Ramornie.  A
    reward is offered for his apprehension.'

In a moment I was in the next room, stripping from me the pearl-coloured
suit!

I confess I was now a good deal agitated.  It is difficult to watch the
toils closing slowly and surely about you, and to retain your composure;
and I was glad that Rowley was not present to spy on my confusion.  I was
flushed, my breath came thick; I cannot remember a time when I was more
put out.

And yet I must wait and do nothing, and partake of my meals, and
entertain the ever-garrulous Rowley, as though I were entirely my own
man.  And if I did not require to entertain Mrs. McRankine also, that was
but another drop of bitterness in my cup!  For what ailed my landlady,
that she should hold herself so severely aloof, that she should refuse
conversation, that her eyes should be reddened, that I should so
continually hear the voice of her private supplications sounding through
the house?  I was much deceived, or she had read the insidious paragraph
and recognised the comminated pearl-grey suit.  I remember now a certain
air with which she had laid the paper on my table, and a certain sniff,
between sympathy and defiance, with which she had announced it: 'There's
your _Mercury_ for ye!'

In this direction, at least, I saw no pressing danger; her tragic
countenance betokened agitation; it was plain she was wrestling with her
conscience, and the battle still hung dubious.  The question of what to
do troubled me extremely.  I could not venture to touch such an intricate
and mysterious piece of machinery as my landlady's spiritual nature: it
might go off at a word, and in any direction, like a badly-made firework.
And while I praised myself extremely for my wisdom in the past, that I
had made so much a friend of her, I was all abroad as to my conduct in
the present.  There seemed an equal danger in pressing and in neglecting
the accustomed marks of familiarity.  The one extreme looked like
impudence, and might annoy, the other was a practical confession of
guilt.  Altogether, it was a good hour for me when the dusk began to fall
in earnest on the streets of Edinburgh, and the voice of an early
watchman bade me set forth.

I reached the neighbourhood of the cottage before seven; and as I
breasted the steep ascent which leads to the garden wall, I was struck
with surprise to hear a dog.  Dogs I had heard before, but only from the
hamlet on the hillside above.  Now, this dog was in the garden itself,
where it roared aloud in paroxysms of fury, and I could hear it leaping
and straining on the chain.  I waited some while, until the brute's fit
of passion had roared itself out.  Then, with the utmost precaution, I
drew near again; and finally approached the garden wall.  So soon as I
had clapped my head above the level, however, the barking broke forth
again with redoubled energy.  Almost at the same time, the door of the
cottage opened, and Ronald and the Major appeared upon the threshold with
a lantern.  As they so stood, they were almost immediately below me,
strongly illuminated, and within easy earshot.  The Major pacified the
dog, who took instead to low, uneasy growling intermingled with
occasional yelps.

'Good thing I brought Towzer!' said Chevenix.

'Damn him, I wonder where he is!' said Ronald; and he moved the lantern
up and down, and turned the night into a shifting puzzle-work of gleam
and shadow.  'I think I'll make a sally.'

'I don't think you will,' replied Chevenix.  'When I agreed to come out
here and do sentry-go, it was on one condition, Master Ronald: don't you
forget that!  Military discipline, my boy!  Our beat is this path close
about the house.  Down, Towzer! good boy, good boy--gently, then!' he
went on, caressing his confounded monster.

'To think!  The beggar may be hearing us this minute!' cried Ronald.

'Nothing more probable,' said the Major.  'You there, St. Ives?' he
added, in a distinct but guarded voice.  'I only want to tell you, you
had better go home.  Mr. Gilchrist and I take watch and watch.'

The game was up.  '_Beaucoup de plaisir_!' I replied, in the same tones.
'_Il fait un peu froid pour veiller_; _gardez-vous des engelures_!'

I suppose it was done in a moment of ungovernable rage; but in spite of
the excellent advice he had given to Ronald the moment before, Chevenix
slipped the chain, and the dog sprang, straight as an arrow, up the bank.
I stepped back, picked up a stone of about twelve pounds weight, and
stood ready.  With a bound the beast landed on the cope-stone of the
wall; and, almost in the same instant, my missile caught him fair in the
face.  He gave a stifled cry, went tumbling back where he had come from,
and I could hear the twelve-pounder accompany him in his fall.  Chevenix,
at the same moment, broke out in a roaring voice: 'The hell-hound!  If
he's killed my dog!' and I judged, upon all grounds, it was as well to be
off.




CHAPTER XXX--EVENTS OF WEDNESDAY; THE UNIVERSITY OF CRAMOND


I awoke to much diffidence, even to a feeling that might be called the
beginnings of panic, and lay for hours in my bed considering the
situation.  Seek where I pleased, there was nothing to encourage me and
plenty to appal.  They kept a close watch about the cottage; they had a
beast of a watch-dog--at least, unless I had settled it; and if I had, I
knew its bereaved master would only watch the more indefatigably for the
loss.  In the pardonable ostentation of love I had given all the money I
could spare to Flora; I had thought it glorious that the hunted exile
should come down, like Jupiter, in a shower of gold, and pour thousands
in the lap of the beloved.  Then I had in an hour of arrant folly buried
what remained to me in a bank in George Street.  And now I must get back
the one or the other; and which? and how?

As I tossed in my bed, I could see three possible courses, all extremely
perilous.  First, Rowley might have been mistaken; the bank might not be
watched; it might still be possible for him to draw the money on the
deposit receipt.  Second, I might apply again to Robbie.  Or, third, I
might dare everything, go to the Assembly Ball, and speak with Flora
under the eyes of all Edinburgh.  This last alternative, involving as it
did the most horrid risks, and the delay of forty-eight hours, I did but
glance at with an averted head, and turned again to the consideration of
the others.  It was the likeliest thing in the world that Robbie had been
warned to have no more to do with me. The whole policy of the Gilchrists
was in the hands of Chevenix; and I thought this was a precaution so
elementary that he was certain to have taken it.  If he had not, of
course I was all right: Robbie would manage to communicate with Flora;
and by four o'clock I might be on the south road and, I was going to say,
a free man.  Lastly, I must assure myself with my own eyes whether the
bank in George Street were beleaguered.

I called to Rowley and questioned him tightly as to the appearance of the
Bow Street officer.

'What sort of looking man is he, Rowley?' I asked, as I began to dress.

'Wot sort of a looking man he is?' repeated Rowley.  'Well, I don't very
well know wot you would say, Mr. Anne.  He ain't a beauty, any'ow.'

'Is he tall?'

'Tall?  Well, no, I shouldn't say _tall_ Mr. Anne.'

