it there.  When night came the position was little changed.  The
advantage still lay with the Confederates.

Next day there was no hesitation.  Both sides knew that the deadly
duel must be fought to the close, and at dawn the roll and thud of
cannon began.  From hill to hill gun answered gun, shells screamed
and hissed, and the whole valley seemed to be encircled with flame
and smoke.  But the Confederates gained nothing.  The Federals stood
firm.

At length Lee determined to make a mighty effort to smash the
center of the Federal line, and split it in two.  Collecting about a
hundred and fifty guns he massed them along a height named Seminary
Ridge, and with these he pounded the Federals on Cemetery Hill
opposite.  For two hours the terrible cannonade lasted.  At first
the Federal guns replied vigorously, then they almost ceased.  They
ceased, not because they had been put out of action, not because
ammunition was running short, but because Meade was reserving his
strength for the infantry attack he knew must come.

In the Confederate camp there was strained anxiety.  Lee had determined
to make the attack, but General Longstreet was against it.  He did
not believe that it could succeed.  It was, he felt sure, only the
useless throwing away of brave lives, and his heart was wrung with
sorrow at the thought.  But Lee insisted, and General George E.
Pickett's division was chosen to make the attempt.

So Longstreet gave way.  But when Pickett came to him for last
orders he could not speak; he merely nodded his head, and turned
away with a sob.

Pickett, however, knew neither hesitation nor fear.

"Sir," he said firmly, "I shall lead my division forward."

Again Longstreet gave a sign, and Pickett, gallant and gay, rode off
"into the jaws of death." Erect and smiling, his cap set rakishly
over one ear, his brown-gold hair shining in the sun, he seemed,
said Longstreet long after, more like a "holiday soldier" than a
general about to lead a desperate and almost hopeless attack.

The Federal lines were a mile away.  Towards them, towards the
bristling row of guns, the men marched steadily, keeping step as
if on parade, their banners fluttering gaily, and their bayonets
glittering in the sunshine.  Confident and elated they swept on.
They were out to win not merely the battle but the war, and they
meant to do it.

Half the distance was covered.  Then the Federal guns spoke.  Crashing
and thundering they tore great gaps in the approaching column.  Still
the men moved on steadily, resistlessly, until they came within
musket range.  Then on a sudden the whole Federal line became as it
were a sheet of flame and smoke, and the first line of the advancing
Confederates seemed to crumble away before the fearful fusilade.  But
the second line came on only faster and yet faster, firing volley
after volley, scattering frightful death as they came.

Nothing could stay their impetuous charge.  On they came right up
to the rifle pits.  In a rush they were across them, and over the
barricades.  Then with a yell of victory they threw themselves upon
the guns, bayoneting the gunners.  Leaping upon the barricade a man
held aloft the Confederate flag, waving it in triumphant joy.  The
next instant he fell mortally wounded, and the flag, bloodstained
and torn, was trampled under foot.

The Confederate success was only the success of a moment.  The
handful of heroic men who had reached the Federal guns could not
hope to hold them.  They died gallantly.  That was all.

A storm of shot and shell tore its way through the still advancing
ranks.  It became an ordeal of fire too great for even the bravest
to face.  The lines at length wavered, they broke, and the men were
scattered in flight.  Thousands lay dead and dying on the field, many
surrendered and were taken prisoner, and of the fifteen thousand
gallant soldiers who had set forth so gaily, only a pitiful remnant
of thirteen hundred blood-stained, weary men at length reached
their own lines.

This gallant and hopeless charge brought the battle of Gettysburg
to an end.  It brought victory to the Federal side, and the Confederates
slowly retired into Virginia once more.

Yet the victory was not very great nor in any way decisive, and
the cost of life had been frightful.  Indeed, so many brave men
had fallen upon this dreadful field that the thought came to the
Governor of the state that it would be well to make a portion of
it into a soldiers' burial place and thus consecrate it forever
as holy ground.  All the states whose sons had taken part in the
battle willingly helped, and a few months after the battle it was
dedicated.  And there President Lincoln made one of his most beautiful
and famous speeches.

"Fourscore and seven years ago," he said, "our fathers brought
forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and
dedicated to the proposition that all men are equal.  Now we are
engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any
nation so conceived, and so dedicated, can long endure.  We are
met on a great battlefield of that war.  We have come to dedicate a
portion of that field, as a final resting-place for those who here
gave their lives that that nation might live.  It is altogether
fitting and proper that we should do this.  But, in a larger sense
we cannot dedicate - we cannot consecrate - we cannot hollow - this
ground.  The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have
consecrated it, far above our poor power to add or detract.  The
world will little note, nor long remember, what we say here, but
it can never forget what they did here.  It is for us, the living,
rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they
who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced.  It is rather for
us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us-that
from these honoured dead we take increased devotion to that cause
for which they gave the last full measure of devotion - that we
here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain-that
this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom - and
that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall
not perish from the earth."

__________





Chapter 89 - Lincoln-Grant's Campaign-Sheridan's Ride




The victory of Gettysburg which had been so dearly bought was
not very great.  But hard upon it came the news that on the 4th of
July Vicksburg had surrendered to General Grant.  And taking both
victories together the people of the North felt that now they had
cause to hope.

After the capture of New Orleans in April, 1862, Faragut had sailed
up the Mississippi, and except for Vicksburg the whole valley was
in the control of the Federals.  Faragut would have attacked Vicksburg
also but his land force was not strong enough, and Halleck, who
was then commander-in-chief, did not see the great importance of
Vicksburg, and refused to send soldiers to aid him.

The Confederates, however, knew the importance of holding the city,
for it was the connecting link between the revolted states which
lay east and those which lay west of the great river.  Through it
passed enormous supplies of food from the West, and great quantities
also of arms and ammunition, and other war stores, which came from
Europe by way of Mexico.

So while the Federals neglected to take Vicksburg the Confederates
improved its fortifications until they were so strong that it seemed
almost impossible that it should ever be taken.

At length Grant was given supreme command of the western army,
and he, well knowing the importance of Vicksburg, became intent
on taking it.  Again and yet again he tried and failed.  Indeed he
failed so often that people began to clamour for his recall.  But
President Lincoln turned a deaf ear to the clamour and decided
always to "try him a little longer" and still a little longer.  And
Grant justified his trust.

Finding it impossible to take Vicksburg by assault he determined
to besiege it.  In a brilliant campaign of less than a fortnight he
marched a hundred and fifty miles, and fought four battles.  Then he
sat down with his victorious army before Vicksburg, and a regular
siege began.

Vicksburg was now completely surrounded.  On the river the fleet
kept watch, so that no boats carrying food, ammunition, or relief
of any kind could reach the fated city.  On land Grant's army dug
itself in, daily bringing the ring of trenches closer and closer
to the Confederate fortifications.  They were so close at last that
the soldiers on either side could hear each other talking, and
often friendly chat passed between the "Yanks" and the "Johnnies"
or Southerners.

"When are you coming into town, Yank?" the Confederates would ask.

"Well, Johnnie, we are thinking of celebrating the 4th of July
there," the Northerners would reply.

And at this the Johnnies would laugh as at a huge joke.  No 4th of
July would the Yanks celebrate in their city.

Regularly, too, the Confederates would pass over the little Vicksburg
paper, the Daily Citizen, to their enemies.  This paper appeared
daily to the last, although paper grew so scarce that it sometimes
consisted only of one sheet eighteen inches long and six inches
wide.  At length printing paper gave out altogether, and the journal
appeared printed on the plain side of wall paper.

Day was added to day, and week to week, and still the siege of
Vicksburg lasted.  All day cannon roared, shells screamed and whistled,
and the city seemed enveloped in flame and noise.  The streets
were places of death and danger, and the people took refuge in the
cellars of the houses, or in caves which they dug out of the clayey
soil.  In these caves whole families lived for weeks together, only
creeping out to breathe the air during the short intervals, night
and morning, when the guns ceased firing.

Food grew scarcer and scarcer until at length there was nothing
left but salt bacon, the flesh of mules, rats, and mouldy pea flour.
The soldiers became no longer fit to man the guns, their rations
being no more than a quarter of a pound of bacon and the same of
flour each day.  Water too ran short, and they were obliged to drink
the muddy water of the Mississippi.

Like pale specters the people crept about, and many, both soldiers
and citizens, died from starvation and disease brought on by
starvation.  At length Vicksburg seemed little more than one great
hospital, encircled by fire, made hideous by noise.  Human nature
could endure no longer, and on the morning of the 3rd of July white
flags appeared upon the ramparts.

Immediately the roar of cannon ceased, and silence fell on city and
camp.  After the six weeks' inferno it seemed to the racked nerves
and aching ears of the inhabitants as if the silence might be felt,
as if the peace wrapped them about like a soft robe.  The relief was
so great that many who had endured the weeks of torture dry-eyed
now burst into tears.  But they were healing tears.

Under a lonely tree, a few hundred yards beyond the Confederate lines,
Grant met General John C.  Pemberton, the defender of Vicksburg.  The
two men had fought side by side in the Mexican War, and had been
friends.  Now although divided by cruel strife they shook hand as
of old.  But memories of bygone days did not soften Grant's heart.
His terms were hard.  Once more he demanded unconditional surrender.
And Pemberton, knowing that resistance was impossible, yielded.

Next day the surrender was accomplished, and thirty thousand men
became prisoners of war.  Before noon the Union flag was flying over
the Court House.  Thus the "Yanks" celebrated the "glorious Fourth"
in Vicksburg, as they had said they would do.  But there was no
noisy rejoicing.  The Federals took possession almost in silence,
for they had too much admiration for their gallant foe to wish to
give them pain.  One cheer indeed rent the air, but it was given
for the glorious defenders of Vicksburg.

The whole North was now united in passionate admiration for Grant.
Cheering crowds followed him in the streets.  Fools and wise men
alike were eager to know him, to boast that they had spoken to him
or touched his hand.  Yet at first sight Grant seemed to have little
of the hero about him.  He was an "ordinary, scrubby looking man,
with a slightly seedy look," said one who saw him in those days.
"He did not march nor quite walk, but pitched along as if the next
step would bring him to his nose." But his eye was clear and blue,
he had a determined look, and seemed like a man it would be bad to
trifle with.

This shambling, scrubby looking man, with the clear blue eyes, was
now the idol of the people.  Lincoln too saw his genius as a leader,
and willingly yielding to the popular demand made him commander-in-chief
of all the United States armies.

Before long Grant had made his plans for the next campaign.  It was
a twofold one.  He himself with one army determined by blow after
blow to hammer Lee into submission while Sherman was to tackle the
other great Confederate army under Johnston.

In the beginning of May, Grant set out, and on the 5th and 6th the
battle of the Wilderness was fought not far from where the battle
of Chancellorsville had been fought the year before.  Grant had not
meant to fight here, but Lee, who knew every inch of the ground,
forced the fight on him.

In the tangled underwood of the Wilderness artillery and cavalry
were of little use, and the battle became a fierce struggle between
the foot soldiers of either army.  The forest was so thick that
officers could only see a small part of their men, and could only
guess at what was going on by the sound of the firing, and the
shouts exultant or despairing, of the men who were drive to and
fro in the dark and dreary thickets.  In the end neither side gained
anything except an increased respect for the foe.

Grant's aim was to take Richmond, the Confederate capital, and
after the battle of the Wilderness with that aim still before him
he moved his army to Spotsylvania.  He was hotly pursued by Lee and
here on the 10th and 12th of May another stern struggle took place.

The fighting on the 10th was so terrible that on the 11th both
armies rested as by common consent.  Next day the battle began again
and lasted until midnight.  It was a hand-to-hand struggle.  The tide
of victory swung this way and that.  Positions were taken and lost,
and taken again and after twenty-four hours of fighting neither
side had won.  Only thousands of brave men lay dead upon the field.

Still intent on Richmond, Grant moved southwards after this
terrible battle, followed closely by Lee.  Everyday almost there were
skirmishes between the two armies, but still Grant pressed onward
and arrived at length within a few miles of Richmond.  Here at Cold
Harbor Lee took up a strongly entrenched position from which it
seemed impossible to oust him, except by a grand assault.  Grant
determined to make that assault.

Both officers and men knew that it could not succeed, but Grant
commanded it and they obeyed.  Yet so sure were many of the men that
they were going to certain death that it is said they wrote their
names and addresses on slips of paper which they tacked to the backs
of their coats, so that when their bodies were found it might be
easily known who they were, and news be sent to their friends.

At half-past four in the grey morning light eighty thousand men
rushed upon the foe.  They were met with a blinding fire and swept
away.  In half an hour the attack was over.  It was the deadliest
half hour in all American history, and eight thousand Union men
lay dead upon the field.

"Some one had blundered." Grant had blundered.  He knew it, and all
his life after regretted it. "No advantage whatever was gained,"
he said, "to make up for the heavy loss we suffered."

In this terrible campaign he had lost sixty thousand men.  He had
not taken Richmond.  He had neither destroyed nor dispersed Lee's
army.  Still he hammered on, hoping in the long run to wear out Lee.
For the Confederates had lost heavily, too, and they had no more
men with which to make good their losses.  On the other hand the
gaps in the Federal army were filled up almost as soon as made.
"It's no use killing these fellows," said the Confederates, "a half
dozen take the place of every one we kill."

But the people of the North could not look on calmly at these
terrible doings.  They cast their idol down, and cried out against
Grant as a "butcher." They demanded his removal.  But Lincoln refused
again to listen to the clamour as he had refused before. "I cannot
spare that man," he said, "at least he fights."

Grant was terrible only for a good end.  He was ruthless so that
the war might be brought the more speedily to a close.  And Lincoln,
the most tender hearted of all men, knew it.  Undismayed therefore
Grant fought on.  But his army was weary of much fighting, disheartened
by ill success, weakened by many losses.  New recruits indeed had
been poured into.  But they were all unused to discipline.  Months of
drill were needed before they could become good soldiers.  In June
then Grant settled down to besiege Petersburg, and drill his new
men the while, and not till the spring of 1865 did the army of the
Potomac again take the field.

Meanwhile there was fighting elsewhere.

On the part of the Confederates there was a constant endeavour
to take Washington, and in July of this year the Confederate army
actually came within a few miles of the city.  There was great alarm
in the capital, for it was defended chiefly by citizen soldiers
and fresh recruits who had little knowledge of warfare.  But just in
time Grant sent strong reinforcements from the army of the Potomac
and the Confederates marched away without making an attack.  They only
retired, however, into the Shenandoah Valley, and their presence
there was a constant menace to Washington.  Early in August therefore
General Sheridan was sent to clear the enemy out of the valley,
and relieve Washington from the constant fear of attack.

He began his work vigorously, and soon had command of most of the
roads leading to Washington.  But he knew that General Jubal A.
Early who commanded the Confederate troops was a skilful and tried
soldier, and, to begin with, he moved with caution.  For some weeks
indeed both commanders played as it were a game of chess, maneuvering
for advantage of position.  But at length a great battle was fought
at Winchester in which the Confederates were defeated and driven from
the field.  Three days later another battle was fought at Fisher's
Hill, and once again in spite of gallant fighting the Confederates
were beaten.

After this battle Sheridan marched back through the valley,
destroying and carrying away everything which might be of use to
the foe.  Houses were left untouched, but barns and mills with all
their stores of food and forage were burned to the ground.  Thousands
of horses and cattle were driven off, and the rich and smiling
valley made a desolation, with nothing left in it, as Grant said,
to invite the enemy to return.

Having finished this work Sheridan dashed off to Washington, to
consult with the Secretary of war about his future movements.  The
Confederate army had meanwhile encamped again near Fisher's Hill.
And Early, hearing of Sheridan's absence, determined to make a
surprise attack on the Federal army.

In the darkness of the night they set out, and stealthily crept
towards the Federal camp at Cedar Creek.  Every care was taken so
that no sound should be made.  The men were even ordered to leave
their canteens behind, lest they should rattle against their rifles.
Not a word was spoken as the great column crept onward, climbing
up and down steep hillsides, fording streams, pushing through
thickly growing brushwood.  At length before sunrise, without alarm
or hindrance of any kind the Confederates reached the camp of the
sleeping Federals.

Each man was soon in his appointed place, and in the cold grey
dawn stood waiting the signal.  At length a shot rang out, and with
their well-known yell the Confederates threw themselves into the
camp.

As quickly as might be the Federals sprang up and seized their
arms.  But they had been taken utterly by surprise, and before they
could form in battle array they were scattered in flight.

Before the sun was well up the Federals were defeated, and their
camp and cannon were in the hands of the enemy.  Meanwhile Sheridan
had reached Winchester on his return journey from Washington.  He
had slept the night there, and had been awakened by the sound of
firing.  At first he thought little of it, but as the roar continued
he became sure that a great battle was being fought-and he was
twenty miles away! He set spurs to his horse, and through the cool
morning air,

"A steed as black as steeds of night, Was seen to pass, as with
eagle flight.  As if he knew the terrible need, He stretched away
with his utmost speed."

Mile after mile the great black horse ate up the roads.  The sound
of firing grew louder and louder, and at length men fleeing in rout
and confusion came in sight.  There was every sign of a complete
defeat.  Wounded, unwounded, baggage wagons, mule teams, all were
fleeing in confusion.

It was a grievous sight for Sheridan.  But he refused to accept
defeat.  Rising high in his stirrups he waved his hat in the air,
and shouted cheerily, "Face the other way, boys.  We are going back
to our camp.  We are going to lick them into their boots."

At the sound of his voice the fleeing soldiers paused, and
with a mighty shout they faced about.  Even the wounded joined in
the cheering.  The beaten, disheartened army took heart again, the
scattered, disorganized groups were gathered, a compact line of
battle was formed, and at the end of two hours the men were not
only ready but eager once more to grapple with the foe.

Then the second battle of Cedar Creek was fought.  At ten o'clock in
the morning the Federals had been defeated.  By five in the afternoon
the Confederates were not only defeated, but utterly routed.  Their
army was shattered and the war swept out of the Shenandoah Valley
for good and all.  Then Sheridan marched his victorious troops to
join Grant before Petersburg.

__________





Chapter 90 - Lincoln - Sherman's March to the Sea - Lincoln Re-Elected
President




Grant's plan of action was twofold, and while he was fighting the
second Confederate army under General J.E.  Johnston.  At the beginning
of the campaign Sherman's army was at Chattanooga in Tennessee,
and while Grant was fighting the battle of the Wilderness, he began
his march to Atlanta, Georgia.  Fighting all the way, the Confederate
army always retreating before him, he slowly approached Atlanta.
At length on September 2nd he entered and took possession of it.

Here for a few weeks the soldiers rested after their arduous labours.
The preparation for the next campaign began.  All the sick and
wounded, extra tents and baggage, in fact every one and everything
which could be done without, was sent back to Tennessee.  For the
order had gone forth that the army was to travel light on this
campaign.  None but the fit and strong were to take part in it, and
they were to carry with them only three weeks' rations.

Where they were going the men did not know.  They did not ask.  There
was no need to trouble, for Sherman was leading them, and they knew
he would lead them to victory.

After Richmond, Atlanta had supplied more guns and ammunition and
other war material for the Confederacy than any other town, and
before he left it, Sherman determined to destroy everything which
might be of use to the enemy.  So he emptied the town of all its
inhabitants, and blew up all the gun and ammunition factories,
storehouses, and arsenals.  He tore up the railroads all around
Atlanta also, and last of all cut the telegraph which linked him
to the North.  Then cut off as it were from all the world with his
force of nearly sixty-six thousand men, he turned eastward toward
the sea.

The army marched in four divisions, taking roads which as nearly
as possible ran alongside each other, so that each division might
keep in touch with the others.  Every morning at daybreak they broke
camp and during the day marched from ten to fifteen miles.  And as
they passed through it they laid waste the land.  Railroads were
torn up and thoroughly destroyed.  The sleepers were made into piles
and set alight, the rails were laid on the top of the bonfires, and
when hot enough to be pliable were twisted beyond all possibility
of being used again.  Telegraph wires and poles were torn down,
factories were burned, only private homes being left untouched.

Foragers quartered the country, sweeping it bare of cattle, poultry,
fodder and corn.  For both man and beast of the great army fed upon
the land as they passed through it, the rations with which they had
come provided being kept in case of need.  Indeed the troops fed so
well that the march, it was said, was like a "continuous Thanksgiving."
What they did not eat they destroyed.

Thus right across the fertile land a stretch of waste and desolation
was created about sixty miles wide.  Yet it was not done in wantonness,
but as a terrible necessity of war.  It clove the Confederacy from
east to west as thoroughly as the Mississippi clove it from north
to south.  It rifled and well-nigh exhausted the rich granary which
fed the Confederate army, and by destroying the railroads prevented
even what was left being sent to them.  Grant  meant to end the war,
and it seemed to him more merciful to destroy food and property
than to destroy men.

Through all this great raid there was little fighting done.  And
as the army marched day by day through the sunny land a sort of
holiday spirit pervaded it.  The work was a work of grim destruction,
but it was done in the main with good temper.  The sun shone, the
men led a free and hardy life, growing daily more brown and sinewy,
and at the end of the march of nearly three hundred miles, far
from being worn out, they were more fit and strong than when they
set forth.

By the second week in December the goal was reached - Savannah and
the sea.  Here the army joined hands with the navy.  Fort McAllister,
which defended the south side of the city, was taken by a brilliant
assault, and Sherman prepared for a siege of Savannah both by land
and water.  But in the night the Confederates quietly slipped out
of the city, and retreated across the swamps.  When their flight
was discovered they were already beyond reach of pursuit, and with
hardly a blow struck, the city of Savannah fell into the hands of
the Federals.

The great march had ended triumphantly on December 21. "I beg to
present to you, as a Christmas gift," wrote Sherman to Lincoln,
"the city of Savannah with a hundred and fifty-nine heavy guns and
plenty of ammunition, and also about twenty-five thousand bales of
cotton."

This news followed hard on the news of another victory.  For
on December 15th and 16th the Federals under General George H.
Thomas had fought a great battle at Nashville, Tennessee, in which
the Confederates had been defeated.  By this battle their strength
beyond the Alleghenies was practically crushed, so as the year 1864
closed, the hopes of the Federals rose high.

Early in 1865 still another victory was recorded in the taking
of Fort Fisher in North Carolina.  This was the  last port in the
possession of the Confederates.  With it, they lost their last link
with the outside world, and the blockade which Lincoln had proclaimed
nearly four years before was at length complete.

All hope of success now utterly vanished for the Confederates.
Even Lee knew it, and he might have advised the South to lay down
arms, but Jefferson Davis, the Southern President, doggedly refused
to own himself beaten.  So the war continued.

On the 1st of February, Sherman set out from Savannah on a second
march.  This time he turned northward, and carried his victorious
army right through the Carolinas.  The march was longer by more
than a hundred miles than his now famous march to the sea.  It was
one too of much greater difficulty.  Indeed, compared with it, the
march to the sea had been a mere picnic.

The weather now was horrible.  Rain fell in torrents, and the army
floundered through seas of mud.  Along the whole way too they were
harassed by the foe, and hardly a day passed without fighting of some
sort.  But, like an inexorable fate, Sherman pressed on, destroying
railroads, and arsenals, creating a desert about him until at length
he joined forces with Grant.

In the midst of this devastating war while some states were fighting
for separation, another new state was added to the Union.  This was
Nevada.  Nevada is Spanish and means snowy, and the state takes its
name from the snowy topped mountains which run through it.  It was
formed out of part of the Mexican territory.  Like West Virginia,
the other battle-born state, it was true to the Union.  And scanty
though the population was, it raised more than a thousand men for
the Union cause.

Now too, in the midst of war in November of 1864 came the time of
electing a new President.  Many people were tired of the war.  They
had expected it to last for a few months, and it had lasted for
years, and some of them were inclined to blame Lincoln for it.  So
they wanted a new President.  But for the most part the people loved
Lincoln.  He was Father Abe to them.  And even those who wanted a
change agreed with Lincoln himself when he said that "it was not
well to swap horses when crossing a stream."

So Lincoln was triumphantly elected and on March 4th, 1865, he was
inaugurated for the second time.  He made the shortest speech ever
made on such an occasion, and he closed this short speech with the
most beautiful and unforgettable words.

"With malice towards none, with charity for all, with firmness in
the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to
finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care
for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and
for his orphan -to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and
lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations."

__________





Chapter 91 - Lincoln - The End of the War - The President's Death




No President ever took up his burden in a more great hearted
fashion than Lincoln.  No President ever faced the difficulties of
his position with so much tenderness, and so much strength.  But
he felt his burdens lie heavy on his shoulders.  Deep lines of pain
were graven on his face, and to his sad eyes there came a deeper
sadness.  Yet he never lost heart, and even in the gravest moments
he would pause to tell a funny story.

"I should break down otherwise," he said.

He had no anger against the south, only a deep pity, a deep desire
to see the country one again.  So, much as he longed for peace, he
would listen to no proposal which did not mean peace with union.
And, as Jefferson Davis declared that he would rather die than see
North and South united, the war continued.

On the 1st of April a great battle was fought at Five Forks, a few
miles from Petersburg.  In this the Confederates were defeated, and
more than five thousand were taken prisoner.  The next day, true to
his hammering policy, Grant ordered a great assault all along the
lines before Petersburg.  At daybreak the attack began, and again
the Federals were victorious.  All that brave men could do the
Confederates did.  But their valour availed them nothing.  They were
far outnumbered, and their line was pierced in many places.

That morning President Davis was sitting in church at Richmond when
a dispatch from Lee was brought to him. "My lines are broken," it
said; "Richmond must be evacuated this evening."

Quickly and silently Jefferson Davis left the church.  His day of
power was over, and, with his Cabinet and officials, he fled from
Richmond.

Soon the news spread throughout the Southern capital, and panic
seized upon the people.  Warehouses, filled with tobacco and cotton,
were set in flames.  All that was evil in the city broke loose, the
prison was emptied, rogues and robbers worked their will.  Soon the
streets were filled with a struggling mob of people, some bent on
plunder, others on fleeing from the place of terror and turmoil.

The night passed in confusion and horror past description.  Then
the next day the Federals took possession of the distracted city,
and in a few hours the tumult was hushed, the flames subdued, and
something like order restored.

Meanwhile, without entering the city, Grant was hotly pursuing Lee
and his army.  The chase was no long one.  Lee's army was worn out,
ragged, barefoot and starving.  Grant, with an army nearly three
times as large, and well equipped besides, soon completely surrounded
him north, south, east and west.  Escape there was none.

"There is nothing left me but to go and see General Grant," said
Lee, "and I would rather die a thousand deaths." But like the brave
soldier he was, he faced what seemed worse that death rather than
uselessly sacrifice gallant lives.

A few letters passed between the two great leaders, then they met
in a private house at Appomattox Court House.  The contrast between
the two was great.  Lee looked the Southern aristocrat he was.
White-haired and tall, erect still in spite of his sixty years, he
was dressed in splendid  uniform, and wore a jeweled sword at his
side.  Grant, half a head shorter, fifteen years younger, seemed
but a rough soldier beside him.  He wore only the blue blouse of a
private, and carried no sword, nothing betraying his rank except
his shoulder straps.

It was Lee's first meeting with "Unconditional Surrender" Grant.
But this time Grant drove no hard bargain. "I felt like anything
rather than rejoicing at the downfall of a foe who had fought so
long and valiantly," he said many years after.  The war was over,
and there was no need of severity.  So officers and men alike were
all released on the promise that they would not again take up arms
against the United States.  The officers were allowed to keep their
swords, their horses and belongings.  The privates also were allowed
to keep their horses, for as Grant said, " they would need them
for their spring ploughing."

Everything being settled, Lee returned to his men to break the
news to them.  His face was stern and sad as he faced his worn and
ragged troops.  As he looked at them words failed him. "Men," he
said, "we have fought through the war together, and I have done
the best I could for you." Then he ceased.  Tears blinded and choked
him, sobs burst from the hardy men who had followed him joyfully
to death.  So they said farewell.

Grant on his side would allow no rejoicing in his camp, no firing
