
"Monsieur le baron," she said in a low tone, "do you think that the air
of Paris agrees with you as well as that of the army?"

He felt from the manner in which she spoke, that she meant more than she
said.

"So far, madam, it has not disagreed with me," he said; "and even did
it do so I should not be able to leave it, as I have orders to remain
here."

"By the way, monsieur," she said, changing the subject of conversation,
"it is whispered that that party of pleasure to which you took the
officers of your regiment at St. Germain did not come off, at least none
of the landlords of the hotels there can recall any such gathering, and
it is even said that your falling in with the carriage of the Duke of
Orleans was not altogether an accident. I only mention the reports; of
course, it was a matter of no moment whether your party dined at St.
Germain or at Sevres. But sometimes misapprehensions of this kind
lead to trouble, especially when they happen a few days before serious
events. I like you, Colonel Campbell, and that is why I have mentioned
this; you understand me, I have no doubt;" and, turning to a gentleman
who had at that moment approached her, she entered into a lively
conversation with him, and Hector rose, and with the words, "Thank you,
madam," bowed, and moved away.

It was easy to understand her meaning. Beaufort and the conspirators
whose plan he had thwarted, and who had suffered imprisonment and exile
thereby, had in some way discovered that it was to him that they owed
their failure and disgrace. At the moment his explanation and that of
his officers had deceived them, but doubtless someone whose connection
with the plot was unsuspected had instituted inquiries, found that the
party he had spoken of had not taken place, and had at once come to
the conclusion that he had in some way discovered their intentions, had
really ridden out with his officers to furnish a guard to Mazarin, and
had afterwards acquainted him with what he had discovered. Doubtless,
as Madame de Chevreuse had warned him, the air of Paris was at present
dangerously unwholesome for him. He had been the means of bringing
disgrace and punishment upon the Duc de Vendome and the Duke of
Beaufort, two of the most powerful nobles in France, and a host of their
friends.

It was probable that they only recently assured themselves that it was
he who had thwarted their plans; had it been otherwise he would scarcely
have escaped their vengeance the last time that he was in Paris. Now,
from what Madame de Chevreuse had said, he had no doubt whatever that
some plot would be made against his life. He might thwart one such
attempt, but others would follow. He resolved to lay the matter before
the cardinal and take his advice. Accordingly he waited until he was
leaving; several gentlemen of his suite accompanied him, and at the
entrance to the Louvre the men of the cardinal's guard fell in on either
side. When they reached Mazarin's hotel Hector moved up to him.

"Can I have a few words with you, your eminence?"

"Certainly, Colonel Campbell; I never retire to bed till long past
midnight. It is something serious, I see," he said quickly as they
entered his apartment, where a number of candles were burning, and he
obtained a full view of Hector's face. "Another plot?"

"Not against your eminence; it is a matter which concerns myself only.
I have been warned tonight that my share in the last affair has been
discovered, that inquiries have been made at St. Germain, and that the
various innkeepers have declared that no party of officers dined there
that morning, and that it was therefore concluded that our presence
behind your carriage was not accidental. They no doubt guessed that
it was I who discovered the plot, in consequence of which so many were
arrested and exiled. I have been distinctly warned that the air of Paris
is unwholesome for me."

"Who warned you?" the cardinal said abruptly.

"It would not be fair of me to mention the name, but it is at any rate
one who is of Beaufort's party."

"Ah!" the cardinal said sharply, "I noticed you sitting for a few
minutes by Madame de Chevreuse. Never mind, I will respect your
confidence. I can well understand, after what you have said, that there
is great danger here, and it is a danger from which it is well nigh
impossible to protect you, unless you take up your residence here and
never stir abroad. Nor do I know that you would be safer with the army;
an assassin's knife can reach a man as easily in a camp as in a city,
and with perhaps less risk of detection. Neither Beaufort nor Vendome
are men to forget or forgive an injury, and they have scores of
fellows who would for a few crowns murder anyone they indicated, and of
gentlemen of higher rank who, although not assassins, would willingly
engage you in a duel, especially those who suffered in the plot that you
discovered. Frankly, what do you think yourself?"

"I might retire to la Villar, cardinal. I should be safe there in my own
castle."

"So long as you did not leave it; but a man with a musket in ambush
behind a hedge might cut your career short. It is probable enough that
you are watched, and in that case I should doubt whether you would ever
get to la Villar, nor do I think that if you left for the Rhine you
would get halfway. Now you see, Monsieur Campbell, that your cause is
mine, and that your safety touches me as if it were my own, for it was
in my service that you incurred the danger. I must think the matter
over. In the meantime I beg of you to sleep here tonight. I will send
word to your servant that you will not return. I could of course send
a guard with you to your hotel, but some of the servants there may
have been bribed to murder you as you slept. I can look after myself; I
seldom leave the house except to go to the Louvre, and I never go even
that short distance without a guard, but it is much more difficult to
protect you."

"I have my own bodyguard, your excellency--four stout Scotch soldiers
and my lackey, Paolo, who is a good swordsman also; and as it does not
seem to me that I should be safer elsewhere than here, I shall at any
rate stay for a time. I should imagine that the warning was a general
one. They have just found out that I had a hand in thwarting their plot
against you, and I dare say used threats; but the threats of angry men
come very often to nothing; and at any rate, I do not choose that they
should obtain the satisfaction of driving me from Paris against my
will."

The cardinal shook his head. "You see, monsieur, that Beaufort is a man
who hesitates at nothing. A scrupulous person would hardly endeavour to
slay a cardinal, who is also the minister of France, in the streets of
Paris in broad daylight. He is capable of burning down the Pome d'Or,
and all within it, in order to obtain revenge on you. I feel very uneasy
about you. However, sleep may bring counsel, and we will talk it over
again in the morning."

"Have you thought of anything, Monsieur Campbell?" Mazarin asked when
they met in the morning.

"I have not, sir, save to go on trusting to my own sword and my
followers."

"I can think of nothing," the cardinal said, "save to send an order to
Turenne for two companies of your regiment to march hither, where, on
their arrival, you will receive orders to proceed with them to your
castle of la Villar, and to use them in the king's service in repressing
all troubles that may occur in Poitou. What say you to that?"

"I would not deprive her majesty of two hundred of her best soldiers
to guard me from what may not be after all a very real danger. My own
conclusions, after thinking it over this morning, are that I will remain
here for a time, trusting to my friends and my own sword. If a serious
attempt is made on my life I could then consider whether it would be
best to withdraw myself, and if so, whither to go; but I will not run
away merely on a vague hint that my life is in danger. I have faced
death in battle many times, and this danger can hardly be considered
as more serious. I imagine that in the first case some of the
duke's followers will force me into a duel, before proceeding to try
assassination, and although doubtless he has some good blades among his
friends, I do not think that I need to feel uneasy on that score. I was
always practising with my sword as a boy. Since I have been in the army
I have spent a good deal of my time, when in winter quarters, in such
practice with my own officers, and with any maitres d'armes in the towns
where I have been, and while in Italy had the opportunity of learning
much, for there are fine fencers there."

"So be it, then," Mazarin said. "But if matters go to extremes, remember
that I consider myself responsible for you. I believe that you saved my
life, and although there are many things that men say against me, none
have ever charged me with ingratitude. If I can protect you in no other
way I shall have you arrested, sent to the frontier, that is to say, to
the sea frontier, and put on board ship and sent to England or Scotland,
as you choose, with a chest containing a sum that will suffice to
purchase any estate you may choose there.

"I am in earnest," he went on as Hector was about to answer. "It is
for my own sake as much as yours; when my friends are attacked I am
attacked, and I am doubly bound in your case. It needs but a stroke of
my pen to make you a duke and lord of half a province; and if I cannot
do that here, because you would still be within reach of your enemies, I
can, as far as the estates go, do it for you abroad. Do not fail to let
me know each day if anything new takes place."

Hector felt that there was no more to say, and bowing, left the
cardinal's presence and went out. Paolo and Macpherson were waiting
outside.

"The cardinal's messenger, who brought the news last night that you
would not return, master," the former said when he saw by Hector's look
of surprise that he had not expected to see him there, "said also that
I and one of your men had best be here at eight this morning and wait
until you came out."

"I did not know that he had sent such a message, Paolo, but I will when
we get to the hotel tell you why he sent it."

The street was somewhat crowded, and Hector had gone but a short
distance when he saw three gentlemen, who he knew to be intimates of
the Duke of Beaufort, coming in the other direction. One of them was
Monsieur de Beauvais, who said in a loud tone to his companions just as
Hector was passing:

"That is the Scotchman whom the cardinal employs to do his dirty
business."

Hector faced round at once. "At any rate, Monsieur de Beauvais, the
Scotchman in question is not employed by the cardinal as an assassin,
which is an even more dishonourable post."

De Beauvais turned white with anger. "Behind the Luxembourg in an hour's
time, Monsieur de Villar."

"I shall be there," Hector said coldly. He paused a minute, after the
three gentlemen, with the customary salute, walked on. He did not like
to go to the Hotel Mazarin lest the cardinal should obtain news of what
was going to take place, so he waited in the neighbourhood, knowing that
some of Mazarin's personal friends would be sure to arrive about this
hour. Presently he saw a colonel who, like himself, was spending the
winter in Paris, and who frequently attended the cardinal's levees.

"Colonel de Serres, as a fellow soldier I have a service to ask of you."

"I am entirely at your disposal, Monsieur Campbell."

"I have just had a quarrel forced upon me by Monsieur de Beauvais, and
I have to meet him in fifty minutes' time at the back of the Luxembourg.
As he was in company with two gentlemen, the Comte de Marplat and
Monsieur de Vipont, I shall be glad if you would kindly act as my
second, and if you can find another officer who would do so, I shall be
glad of his services also."

"I shall be glad to support you, Monsieur Campbell, and can lay my hand
on another second at once, for here comes my friend and yours, Monsieur
Emile de Chavigny, who will, like myself, be charmed to be concerned in
any affair against the duke's friends."

De Chavigny, whom Hector had seen at the court on the previous day
for the first time since they had parted in Italy, agreed at once to
Hector's request.

"De Beauvais has the reputation of being a good swordsman, Campbell,"
he said as they walked together towards the Luxembourg, Paolo and his
companion having now returned to the inn at his master's order; "but I
should say that he will want all his skill now. You were by far the best
swordsman among us when you left us suddenly in the south, and doubtless
since then your skill will not have fallen off."

"No, I know a good deal more than I knew then, Chavigny. There were few
days when we were in winter quarters that I had not an hour's work in
the fencing school with the officers of my regiment, and whenever I
heard that there was a professor of the art I have never failed to
frequent his salon and to learn his favourite strokes."

"That is all right, then. We need have no fear whatever as to the
result."

They reached the point fixed upon a minute or two before the clock
struck, and just as it chimed de Beauvais and his friends made their
appearance. The seconds exchanged a few words and selected a piece of
ground for the encounter, the principals at once removed their doublets
and faced each other.

"This is a duel a la mort," de Beauvais said in a loud voice.

"For that I am quite prepared," Hector said quietly; "but you are likely
to find, Monsieur de Beauvais, that it is not so easy a thing to
kill the colonel of one of her majesty's regiments as it is to stab a
churchman in his carriage."

De Beauvais at once took up his position, and, without the parade of
courtesy that usually preceded an encounter, fell furiously upon Hector.
The latter did not give way a step. With a wrist of iron he put aside
half a dozen thrusts, and then lunging, ran de Beauvais through the
body, his sword hilt striking against his adversary's chest.

De Beauvais' two seconds ran forward as their principal fell. "He is
dead," one said as they knelt over him. Then rising he addressed Hector:
"Monsieur le Colonel Campbell," he said, "I claim satisfaction at your
hands, for I take it that your words applied to me as well as to de
Beauvais, though addressed only to him."

"You may take it so," Hector replied coldly, "for you were also at that
house in the Rue St. Honore on that occasion you know of."

Hector's two seconds endeavoured to interpose, but he said: "Gentlemen,
I must ask you to let the matter go on. This is no ordinary duel. These
gentlemen, with whom I have no personal animosity, have picked a quarrel
with me at the request of one higher in rank than themselves, and are
simply his agents. I had no hesitation in killing the first of them, but
as Monsieur de Vipont wishes an encounter with me in spite of what he
has seen I will give him one, but will content myself with a less severe
lesson than that I have given Monsieur de Beauvais. Now, sir, I am at
your service."

De Vipont, knowing now how dangerous an opponent he was meeting, fought
cautiously. Hector, however, was anxious to finish the matter before
they were interrupted, and therefore took the offensive, and after two
passes ran his antagonist through the shoulder.

"Now, Monsieur le Comte, do you desire a turn?" he said carelessly.

The count was pale, but he answered steadily, "I claim it by the same
right as Monsieur de Vipont."

"Agreed," Hector said; and as soon as the count had removed his upper
garments they engaged.

The swords had scarcely clashed when the count's weapon was wrenched
from his hand and sent flying for a distance of twenty paces.

"That is enough," Colonel de Serres said, stepping forward; "you have
done what you thought to be your duty, Monsieur le Comte, but it needs
very different blades from those of yourself and your companions to
stand before Colonel Campbell. He had you at his mercy, and had a right
to take your life if he chose; but as he refrained from doing that
when you had your sword in your hand, he certainly will not do so now.
Messieurs, we wish you good morning."

"And you may mention," Hector added, "to this person of high rank,
that I shall be happy to accommodate as many of the gentlemen of his
following as choose to take the matter up."

"He will send no more to you, Campbell," Chavigny said as they moved
off, leaving the count, whose valet now ran up, to obtain a vehicle and
carry his dead and wounded comrades away.

"No, I fancy not; he will try other means now. The war has only begun.
Men like Lei, Brillet, and the Campions are not the sort of men who
would act as bravos, even for the Duke of Beaufort, and I do not think
that he would even venture to propose it to them. It will be meaner
instruments that he will employ next time. However, I shall of course
go straight to the cardinal and acquaint him with what has happened.
I doubt not but that he will lay the matter before the queen, and then
that Beaufort will hear of it; but, passionate and revengeful as he is,
I think that he will not be turned from his purpose, even if he knows
that he may be forced to retire to his estates, or even leave the
country till the matter blows over."



CHAPTER XXI: THE DUKE'S REVENGE

The cardinal listened gravely to Hector's account of the duel, and of
the circumstances that gave rise to it.

"I will go at once to the Louvre and appeal to her majesty," he said;
"you know how warmly she spoke to you on the day when you saved my life.
Still, I fear that the sternest reproof, or even an order to retire to
his estates, would not turn him from his purpose."

"I am sure of it, your eminence; still, as I have proved victor in the
first battle in the campaign I will bide a second."

"Mind that you do not get stabbed in the back, colonel."

"I will beware of that, sir; whenever I walk the streets in future Paolo
shall keep a pace behind me, and I warrant that he will protect me from
any attempt of that sort."

"At any rate remain here until I return from the Louvre."

In an hour Mazarin returned. "The duke has been beforehand with us," he
said. "When I told the queen of what had happened, and why this quarrel
had been fastened upon you, she sent at once for the duke, and drew out
an order, which I signed, for him to retire at once to his estates;
but the royal messenger returned with the news that he had half an hour
before ridden away to visit his father at Vendome. A courier will start
at once with the order, but I doubt whether he will be found there. It
is probable that he has gone to one of his own estates, and it may be
some time before we find out where he is. However, it is something that
he has gone."

On his return to the inn Hector told Paolo what had taken place.

"It is a pity that you did not kill them all, master."

"Not at all, Paolo; had I done so every one of their friends would
have been set against me. Both these men are of good families, and will
doubtless report that I had their lives at my mercy and spared them, and
after that no gentleman of reputation would take the matter up. I shall
have to be very careful in future, but now that the duke has gone there
is not likely to be any further trouble just at present."

Paolo shook his head. "Nay, master, I think the danger all the greater.
In the first place, we do not know that he has gone. I think it far
more likely that he is hiding in the house of one of his friends. He
has pretended to leave because he was sure the cardinal would take the
matter up, and in order that, if he is absent from Paris when any harm
befell you, it could not be brought home to him. I do not suppose that
next time he will employ any of his own people. He is most popular among
the mob of Paris, who call him the King of the Markets, and he will have
no difficulty in getting as many daggers as he wishes from the scum of
the faubourgs. It would be difficult in the extreme to prove that he had
aught to do with it, for you may be sure that he would really go down
into the country with all speed the moment the deed was done.

"In future, master, you must not go out without having me close behind
you; as for the others, I would put them in ordinary citizen garb, and
let them follow some twenty yards behind, so as to be in readiness to
run up at once. They could carry swords openly, and have their pistols
hidden under their doublets."

"It might be as well, at any rate for the present. If, as you think,
Beaufort is hidden in Paris, it is certain he will lose no time."

Paolo nodded. "I will get the men disguises at once. They had better be
different; Macpherson can be dressed as a soldier, Nicholl as a burgher,
and Sandy Grahame and Hunter as rough mechanics. They, of course, could
not carry swords, but might take heavy cudgels. They would not walk
together, or seem to have any knowledge of each other. Sandy might be
ten paces behind you, Nicholl twenty, and the others thirty, or where
the street is wide they could keep abreast of you on the other side. Are
you going to the Louvre this evening?"

"Yes, the cardinal said that the queen wished that I should appear
there. I would much rather have stayed away, as doubtless the affair
behind the Luxembourg will be generally known by this evening, and I
shall feel my position a very unpleasant one, though I imagine that the
queen intends, by her countenance of me, to show that I have not fallen
into disgrace for duelling."

Such was indeed the case. All eyes were turned upon Hector when he
entered the royal saloon. Many of Mazarin's friends came up and shook
hands with him warmly, while the adherents of Beaufort and Vendome stood
aloof from him with angry faces. Presently the door opened, and the
queen, closely followed by Mazarin and a train of ladies and gentlemen,
entered.

As she passed Hector she stopped. "Monsieur le Baron de la Villar," she
said in clear tones, which were heard all over the apartment, "much as I
object to duelling, and determined as I am to enforce the edicts against
it, I feel that in the encounter this morning you were in no way to
blame, and that it was forced upon you. It is scandalous that one who
has so bravely shed his blood and risked his life in defence of France
should be assailed in the capital, and for what reason? Because he
proved faithful to the queen and her minister. You have punished the
chief of the aggressors, and I shall know how to punish those who stood
behind him;" and with a gracious bow in response to his deep reverence
she moved on.

The little speech created a deep sensation among the courtiers. That
the queen herself should so publicly give her countenance to this
young Scottish gentleman, and should--for no one doubted to whom she
alluded--even threaten one of the most powerful nobles in the land,
showed how strongly she felt. No one, with the exception of half a dozen
persons, understood her allusion to the service that he had rendered to
her and the cardinal, but all felt that it must be something altogether
exceptional. Many of the nobles who belonged neither to the party of
