of eating and sleeping and finding a home for the children. The Egyptian
began to speculate upon many strange problems that confronted him.
Where did the stars come from? Who made the noise of the thunder which
frightened him so terribly? Who made the River Nile rise with such
regularity that it was possible to base the calendar upon the appearance
and the disappearance of the annual floods? Who was he, himself, a
strange little creature surrounded on all sides by death and sickness
and yet happy and full of laughter?

He asked these many questions and certain people obligingly stepped
forward to answer these inquiries to the best of their ability. The
Egyptians called them "priests" and they became the guardians of his
thoughts and gained great respect in the community. They were highly
learned men who were entrusted with the sacred task of keeping the
written records. They understood that it is not good for man to
think only of his immediate advantage in this world and they drew his
attention to the days of the future when his soul would dwell beyond the
mountains of the west and must give an account of his deeds to Osiris,
the mighty God who was the Ruler of the Living and the Dead and who
judged the acts of men according to their merits. Indeed, the priests
made so much of that future day in the realm of Isis and Osiris that
the Egyptians began to regard life merely as a short preparation for the
Hereafter and turned the teeming valley of the Nile into a land devoted
to the Dead.

In a strange way, the Egyptians had come to believe that no soul could
enter the realm of Osiris without the possession of the body which had
been its place of residence in this world. Therefore as soon as a man
was dead his relatives took his corpse and had it embalmed. For weeks
it was soaked in a solution of natron and then it was filled with pitch.
The Persian word for pitch was "Mumiai" and the embalmed body was called
a "Mummy." It was wrapped in yards and yards of specially prepared linen
and it was placed in a specially prepared coffin ready to be removed to
its final home. But an Egyptian grave was a real home where the body was
surrounded by pieces of furniture and musical instruments (to while away
the dreary hours of waiting) and by little statues of cooks and bakers
and barbers (that the occupant of this dark home might be decently
provided with food and need not go about unshaven).

Originally these graves had been dug into the rocks of the western
mountains but as the Egyptians moved northward they were obliged to
build their cemeteries in the desert. The desert however is full of
wild animals and equally wild robbers and they broke into the graves and
disturbed the mummy or stole the jewelry that had been buried with the
body. To prevent such unholy desecration the Egyptians used to build
small mounds of stones on top of the graves. These little mounds
gradually grew in size, because the rich people built higher mounds than
the poor and there was a good deal of competition to see who could make
the highest hill of stones. The record was made by King Khufu, whom the
Greeks called Cheops and who lived thirty centuries before our era. His
mound, which the Greeks called a pyramid (because the Egyptian word for
high was pir-em-us) was over five hundred feet high.

It covered more than thirteen acres of desert which is three times as
much space as that occupied by the church of St. Peter, the largest
edifice of the Christian world.

During twenty years, over a hundred thousand men were busy carrying the
necessary stones from the other side of the river--ferrying them across
the Nile (how they ever managed to do this, we do not understand),
dragging them in many instances a long distance across the desert and
finally hoisting them into their correct position. But so well did
the King's architects and engineers perform their task that the narrow
passage-way which leads to the royal tomb in the heart of the stone
monster has never yet been pushed out of shape by the weight of those
thousands of tons of stone which press upon it from all sides.




THE STORY OF EGYPT

THE RISE AND FALL OF EGYPT


THE river Nile was a kind friend but occasionally it was a hard
taskmaster. It taught the people who lived along its banks the noble art
of "team-work." They depended upon each other to build their irrigation
trenches and keep their dikes in repair. In this way they learned how
to get along with their neighbours and their mutual-benefit-association
quite easily developed into an organised state.

Then one man grew more powerful than most of his neighbours and he
became the leader of the community and their commander-in-chief when the
envious neighbours of western Asia invaded the prosperous valley. In
due course of time he became their King and ruled all the land from the
Mediterranean to the mountains of the west.

But these political adventures of the old Pharaohs (the word meant
"the Man who lived in the Big House") rarely interested the patient and
toiling peasant of the grain fields. Provided he was not obliged to pay
more taxes to his King than he thought just, he accepted the rule of
Pharaoh as he accepted the rule of Mighty Osiris.

It was different however when a foreign invader came and robbed him of
his possessions. After twenty centuries of independent life, a savage
Arab tribe of shepherds, called the Hyksos, attacked Egypt and for five
hundred years they were the masters of the valley of the Nile. They were
highly un-popular and great hate was also felt for the Hebrews who
came to the land of Goshen to find a shelter after their long wandering
through the desert and who helped the foreign usurper by acting as his
tax-gatherers and his civil servants.

But shortly after the year 1700 B.C. the people of Thebes began a
revolution and after a long struggle the Hyksos were driven out of the
country and Egypt was free once more.

A thousand years later, when Assyria conquered all of western Asia,
Egypt became part of the empire of Sardanapalus. In the seventh century
B.C. it became once more an independent state which obeyed the rule of a
king who lived in the city of Sais in the Delta of the Nile. But in the
year 525 B.C., Cambyses, the king of the Persians, took possession
of Egypt and in the fourth century B.C., when Persia was conquered by
Alexander the Great, Egypt too became a Macedonian province. It regained
a semblance of independence when one of Alexander's generals set himself
up as king of a new Egyptian state and founded the dynasty of the
Ptolemies, who resided in the newly built city of Alexandria.

Finally, in the year 89 B.C., the Romans came. The last Egyptian queen,
Cleopatra, tried her best to save the country. Her beauty and charm were
more dangerous to the Roman generals than half a dozen Egyptian army
corps. Twice she was successful in her attacks upon the hearts of her
Roman conquerors. But in the year 30 B.C., Augustus, the nephew and
heir of Caesar, landed in Alexandria. He did not share his late uncle's
admiration for the lovely princess. He destroyed her armies, but spared
her life that he might make her march in his triumph as part of the
spoils of war. When Cleopatra heard of this plan, she killed herself by
taking poison. And Egypt became a Roman province.




MESOPOTAMIA

MESOPOTAMIA--THE SECOND CENTRE OF EASTERN CIVILISATION


I AM going to take you to the top of the highest pyramid and I am going
to ask that you imagine yourself possessed of the eyes of a hawk. Way,
way off, in the distance, far beyond the yellow sands of the desert, you
will see something green and shimmering. It is a valley situated between
two rivers. It is the Paradise of the Old Testament. It is the land of
mystery and wonder which the Greeks called Mesopotamia--the "country
between the rivers."

The names of the two rivers are the Euphrates (which the Babylonians
called the Purattu) and the Tigris (which was known as the Diklat). They
begin their course amidst the snows of the mountains of Armenia where
Noah's Ark found a resting place and slowly they flow through the
southern plain until they reach the muddy banks of the Persian gulf.
They perform a very useful service. They turn the arid regions of
western Asia into a fertile garden.

The valley of the Nile had attracted people because it had offered them
food upon fairly easy terms. The "land between the rivers" was popular
for the same reason. It was a country full of promise and both the
inhabitants of the northern mountains and the tribes which roamed
through the southern deserts tried to claim this territory as their
own and most exclusive possession. The constant rivalry between the
mountaineers and the desert-nomads led to endless warfare. Only the
strongest and the bravest could hope to survive and that will explain
why Mesopotamia became the home of a very strong race of men who
were capable of creating a civilisation which was in every respect as
important as that of Egypt.




THE SUMERIANS

THE SUMERIAN NAIL WRITERS, WHOSE CLAY TABLETS TELL US THE STORY OF
ASSYRIA AND BABYLONIA, THE GREAT SEMITIC MELTING-POT


THE fifteenth century was an age of great discoveries. Columbus tried
to find a way to the island of Kathay and stumbled upon a new and
unsuspected continent. An Austrian bishop equipped an expedition which
was to travel eastward and find the home of the Grand Duke of Muscovy,
a voyage which led to complete failure, for Moscow was not visited by
western men until a generation later. Meanwhile a certain Venetian
by the name of Barbero had explored the ruins of western Asia and had
brought back reports of a most curious language which he had found
carved in the rocks of the temples of Shiraz and engraved upon endless
pieces of baked clay.

But Europe was busy with many other things and it was not until the
end of the eighteenth century that the first "cuneiform inscriptions"
(so-called because the letters were wedge-shaped and wedge is called
"Cuneus" in Latin) were brought to Europe by a Danish surveyor, named
Niebuhr. Then it took thirty years before a patient German school-master
by the name of Grotefend had deciphered the first four letters, the
D, the A, the R and the SH, the name of the Persian King Darius.
And another twenty years had to go by until a British officer, Henry
Rawlinson, who found the famous inscription of Behistun, gave us a
workable key to the nail-writing of western Asia.

Compared to the problem of deciphering these nail-writings, the job of
Champollion had been an easy one. The Egyptians used pictures. But the
Sumerians, the earliest inhabitants of Mesopotamia, who had hit upon
the idea of scratching their words in tablets of clay, had discarded
pictures entirely and had evolved a system of V-shaped figures which
showed little connection with the pictures out of which they had been
developed. A few examples will show you what I mean. In the beginning a
star, when drawn with a nail into a brick looked as follows: {illust.}
This sign however was too cumbersome and after a short while when the
meaning of "heaven" was added to that of star the picture was simplified
in this way {illust.} which made it even more of a puzzle. In the same
way an ox changed from {illust} into {illust.} and a fish changed from
{illust.} into {illust.} The sun was originally a plain circle {illust.}
and became {illust.} If we were using the Sumerian script today we would
make an {illust.} look like {illust.}. This system of writing down our
ideas looks rather complicated but for more than thirty centuries it
was used by the Sumerians and the Babylonians and the Assyrians and the
Persians and all the different races which forced their way into the
fertile valley.

The story of Mesopotamia is one of endless warfare and conquest. First
the Sumerians came from the North. They were a white People who had
lived in the mountains. They had been accustomed to worship their Gods
on the tops of hills. After they had entered the plain they constructed
artificial little hills on top of which they built their altars. They
did not know how to build stairs and they therefore surrounded their
towers with sloping galleries. Our engineers have borrowed this idea, as
you may see in our big railroad stations where ascending galleries lead
from one floor to another. We may have borrowed other ideas from the
Sumerians but we do not know it. The Sumerians were entirely ab-sorbed
by those races that entered the fertile valley at a later date. Their
towers however still stand amidst the ruins of Mesopotamia. The Jews saw
them when they went into exile in the land of Babylon and they called
them towers of Babillli, or towers of Babel.

In the fortieth century before our era, the Sumerians had entered
Mesopotamia. They were soon afterwards over-powered by the Akkadians,
one of the many tribes from the desert of Arabia who speak a common
dialect and who are known as the "Semites," because in the olden days
people believed them to be the direct descendants of Shem, one of the
three sons of Noah. A thousand years later, the Akkadians were forced to
submit to the rule of the Amorites, another Semitic desert tribe whose
great King Hammurabi built himself a magnificent palace in the holy
city of Babylon and who gave his people a set of laws which made the
Babylonian state the best administered empire of the ancient world. Next
the Hittites, whom you will also meet in the Old Testament, over-ran the
Fertile Valley and destroyed whatever they could not carry away. They
in turn were vanquished by the followers of the great desert God, Ashur,
who called themselves Assyrians and who made the city of Nineveh the
center of a vast and terrible empire which conquered all of western Asia
and Egypt and gathered taxes from countless subject races until the end
of the seventh century before the birth of Christ when the Chaldeans,
also a Semitic tribe, re-established Babylon and made that city the most
important capital of that day. Nebuchadnezzar, the best known of their
Kings, encouraged the study of science, and our modern knowledge of
astronomy and mathematics is all based upon certain first principles
which were discovered by the Chaldeans. In the year 538 B.C. a crude
tribe of Persian shepherds invaded this old land and overthrew the
empire of the Chaldeans. Two hundred years later, they in turn were
overthrown by Alexander the Great, who turned the Fertile Valley, the
old melting-pot of so many Semitic races, into a Greek province. Next
came the Romans and after the Romans, the Turks, and Mesopotamia, the
second centre of the world's civilisation, became a vast wilderness
where huge mounds of earth told a story of ancient glory.




MOSES

THE STORY OF MOSES, THE LEADER OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE


SOME time during the twentieth century before our era, a small and
unimportant tribe of Semitic shepherds had left its old home, which was
situated in the land of Ur on the mouth of the Euphrates, and had tried
to find new pastures within the domain of the Kings of Babylonia. They
had been driven away by the royal soldiers and they had moved westward
looking for a little piece of unoccupied territory where they might set
up their tents.

This tribe of shepherds was known as the Hebrews or, as we call them,
the Jews. They had wandered far and wide, and after many years of dreary
peregrinations they had been given shelter in Egypt. For more than five
centuries they had dwelt among the Egyptians and when their adopted
country had been overrun by the Hyksos marauders (as I told you in
the story of Egypt) they had managed to make themselves useful to the
foreign invader and had been left in the undisturbed possession of their
grazing fields. But after a long war of independence the Egyptians had
driven the Hyksos out of the valley of the Nile and then the Jews had
come upon evil times for they had been degraded to the rank of common
slaves and they had been forced to work on the royal roads and on the
Pyramids. And as the frontiers were guarded by the Egyptian soldiers it
had been impossible for the Jews to escape.

After many years of suffering they were saved from their miserable
fate by a young Jew, called Moses, who for a long time had dwelt in the
desert and there had learned to appreciate the simple virtues of his
earliest ancestors, who had kept away from cities and city-life and had
refused to let themselves be corrupted by the ease and the luxury of a
foreign civilisation.

Moses decided to bring his people back to a love of the ways of the
patriarchs. He succeeded in evading the Egyptian troops that were sent
after him and led his fellow tribesmen into the heart of the plain at
the foot of Mount Sinai. During his long and lonely life in the desert,
he had learned to revere the strength of the great God of the Thunder
and the Storm, who ruled the high heavens and upon whom the shepherds
depended for life and light and breath. This God, one of the many
divinities who were widely worshipped in western Asia, was called
Jehovah, and through the teaching of Moses, he became the sole Master of
the Hebrew race.

One day, Moses disappeared from the camp of the Jews. It was whispered
that he had gone away carrying two tablets of rough-hewn stone. That
afternoon, the top of the mountain was lost to sight. The darkness of
a terrible storm hid it from the eye of man. But when Moses returned,
behold! there stood engraved upon the tablets the words which Jehovah
had spoken unto the people of Israel amidst the crash of his thunder and
the blinding flashes of his lightning. And from that moment, Jehovah was
recognised by all the Jews as the Highest Master of their Fate, the only
True God, who had taught them how to live holy lives when he bade them
to follow the wise lessons of his Ten Commandments.

They followed Moses when he bade them continue their journey through the
desert. They obeyed him when he told them what to eat and drink and what
to avoid that they might keep well in the hot climate. And finally after
many years of wandering they came to a land which seemed pleasant and
prosperous. It was called Palestine, which means the country of the
"Pilistu" the Philistines, a small tribe of Cretans who had settled
along the coast after they had been driven away from their own island.
Unfortunately, the mainland, Palestine, was already inhabited by another
Semitic race, called the Canaanites. But the Jews forced their way into
the valleys and built themselves cities and constructed a mighty temple
in a town which they named Jerusalem, the Home of Peace. As for Moses,
he was no longer the leader of his people. He had been allowed to see
the mountain ridges of Palestine from afar. Then he had closed his tired
eyes for all time. He had worked faithfully and hard to please Jehovah.
Not only had he guided his brethren out of foreign slavery into the free
and independent life of a new home but he had also made the Jews the
first of all nations to worship a single God.




THE PHOENICIANS

THE PHOENICIANS WHO GAVE US OUR ALPHABET


THE Phoenicians, who were the neighbours of the Jews, were a Semitic
tribe which at a very early age had settled along the shores of the
Mediterranean. They had built themselves two well-fortified towns, Tyre
and Sidon, and within a short time they had gained a monopoly of the
trade of the western seas. Their ships went regularly to Greece and
Italy and Spain and they even ventured beyond the straits of Gibraltar
to visit the Scilly islands where they could buy tin. Wherever they
went, they built themselves small trading stations, which they called
colonies. Many of these were the origin of modern cities, such as Cadiz
and Marseilles.

They bought and sold whatever promised to bring them a good profit.
They were not troubled by a conscience. If we are to believe all their
neighbours they did not know what the words honesty or integrity meant.
They regarded a well-filled treasure chest the highest ideal of all good
citizens. Indeed they were very unpleasant people and did not have a
single friend. Nevertheless they have rendered all coming generations
one service of the greatest possible value. They gave us our alphabet.

The Phoenicians had been familiar with the art of writing, invented by
the Sumerians. But they regarded these pothooks as a clumsy waste
of time. They were practical business men and could not spend hours
engraving two or three letters. They set to work and invented a new
system of writing which was greatly superior to the old one. They
borrowed a few pictures from the Egyptians and they simplified a number
of the wedge-shaped figures of the Sumerians. They sacrificed the pretty
looks of the older system for the advantage of speed and they reduced
the thousands of different images to a short and handy alphabet of
twenty-two letters.

In due course of time, this alphabet travelled across the AEgean Sea and
entered Greece. The Greeks added a few letters of their own and carried
the improved system to Italy. The Romans modified the figures somewhat
and in turn taught them to the wild barbarians of western Europe. Those
wild barbarians were our own ancestors, and that is the reason why this
book is written in characters that are of Phoenician origin and not
in the hieroglyphics of the Egyptians or in the nail-script of the
Sumerians.




THE INDO-EUROPEANS

THE INDO-EUROPEAN PERSIANS CONQUER THE SEMITIC AND THE EGYPTIAN WORLD


THE world of Egypt and Babylon and Assyria and Phoenicia had existed
almost thirty centuries and the venerable races of the Fertile Valley
were getting old and tired. Their doom was sealed when a new and
more energetic race appeared upon the horizon. We call this race the
Indo-European race, because it conquered not only Europe but also made
itself the ruling class in the country which is now known as British
India.

These Indo-Europeans were white men like the Semites but they spoke
a different language which is regarded as the common ancestor of all
European tongues with the exception of Hungarian and Finnish and the
Basque dialects of Northern Spain.

When we first hear of them, they had been living along the shores of the
Caspian Sea for many centuries. But one day they had packed their tents
and they had wandered forth in search of a new home. Some of them had
moved into the mountains of Central Asia and for many centuries they had
lived among the peaks which surround the plateau of Iran and that is why
we call them Aryans. Others had followed the setting sun and they had
taken possession of the plains of Europe as I shall tell you when I give
you the story of Greece and Rome.

For the moment we must follow the Aryans. Under the leadership of
Zarathustra (or Zoroaster) who was their great teacher many of them had
left their mountain homes to follow the swiftly flowing Indus river on
its way to the sea.

Others had preferred to stay among the hills of western Asia and there
they had founded the half-independent communities of the Medes and the
Persians, two peoples whose names we have copied from the old Greek
history-books. In the seventh century before the birth of Christ, the
Medes had established a kingdom of their own called Media, but this
perished when Cyrus, the chief of a clan known as the Anshan, made
himself king of all the Persian tribes and started upon a career of
conquest which soon made him and his children the undisputed masters of
the whole of western Asia and of Egypt.

Indeed, with such energy did these Indo-European Persians push their
triumphant campaigns in the west that they soon found themselves in
serious difficulties with certain other Indo-European tribes which
centuries before had moved into Europe and had taken possession of the
Greek peninsula and the islands of the AEgean Sea.

These difficulties led to the three famous wars between Greece and
Persia during which King Darius and King Xerxes of Persia invaded the
northern part of the peninsula. They ravaged the lands of the Greeks and
tried very hard to get a foothold upon the European continent.

But in this they did not succeed. The navy of Athens proved
unconquerable. By cutting off the lines of supplies of the Persian
armies, the Greek sailors invariably forced the Asiatic rulers to return
to their base.
