his representative, the Vekeel cried out:

"I--I am Omar's vicar!" but a disapproving murmur from the judges, as
with one voice, rejected his pretensions, and at a proposal of the
Kadi it was resolved that the young man should be protected against any
arbitrary attack on the part of the Vekeel by a double guard; for many
grave accusations against Obada were already on their way to Medina. The
negro quitted the court, mad with rage, and concocting fresh indictments
against Paula with the old man.

When Paula returned to her cell old Betta thought that she must have
been pardoned; for how glad, how proud, how full of spirit she entered
it! The worst peril was diverted from her lover, and she and her love
had saved him!

She gave herself up for lost; but whatever fate might have in store for
her, life lay open before him; he would have time to prove his splendid
powers, and that he would do so, as she would have him do it, she felt
certain.

She had not ended telling her nurse of the judges' decision, when the
warder announced the Kadi. In a minute or two he made his appearance;
she expressed her thanks, and he warmly assured her that he regarded the
disgrace of being perhaps a beguiled judge as a favor of Fortune; then
he turned the conversation on the real object of his visit.

In the letter, he began, which he had received the evening before from
his uncle Haschim, there was a great deal about her. She had quite won
the old merchant's heart, and the enquiries for her father which he had
set on foot....

Here she interrupted him saying: "Oh, my lord; is the wish, the prayer
of my life to be granted?"

"Your father, the noble Thomas, before whom even the Moslem bows, has
been..." and then Othman went on to tell her that the hero of Damascus
had in fact retired to Sinai and had been living there as a hermit.
But she must not indulge in premature rejoicing, for the messengers had
found him ill, consumed by disease arising from his wounded lungs, and
almost at death's door. His days were numbered....

"And I, I am a prisoner," groaned the girl. "Held fast, helpless, robbed
of all means of flying to his arms!"

He again bid her be calm, and went on to tell her: in his soft, composed
manner, that two days since a Nabathaean had come to him and had asked
him, as the chief administrator of justice in Egypt, whether an old foe
of the Moslems, a general who had fought in the service of the emperor
and the cross against the Khaliff and the crescent, and who was now
sick, weary, and broken, might venture on Egyptian soil without fear of
being seized by the Arab authorities; and when he, Othman, had learnt
that this man was no other than Thomas, the hero of Damascus, he had
promised him his life and freedom, promised them gladly, as he felt
assured his sovereign the Khaliff would desire.

So this very day her father had reached Fostat, and the Kadi had
received him as a guest into his house. Thomas, indeed, stood on the
brink of the grave; but he was inspirited and sustained by the hope of
seeing his daughter. It had been falsely reported to him that she had
perished in the massacre at Abyla and he had already mourned her fate.

It was now his duty to fulfil the wish of a dying man, and he had
ordered the prison servants to prepare the room adjoining Paula's cell
with furniture which was on the way from his house. The door between the
two would be opened for her.

"And I shall see him again, have him again to live with--to close his
eyes, perhaps to die with him!" cried Paula; and, seizing the good man's
hand, she kissed it gratefully.

The Moslem's eyes filled with tears as he bid her not to thank him,
but God the All-merciful; and before the sun went down the head of the
doomed daughter was resting on the breast of the weary hero who was so
near his end, though his unimpaired mind and tender heart rejoiced in
their reunion as fully and deeply as did his beloved and only child. A
new and unutterable joy came to Paula in the gloom of her prison; and
that same day the warder carried a letter from her to Orion, conveying
her father's greetings; and, as he read the fervent blessing, he felt
as though an invisible hand had released him for ever from the curse his
own father had laid upon him. A wonderful glad sense of peace came over
him with power and pleasure in work, and he gave his brains and pen no
rest till morning was growing grey.




CHAPTER XXII.

Horapollo made his way home to his new quarters from the court of
justice with knit and gloomy brows. As he passed Susannah's garden hedge
he saw a knot of people gathered together and pointing out furtively to
the handsome residence beyond.

They, like a hundred other groups he had passed, hailed him with words
of welcome, thanks, and encouragement and, as he bowed to them slightly,
his eyes followed the direction of their terrified gaze and he started;
above the great garden gates hung the black tablet; a warning that
looked like a mark of disgrace, crying out to the passer-by: "Avoid this
threshold! Here rages the destroying pestilence!"

The old man had a horror of everything that might remind him of death,
and a cold shiver ran through him. To live so near to a focus of the
disease was most alarming and dangerous! How had it invaded this, the
healthiest part of the town, which the last raging epidemic had spared?

An officer of the town-council, whom he called to him, told him that two
slaves, father and son, whose duty it was to take charge of the baths
in the widow's house, had been first attacked, but they had been
carried quietly away in the night to the new tents for the sick; to-day,
however, the widow herself had fallen ill. To prevent the spread of the
infection, the plot of ground was now guarded on all sides.

"Be strict, be sharp; not a rat must creep out!" cried the old man as he
rode on.

He was later than he had been yesterday; supper must be ready. After a
short rest he was preparing to join the family at their meal, washing
and dressing with the help of his servant, when a lame slave-girl came
into his room and placed a tray covered with steaming dishes on the low
table by the divan.

What was the meaning of this? Before he could ask, he was informed that
for the future the women wished to eat by themselves; he would be served
in his own room.

At this a bright patch of red colored his cheeks; after brief reflection
he cried to his servant. "My ass!" and added to the girl: "Where is your
mistress?"

"In the viridarium with Gamaliel the goldsmith; but they are going to
supper immediately."

"And without their guest? I understand!" muttered the old man, taking up
his hat and marching past the maid out of the room. In the hall he met
Gamaliel, to whom a slave-girl was handing his stick. Horapollo could
guess that the Jew had come only to warn the women against him and,
without vouchsafing him a glance, he went into the dining-room. There he
found Pulchena and Mary kneeling in tears by the side of Joanna, who was
weeping too.

He guessed for whom were these lamentations, and prompted by the wish to
prove the falsity of the accusation that charged him with having entered
the house as a spy, he spoke to the widow. She shuddered as he entered,
and she now pointed to the door with an outstretched finger; when
he nevertheless stood still and was about to make his defence, she
interrupted him loudly and urgently: "No, no, my lord! This house is
henceforth closed against you! You yourself have broken every tie that
bound us! Do not any longer disturb our peace! Go back to the place you
came from."

At this the old man made one more attempt to speak; but the widow rose,
and saying: "Come, my children," she hastily withdrew with the girls
into the adjoining room, and closed the door.

Horapollo was left alone on the threshold.

Old as he was, in all his life he had never suffered such an insult; but
he did not lay it to the score of those who had shown him the door, but
to the already long one of the Syrian girl; as he rode back to his
own home on his white ass, he stopped several times to speak to the
passers-by.

During the following day or two he heeded not the heat of the weather,
nor his own need of rest for his body, and quiet occupation for his
mind; morning, noon and night he was riding about the streets stirring
up the people, and setting forth in insinuating speeches that they must
perish miserably if they rejected the only means of deliverance which he
had pointed out to them. He was present at every meeting of the Senate,
and his inflammatory eloquence kept the town council on his side, and
nullified the efforts of the bishop, while he pressed them to fix the
day of the marriage of the Nile with his bride.

He knew the Egyptians and their passion for the intoxicating joys of a
splendid ceremonial. This festival: the wedding of the Bride of the Nile
to her mighty and unresting spouse, on whom the weal or woe of the
land depended, was to be as a flowery oasis in the waste of dearth
and desolation. He recalled every detail of the reminiscences of his
childhood as to the processions in Honor of Isis, and the festivals
dedicated to her and her triad; every record of his own experience
and that of former generations; all he had read in books of the great
pilgrimages and dramas of heathen Egypt--and he described it all in his
speeches, painted it in glowing colors to the Senate and the mob,
and counselled the authorities to reproduce it all with unparalleled
splendor on the occasion of this marriage.

Every man in whose veins flowed Egyptian blood listened to him
attentively, took pleasure in his projects, and was quite ready to do
his utmost to enhance the glories of this ceremonial, in which every one
was to take part either active or passive. Thousands were ruined, but
there was yet enough and to spare for this marriage feast, and the
Senate did not hesitate to raise a fresh loan.

"Destruction or Deliverance!" was the watch-word Horapollo had given
the Memphites. If everything came to ruin their hoarded talents would be
lost too; if, on the other hand, the sacrifice produced its result, if
the Nile should bless its children with renewed prosperity, what need
the town or country care for a few thousand drachmae more or less?

So the day was fixed!

Not quite two weeks after Paula's trial, on the day of Saint Serapis
the miraculous, saving, auspicious ceremonial was to take place. And how
glowing was the picture given of the Bride's beauty by the old man,
and by the judges and officials who had seen her! How brightly old
Horapollo's eyes would flash with hate as he described it! The eyes of
love could not be more radiant.

All that this patrician hussy had done to aggrieve him--she should
expiate it all, and his triumph meant woe, not only to that one woman,
but to the Christian faith which he hated!

Bishop John, however, had not been idle meanwhile. Immediately after
his interference with the popular vote he had despatched a letter by
a carrier-pigeon to the patriarch in Upper Egypt, and Benjamin's reply
would no doubt give him powers for still more vigorous measures. In
church, before the Senate, and even in the highways, he and his clergy
did their utmost to combat the atrocious project of the authorities and
the populace, but the zeal which was stirred up by old Horapollo soon
broke into brighter flames than the conservatism, orthodoxy and breadth
of view which the ecclesiastics did their utmost to fan. The wind
blew with equal force from both quarters, but on one side it blew on
smoldering fuel, and on the other on overflowing and flaming stores.
Famine and despair had undermined faith, and weakened discipline;
even the mightiest weapons of the Church--Cursing and blessing--were
powerless. A floating beam was held out to sinking men, and they would
no longer wait for the life-boat that was approaching to rescue them,
with strong hands at the oars and a trusty pilot at the helm.

Horapollo went no more to the widow's home. A few hours after she had
shown him the door, his slaves came and fetched away the various things
he had carried there with him. His body servant at the same time brought
a large sealed phial and a letter to Dame Joanna, as follows:

"It is wrong to judge a man without hearing his defence. This you have
done; but I owe you no grudge. Philippus, on his return, will perhaps
pick up the ends of the tie and join again what you have this day cut.
I send you a portion of the remedy he left with me at parting to use
against the plague in case of need. Its good effects have been tested
within the last few days. May the sickness which has fallen on your
neighbors, spare you and yours."

Joanna was much pleased with this letter but, when she had read it
aloud, little Mary exclaimed:

"If any one should fall ill he shall not take a drop of that mixture! I
tell you he only wants to poison us!"

Joanna, however, maintained that the old man was not bad hearted in
spite of his unaccountable hatred of Paula; and Pulcheria declared that
it must be so, if only because Philip esteemed him so highly. If only
he were here, everything would have been different and have turned out
well.

Mary remained with the mother and daughter till it grew dark; her
chatter always led them back to Paula; and when, in the afternoon, the
Nabathaean messenger came to them, and told them from their captive
friend that he had brought her father home to her, the women once more
began to hope, and Mary could allow herself to give free expression
to her fond love before she quitted them, without exciting their
suspicions.

At length she said she must go to her lessons with Eudoxia; she had
a hard task before her and they must think of her and wish her good
success. She threw her arms first round the widow's neck and then round
Pulcheria's; and, as the tears would start to her eyes, she asked them
if she were not indeed a silly childish thing--but they were to think of
her all the same and never to forget her.

She met the governess in her own room; Eudoxia cut off the fine, soft
curls, shedding her first tears over them; and those tears flowed faster
as she placed round Mary's neck a little reliquary containing a lock
from the sheep-skin of St. John the Baptist, which had belonged to her
own mother. It was very dear and sacred to her, and she had never
before parted from it, but now it was to protect the child and bring her
happiness--great happiness.

Had it brought her such happiness?--Not much, in truth; and yet she
believed in the saving and beneficent influence of the relic.

At last Mary stood before her with short hair and in a boy's dress; and
what a sweet and lovely little fellow it was; Eudoxia could not weary
of looking at him. But Mary was too pretty, too frail for a boy; and
Eudoxia advised her to pull her broad travelling hat low over her eyes
as soon as she came in sight of men, or else to darken her color.

Gamaliel, who had in fact come to warn Dame Joanna against Horapollo,
had kept them informed of the progress of this day's sitting, and
Paula's conduct to save her lover had increased Mary's admiration for
her. When she should confront Amru she could answer him on every head,
so she felt equipped at all points as she stole through the garden with
Eudoxia, and down to the quay.

When she had passed the gateway she once more kissed her hand to the
house she loved and its inmates; then, pointing with a sigh to the
neighboring garden, she said:

"Poor Katharina! she is a prisoner now.--Do you know, Eudoxia, I am
still very fond of her, and when I think that she may take the plague,
and die but no!--Tell Mother Joanna and Pulcheria to be kind to her.
To-morrow, after breakfast, give them my letter; and this evening, if
they get anxious, you can only quiet them by saying you know all and
that it is of no use to fret about me. You will set it all right and not
allow them to grieve."

As they passed a Jacobite chapel that stood open, she begged Eudoxia to
wait for her and fell on her knees before the crucifix. In a few minutes
she came out again, bright and invigorated and, as they passed the last
houses in the town, she exclaimed:

"Is it not wicked, Eudoxia? I am leaving those I love dearly, very
dearly, and yet I feel as glad as a bird escaping from its cage. Good
Heaven! Only to think of the ride by night through the desert and over
the hills, a swift beast under me, and over my head no ceiling but the
blue sky and countless stars! Onward and still onward to a glorious
end, left entirely to myself and entrusted with an important task like a
grownup person! Is it not splendid? And by God's help--and if I find the
governor and succeed in touching his heart.... Now, confess, Eudoxia,
can there be a happier girl in the whole wide world?"

They found the Masdakite at Nesptah's inn with some capital dromedaries
and the necessary drivers and attendants. The Greek governess gave her
pupil much good advice, and added her "maternal" blessing with her whole
heart. Rustem lifted the child on to the dromedary, carefully settling
her in the saddle, and the little caravan set out. Mary waved repeated
adieux to her old governess and newly-found friend, and Eudoxia was
still gazing after her long after she had vanished in the darkness.

Then she made her way home, at first weeping silently with bowed head,
but afterwards tearless, upright, and with a confident step. She was
in unusually good spirits, her heart beat higher than it had done for
years; she felt uplifted by the sense of relief from a burthensome
duty, and of freedom to act independently on the dictates of her own
intelligence. She would assert herself, she would show the others that
she had acted rightly; and when at supper-time Mary was missing, and
had not returned even at bed-time, there was much to do to soothe and
comfort them, and much misconstruction to endure; but she took it all
patiently, and it was a consolation to her to bear such annoyance for
her little favorite.

Next morning, when she had delivered Mary's letter to Dame Joanna,
her love and endurance were put to still severer proof; indeed, the
meek-tempered widow allowed herself to be carried away to such an
outbreak as hitherto would undoubtedly have led Eudoxia to request her
dismissal, with sharp recrimination; but she took it all calmly.

It was not till noon-day--when the bishop made his appearance to
carry the child off to the convent, and was highly wrathful at Mary's
disappearance, threatening the widow, and declaring that he would search
the whole country through for the little girl and find her at last,
that Eudoxia felt that the moment of her triumph had come. She quietly
allowed the bishop to depart, and then only did she send her last and
best shaft at Joanna by informing her that she had in fact encouraged
the child in her exploit on purpose to save her from the cloister. Her
newly-found motherly feeling made her eloquent, and with a result that
she had almost ceased to hope for: the warm-hearted little woman, who
had hurt her with such cruel words, threw her arms round Eudoxia's tall,
meagre figure, put up her face to kiss her, called her a brave, clever
girl, and begged her forgiveness for all she had said and done the day
before.

So, when the Greek went to bed, she felt as if her life had turned
backwards and she had grown more like the happy young creature she had
once been with her sisters in her parents' house.




CHAPTER XXIII.

Paula now understood what hung over her. It is Bishop John who had told
her, as gently as he could, and with every assurance that he still clung
to the hope that he could stop the hideous heathen abomination; but
even without this she would certainly have known what was impending,
for large crowds of people gathered every day under the prisonwalls, and
loud cries reached her, demanding to see the "Bride of the Nile."

Now and again shouts of "Hail!" came up to her; but when the demented
creatures had shrieked themselves hoarse, and in vain, they would abuse
her vilely. The cry for the "Bride" never ceased from morning till
night, and the head warder of the prison was glad that the bishop had
relieved him of the task of explaining to Paula the meaning of the
fateful word, whose significance she had repeatedly asked him.

At first this fresh and terrible peril had startled and shaken her; but
she did her utmost to cling to the hope held out by the bishop so as
to appear calm, and as far as possible cheerful, in her sick father's
presence. And in this she succeeded so long as it was day; but at night
she was a prey to agonizing terrors. Then, in fancy she saw herself
surrounded by a raging mob, dragged to the river and cast into a watery
grave before a thousand eyes. Then, prayer was of no avail, nor any
resolve or effort; not the tender messages that constantly reached her
from Orion, nor the songs he would sing for her in the brief moments of
leisure he allowed himself; not the bishop's words of comfort, nor the
visits of those she loved. The warder would admit her friends as often
as he was able; and among those who found their way to her cell were the
Senator Justinus and his wife.

By great good fortune Martina had quitted Susannah's house as soon
as the two slaves had fallen ill and she had heard that the physician
pronounced them to be sickening of the plague. She had returned to her
rooms in the inn kept by Sostratus, but her nephew Narses had remained
with Katharina and her mother. He was indeed intending to follow her
with Heliodora; but, by the time they were ready to set out, Susannah,
too, had fallen a victim to the pestilence and the authorities had
forbidden all egress from her house.

Heliodora might have succeeded in leaving in time, alone; but she would
not abandon her unfortunate brother-in-law; for he never felt easy but
in her presence, would allow no one else to wait on him, and would take
neither food nor drink unless they were offered him by her. Besides
this, the cavalry officer, once so stalwart, had in his weakness become
pathetically like her lost husband, and she knew that Narses had been
the first to love her, and that it was only for his brother's sake that
he had concealed his passion. Her motherly instincts found an outlet
in the care of the half-crushed, but not hopelessly lost man; and the
desire to drag him back to life kept her busy day and night, and made
her regard everything else as trivial and of secondary importance. Her
life had once more found a purpose; her efforts were for an attainable
end, and she devoted herself to him body and soul.

Her uncle had told her that Orion was bound to Paula by a supreme
passion.--This had been a painful blow, but the Syrian girl had
impressed her; she looked up to her, and it soothed her wounded
self-esteem to reflect that she had lost her lover to no inferior woman.
Though her longing for him still surged up in many a silent hour, she
felt it an injustice, a stint of love to her invalid charge.

So far as Katharina was concerned, next to her mother, Heliodora was the
object of her deepest anxiety. The least word of complaint from either
terrified her; and if Susannah sank on the divan exhausted by the heat,
or Heliodora had a headache after watching through the night by the sick
man, the girl would turn pale, her heart would beat painfully, she would
paint them in fancy stricken by the plague, with burning brows and the
horrible, fatal spots on their foreheads and cheeks; and whenever these
alarms pressed on the young criminal she felt the ominous weight on the
top of her head where the dead bishop's hand had rested.

The senator's wife had so completely changed in her demeanor to the
water-wagtail, since Paula's imprisonment, that to Katharina she was
as a living reproach, so she had no regret at seeing the worthy pair
depart. But scarcely had they left when misfortune took their place as
an unbidden guest.

The slave whose duty it was to heat the baths had reserved a portion of
the infected garments that had been given to him to burn; his son had
helped him, and Katharina's nurse, the mother of her foster-brother
Anubis, had come into direct contact with her immediately after her
return from the soothsayer's and from the bishop's. All three had caught
the disease. They had all three been removed to the hospital tents--the
slave and the nurse as corpses.

But had the fearful infection been taken away with them? If not, it
would be the turn next of those whom she herself had pushed into the
arms of the fell monster: First Heliodora, and then her mother! And
she, rightfully, ought to have fallen before them; and if the pestilence
should seize her and death should drag her down into the grave it would
be showing her mercy. She was still so young, and yet she hated life. It
had nothing in store for her but humiliation and disappointment, arrows
which, sent from the prison, pierced her to the heart, and a torturing
fear which never gave her any peace, day or night.

When the physician came to transport the sick to the hospital in the
desert, he mentioned incidentally that the judges had condemned Paula
to death, and that the populace and senate, in spite of the new bishop's
prohibition, had determined to cast her into the river in accordance
with an ancient custom. Orion's fate was not to be decided till the
following day; but it would hardly be to his advantage in the eyes of
his Jacobite judges, that his betrothed was this Syrian Melchite.

At this Katharina was forced to support herself against her mother's
arm-chair to save herself from sinking on her knees; with tingling
cheeks she questioned the leech till he lost all patience and turned
away much annoyed at such excessive feminine curiosity.

Yes! "The other" was his betrothed before all the world; but only to
die! The blood rushed through her veins in a hot tide at the thought;
she could have laughed aloud and fallen on the neck of every one she
met. What she felt was hideous; malignant spite possessed her; but it
gave her rapture--delicious rapture--a flower of hell, but with splendid
petals and intoxicating perfume. But its splendor dazzled her and its
fragrance presently sickened her. Sheer horror of herself came over
her, and yet she could have shouted with joy each time that the thought
flashed through her brain: "The other must die!"

Her mother feared that her daughter, too, was about to fall ill,
her eyes glowed so strangely and she was so restless and nervously
excitable.

Since Heliodora had taken the overwhelming news of Orion's betrothal
to Paula with astonishing though sorrowful calmness, to the hot-blooded
girl she was nothing, nobody, utterly unworthy of her notice.

To spite her she had committed a crime as like murder as one snake is
like another, and imperilled her own mother's life! It was enough to
drive her to despair, to make her scourge herself with rods!

When Susannah kissed her at parting for the night she complained of a
slight sore throat and of her lips, which she fancied must be swollen.
Katharina detained her, questioned her with a trembling voice, put the
lamp close to her, and held her breath while she examined her face, her
neck, and her arms for the dreadful spots. But none were to be seen and
her mother laughed at her terrors, called her a dutiful, anxious child,
and warned her not to be too full of fears, as they were supposed to
invite the disease.

All night the girl could not sleep. Her malicious triumph was past;
nothing but painful thoughts and grewsome images haunted her while
awake, and pursued her more persistently when she dozed. By dawn of day
her alarm for her mother was so great that she sprang out of bed and
went to her room; Susannah was sleeping so soundly that she did not even
hear her. Much relieved Katharina crept back to bed; but in the morning
the worst had happened: Susannah could no longer leave her bed; she was
feverish, and on her lips, the very lips which had kissed her child's
infected hair, there were indeed, between her nose and mouth, the first
terrible, unmistakable spots.

The leech came and confirmed the fact.--The house was closed and barred.

The physician and Susannah, who was still in full possession of her
senses, wished and insisted that Katharina should withdraw to the
gardener's house, but she refused with defiant obstinacy, saying she
would rather die with her mother than leave her.

Quite beside herself she threw herself on the sick woman, and kissed
the spots on her mouth to divert the poison into her own blood; but the
physician angrily pulled her away, and the sufferer reproved her with
tears in her eyes which spoke her fervent affection.

She was now allowed to nurse her mother. Two nuns came to her
assistance, and said, not only to the rich widow but behind her back,
that they had never seen so devoted and loving a daughter. Even Bishop
John, who did not shrink from entering the houses of the sick to give
them spiritual consolation, praised Katharina's conduct; and he, who had
hitherto regarded the water-wagtail as no more than a bright, restless
child, treated her with respect, talked to her as to a grown-up
person, and answered her questions--which for the most part referred to
Paula--gravely and fully.

The prelate, who was full of admiration for Thomas' daughter, told
Katharina how, to save her lover, she had taken a crime upon herself
which deprived her of every claim to mercy. The Syrian girl was only a
Melchite, but to take another's guilt, out of love, was treading indeed
in the footsteps of Christ, if ever anything was. At this Katharina
shrugged her shoulders, as though to say: "Do you think so much of that?
Could not I gladly have done the same?"

The priest saw this and admonished her kindly to be on her guard against
spiritual pride, though she had indeed earned the right to believe
herself capable of the sternest devotion, and did not cease to set an
example of filial and Christian love.

He departed; and Katharina, to whom every word in praise of her
behavior to her mother, whom her sin had brought to her death-bed, was a
torturing mockery, felt that she had deceived one more worthy soul. She
did not, to be sure, deserve to be charged with spiritual pride; for
in this silent chamber, where death stood on the threshold, she thought
over all the horrible things she had done, and told herself repeatedly
that she was the chief and most vile of sinners.

Many times she felt impelled to confide in another soul, to invite a
pitying eye to behold and share her inward suffering.

To the bishop above all, the most venerable priest she knew, she
would most readily have confessed everything and have submitted to any
penance, however severe, at his hands, but shame held her back; and even
more did another more urgent consideration. The prelate, she knew, would
demand of her that she should forsake her old life, root out from her
soul the old feelings and desires, and begin a new existence; but for
this the time had not yet come: her love was still an indispensable
condition of life, and her hatred was even more dear to her. When
Paula's terrible doom should indeed have overtaken her, and Katharina,
her heart full of those old feelings, had gloated over it; when she
should have been able to prove to Orion that her love was no less great
and strong and self-sacrificing than that of Thomas' daughter; when she
should have compelled him--as she would and must--to acknowledge that
he had cruelly misprized her and sinned against her; then, and not till
then, would she make peace with herself, with the Church, and with her
Saviour. Nay, if need be, she would take the veil and mourn away
the rest of her young life as a penitent, in a convent or a solitary
rock-cell. But now--when Paula, his betrothed, had done this great thing
for him--to perish now, with her love unseen, unknown, uncared for,
perhaps forgotten by him, to retire into herself and vanish from his
ken--that was too much for human nature! Sooner would she be lost
forever; body and soul in everlasting perdition, a prey to Satan and
hell--in which she believed as firmly as in her own existence.

So she went on nursing her mother, saw the red spots spread over the
sick woman's whole body--watched the fever that increased from day
to day, from hour to hour; listened with a mixture of horror and
gladness--at which she herself shuddered, though she fed her heart on
it--to the reports of the preparations for the sacrifice of the Bride of
the Nile, and to all the bishop could tell her of Paula, and her dying
father, and Orion. She trembled for little Mary, who had disappeared
from the neighboring garden, till she heard that the child had fled to
escape the cloister; each day she learnt that Heliodora, who had
moved to the gardener's house with her invalid, had as yet escaped the
pestilence; while in the prayers, which even now she never failed to
offer up morning and evening, she implored the Almighty and her patron
saints to rescue the young widow, to save her from causing the death of
her own mother, and to forgive her for having indirectly caused that of
worthy old Rufinus, who had always been so good to her, and of so many
innocent creatures by her treachery.

Thus the terrible days and nights of anguish passed by; and the captives
whom the girl's sins had brought to prison were happier than she, in
spite of the doom that threatened them.

The fate of his betrothed tortured Orion more than a hundred aching
wounds. Paula's terrible end was fast approaching, and his brain burned
at the mere thought. Now, as he was told by the warder, by the bishop,
and by Justinus, the day after to-morrow was fixed for the bridal of his
betrothed. In two days the bride, decked by base and mocking hands for
an atrocious and accursed farce, would be wreathed and wedded, not to
him, the bridegroom whom she loved, but to the Nile--the insensible,
death-dealing element. He rushed up and down his cell like a madman, and
tore his lute-strings when he tried to soothe his soul with music; but
then a calm, well-intentioned voice would come from the adjoining room,
exhorting him not to lose hope, to trust in God, not to forget his duty
and the task before him. And Orion would control himself resolutely,
pull himself together, and throw himself into his work again.

Day and night were alike to him. The senator had provided him with a
lamp and oil. When he was wearied out, he allowed himself no longer
sleep on his hard couch than human nature imperatively demanded; and as
soon as he had shaken it off he again became absorbed in maps and lists,
plied his pen, thought, sketched, calculated, and reflected. Then, if
a doubt arose in his mind or he could not trust his own memory and
judgment, he knocked at the wall, and his shrewd and experienced friend
was at all times ready to help him to the best of his knowledge and
opinion. The senator went to Arsinoe for him, to gain information as
to the seaboard from the archives preserved there; and so the work went
forward, approaching its end, strengthening and raising his sinking
spirit, bringing him the pleasures of success, and enabling him not
unfrequently to forget for hours that which otherwise might have brought
the bravest to despair.

The warder, the senator or his worthy wife, Dame Joanna or Eudoxia--who
twice had the pleasure of accompanying her--each time they visited him
had some message or note to carry to Paula, telling her how far his work
had progressed; and to her it was a consolation and heartfelt joy to be
able to follow him in his labors. And many a token of his love, esteem,
and admiration gave her courage, when even her brave heart began to
quail.

Ah! It was not alone her terror of a horrible death that tortured her
soul. Her father, whom she considered it her greatest joy in life to
have found again, was fading beyond all hope under her loving hands.
His poor wounded lungs refused its service. It was with great difficulty
that he could swallow a few drops of wine and mouthfuls of food; and
in these last days his clear mind had lain as it were under a
shroud--perhaps it was happier so, as she told herself and as her
friends said to comfort her.

He, too, had heard the cries of: "Hail to the Bride of the Nile!"

"Bring out the Bride!"

"Away with the Bride of the Nile!" Though he had no suspicion of their
meaning, they had haunted his thoughts incessantly during the last few
days; and the terrible, strange words had seemed to charm his fancy,
for to Paula's distress he would murmur them to himself tenderly or
thoughtfully as the case might be.

Many times the idea occurred to her that she might put an end to her
life before the worst should befall, before she became a spectacle for a
whole nation, to be jeered at and made a delightful and exciting show to
rouse their cruelty or their compassion. But dared she do it? Dared she
defy the Most High, the Lord in whom she put her trust, into whose hand
she commended herself in a thousand dumb but fervent prayers.

No. To the very last she would trust and hope. And wonderful to say!
Each time she had reached the very limits of her powers of endurance,
feeling she could certainly bear no more and must succumb, something
came to her to revive her faith or her courage: a message would be
brought her from Orion, or Dame Joanna or Pulcheria came to see her; the
bishop sought an interview, or her father's mind rallied and he could
speak to her in beautiful and stimulating words. Often the warder would
announce the senator and his wife, and their vigorous and healthy minds
always hit on the very thing she needed. Martina, particularly, with her
subtle motherly instinct, always understood whatever was agitating her;
and once she showed her a letter from Heliodora, in which she spoke of
the calmness she had won through nursing their dear invalid, and said
how thankful she was to see the reward of her care and toil. Narses was
already quite another man, and she could know no higher task than that
of reconciling the hapless man to life, nay, of making it dear to him
again. She no longer thought of Orion but as she might of a beautiful
song she once had heard in a delightful hour.

Thus time passed, even for the imprisoned maiden, till only two nights
remained before St. Serapis' day when the fearful marriage was to be
solemnized.

It was evening when the bishop came to visit Paula. He regarded it as
his duty to tell her that the execution of her sentence was fixed for
the day after to-morrow. He should hope and believe till the last, but
his own power over the misguided mob was gone from him. In any case, and
if the worst should befall, he would be at her side to protect her by
the dignity of his office. He had come now, so as to give her time to
prepare her self in every respect. The care of her noble father till his
last hour on earth he would take upon himself as a dear and sacred duty.

Though she had believed herself surely prepared long since for the
worst, this news fell on her like a thunderbolt. What lay before her
seemed so monstrous, so unexampled, that it was impossible that she ever
could look forward to it firmly and calmly.

For a long time she could not help clinging desperately to her faithful
Betta, and it was only by degrees that she so far recovered herself as
to be able to speak to the bishop, and thank him. He, however, could
only lament his inability to earn her fullest gratitude, for the
patriarch's reply to his complaint of those who promised rescue to the
people by the instrumentality of a heathen abomination--a document on
which he had founded his highest hopes for her--had had a different
result from that which he had expected. The patriarch, to be sure,
condemned the abominable sacrifice, but he did it in a way which lacked
the force necessary to terrify and discourage the misled mob. However,
he would try what effect it might have on the people, and a number of
scribes were at work to make copies of it in the course of the night.
These would be sent to the Senators next morning, posted up in the
market-place and public buildings, and distributed to the people; but he
feared all this would have no effect.

"Then help me to prepare for death," said Paula gloomily. "You are not
a priest of my confession, but no church has a more worthy minister. If
you can absolve me in the name of your Redeemer, mine will pardon me. We
look at Him, it is true, with different eyes, but He is the Saviour of
us both, nevertheless." A contradictory reply struggled for utterance in
the strict Jacobite's mind, but at such a moment he felt he must repress
it; he only answered:

"Speak, daughter, I am listening."

And she poured forth all her soul, as though he had been a priest of her
own creed, and his eyes grew moist as he heard this confession of a
pure and loving heart, yearning for all that was highest and best.
He promised her the mercy of the Redeemer, and when he had ended with
"Amen," and blessed her, he looked down at the ground for some minutes
and presently said, "Follow me, Child."

"Whither?" she asked in surprise; for she thought that her last hour
had already come, and that he was about to lead her away to the place
of execution, or to her watery, ever-flowing tomb; but he smiled as he
replied: "No, child. To-day I have only the pleasing duty of blessing
your betrothal before God; if only you will promise not to estrange your
husband from the faith of his fathers--for what will not a man sacrifice
to win the love of a woman.--You promise? Then I will take you to your
Orion."

He rapped on the door of the cell, and when the warder had opened it
he whispered his orders; Paula followed him silently and with blushing
cheeks, and in a few minutes she was clasped to her lover's breast
while, for the first time--and perhaps the last--their lips met in a
kiss.

The prelate gave them a few minutes together; when he had blessed
them both and solemnized their betrothal, he led her back to her cell.
However, she had hardly time to thank him out of the fulness of her
