had not calculated that, according to the custom of robbers in other
countries, but contrary to that of the English highwayman of those
days, they meant to ensure robbery by previous murder. An accident also
happened to delay them a little while on the road. In riding through
one of the glades of the forest, they found a man dismounted and sitting
under a tree, groaning with such bitterness of spirit, that Lowestoffe
could not forbear asking if he was hurt. In answer, he said he was
an unhappy man in pursuit of his wife, who had been carried off by a
villain; and as he raised his countenance, the eyes of Richie, to his
great astonishment, encountered the visage of John Christie.

"For the Almighty's sake, help me, Master Moniplies!" he said; "I have
learned my wife is but a short mile before, with that black villain Lord
Dalgarno."

"Have him forward by all means," said Lowestoffe; "a second Orpheus
seeking his Eurydice!--Have him forward--we will save Lord Dalgarno's
purse, and ease him of his mistress--Have him with us, were it but for
the variety of the adventure. I owe his lordship a grudge for rooking
me. We have ten minutes good."

But it is dangerous to calculate closely in matters of life and death.
In all probability the minute or two which was lost in mounting John
Christie behind one of their party, might have saved Lord Dalgarno
from his fate. Thus his criminal amour became the indirect cause of
his losing his life; and thus "our pleasant vices are made the whips to
scourge us."

The riders arrived on the field at full gallop the moment after the shot
was fired; and Richie, who had his own reasons for attaching himself to
Colepepper, who was bustling to untie the portmanteau from the page's
saddle, pushed against him with such violence as to overthrow him, his
own horse at the same time stumbling and dismounting his rider, who was
none of the first equestrians. The undaunted Richie immediately arose,
however, and grappled with the ruffian with such good-will, that, though
a strong fellow, and though a coward now rendered desperate, Moniplies
got him under, wrenched a long knife from his hand, dealt him a
desperate stab with his own weapon, and leaped on his feet; and, as the
wounded man struggled to follow his example, he struck him upon the head
with the butt-end of a musketoon, which last blow proved fatal.

"Bravo, Richie!" cried Lowestoffe, who had himself engaged
at sword-point with one of the ruffians, and soon put him to
flight,--"Bravo! why, man, there lies Sin, struck down like an ox, and
Iniquity's throat cut like a calf."

"I know not why you should upbraid me with my upbringing, Master
Lowestoffe," answered Richie, with great composure; "but I can tell you,
the shambles is not a bad place for training one to this work."

The other Templar now shouted loudly to them,--"If ye be men, come
hither--here lies Lord Dalgarno, murdered!"

Lowestoffe and Richie ran to the spot, and the page took the
opportunity, finding himself now neglected on all hands, to ride off
in a different direction; and neither he, nor the considerable sum with
which his horse was burdened, were ever heard of from that moment.

The third ruffian had not waited the attack of the Templar and Jin Vin,
the latter of whom had put down old Christie from behind him that he
might ride the lighter; and the whole five now stood gazing with horror
on the bloody corpse of the young nobleman, and the wild sorrow of the
female, who tore her hair and shrieked in the most disconsolate manner,
until her agony was at once checked, or rather received a new direction,
by the sudden and unexpected appearance of her husband, who, fixing on
her a cold and severe look, said, in a tone suited to his manner--"Ay,
woman! thou takest on sadly for the loss of thy paramour."--Then,
looking on the bloody corpse of him from whom he had received so deep an
injury, he repeated the solemn words of Scripture,--"'Vengeance is mine,
saith the Lord, and I will repay it.'--I, whom thou hast injured, will
be first to render thee the decent offices due to the dead."

So saying, he covered the dead body with his cloak, and then looking on
it for a moment, seemed to reflect on what he had next to perform. As
the eye of the injured man slowly passed from the body of the seducer
to the partner and victim of his crime, who had sunk down to his feet,
which she clasped without venturing to look up, his features, naturally
coarse and saturnine, assumed a dignity of expression which overawed
the young Templars, and repulsed the officious forwardness of Richie
Moniplies, who was at first eager to have thrust in his advice and
opinion. "Kneel not to me, woman," he said, "but kneel to the God
thou hast offended, more than thou couldst offend such another worm as
thyself. How often have I told thee, when thou wert at the gayest and
the lightest, that pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit
before a fall? Vanity brought folly, and folly brought sin, and sin hath
brought death, his original companion. Thou must needs leave duty, and
decency, and domestic love, to revel it gaily with the wild and with the
wicked; and there thou liest like a crushed worm, writhing beside the
lifeless body of thy paramour. Thou hast done me much wrong--dishonoured
me among friends--driven credit from my house, and peace from my
fireside--But thou wert my first and only love, and I will not see
thee an utter castaway, if it lies with me to prevent it.--Gentlemen,
I render ye such thanks as a broken-hearted man can give.--Richard,
commend me to your honourable master. I added gall to the bitterness of
his affliction, but I was deluded.--Rise up, woman, and follow me."

He raised her up by the arm, while, with streaming eyes, and bitter
sobs, she endeavoured to express her penitence. She kept her hands
spread over her face, yet suffered him to lead her away; and it was only
as they turned around a brake which concealed the scene they had left,
that she turned back, and casting one wild and hurried glance towards
the corpse of Dalgarno, uttered a shriek, and clinging to her husband's
arm, exclaimed wildly,--"Save me--save me! They have murdered him!"

Lowestoffe was much moved by what he had witnessed; but he was ashamed,
as a town-gallant, of his own unfashionable emotion, and did a force
to his feelings when he exclaimed,--"Ay, let them go--the kind-hearted,
believing, forgiving husband--the liberal, accommodating spouse. O what
a generous creature is your true London husband!--Horns hath he, but,
tame as a fatted ox, he goreth not. I should like to see her when
she hath exchanged her mask and riding-beaver for her peaked hat
and muffler. We will visit them at Paul's Wharf, coz--it will be a
convenient acquaintance."

"You had better think of catching the gipsy thief, Lutin," said Richie
Moniplies; "for, by my faith, he is off with his master's baggage and
the siller."

A keeper, with his assistants, and several other persons, had now come
to the spot, and made hue and cry after Lutin, but in vain. To their
custody the Templars surrendered the dead bodies, and after going
through some formal investigation, they returned, with Richard and
Vincent, to London, where they received great applause for their
gallantry.--Vincent's errors were easily expiated, in consideration
of his having been the means of breaking up this band of villains;
and there is some reason to think, that what would have diminished
the credit of the action in other instances, rather added to it in
the actual circumstances, namely, that they came too late to save Lord
Dalgarno.

George Heriot, who suspected how matters stood with Vincent, requested
and obtained permission from his master to send the poor young fellow on
an important piece of business to Paris. We are unable to trace his
fate farther, but believe it was prosperous, and that he entered into
an advantageous partnership with his fellow-apprentice, upon old
Davy Ramsay retiring from business, in consequence of his daughter's
marriage. That eminent antiquary, Dr. Dryasdust, is possessed of an
antique watch, with a silver dial-plate, the mainspring being a piece
of catgut instead of a chain, which bears the names of Vincent and
Tunstall, Memory-Monitors.

Master Lowestoffe failed not to vindicate his character as a man of
gaiety, by inquiring after John Christie and Dame Nelly; but greatly to
his surprise, (indeed to his loss, for he had wagered ten pieces that he
would domesticate himself in the family,) he found the good-will, as
it was called, of the shop, was sold, the stock auctioned, and the late
proprietor and his wife gone, no one knew whither. The prevailing belief
was, that they had emigrated to one of the new settlements in America.

Lady Dalgarno received the news of her unworthy husband's death with a
variety of emotions, among which, horror that he should have been cut
off in the middle career of his profligacy, was the most prominent.
The incident greatly deepened her melancholy, and injured her health,
already shaken by previous circumstances. Repossessed of her own
fortune by her husband's death, she was anxious to do justice to Lord
Glenvarloch, by treating for the recovery of the mortgage.

But the scrivener, having taken fright at the late events, had left the
city and absconded, so that it was impossible to discover into whose
hands the papers had now passed. Richard Moniplies was silent, for his
own reasons; the Templars, who had witnessed the transaction, kept
the secret at his request, and it was universally believed that the
scrivener had carried off the writings along with him. We may here
observe, that fears similar to those of Skurliewhitter freed London for
ever from the presence of Dame Suddlechop, who ended her career in the
_Rasp-haus_, (viz. Bridewell,) of Amsterdam.

The stout old Lord Huntinglen, with a haughty carriage and unmoistened
eye, accompanied the funeral procession of his only son to its last
abode; and perhaps the single tear which fell at length upon the coffin,
was given less to the fate of the individual, than to the extinction of
the last male of his ancient race.




CHAPTER XXXVII


_Jacques_. There is, suie, another flood toward, and these couples are
coming to the ark!--Here comes a pair of very strange beasts.--_As You
Like It_.

The fashion of such narratives as the present, changes like other
earthly things. Time was that the tale-teller was obliged to wind up
his story by a circumstantial description of the wedding, bedding, and
throwing the stocking, as the grand catastrophe to which, through so
many circumstances of doubt and difficulty, he had at length happily
conducted his hero and heroine. Not a circumstance was then omitted,
from the manly ardour of the bridegroom, and the modest blushes of the
bride, to the parson's new surplice, and the silk tabinet mantua of
the bridesmaid. But such descriptions are now discarded, for the same
reason, I suppose, that public marriages are no longer fashionable, and
that, instead of calling together their friends to a feast and a dance,
the happy couple elope in a solitary post-chaise, as secretly as if they
meant to go to Gretna-Green, or to do worse. I am not ungrateful for a
change which saves an author the trouble of attempting in vain to give
a new colour to the commonplace description of such matters; but,
notwithstanding, I find myself forced upon it in the present instance,
as circumstances sometimes compel a stranger to make use of an old road
which has been for some time shut up. The experienced reader may have
already remarked, that the last chapter was employed in sweeping out
of the way all the unnecessary and less interesting characters, that I
might clear the floor for a blithe bridal.

In truth, it would be unpardonable to pass over slightly what so
deeply interested our principal personage, King James. That learned and
good-humoured monarch made no great figure in the politics of Europe;
but then, to make amends, he was prodigiously busy, when he could find a
fair opportunity of intermeddling with the private affairs of his loving
subjects, and the approaching marriage of Lord Glenvarloch was matter
of great interest to him. He had been much struck (that is, for him,
who was not very accessible to such emotions) with the beauty and
embarrassment of the pretty Peg-a-Ramsay, as he called her, when he
first saw her, and he glorified himself greatly on the acuteness which
he had displayed in detecting her disguise, and in carrying through the
whole inquiry which took place in consequence of it.

He laboured for several weeks, while the courtship was in progress, with
his own royal eyes, so as wellnigh to wear out, he declared, a pair
of her father's best barnacles, in searching through old books and
documents, for the purpose of establishing the bride's pretensions to
a noble, though remote descent, and thereby remove the only objection
which envy might conceive against the match. In his own opinion, at
least, he was eminently successful; for, when Sir Mungo Malagrowther one
day, in the presence-chamber, took upon him to grieve bitterly for the
bride's lack of pedigree, the monarch cut him short with, "Ye may save
your grief for your ain next occasions, Sir Mungo; for, by our royal
saul, we will uphauld her father, Davy Ramsay, to be a gentleman of nine
descents, whase great gudesire came of the auld martial stock of the
House of Dalwolsey, than whom better men never did, and better never
will, draw sword for king and country. Heard ye never of Sir William
Ramsay of Dalwolsey, man, of whom John Fordoun saith,--'He was
_bellicosissimus, nobilissimus?_'--His castle stands to witness for
itsell, not three miles from Dalkeith, man, and within a mile of
Bannockrig. Davy Ramsay came of that auld and honoured stock, and I
trust he hath not derogated from his ancestors by his present craft.
They all wrought wi' steel, man; only the auld knights drilled holes wi'
their swords in their enemies' corslets, and he saws nicks in his brass
wheels. And I hope it is as honourable to give eyes to the blind as
to slash them out of the head of those that see, and to show us how to
value our time as it passes, as to fling it away in drinking, brawling,
spear-splintering, and such-like unchristian doings. And you maun
understand, that Davy Ramsay is no mechanic, but follows a liberal art,
which approacheth almost to the act of creating a living being,
seeing it may be said of a watch, as Claudius saith of the sphere of
Archimedes, the Syracusan--

"Inclusus variis famulatur spiritus astris, Et vivum certis motibus
urget opus.'"

"Your Majesty had best give auld Davy a coat-of-arms, as well as a
pedigree," said Sir Mungo.

"It's done, or ye bade, Sir Mungo," said the king; "and I trust we, who
are the fountain of all earthly honour, are free to spirit a few drops
of it on one so near our person, without offence to the Knight of Castle
Girnigo. We have already spoken with the learned men of the Herald's
College, and we propose to grant him an augmented coat-of-arms, being
his paternal coat, charged with the crown-wheel of a watch in chief, for
a difference; and we purpose to add Time and Eternity, for supporters,
as soon as the Garter King-at-Arms shall be able to devise how Eternity
is to be represented."

"I would make him twice as muckle as Time," [Footnote: Chaucer says,
there is nothing new but what it has been old. The reader has here the
original of an anecdote which has since been fathered on a Scottish
Chief of our own time.] said Archie Armstrong, the Court fool, who
chanced to be present when the king stated this dilemma. "Peace, man--ye
shall be whippet," said the king, in return for this hint; "and you, my
liege subjects of England, may weel take a hint from what we have said,
and not be in such a hurry to laugh at our Scottish pedigrees, though
they be somewhat long derived, and difficult to be deduced. Ye see that
a man of right gentle blood may, for a season, lay by his gentry, and
yet ken whare to find it, when he has occasion for it. It would be as
unseemly for a packman, or pedlar, as ye call a travelling merchant,
whilk is a trade to which our native subjects of Scotland are specially
addicted, to be blazing his genealogy in the faces of those to whom he
sells a bawbee's worth of ribbon, as it would be to him to have a
beaver on his head, and a rapier by his side, when the pack was on his
shoulders. Na, na--he hings his sword on the cleek, lays his beaver on
the shelf, puts his pedigree into his pocket, and gangs as doucely and
cannily about his peddling craft as if his blood was nae better than
ditch-water; but let our pedlar be transformed, as I have kend it happen
mair than ance, into a bein thriving merchant, then ye shall have a
transformation, my lords.

     'In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas--'

Out he pulls his pedigree, on he buckles his sword, gives his beaver a
brush, and cocks it in the face of all creation. We mention these things
at the mair length, because we would have you all to know, that it is
not without due consideration of the circumstances of all parties, that
we design, in a small and private way, to honour with our own royal
presence the marriage of Lord Glenvarloch with Margaret Ramsay, daughter
and heiress of David Ramsay, our horologer, and a cadet only thrice
removed from the ancient house of Dalwolsey. We are grieved we cannot
have the presence of the noble Chief of that House at the ceremony; but
where there is honour to be won abroad the Lord Dalwolsey is seldom
to be found at home. _Sic fuit, est, et erit_.-Jingling Geordie, as ye
stand to the cost of the marriage feast, we look for good cheer."

Heriot bowed, as in duty bound. In fact, the king, who was a great
politician about trifles, had manoeuvred greatly on this occasion,
and had contrived to get the Prince and Buckingham dispatched on an
expedition to Newmarket, in order that he might find an opportunity in
their absence of indulging himself in his own gossiping, _coshering_
habits, which were distasteful to Charles, whose temper inclined to
formality, and with which even the favourite, of late, had not thought
it worth while to seem to sympathise. When the levee was dismissed, Sir
Mungo Malagrowther seized upon the worthy citizen in the court-yard
of the Palace, and detained him, in spite of all his efforts, for the
purpose of subjecting him to the following scrutiny:--

"This is a sair job on you, Master George--the king must have had little
consideration--this will cost you a bonny penny, this wedding dinner?"

"It will not break me, Sir Mungo," answered Heriot; "the king hath a
right to see the table which his bounty hath supplied for years, well
covered for a single day."

"Vera true, vera true--we'll have a' to pay, I doubt, less or mair--a
sort of penny-wedding it will prove, where all men contribute to the
young folk's maintenance, that they may not have just four bare legs in
a bed together. What do you propose to give, Master George?--we begin
with the city when money is in question." [Footnote: The penny-wedding
of the Scots, now disused even among the lowest ranks, was a peculiar
species of merry-making, at which, if the wedded pair were popular, the
guests who convened, contributed considerable sums under pretence of
paying for the bridal festivity, but in reality to set the married folk
afloat in the world.]

"Only a trifle, Sir Mungo--I give my god-daughter the marriage ring;
it is a curious jewel--I bought it in Italy; it belonged to Cosmo
de Medici. The bride will not need my help--she has an estate which
belonged to her maternal grandfather."

"The auld soap-boiler," said Sir Mungo; "it will need some of his suds
to scour the blot out of the Glenvarloch shield--I have heard that
estate was no great things."

"It is as good as some posts at Court, Sir Mungo, which are coveted by
persons of high quality," replied George Heriot.

"Court favour, said ye? Court favour, Master Heriot?" replied Sir Mungo,
choosing then to use his malady of misapprehension; "Moonshine in
water, poor thing, if that is all she is to be tochered with--I am truly
solicitous about them."

"I will let you into a secret," said the citizen, "which will relieve
your tender anxiety. The dowager Lady Dalgarno gives a competent fortune
to the bride, and settles the rest of her estate upon her nephew the
bridegroom."

"Ay, say ye sae?" said Sir Mungo, "just to show her regard to her
husband that is in the tomb--lucky that her nephew did not send him
there; it was a strange story that death of poor Lord Dalgarno--some
folk think the poor gentleman had much wrong. Little good comes of
marrying the daughter of the house you are at feud with; indeed, it was
less poor Dalgarno's fault, than theirs that forced the match on him;
but I am glad the young folk are to have something to live on, come how
it like, whether by charity or inheritance. But if the Lady Dalgarno
were to sell all she has, even to her very wylie-coat, she canna gie
them back the fair Castle of Glenvarloch--that is lost and gane--lost
and gane."

"It is but too true," said George Heriot; "we cannot discover what has
become of the villain Andrew Skurliewhitter, or what Lord Dalgarno has
done with the mortgage."

"Assigned it away to some one, that his wife might not get it after he
was gane; it would have disturbed him in his grave, to think Glenvarloch
should get that land back again," said Sir Mungo; "depend on it, he will
have ta'en sure measures to keep that noble lordship out of her grips or
her nevoy's either."

"Indeed it is but too probable, Sir Mungo," said Master Heriot; "but
as I am obliged to go and look after many things in consequence of this
ceremony, I must leave you to comfort yourself with the reflection."

"The bride-day, you say, is to be on the thirtieth of the instant
month?" said Sir Mungo, holloing after the citizen; "I will be with you
in the hour of cause."

"The king invites the guests," said George Heriot, without turning back.

"The base-born, ill-bred mechanic!" soliloquised Sir Mungo, "if it were
not the odd score of pounds he lent me last week, I would teach him how
to bear himself to a man of quality! But I will be at the bridal banquet
in spite of him."

Sir Mungo contrived to get invited, or commanded, to attend on the
bridal accordingly, at which there were but few persons present; for
James, on such occasions, preferred a snug privacy, which gave him
liberty to lay aside the encumbrance, as he felt it to be, of his regal
dignity. The company was very small, and indeed there were at least two
persons absent whose presence might have been expected. The first of
these was the Lady Dalgarno, the state of whose health, as well as the
recent death of her husband, precluded her attendance on the ceremony.
The other absentee was Richie Moniplies, whose conduct for some time
past had been extremely mysterious. Regulating his attendance on Lord
Glenvarloch entirely according to his own will and pleasure, he had,
ever since the rencounter in Enfield Chase, appeared regularly at his
bedside in the morning, to assist him to dress, and at his wardrobe in
the evening. The rest of the day he disposed of at his own pleasure,
without control from his lord, who had now a complete establishment of
attendants. Yet he was somewhat curious to know how the fellow disposed
of so much of his time; but on this subject Richie showed no desire to
be communicative.

On the morning of the bridal-day, Richie was particularly attentive in
doing all a valet-de-chambre could, so as to set off to advantage the
very handsome figure of his master; and when he had arranged his dress
to the utmost exactness, and put to his long curled locks what he called
"the finishing touch of the redding-kaim," he gravely kneeled down,
kissed his hand, and bade him farewell, saying that he humbly craved
leave to discharge himself of his lordship's service.

"Why, what humour is this?" said Lord Glenvarloch; "if you mean to
discharge yourself of my service, Richie, I suppose you intend to enter
my wife's?"

"I wish her good ladyship that shall soon be, and your good lordship,
the blessings of as good a servant as myself, in heaven's good time,"
said Richie; "but fate hath so ordained it, that I can henceforth only
be your servant in the way of friendly courtesy."

"Well, Richie," said the young lord, "if you are tired of service, we
will seek some better provision for you; but you will wait on me to the
church, and partake of the bridal dinner?"

"Under favour, my lord," answered Richie; "I must remind you of our
covenant, having presently some pressing business of mine own, whilk
will detain me during the ceremony; but I will not fail to prie Master
George's good cheer, in respect he has made very costly fare, whilk it
would be unthankful not to partake of."

"Do as you list," answered Lord Glenvarloch; and having bestowed a
passing thought on the whimsical and pragmatical disposition of his
follower, he dismissed the subject for others better suited to the day.

The reader must fancy the scattered flowers which strewed the path
of the happy couple to church--the loud music which accompanied the
procession--the marriage service performed by a bishop--the king, who
met them at Saint Paul's, giving away the bride,--to the great relief
of her father, who had thus time, during the ceremony, to calculate the
just quotient to be laid on the pinion of report in a timepiece which he
was then putting together.

When the ceremony was finished, the company were transported in the
royal carriages to George Heriot's, where a splendid collation was
provided for the marriage-guests in the Foljambe apartments. The king
no sooner found himself in this snug retreat, than, casting from him
his sword and belt with such haste as if they burnt his fingers, and
flinging his plumed hat on the table, as who should say, Lie there,
authority! he swallowed a hearty cup of wine to the happiness of the
married couple, and began to amble about the room, mumping, laughing,
and cracking jests, neither the wittiest nor the most delicate, but
accompanied and applauded by shouts of his own mirth, in order to
encourage that of the company. Whilst his Majesty was in the midst of
this gay humour, and a call to the banquet was anxiously expected,
a servant whispered Master Heriot forth of the apartment. When he
re-entered, he walked up to the king, and, in his turn whispered
something, at which James started.

"He is not wanting his siller?" said the king, shortly and sharply.

"By no means, my liege," answered Heriot. "It is a subject he states
himself as quite indifferent about, so long as it can pleasure your
Majesty."

"Body of us, man!" said the king, "it is the speech of a true man and a
loving subject, and we will grace him accordingly--what though he be
but a carle--a twopenny cat may look at a king. Swith, man! have
him--_pundite fores_.--Moniplies?--They should have called the chield
Monypennies, though I sall warrant you English think we have not such a
name in Scotland."

"It is an ancient and honourable stock, the Monypennies," said Sir Mungo
Malagrowther; "the only loss is, there are sae few of the name."

"The family seems to increase among your countrymen, Sir Mungo," said
Master Lowestoffe, whom Lord Glenvarloch had invited to be present,
"since his Majesty's happy accession brought so many of you here."

"Right, sir--right," said Sir Mungo, nodding and looking at George
Heriot; "there have some of ourselves been the better of that great
blessing to the English nation."

As he spoke, the door flew open, and in entered, to the astonishment
of Lord Glenvarloch, his late serving-man Richie Moniplies, now
sumptuously, nay, gorgeously, attired in a superb brocaded suit, and
leading in his hand the tall, thin, withered, somewhat distorted form
of Martha Trapbois, arrayed in a complete dress of black velvet,
which suited so strangely with the pallid and severe melancholy of her
countenance, that the king himself exclaimed, in some perturbation,
"What the deil has the fallow brought us here? Body of our regal selves!
it is a corpse that has run off with the mort-cloth!"

"May I sifflicate your Majesty to be gracious unto her?" said Richie;
"being that she is, in respect of this morning's wark, my ain wedded
wife, Mrs. Martha Moniplies by name."

"Saul of our body, man! but she looks wondrous grim," answered King
James. "Art thou sure she has not been in her time maid of honour to
Queen Mary, our kinswoman, of redhot memory?"

"I am sure, an it like your Majesty, that she has brought me fifty
thousand pounds of good siller, and better; and that has enabled me to
pleasure your Majesty, and other folk."

"Ye need have said naething about that, man," said the king; "we ken our
obligations in that sma' matter, and we are glad this rudas spouse of
thine hath bestowed her treasure on ane wha kens to put it to the profit
of his king and country.--But how the deil did ye come by her, man?"

"In the auld Scottish fashion, my liege. She is the captive of my bow
and my spear," answered Moniplies. "There was a convention that she
should wed me when I avenged her father's death--so I slew, and took
possession."

"It is the daughter of Old Trapbois, who has been missed so long," said
Lowestoffe.--"Where the devil could you mew her up so closely, friend
Richie?"

"Master Richard, if it be your will," answered Richie; "or Master
Richard Moniplies, if you like it better. For mewing of her up, I found
her a shelter, in all honour and safety, under the roof of an honest
countryman of my own--and for secrecy, it was a point of prudence, when
wantons like you were abroad, Master Lowestoffe."

There was a laugh at Richie's magnanimous reply, on the part of every
one but his bride, who made to him a signal of impatience, and said,
with her usual brevity and sternness,--"Peace--peace, I pray you, peace.
Let us do that which we came for." So saying, she took out a bundle of
parchments, and delivering them to Lord Glenvarloch, she said aloud,--"I
take this royal presence, and all here, to witness, that I restore the
ransomed lordship of Glenvarloch to the right owner, as free as ever it
was held by any of his ancestors."

"I witnessed the redemption of the mortgage," said Lowestoffe; "but I
little dreamt by whom it had been redeemed."

"No need ye should," said Richie; "there would have been small wisdom in
crying roast-meat."

"Peace," said his bride, "once more.--This paper," she continued,
delivering another to Lord Glenvarloch, "is also your property--take it,
but spare me the question how it came into my custody."

The king had bustled forward beside Lord Glenvarloch, and fixing an
eager eye on the writing, exclaimed--"Body of ourselves, it is our royal
sign-manual for the money which was so long out of sight!--How came you
by it, Mistress Bride?"

"It is a secret," said Martha, dryly.

"A secret which my tongue shall never utter," said Richie,
resolutely,--"unless the king commands me on my allegiance."

"I do--I do command you," said James, trembling and stammering with the
impatient curiosity of a gossip; while Sir Mungo, with more malicious
anxiety to get at the bottom of the mystery, stooped his long thin form
forward like a bent fishing-rod, raised his thin grey locks from his
ear, and curved his hand behind it to collect every vibration of the
expected intelligence. Martha in the meantime frowned most ominously on
Richie, who went on undauntedly to inform the king, "that his deceased
father-in-law, a good careful man in the main, had a' touch of worldly
wisdom about him, that at times marred the uprightness of his walk;
he liked to dabble among his neighbour's gear, and some of it would at
times stick to his fingers in the handling."

"For shame, man, for shame!" said Martha; "since the infamy of the
deed must be told, be it at least briefly.--Yes, my lord," she added,
addressing Glenvarloch, "the piece of gold was not the sole bait which
brought the miserable old man to your chamber that dreadful night--his
object, and he accomplished it, was to purloin this paper. The wretched
scrivener was with him that morning, and, I doubt not, urged the doting
old man to this villainy, to offer another bar to the ransom of your
estate. If there was a yet more powerful agent at the bottom of this
conspiracy, God forgive it to him at this moment, for he is now where
the crime must be answered!"

"Amen!" said Lord Glenvarloch, and it was echoed by all present.

"For my father," continued she, with her stern features twitched by an
involuntary and convulsive movement, "his guilt and folly cost him his
life; and my belief is constant, that the wretch, who counselled him
that morning to purloin the paper, left open the window for the entrance
of the murderers."

Every body was silent for an instant; the king was first to speak,
commanding search instantly to be made for the guilty scrivener.
"_I, lictor,_" he concluded, "_colliga manus--caput obnubito-infelici
suspendite arbori_."

Lowestoffe answered with due respect, that the scrivener had absconded
at the time of Lord Dalgarno's murder, and had not been heard of since.

"Let him be sought for," said the king. "And now let us change the
discourse--these stories make one's very blood grew, and are altogether
unfit for bridal festivity. Hymen, O Hymenee!" added he, snapping his
fingers, "Lord Glenvarloch, what say you to Mistress Moniplies, this
bonny bride, that has brought you back your father's estate on your
bridal day?"

"Let him say nothing, my liege," said Martha; "that will best suit his
feelings and mine."

"There is redemption-money, at the least, to be repaid," said Lord
Glenvarloch; "in that I cannot remain debtor."

"We will speak of it hereafter," said Martha; "_my_ debtor _you_ cannot
be." And she shut her mouth as if determined to say nothing more on the
subject.

Sir Mungo, however, resolved not to part with the topic, and availing
himself of the freedom of the moment, said to Richie--"A queer story
that of your father-in-law, honest man; methinks your bride thanked you
little for ripping it up."

"I make it a rule, Sir Mungo," replied Richie, "always to speak any evil
I know about my family myself, having observed, that if I do not, it is
sure to be told by ither folks."

"But, Richie," said Sir Mungo, "it seems to me that this bride of yours
is like to be master and mair in the conjugal state."

"If she abides by words, Sir Mungo," answered Richie, "I thank heaven I
can be as deaf as any one; and if she comes to dunts, I have twa hands
to paik her with."

"Weel said, Richie, again," said the king; "you have gotten it on baith
haffits, Sir Mungo.--Troth, Mistress Bride, for a fule, your gudeman has
a pretty turn of wit."

"There are fools, sire," replied she, "who have wit, and fools who
have courage--aye, and fools who have learning, and are great fools
notwithstanding.--I chose this man because he was my protector when
I was desolate, and neither for his wit nor his wisdom. He is truly
honest, and has a heart and hand that make amends for some folly. Since
I was condemned to seek a protector through the world, which is to me a
wilderness, I may thank God that I have come by no worse."

"And that is sae sensibly said," replied the king, "that, by my saul,
I'll try whether I canna make him better. Kneel down, Richie--somebody
lend me a rapier--yours, Mr. Langstaff, (that's a brave name for a
lawyer,)--ye need not flash it out that gate, Templar fashion, as if ye
were about to pink a bailiff!"

He took the drawn sword, and with averted eyes, for it was a sight he
loved not to look on, endeavoured to lay it on Richie's shoulder, but
nearly stuck it into his eye. Richie, starting back, attempted to rise,
but was held down by Lowestoffe, while Sir Mungo, guiding the royal
weapon, the honour-bestowing blow was given and received: "_Surge,
carnifex_--Rise up, Sir Richard Moniplies, of Castle-Collop!--And, my
lords and lieges, let us all to our dinner, for the cock-a-leekie is
cooling."




NOTES


Note I. p. l4.--DAVID RAMSAY

David Ramsay, watchmaker and horologer to James I., was a real person,
though the author has taken the liberty of pressing him into the service
of fiction. Although his profession led him to cultivate the exact
sciences, like many at this period he mingled them with pursuits which
were mystical and fantastic. The truth was, that the boundaries between
truth and falsehood in mathematics, astronomy, and similar pursuits,
were not exactly known, and there existed a sort of _terra incognita_
between them, in which the wisest men bewildered themselves. David
Ramsay risked his money on the success of the vaticinations which his
researches led him to form, since he sold clocks and watches under
condition, that their value should not become payable till King James
was crowned in the Pope's chair at Rome. Such wagers were common in that
day, as may be seen by looking at Jonson's Every Man out of his Humour.

David Ramsay was also an actor in another singular scene, in which the
notorious astrologer Lilly was a performer, and had no small expectation
on the occasion, since he brought with him a half-quartern sack to put
the treasure in.

"David Ramsay, his Majesty's clock-maker, had been informed that there
was a great quantity of treasure buried in the cloister of Westminster
Abbey. He acquaints Dean Withnam therewith, who was also then Bishop
of Lincoln. The Dean gave him liberty to search after it, with this
proviso, that if any was discovered, his church should have a share of
it. Davy Ramsay finds out one John Scott, who pretended the use of the
Mosaical rods, to assist him herein. [Footnote: The same now called,
I believe, the Divining Rod, and applied to the discovery of water
not obvious to the eye.] I was desired to join with him, unto which
I consented. One winter's night, Davy Ramsay, with several gentlemen,
myself, and Scott, entered the cloisters. We played the hazel rods round
about the cloisters. Upon the west end of the cloisters the rods turned
one over another, an argument that the treasure was there. The labourers
digged at least six feet deep, and then we met with a coffin; but which,
in regard it was not heavy, we did not open, which we afterwards much
repented.

"From the cloisters we went into the abbey church, where, upon a
sudden, (there being no wind when we began,) so fierce and so high, so
blustering and loud a wind did rise, that we verily believed the west
end of the church would have fallen upon us. Our rods would not move at
all; the candles and torches, also, but one were extinguished, or burned
very dimly. John Scott, my partner, was amazed, looked pale, knew not
what to think or do, until I gave directions and command to dismiss the
demons; which, when done, all was quiet again, and each man returned
unto his lodging late, about twelve o'clock at night. I could never
since be induced to join with any such like actions.

"The true miscarriage of the business was by reason of so many people
