The pangs of a convulsion fit did not long shackle the determined
Bruce.  The energy of his spirit struggling to gain the side of Wallace
in this his extreme need (for he well knew Edward's implacable soul),
roused him from his worse than swoon.  With his extended arms dashing
away the restoratives with which both Isabella and Ercildown hung over
him, he would have leaped on the floor had not the latter held him down.

"Withhold me not!" cried he; "this is not the time for sickness and
indulgence.  My friend is in the fangs of the tyrant, and shall I lie
here?  No, not for all the empires in the globe will I be detained
another hour."

Isabella, affrighted at the furies which raged in his eyes, but yet
more terrified at the perils attendant on his desperate resolution,
threw herself at his feet, and implored him to stay for her sake.

"No," cried Bruce, "not for thy life, Isabella, which is dearer to me
than my own! not to save this ungrateful country from the doom it
merits would I linger one moment from the side of him who has fought,
bled, and suffered for me and mine, who is now treated with ignominy,
and sentenced to die, for my delinquency!  Had I consented to proclaim
myself on my landing, secure with Bruce the king envy would have feared
to strike; but I must first win a fame like his!  And while I lay here,
they tore him from the vain and impotent Bruce!  But, Almighty pardoner
of my sins!" cried he, with vehemence, "grant me strength to wrest him
from their grip, and I will go barefoot to Palestine, to utter all my
gratitude!"

Isabella sunk weeping into the arms of her aunt.  And the venerable
Ercildown, wishing to curb an impetuosity which could only involve its
generous agent in a ruin deeper than that it sought to revenge, with
more zeal than judgment, urged to the prince the danger into which such
boundless resentment would precipitate his own person.  At this
intimation the impassioned Bruce, stung to the soul that such an
argument could be expected to have weight with him, solemnly bent his
knees, and clasping his sword, vowed before Heaven "either to release
Wallace or--" to share his fate! he would have added; but Isabella,
watchful of his words, suddenly interrupted him, by throwing herself
wildly on his neck, and exclaiming:

"Oh, say not so!  Rather swear to pluck the tyrant from his throne;
that the scepter of my Bruce may bless England, as it will yet do this
unhappy land!"

"She says right!" ejaculated Ercildown, in a prophetic transport; "and
the scepter of Bruce, in the hands of his offspring, shall bless the
united countries to the latest generations!  The walls of separation
shall then be thrown down, and England and Scotland be one people."

Bruce looked steadfastly on the sage: "Then if thy voice utter holy
verity, it will not again deny my call to wield the power that Heaven
bestows!  I follow my fate!  To-morrow's dawn sees me in the path to
snatch my best treasure, my counselor, my guide, from the judgment of
his enemies--or woe to England, woe to all Scotland born who have
breathed one hostile word against his sacred life!  Helen dost thou
hear me?" cried he: "Wilt thou not assist me to persuade thy too timid
sister that her Bruce's honor, his happiness, lives in the preservation
of his friend?  Speak to her, counsel her, sweet Helen, and, and,
please the Almighty arm of Heaven, I will reward thy tenderness with
the return of Wallace!"

Helen gazed intently on him while he spoke.  She smiled when he ended,
but she did not answer, and there was a wild vacancy in the smile that
seemed to say she knew not what had been spoken, and that her thoughts
were far away.  Without further regarding him or any present, she arose
and left the room.  At this moment of fearful abstraction, her whole
soul was bent with an intensity that touched on madness, on the
execution of a project which had rushed into her mind in the moment she
heard of Wallace's deathful captivity and destination.

Helen gazed intently on him while he spoke.  She smiled when he ended,
but she did not answer, and there was a wild vacancy in the smile that
seemed to say she knew not what had been spoken, and that her thoughts
were far away.  Without further regarding him or any present, she arose
and left the room.  At this moment of fearful abstraction, her whole
soul was bent with an intensity that touched on madness, on the
execution of a project which had rushed into her mind in the moment she
heard of Wallace's deathful captivity and destination.

The approach of night favored her design.  Hurrying to her chamber, she
dismissed her maids with the prompt excuse that she was ill, and
desired not to be disturbed until morning, then bolting the door, she
quickly habited herself as the dear memorial of her happy days in
France, and dropping from her window into the pleasance beneath, ran
swiftly through its woody precincts toward Dundee.

Before she arrived at the suburbs of Ferth, her tender feet became so
blistered, she found the necessity of stopping at the first cottage.
But her perturbed spirits rendered it impossible for her to take rest,
and she answered the hospitable offer of its humble owner, with a
request that he would go into the town and immediately purchase a
horse, to carry her that night to Dundee.  She put her purse into the
man's hand, who without further discussion obeyed.  When the animal was
brought and the honest Scot returned her the purse with its remaining
contents, she divided them with him, and turning from his thanks,
mounted the horse, and rode away.

About an hour before dawn, she arrived within view of the ships lying
in the harbor at Dundee.  At this sight she threw herself off the
panting animal, and leaving it to rest and liberty, hastened to the
beach.  A gentle breeze blew freshly from the northwest, and several
vessels were heaving their anchors to get under weigh.

"Are any," demanded she, "bound for the Tower of London?"

"None," were the replies.  Despair was now in her heart and gesture.
But suddenly recollecting that in dressing herself for flight she had
not taken off the jewels she usually wore, she exclaimed with renovated
hope, "Will not gold tempt some one to carry me thither?"  A rough
Norwegian sailor jumped from the side of the nearest vessel, and
readily answered in the affirmative.  "My life," rejoined she, "or a
necklace of pearls shall be yours, in the moment you land me at the
Tower of London."  The man seeing the youth and agitation of the
seeming boy, doubted his power to perform so magnificent a promise, and
was half inclined to retract his assent; but Helen pointing to a jewel
on her finger as a proof that she did not speak of things beyond her
read, he no longer hesitated; and pledging his word that wind and tide
in his favor, he would land her at the Tower Stairs, she, as if all
happiness must meet her at that point, sprung into his vessel.  The
sails were unfurled, the voices of the men chanted forth their cheering
responses on clearing the harbor, and Helen throwing herself along the
floor of her little cabin, in that prostration of body and soul,
silently breathed her thanks to God for being indeed launched on the
ocean, whose waves she trusted would soon convey her to Wallace; to
sooth, to serve--to die, or to compass the release of him who had
sacrificed more than his life for her father's preservation--for him
who had saved herself from worse than death.




Chapter LXXXI.

The Thames.


On the evening of the fourteenth day from the one in which Helen had
embarked, the little ship of Dundee entered on the bright bosom of the
Nore.  While she sat on the deck watching the progress of the vessel
with an eager spirit, which would gladly have taken wings to have flown
to the object of her voyage, she first saw the majestic waters of the
Thames.  But it was a tyrannous flood to her, and she marked not the
diverging shores crowned with palaces; her eyes looked over every
stately dome to seek the black summits of the Tower.  At a certain
point the captain of the vessel spoke through his trumpet to summon a
pilot from the land.  In a few minutes he was obeyed.  The Englishman
took the helm.  Helen was reclined on a coil of ropes near him.  He
entered into conversation with the Norwegian, and she listened in
speechless attention to a recital which bound up her every sense in
that hearing.  The captain had made some unprincipled jest on the
present troubles of Scotland, now his adopted country from his
commercial interests, and he added with a laugh, "that he though any
ruler the right one who gave him a free course in traffic."  In answer
to this remark, and with an observation not very flattering to the
Norwegian's estimation of right and wrong, the Englishman mentioned the
capture of the once renowned champion of Scotland.  Even the enemy who
recounted the particulars, showed a truth in the recital which shamed
the man who had benefited by the patriotism he affected to despise, and
for which Sir William Wallace was now likely to shed his blood.

"I was present," continued the pilot, "when the brave Scot was put on
the raft, which carried him through the Traitor's Gate into the Tower.
His hands and feet were bound with iron; but his head, owing to
faintness from the wounds he had received at Lumloch, was so bent down
on his breast as he reclined on the float, that I could not then see
his face.  There was a great pause, for none of us, when he did appear
in sight, could shout over the downfall of so merciful a conqueror.
Many were spectators of this scene whose lives he had spared on the
fields of Scotland; and my brother was amongst them.  However, that I
might have a distinct view of the man who has so long held our warlike
monarch in dread, I went to Westminster Hall on the day appointed for
his trial.  The great judges of the land, and almost all the lords
besides were there, and a very grand spectacle they made.  But when the
hall-door was opened, and the dauntless prisoner appeared, then it was
that I saw true majesty.  King Edward on his throne never looked with
such a royal air.  His very chains seemed given to be graced by him as
he moved through the parting crowd with the step of one who had been
used to have all his accusers at his feet.  Though pale with loss of
blood, and his countenance bore traces of the suffering occasioned by
the state of his yet unhealed wounds, his head was now erect, and he
looked with undisturbed dignity on all around.  The Earl of Gloucester,
whose life and liberty he had granted at Berwick, sat on the right of
the lord chancellor.  Bishop Beck, the Lords de Valence and Soulis,
with one Monteith (who it seems was the man that betrayed him into our
hands), charged him with high treason against the life of King Edward
and the peace of his majesty's realms of England and Scotland.
Grievous were the accusations brought against him, and bitter the
revilings with which he was denounced as a traitor too mischievous to
deserve any show of mercy.  The Earl of Gloucester at last rose
indignantly, and in energetic and respectful terms, called on Sir
William Wallace, by the reverence in which he held the tribunal of
future ages, to answer for himself!

"'On this adjuration, brave earl!' replied he, 'I will speak!'  O! men
of Scotland, what a voice was that!  In it was all honesty and
nobleness! and a murmur arose from some who feared its power, which
Gloucester was obliged to check by exclaiming aloud with a stern voice;
'Silence, while Sir William Wallace answers.  He who disobeys,
sergeant-at-arms, take into custody!'  A pause succeeded, and the
chieftain, with god-like majesty of truth, denied the possibility of
being a traitor where he never had owed allegiance.  But with a
matchless fearlessness, he avowed the facts alleged against him, which
told the havoc he had made of the English on the Scottish plains, and
the devastations he had afterward wrought in the lands of England.  'It
was a son,' cried he, 'defending the orphans of his father from the
steel and rapine of a treacherous friend!  It was the sword of
restitution gathering on that false friend's fields the harvests he had
ravaged from theirs!'  He spoke more and nobly--too nobly for them who
heard him.  They rose to a man to silence what they could not confute;
and the sentence of death was pronounced on him--the cruel death of a
traitor!  The Earl of Gloucester turned pale on his seat, but the
countenance of Wallace was unmoved.  As he was led forth, I followed,
and of Wallace was unmoved.  As he was led forth, I followed, and saw
the young Le de Spencer, with several other reprobate gallants of our
court, ready to receive him.  With shameful mockery they flew laurels
on his head, and with torrents of derision, told him, it was meet they
should so salute the champion of Scotland!  Wallace glanced on them a
look which spoke pity rather than contempt, and, with a serene
countenance, he followed the warden toward the Tower.  The hirelings of
his accusers loaded him with invectives as he passed along; but the
populace who beheld his noble mien, with those individuals who had
heard of--while many had felt--his generous virtues, deplored and wept
his sentence.  To-morrow at sunrise he dies."

Helen's face being overshadowed by the low brim of her hat, the agony
of her mind could not have been read in her countenance had the good
Southron been sufficiently uninterested in his story to regard the
sympathy of others; but as soon as he had uttered the last dreadful
words, "To-morrow at sunrise he dies!" she started from her seat; her
horror-struck senses apprehended nothing further, and turning to the
Norwegian, "Captain," cried she, "I must reach the Tower this night!"

"Impossible!" was the reply: "the tide will not take us up till
to-morrow at noon."


"Then the waves shall!" cried she, and frantically rushing toward the
ship's side, she would have thrown herself into the water, had not the
pilot caught her arm.

"Boy!" said he, "are you mad? your action, your looks--"

"No," interrupted she, wringing her hands; "but in the Tower I must be
this night, or--  Oh! God of mercy, end my misery!"

The unutterable anguish of her voice, countenance, and gesture excited
a suspicion in the Englishman, that this youth was connected with the
Scottish chief; and not choosing to hint his surmise to the unfeeling
Norwegian, in a different tone he exhorted Helen to composure, and
offered her his own boat, which was then towed at the side of the
vessel, to take her to the Tower.  Helen grasped the pilot's rough
hand, and in a paroxysm of gratitude pressed it to her lips; then
forgetful of her engagements with the insensible man who stood unmoved
by his side, sprung into the boat.  The Norwegian followed her, and in
a threatening tone demanded his hire.  She now recollected it, and
putting her hand into her vest, gave him the string of pearls which had
been her necklace.  He was satisfied, and the boat pushed off.

The cross, the cherished memorial of her hallowed meeting with Wallace
in the chapel of Snawdoun, and which always hung suspended on her
bosom, was now in her hand and pressed close to her heart.  The rowers
plied their oars, and her eyes, with a gaze as if they would pierce the
horizon, looked intently onward, while the men labored through the
tide.  Even to see the walls which contained Wallace, seemed to promise
her a degree of comfort she dared hardly hope herself to enjoy.  At
last the awful battlements of England's state prison rose before her.
She could not mistake them.  "That is the Tower," said one of the
rowers.  A shriek escaped her, and instantly covering her face with her
hands, she tried to shut from her sight those very walls she had so
long sought amongst the clouds.  They imprisoned Wallace!  He groaned
within their confines! and their presence paralyzed her heart.

"Shall I die before I reach thee, Wallace?" was the question her almost
flitting soul uttered, as she, trembling, yet with swift steps,
ascended the stone stairs which led from the water's edge to the
entrance to the Tower.  She flew through the different courts to the
one in which stood the prison of Wallace.  One of the boatmen, being
bargeman to the Governor of the Tower, as a privileged person,
conducted her unmolested through every ward till she reached the place
of her destination.  There she dismissed him with a ring from her
finger as his reward; and passing a body of soldiers, who kept guard
before a large porch that led to the dungeons, she entered, and found
herself in an immense paved room.  A single sentinel stood at the end
near to an iron grating, or small portcullis; there, then, was Wallace!
Forgetting her disguise and situation, in the frantic eagerness of her
pursuit, she hastily advanced to the man:

"Let me pass to Sir William Wallace," cried she, "and treasures shall
be your reward."

"Whose treasures, my pretty page?" demanded the soldier; "I dare not,
were it at the suit of the Countess of Gloucester herself."

"Oh!" cried Helen, "for the sake of a greater than any countess in the
land, take this jeweled bracelet, and let me pass!"

The man, misapprehending the words of this adjuration, at sight of the
diamonds, supposing the page must come from the good queen, no longer
demurred.  Putting the bracelet into his bosom, he whispered Helen,
that as he granted this permission at the risk of his life, she must
conceal herself in the interior chamber of the prisoner's dungeon
should any person from the warden visit him during their interview.
She readily promised this; and he informed her that, when through this
door, she must cross two other apartments, the bolts to the entrances
of which she must undraw; and then, at the extremity of a long passage,
a door, fastened by a latch, would admit her to Sir William Wallace.
With these words, the soldier removed the massy bars, and Helen entered.




Chapter LXXXII.

The Tower of London.


Helen's fleet steps carried her in a few minutes through the
intervening dungeons to the door which would restore to her eyes the
being with whose life her existence seemed blended.  The bolts had
yielded to her hands.  The iron latch now gave way; and the ponderous
oak, grating dismally on its hinges, she looked forward, and beheld the
object of all her solicitude leaning along a couch; a stone table was
before him, at which he seemed writing.  He raised his head at the
sound.  The peace of virtue was in his eyes, and a smile on his lips,
as if he had expected some angel visitant.

The first glance at his pale, but heavenly countenance struck to the
heart of Helen; veneration, anguish, shame, all rushed on her at once.
She was in his presence! but how might he turn from consolations he had
not sought!  The intemperate passion of her step-mother now glared
before her; his contempt of the countess' unsolicited advances appeared
ready to be extended to her rash daughter-in-law; and with an
irrepressible cry, which seemed to breathe out her life, Helen would
have fled, but her failing limbs bent under her, and she fell senseless
into the dungeon.  Wallace started from his reclining position.  He
thought his senses must deceive him--and yet the shriek was Lady
Helen's.  He had heard the same cry on the Pentland Hills; in the
chamber of Chateau Galliard!  He rose agitated; he approached the
prostrate youth, and bending to the inanimate form, took off the Norman
hat; he parted the heavy locks which fell over her brow, and recognized
the features of her who alone had ever shared his meditations with his
Marion.  He sprinkled water on her face and hands; he touched her
cheek; it was ashy cold, and the chill struck to his heart.  "Helen!"
exclaimed he; "Helen, awake!  Speak to thy friend!"

Still she was motionless.  "Dead!" cried he, with increased emotion.
His eye and his heart in a moment discerned and understood the rapid
emaciation of those lovely features--now fearing the worst; "Gone so
soon!" repeated he, "gone to tell my Marion that her Wallace comes.
Blessed angel!" cried he, clasping her to his breast, with an energy of
which he was not aware, "take me, take me with thee!"  The pressure,
the voice, roused the dormant life of Helen.  With a torturing sigh she
unsealed her eyes from the death-like load that oppressed them, and
found herself in the arms of Wallace.

All her wandering senses, which from the first promulgation of his
danger had been kept in a bewildered state, now rallied; and, in
recovered sanity, smote her to the soul.  Though still overwhelmed with
grief at the fate which threatened to tear him from her and life, she
now wondered how she could ever have so trampled on the retreating
modesty of her nature, as to have brought herself thus into his
presence; and in a voice of horror, of despair, believing that she had
forever destroyed herself in his opinion, she exclaimed: "O! Wallace!
how came I here?  I am lost--and innocently; but God--the pure God--can
read the soul!"

She lay in hopeless misery on his breast, with her eyes again closed,
almost unconscious of the support on which she leaned.

"Lady Helen," returned he, "was it other than Wallace you sought in
these dungeons?  I dared to think that the Parent we both adore had
sent you hither to be His harbinger of consolation!"  Recalled to
self-possession by the kindness of these words, Helen turned her head
on his bosom, and in a burst of grateful tears, hardly articulated:

"And will you not abhor me for this act of madness?  But I was not
myself.  And yet, where should I live but at the feet of my benefactor?"

The steadfast soul of Wallace was subdued by this language, and the
manner of its utterance.  It was the disinterested dictates of a pure
though agitated spirit, which he now was convinced did most exclusively
love him, but with the passion of an angel; and the tears of a sympathy
which spoke their kindred natures stole from his eyes as he bent his
cheek on her head.  She felt them; and rejoicing in such an assurance
that she yet possessed his esteem, a blessed calm diffused itself over
her mind, and raising herself, with a look of virtuous confidence, she
exclaimed:

"Then you do understand me, Wallace? you pardon me this apparent
forgetfulness of my sex; and you recognize a true sister in Helen Mar?
I may administer to that noble heart, till--" she paused, turning
deathly pale, and then clasping his hand in both hers, in bitter agony
added, "till we meet in heaven!"

"And blissful, dearest saint, will be our union there," replied he,
"where soul meets soul, unencumbered of these earthly fetters; and
mingles with each other, even as thy tender teardrops now glide into
mine!  But there, my Helen, we shall never weep.  No heart will be left
unsatisfied; no spirit will mourn in unrequited love, for that happy
region is the abode of love--of love without the defilements or the
disquietudes of mortality, for there it is an everlasting, pure
enjoyment.  It is a full, diffusive tenderness, which, penetrating all
hearts, unites the whole in one spirit of boundless love in the bosom
of our God!  Who, the source of all love, as John the beloved disciple
saith, 'so loved a lost world, that he sent his only Son to redeem it
from its sins, and to bring it to eternal blessedness!'"

"Ah!" cried Helen, throwing herself on her knees in holy enthusiasm;
"join then your prayers with mine, most revered of friends, that I may
be admitted into such blessedness!  Petition our God to forgive me, and
do you forgive me, that I have sometimes envied the love you bear your
Marion!  But now I love her so entirely, that to be her and your
ministering spirit in Paradise would amply satisfy my soul."

"O! Helen," cried Wallace, grasping her uplifted hands in his, and
clasping them to his heart, "thy soul and Marion's are indeed one, and
as one I love ye!"

This unlooked-for declaration almost overpowered Helen in its flood of
happiness; and, with a smile, which seemed to picture the very heavens
opening before her, she turned her eyes from him to a crucifix which
stood on a table, and bowing her head on its pedestal, was lost in the
devotion of rapturous gratitude.

At this juncture, when, perhaps, the purest bliss that ever descended
on woman's heart now glowed in that of Helen, the Earl of Gloucester
entered.  His were not visits of consolation, for he knew that his
friend, who had built his heroism on the rock of Christianity, did not
require the comfortings of any mortal hand.  At sight of him Wallace
pointing to the kneeling Helen, beckoned him into the inner cell, where
his straw pallet lay; and there, in a low voice, declared who she was,
and requested the earl to use his authority to allow her to remain with
him to the last.

"After that," said he, "I rely on you, generous Gloucester, to convey
safely back to her country a being who seems to have nothing of earth
about her but the terrestrial body which enshrines her angelic soul!"

The sound of a voice speaking with Wallace roused Helen from her happy
trance.  Alarmed that it might be the fatal emissaries of the tyrant,
come prematurely to summon him to his last hour, she started on her
feet.  "Where are you, Wallace?" cried she, looking distractedly around
her; "I must be with you even in death!"

Hearing her fearful cry, he hastened into the dungeon, and relieved her
immediate terror by naming the Earl of Gloucester, who followed him.
The conviction that Wallace was under mortal sentence, which the
heaven-sent impression of his eternal bliss had just almost
obliterated, now glared upon her with redoubled horrors.  This world
again rose before her in the person of Gloucester.  It reminded her
that she and Wallace were not yet passed into the hereafter, whose
anticipated reunion had wrapt her in such sweet elysium.  He had yet
the bitter cup of death to drink to the dregs; and all of human
weakness again writhed within her bosom.  "And is there no hope?"
faltered she, looking earnestly on the disturbed face of Gloucester,
who had bowed with a pitying respect to her as he approached her.  And
then, while he seemed hesitating for an answer, she more firmly, but
imploringly resumed: "Oh, let me seek your king? once he was a crusade
prince!  The cross was then on his breast, and the love of Him who came
to redeem lost man, nay, even his direst enemies, from death unto life,
must have been then in your king's heart.  Oh, if once there, it cannot
be wholly extinguished now!  Let me, gracious earl, but recall to him
that he was then beloved by a queen who to this day is the glory of her
sex.  On that spot of holy contest she preserved his life from an
assassin's poison, by daring the sacrifice of her own!  But she lived
to bless him, and to be blessed herself!  While Sir William Wallace,
also a Christian knight, anointed by virtue and his cause, hath only
done for his own country and its trampled land what King Edward then
did for Christendom in Palestine.  And he was roused to the defense, by
a deed worse than ever infidel inflicted!  The wife of his bosom--who
had all of angel about her, but that of her mortal body--was stabbed by
a murderous Southron governor in Scotland, because she would not betray
her husband to his desolating brand!  I would relate this on my knees,
to your royal Edward, and call on the spirit of his sainted queen to
enforce my suit, by the memory of her love and her devotedness."

Helen, who had risen in her energy of speech and supplication, suddenly
paused, clasped her hands, and stood with upward eyes, looking as if
she beheld the beatified object of her invocation.

"Dearest sister of my soul!" cried Wallace, who had forborne to
interrupt her, taking her clasped hands in his, "thy knees shall never
bend to any less than to the blessed Lord of all mankind, for me!  Did
He will my longer pilgrimage on this earth, of which my spirit is
already weary, it would not be in the power of any human tyrant to hold
me in these bonds.  And, for Edward! believe, that not all thy tender
eloquence could make one impression, where a long obdurate ambition
hath set so deep a seal.  I am content to go, my sister--and angels
whisper me," (and his voice became subdued, though still calm, while he
added, in a lowered tone, like that angel whisper) "that thy bridal bed
will be in William Wallace's grave!"  She spoke not, but at this
assurance turned her tearful eyes upon him, with a beam of delight;
with such delight, the vestal consigns herself to the cloister; with
such delight, the widowed mourner lays her head to rest on the tomb of
him she loved.  But with such delight none are acquainted who know not
what it is to be wedded to the soul of a beloved being, when the body
which was once its vestment lies moldering in the earth.

Gloucester contemplated this chaste union of two spotless hearts, with
an admiration almost amounting to devotion.  "Noble lady," said he,
"the message that I came to impart to Sir William Wallace bears with it
a show of hope; and, I trust that your gentle spirit will yet be as
persuasive as consolatory.  A deputation has just arrived from our
border-counties, headed by the good Barons de Hilton and De
Blenkinsopp, praying the royal mercy for their gallant foe, who had
been most generous to them, they set forth, in their extremity.  And
the king was listening to them, with what temper I know not, when a
private embassy, as opportunely, made its appearance from France, on
the same errand; in short, to negotiate with Edward for the safety of
our friend, as a prince of that realm.  I left the embassadors,"
continued the earl, turning to Wallace, "in debate with his majesty;
and he has at length granted a suspension--nay, has even promised a
repeal of the horrible injustice that was to be completed to-morrow, if
you can be brought to accord with certain proposals, now to be laid
before you.  Accept them, and Edward will comply with all King Philip's
demands in your behalf."

"Then you will accept them!" cried Helen, in a tumult of suspense.  The
communication of Gloucester had made no change in the equable pulse of
Wallace; and he replied, with a look of tender pity upon her animated
countenance.  "The proposals of Edward are too likely to be snares for
that honor which I would bear with me uncontaminated to the grave.
Therefore, dearest consoler of my last hours, do not give way to hopes
which a greater King than Edward may command me to disappoint."  Helen
bowed her head in silence.  The color again faded from her cheek, and
despair once more seized on her heart.

Gloucester resumed; and, after narrating some particulars concerning
the conference between the king and the embassadors, he suggested the
impracticality of secretly retaining Lady Helen, for any length of
time, in the state dungeon.  "I dare not," continued he, "be privy to
her presence here, and yet conceal it from the king.  I know not what
messengers he may send to impart his conditions to you; and should she
be discovered, Edward, doubly incensed, would tear her from you; and,
as an accessory, so involve me in his displeasure, that I should be
disabled from serving either of you further.  Were I so to honor his
feelings as a man as to mention it to him, I do not believe that he
would oppose her wishes; but how to reveal such a circumstance with any
regard to her fair fame, I know not; for all are not sufficiently
virtuous to believe her spotless innocence."

Helen hastily interrupted Gloucester, and with firmness said, "When I
entered these walls, the world and I parted forever.  The good or the
evil opinion of the impure in heart can never affect me--they shall
never see me more.  The innocent will judge me by themselves, and by
the end of my race.  I came to minister with a sister's duty to my own
and my father's preserver; and while he abides here, I will never
consent to leave his feet.  When he goes hence, if it be to bless
mankind again, I shall find the longest life too short to pour forth
all my gratitude; and for that purpose I will dedicate myself in some
nunnery of my native land.  But should he be taken from a world so
unworthy of him, soon, very soon, I shall cease to feel its aspersions
in the grave."

"No aspersions which I can avert, dearest Helen," cried Wallace, "shall
ever tarnish the fame of one whose purity can only be transcended by
her who is now made perfect in heaven!  Consent, noblest of women, to
wear, for the few days I may yet linger here, a name which thy sister
angel has sanctified to me.  Give me a legal right to call you mine,
and Edward himself will not then dare to divide what God has joined
together!"

Helen paused--even her heart seemed to cease its pulsation in the awful
moment.  Did she hear aright? and was she indeed going to invade the
rights of the wife she had so often vowed to regard as the sole object
of Wallace's dearest wishes?  Oh, no; it was not the lover that shone
in his luminous eyes; it was not the mistress that glowed in her bosom.
Words might be breathed; but no change would be wrought in the souls
of them who were already separated from the earth.  With these thoughts
Helen turned toward Wallace; she attempted to answer, but the words
died on the seraphic smile which beamed upon her lips, and she dropped
her head upon his breast.

Gloucester, who saw no other means of insuring to his friend the
comfort of her society, was rejoiced at this mutual resolution.  He had
longed to propose it; but considering the peculiarities of their
situation, knew not how to do so without seeming to mock their
sensibility and fate.  It was now near midnight; and having read the
consent of Helen in the tender emotion which denied her speech, without
further delay he quitted the apartment to summon the confessor of the
warden to unite their hands.

On his re-entrance, he found Helen sitting, dissolved in tears, with
her hand clasped in his friend's.  The sacred rite was soon performed
which endowed her with all the claims upon Wallace which her devoted
heart had so long contemplated with resigned hopelessness--to be his
helpmate on earth, his partner in the tomb, his dear companion in
heaven!  With the last benediction she threw herself on her knees
before him, and put his hand to her lips in eloquent silence.
Gloucester, with a look of kind farewell, withdrew with the priest.

"Thou noble daughter of the noblest Scot!" said Wallace, raising her
from the ground, "this bosom is thy place, and not my feet.  Long it
will not be given me to hold thee here; but even in the hours of years
of our separation my spirit will hover near thee, to bear thine to our
everlasting home."

The heart of Helen alternatively beat violently, and stopped, as if the
vital current were suddenly impeded.  Hope and fear agitated her by
turns; but clinging to the flattering ideas which the arrival of the
embassadors had excited, she timidly breathed a hope that, by the
present interferences of King Philip, Edward might not be found
inexorable.

"Disturb not the holy composure of your soul by such an expectation,"
returned Wallace; "I know my adversary too well to anticipate his
relinquishing the object of his vengeance but at a price more infamous
than the most ignoble death.  Therefore, best beloved of all on earth!
look for no deliverance for thy Wallace but what passes through the
grave; and to me, dearest Helen, its gates are on golden hinges
turning; for all is light and bliss which shines on me from within
their courts!"

Helen's thoughts, in the idea of his being torn from her, could not
wrest themselves from the dire images of his execution; she shuddered,
and in faltering accents replied, "Ah! could we glide from sleep into
so blessed a death, I would hail it even for thee!  But the threatened
horrors, should they fall on thy sacred head, will in that hour, I
trust, also divorce my soul from this grievous world!"

"Not so, my Helen," returned he, "keep not thy dear eyes forever fixed
on the gloomy appendages of death.  The scaffold and the grave have
naught to do with the immortal soul; it cannot be wounded by the one
nor confined by the other.  And is not the soul thy full and perfect
Wallace?  It is that which now speaks to thee--which will cherish thy
beloved idea forever.  Lament not, then, how soon this body, its mere
apparel, is laid down in the dust.  But rejoice still in my existence,
which, through Him who 'led captivity captive,' will never know a
pause?  Comfort then thy heart, my soul's dear sister, and sojourn a
little while on this earth to bear witness for thy Wallace to the
friends he loves."

Helen, who felt the import of his words in her heart, gently bowed her
head, and he proceeded:

"As the first who stemmed with me the torrent which, with God's help,
we so often laid into a calm, I mention to you my faithful men of
Lanark.  Many of them bled and died in the contest; and to their
orphans, with the children of those who yet survive, I consign all of
the world's wealth that yet belongs to William Wallace; Ellerslie and
its estates are theirs.**  To Bruce, my sovereign and my friend--the
loved companion of the hour in which I freed you, my Helen, from the
arms of violence! to him I bequeath this heart, knit to him by bonds
more dear than even loyalty.  Bear it to him; and when he is summoned
to his heavenly throne, then let his heart and mine fill up one urn.
To Lord Ruthven, to Bothwell, to Lockhart, to Scrymgeour, and to
Kirkpatrick I give my prayers and blessings."


**This bequest of Wallace is a fact.


Here Wallace paused.  Helen had listened to him with a holy attention,
which hardly allowed a sigh to breathe from her steadfast heart.  She
spoke, but the voice was scarcely audible.

"And what for him who loves you dearer than life--for Edwin?  He cannot
be forgotten!"

Wallace started at this; then she was ignorant of the death of that
too-faithful friend!  In a hurrying accent he replied, "Never
forgotten!  Oh, Helen.  I asked for him life; and Heaven gave him long
life, even forever and ever!"

Helen's eyes met his, with a look of inquiry:

"That would mean he is gone before you?"

The countenance of Wallace answered her.

"Happy Edwin!" cried she, and the tears rained over her cheeks as she
bent her head on her arms.  Wallace continued--

"He laid down his life to preserve mine in the hovel of Lumloch.  The
false Monteith could get no Scot to lay hands on their true defender;
and even the foreign ruffians he brought to the task might have spared
the noble boy, but an arrow from the traitor himself pierced his heart.
Contention was then no more, and I resigned myself, to follow him."

"What a desert does the world become!" exclaimed Helen; then turning on
Wallace with a saint-like smile, she added, "I would hardly now
withhold you.  You will bear him Helen's love, and tell him how soon I
shall be with you.  If your Father would not allow my heart to break,
in his mercy he may take my soul in the prayers which I shall hourly
breathe to him!"

"Thou hast been lent to me as my sweet consolation here, my Helen,"
replied he, "and the Almighty dispenser of that comfort will not long
banish you from the object of your innocent wishes."

While they thus poured into each other's bosoms the ineffable balm of
friendship's purest tenderness, the eyes of Wallace insensibly closed.
"Your gentle influence," gently murmured he, "brings that sleep to my
eyelids which has not visited them since I first entered these walls.
Like my Marion, Helen, thy presence brings healing on its wings."

"Sleep, then," replied she, "and Marion's angel spirit will keep watch
with mine."




Chapter LXXXIII.

The State Dungeon.


Though all the furies of the elements seemed let loose to rage around
the walls of the dungeon, still Wallace slept in the loud uproar.  Calm
was within, and the warfare of the world could not disturb the balmy
rest into which the angel of peace had steeped his senses.  From this
profound repose he was awakened by the entrance of Gloucester.  Helen
had just sunk into a slight slumber; but the first words of the earl
aroused her, and rising, she followed her beloved Wallace to his side.

Gloucester put a scroll into the hand of Wallace: "Sign that," said he,
"and you are free.  I know not its contents; but the king commissioned
me, as a mark of his grace, to be the messenger of your release."

Wallace read the conditions, and the color deepened on his cheek as his
eye met each article.  "He was to reveal the asylum of Bruce, to
forswear Scotland forever, and to take an oath of allegiance to Edward,
the seal of which should be the English earldom of Cleveland!"  Wallace
closed the parchment.  "King Edward knows what will be my reply, I need
not speak it."

"You will accept his terms?" asked the earl.

"Not to insure me a life of ages, with all earthly bliss my portion!  I
have spoken to these offers before.  Read them, my noble friend, and
then give him as mine the answer which would be yours."

Gloucester obeyed, and while his eyes were bent on the parchment, those
of Helen were fixed on her almost worshiped husband, she looked through
his beaming countenance into his very soul, and there saw the sublime
purpose that consigned his unbending head to the scaffold.  When
Gloucester had finished, covered with the burning blush of shame, he
crushed the disgraceful scroll in his hand, and exclaimed, with
honorable vehemence, against the deep duplicity, the deeper cruelty, of
his father-in-law, so to mock by base subterfuges the embassy of France
and its noble object.

"This is the morning in which I was to have met my fate!" replied
Wallace.  "Tell this tyrant of the earth that I am even now ready to
receive the last stroke of his injustice.  In the peaceful grave, my
Helen," added he, turning to her, who sat pale and aghast, "I shall be
beyond his power!"

Gloucester walked the room in great disturbance of mind, while Wallace
continued, in a lowered tone, to recall some perception of his own
consolations to the abstracted and soul-struck Helen.

The earl stopped suddenly before them: "That the king did not expect
your acquiescence without some hesitation, I cannot doubt, for when I
informed him the Lady Helen Mar, now your wife, was the sharer of your
prison, he started, and told me that should you still oppose yourself
to his conditions, I must bring her to him; who might, perhaps, be the
means of persuading you to receive his mercy."

"Never!" replied Wallace; "I reject what he calls mercy.  He has no
rights of judgment over me, and his pretended mercy is an assumption
which, as a true Scot, I despise.  He may rifle me of my life, but he
shall never beguile me into any acknowledgment of an authority that is
false.  No wife, nor aught of mine, shall ever stand before him as a
suppliant for William Wallace.  I will die as I have lived, the equal
of Edward in all things but a crown, and his superior in being true to
the glory of prince or peasant--unblemished honor!"

Finding the Scottish chief not to be shaken in this determination,
Gloucester, humbled to the soul by the base tyranny of his royal
father-in-law, soon after withdrew, to acquaint that haughty monarch
with the ill success of his embassy.  But ere noon had turned, he
reappeared, with a countenance declarative of some distressing errand.
He found Helen awakened to the full perception of all her pending
evils--that she was on the eve of losing forever the object dearest to
her in this world! and though she wept not, though she listened to the
lord of all her wishes with smiles of holy approval, her heart bled
within; and, with a welcome which enforced his consolatory arguments,
she hailed her own inwardly foreboding mortal pains.

"I come," said Gloucester, "not to urge you to send Lady Helen as a
suitor to King Edward, but to spare her the misery of being separated
from you while life is yours."  He then said that the French
embassadors were kept in ignorance of the conditions which were offered
to the object of their mission; and on being informed that he had
refused them, they showed themselves so little satisfied with the
sincerity of what had been done, that Edward thought it expedient to
conciliate Philip by taking some pains to dislodge their suspicions.
To this effect he proposed to the French lords sending his final
propositions to Sir William Wallace by that chieftain's wife, who he
found was then his companion in the Tower.  "On my intimating,"
continued the earl, "that I feared she would be unable to appear before
him, his answer was, 'Let her see to that; such a refusal shall be
answered by an immediate separation from her husband.'"

"Let me in this demand," cried she, turning with collected firmness to
Wallace, "satisfy the will of Edward.  It is only to purchase my
continuance with you.  Trust me, noblest of men; I should be unworthy
of the name you have given me could I sully it in my person by one
debasing word or action to the author of all our ills!"

"Ah! my Helen," replied he, "what is it you ask?  Am I to live to see a
repetition of the horrors of Ellerslie?"

"No, on my life," answered Glouceseter; "in this instance I would
pledge my soul for King Edward's manhood.  His ambition might lead him
to trample on all men; but still for woman he feels as becomes a man
and a knight."

Helen renewed her supplications; and Wallace (aware that should he
withhold her attendance, his implacable adversary, however he might
spare her personal injury, would not forbear wounding her to the soul
by tearing her from him) gave an unwilling consent to what might seem a
submission on his part to an authority he had shed his blood to oppose.

Helen renewed her supplications; and Wallace (aware that should he
withhold her attendance, his implacable adversary, however he might
spare her personal injury, would not forbear wounding her to the soul
by tearing her from him) gave an unwilling consent to what might seem a
submission on his part to an authority he had shed his blood to oppose.

"But not in these garments," said he; "she must be habited as becomes
her sex and her own delicacy."

Anticipating this propriety, Gloucester had imparted the circumstance
to his countess, and she had sent a casket, which the earl himself now
brought in from the passage.  Helen retired to the inner cell, and
hastily arranging herself in the first suit that presented itself,
reappeared in female apparel, and wrapped in a long veil.  As
Gloucester took her hand to lead her forth, Wallace clasped the other
in his.

"Remember, my Helen," cried he, "that on no terms but untrammeled
freedom of soul, will your Wallace accept of life.  This will not be
granted by the man to whom you go; then speak and act in his presence
as if I were already beyond the skies."

Had this faithful friend, now his almost adoring wife, left his side
with more sanguine hopes, how grievously would they have been blasted!

After an absence of two hours, she returned to the dungeon of Wallace:
and as her trembling form was clasped in his arms, she exclaimed, in a
passion of tears:

"Here will I live, here will I die!  They may sever my soul from my
body, but never again part me from this dear bosom!"

"Never, never, my Helen!" said he, reading her conference with the king
in the wild terror of its effects.  Her senses seemed fearfully
disordered.  While she clung to him, and muttered sentences of an
incoherency that shook him to the soul, he cast a look of such
expressive inquiry upon Gloucester, that the earl could only answer by
hastily putting his hand on his face to hide his emotion.  At last the
tears she shed appeared to relieve the excess of her agonies, and she
gradually sunk into an awful calm.  Then rising from her husband's
arms, she seated herself on his stony couch, and said in a firm voice,
"Earl, I can now bear to hear you repeat the last decision of the King
of England."

Though not absolutely present at the interview between his sovereign
and Lady Helen, from the anteroom Gloucester had heard all that passed,
and now he briefly confessed to Wallace, that he had too truly
appreciated the pretended conciliation of the king.  Edward's proposals
to Helen were as artfully couched as deceptive in their design.  Their
issue was to make Wallace his slave, or to hold him his victim.  In his
conference with her, he addressed the vanity of an ambitious woman;
then, all the affections of a devoted heart: he enforced his arguments
with persuasions to allure, and threats to compel obedience.  In the
last he called up every image to appall the soul of Helen; but,
steadfast in the principles of her lord, while ready to sink under the
menaced horrors of his fate, she summoned all her strength to give
utterance to her last reply.

"Mortal distinctions, King of England!" cried she, "cannot bribe the
wife of Sir William Wallace to betray his virtues.  His life is dear to
me, but his immaculate faith to his God and his lawful prince are
dearer.  I can see him die and live--for I shall join him triumphant in
Heaven; but to behold him dishonor himself, to counsel him so to do, is
beyond my power--I should expire with grief in the shameful moment!"

The indignation of the king at this answer was too oppressive of the
tender nature of Lady Wallace for Gloucester to venture repeating it to
her husband; and, while she turned deathly pale at the recollection,
Wallace, exulting in her conduct, pressed her hand silently but
fervently to his lips.

The earl resumed, but, observing the reawakened agonies of her mind in
her too expressive countenance, he strove to soften the blow he must
inflict in the remainder of his narrative.

"Dearest lady," said he, rather addressing her than Wallace, "to
convince your suffering spirit that no earthly means have been left
unessayed to change the unjust purpose of the king, know that when he
quitted you I left in his presence the queen and my wife, both weeping
tears of disappointment.  On the moment when I found that arguments
could no longer avail, I implored him, by every consideration of God
and man, to redeem his honor, sacrificed by the unjust decree
pronounced on Sir William Wallace.  My entreaties were repulsed with
anger, for the sudden entrance of Lord Athol with fresh fuel to his
flame, so confirmed his direful resolution that, desperate for my
friend, I threw myself on my knees.  The queen, and then my wife, both
prostrate at his feet, enforced my suit, but all in vain; his heart
seemed hardened by our earnestness; and his answer, while it put us to
silence, granted Wallace a triumph even in his dungeon.

"Cease!" cried the king, "Wallace and I have now come to that issue
where one must fall.  I shall use my advantage, though I should walk
over the necks of half my kindred to accomplish his fate.  I can find
no security on my throne, no peace in my bed, until I know that he, my
direst enemy, is no more."

"Sorry am I, generous Gloucester," interrupted Wallace, "that for my
life, you have stooped your knee to one so unworthy of your nobleness.
Let, then, his tyranny take its course.  But its shaft will not reach
the soul his unkingly spirit hopes to wound.  The bitterness of death
was passed when I quitted Scotland.  And for this body, he may dishonor
it, mangle its limbs, but William Wallace may then be far beyond his
reach."

Gloucester gazed on him, doubting the expression of his countenance.
It was calm, but pale even to a marble hue.

"Surely," said he, "my unconquered friend will not now be forced to
self violence?"

"God forbid!" returned Wallace; "suspect me not of such base vassalage
to this poor tabernacle of clay.  Did I believe it my Father's will
that I should die at every pore I would submit, for so his immaculate
Son laid down his life for a rebellious world.  And is a servant
greater than his master, that I should say, Exempt me from this trial?
No! I await his summons, but he so strengthens my soul on his breast,
that the cord of Edward shall never make my free-born Scottish neck
feel its degrading touch."

His pale cheek was now luminous with a bright smile as he pressed his
swelling heart.

With reawakened horror Helen listened to the words of Wallace, which
referred to the last outrage to be committed on his sacred remains.
She recalled the corresponding threats of the king, and again losing
self-possession, starting wildly up, exclaimed:

"And is there no humanity in that ruthless man!  Oh!" cried she,
tearing her eyes from the beloved form on which it had been such bliss
to gaze, "let the sacrifice of my life be offered to this cruel king to
save from indignity--"

She could add no more, but dropped half lifeless on the arm of Wallace.

Gloucester understood the object of such anguished solicitude, and
while Wallace again seated her, he revived her by a protestation, that
the clause she so fearfully deprecated, had been repealed by Edward.
But the good earl blushed as he spoke, for in this instance he said
what was not the truth.  Far different had been the issue of all his
attempts at mitigation.  The arrival of Athol from Scotland with
advices from the Countess of Strathearn, that Lady Helen Mar had fled
southward to raise an insurrection in favor of Wallace, and that Lord
Bothwell had gone to France to move Philip to embrace the same cause,
gave Edward so apt an excuse for giving full way to his hatred against
the Scottish chief, that he pronounced an order for the immediate and
unrestricted execution of his sentence.  Artifice to mislead the French
embassadors with an idea that he was desirous to accord with their
royal master's wish, had been the sole foundation of his proposals to
Wallace.  And his interview with Lady Helen, though so intemperately
conducted, was dictated by the same subtle policy.

When Gloucester found the impossibility of obtaining any further
respite from the murderous decree, he attempted to prevail for the
remission of the last clause, which ordered that his friend's noble
body should be dismembered, and his limbs  sent, as terrors to
rebellion, to the four capital fortresses of Scotland.  Edward spurned
at this petition with even more acrimony than he had done the prayer
for his victim's life, and Gloucester then starting from his knee, in a
burst of honest indignation exclaimed, "Oh! king, remember what is done
by thee this day.  Refusing to give righteous judgment in favor of one
who prefers virtue to a crown and life!  As insincere, as secret, have
been your last conditions with him, but they will be revealed when the
great Judge that searcheth all men's hearts shall cause thee to answer
for this matter at the dreadful day of universal doom.  Thou has now
given sentence on a patriot and a prince, and then shall judgment be
given on thee!"

"Dangerous indeed is his rebellious spirit," cried Edward, in almost
speechless wrath, "since it affects even the duty of my own house!
Gloucester, leave my presence, and on pain of your own death, dare not
approach me till I send for you, to see this rebel's head on London
Bridge!"

To disappoint the revengeful monarch of at least this object of his
malice, Gloucester was now resolved, and imparting his wishes to the
warden of the Tower, who was his trusty friend, he laid a plan
accordingly.

Helen had believed his declaration to her, and bowed her head in sign
