"thou hast not, I trust, dared to bring me a lie in thy mouth, in order
to win my confidence?"

"My lord," said Halbert, "I am incapable of a lie. I should choke on one
were my life to require that I pronounced it. I say, that this sword of
my father was through the body--the point came out behind his back--the
hilt pressed upon his breast-bone. And I will plunge it as deep in the
body of any one who shall dare to charge me with falsehood."

"How, fellow!" said Morton, "wouldst thou beard a nobleman?"

"Be silent, Halbert," said Murray, "and you, my Lord of Morton, forbear
him. I see truth written on his brow."

"I wish the inside of the manuscript may correspond with the
superscription," replied his more suspicious ally. "Look to it, my lord,
you will one day lose your life by too much confidence."

"And you will lose your friends by being too readily suspicious,"
answered Murray. "Enough of this--let me hear thy tidings."

"Sir John Foster," said Morton, "is about to send a party into Scotland
to waste the Halidome."

"How! without waiting my presence and permission?" said Murray--"he is
mad--will he come as an enemy into the Queen's country?"

"He has Elizabeth's express orders," answered Morton, "and they are not
to be trifled with. Indeed, his march has been more than once projected
and laid aside during the time we have been here, and has caused much
alarm at Kennaquhair. Boniface, the old Abbot, has resigned, and whom
think you they have chosen in his place?"

"No one surely," said Murray; "they would presume to hold no election
until the Queen's pleasure and mine were known?"

Morton shrugged his shoulders--"They have chosen the pupil of
old Cardinal Beatoun, that wily determined champion of Rome, the
bosom-friend of our busy Primate of Saint Andrews. Eustace, late the
Sub-Prior of Kennaquhair, is now its Abbot, and, like a second Pope
Julius, is levying men and making musters to fight with Foster if he
comes forward."

"We must prevent that meeting," said Murray, hastily; "whichever party
wins the day, it were a fatal encounter for us--Who commands the troop
of the Abbot?"

"Our faithful old friend, Julian Avenel, nothing less," answered Morton.

"Glendinning," said Murray, "sound trumpets to horse directly, and let
all who love us get on horseback without delay--Yes, my lord, this were
indeed a fatal dilemma. If we take part with our English friends, the
country will cry shame on us--the very old wives will attack us with
their rocks and spindles--the very stones of the street will rise up
against us--we cannot set our face to such a deed of infamy. And my
sister, whose confidence I already have such difficulty in preserving,
will altogether withdraw it from me. Then, were we to oppose the English
Warden, Elizabeth would call it a protecting of her enemies and what
not, and we should lose her."

"The she-dragon," said Morton, "is the best card in our pack; and yet
I would not willingly stand still and see English blades carve Scots
flesh--What say you to loitering by the way, marching far and easy for
fear of spoiling our horses? They might then fight dog fight bull, fight
Abbot fight archer, and no one could blame us for what chanced when we
were not present."

"All would blame us, James Douglas," replied Murray; "we should lose
both sides--we had better advance with the utmost celerity, and do what
we can to keep the peace betwixt them.--I would the nag that brought
Piercie Shafton hither had broken his neck over the highest heuch in
Northumberland!--He is a proper coxcomb to make all this bustle about,
and to occasion perhaps a national war!"

"Had we known in time," said Douglas, "we might have had him privily
waited upon as he entered the Borders; there are strapping lads enough
would have rid us of him for the lucre of his spur-whang. [Footnote:
_Spur-whang_--Spur-leather.] But to the saddle, James Stewart, since so
the phrase goes. I hear your trumpets. Bound to horse and away--we shall
soon see which nag is best breathed."

Followed by a train of about three hundred well-mounted men-at-arms,
these two powerful barons directed their course to Dumfries, and from
thence eastward to Teviotdale, marching at a rate which, as Morton had
foretold, soon disabled a good many of their horses, so that when
they approached the scene of expected action, there were not above
two hundred of their train remaining in a body, and of these most were
mounted on steeds which had been sorely jaded.

They had hitherto been amused and agitated by various reports concerning
the advance of the English soldiers, and the degree of resistance which
the Abbot was able to oppose to them. But when they were six or seven
miles from Saint Mary's of Kennaquhair, a gentleman of the country, whom
Murray had summoned to attend him, and on whose intelligence he knew he
could rely, arrived at the head of two or three servants, "bloody with
spurring, fiery red with haste." According to his report, Sir John
Foster, after several times announcing, and as often delaying, his
intended incursion, had at last been so stung with the news that Piercie
Shafton was openly residing within the Halidome, that he determined to
execute the commands of his mistress, which directed him, at every risk,
to make himself master of the Euphuist's person. The Abbot's unceasing
exertions had collected a body of men almost equal in number to those of
the English Warden, but less practised in arms. They were united under
the command of Julian Avenel, and it was apprehended they would join
battle upon the banks of a small stream which forms the verge of the
Halidome.

"Who knows the place?" said Murray.

"I do, my lord," answered Glendinning.

"'Tis well," said the Earl; "take a score of the best-mounted
horse--make what haste thou canst, and announce to them that I am coming
up instantly with a strong power, and will cut to pieces, without mercy,
whichever party strikes the first blow.--Davidson," said he to the
gentleman who brought the intelligence, "thou shalt be my guide.--Hie
thee on, Glendinning--Say to Foster, I conjure him, as he respects his
mistress's service, that he will leave the matter in my hands. Say to
the Abbot, I will burn the Monastery over his head, if he strikes a
stroke till I come--Tell the dog, Julian Avenel, that he hath already
one deep score to settle with me--I will set his head on the top of the
highest pinnacle of Saint Mary's, if he presume to open another. Make
haste, and spare not the spur for fear of spoiling horse-flesh."

"Your bidding shall be obeyed, my lord," said Glendinning; and choosing
those whose horses were in best plight to be his attendants, he went off
as fast as the jaded state of their cavalry permitted. Hill and hollow
vanished from under the feet of the chargers.

They had not ridden half the way, when they met stragglers coming off
from the field, whose appearance announced that the conflict was begun.
Two supported in their arms a third, their elder brother, who was
pierced with an arrow through the body. Halbert, who knew them to belong
to the Halidome, called them by their names, and questioned them of the
state of the affray; but just then, in spite of their efforts to retain
him in the saddle, their brother dropped from the horse, and they
dismounted in haste to receive his last breath. From men thus engaged,
no information was to be obtained. Glendinning, therefore, pushed
on with his little troop, the more anxiously, as he perceived other
stragglers, bearing Saint Andrew's cross upon their caps and corslets,
flying apparently from the field of battle. Most of these, when they
were aware of a body of horsemen approaching on the road, held to the
one hand or the other, at such a distance as precluded coming to speech
of them. Others, whose fear was more intense, kept the onward road,
galloping wildly as fast as their horses could carry them, and when
questioned, only glared without reply on those who spoke to them, and
rode on without drawing bridle. Several of these were also known to
Halbert, who had therefore no doubt, from the circumstances in which
he met them, that the men of the Halidome were defeated. He became now
unspeakably anxious concerning the fate of his brother, who, he could
not doubt, must have been engaged in the affray. He therefore increased
the speed of his horse, so that not above five or six of his followers
could keep up with him. At length he reached a little hill, at the
descent of which, surrounded by a semi-circular sweep of a small stream,
lay the plain which had been the scene of the skirmish.

It was a melancholy spectacle. War and terror, to use the expression
of the poet, had rushed on to the field, and left only wounds and death
behind them. The battle had been stoutly contested, as was almost always
the case with these Border skirmishes, where ancient hatred, and mutual
injuries, made men stubborn in maintaining the cause of their conflict.
Towards the middle of the plain, there lay the bodies of several men who
had fallen in the very act of grappling with the enemy; and there
were seen countenances which still bore the stern expression of
unextinguishable hate and defiance, hands which clasped the hilt of the
broken falchion, or strove in vain to pluck the deadly arrow from the
wound. Some were wounded, and, cowed of the courage they had lately
shown, were begging aid, and craving water, in a tone of melancholy
depression, while others tried to teach the faltering tongue to
pronounce some half-forgotten prayer, which, even when first learned,
they had but half understood. Halbert, uncertain what course he was next
to pursue, rode through the plain to see if, among the dead or wounded,
he could discover any traces of his brother Edward. He experienced no
interruption from the English. A distant cloud of dust announced that
they were still pursuing the scattered fugitives, and he guessed, that
to approach them with his followers, until they were again under some
command, would be to throw away his own life, and that of his men, whom
the victors would instantly confound with the Scots, against whom they
had been successful. He resolved, therefore, to pause until Murray came
up with his forces, to which he was the more readily moved, as he heard
the trumpets of the English Warden sounding the retreat, and recalling
from the pursuit. He drew his men together, and made a stand in an
advantageous spot of ground, which had been occupied by the Scots in the
beginning of the action, and most fiercely disputed while the skirmish
lasted.

While he stood here, Halbert's ear was assailed by the feeble moan of
a woman, which he had not expected to hear amid that scene, until
the retreat of the foes had permitted the relations of the slain to
approach, for the purpose of paying them the last duties. He looked with
anxiety, and at length observed, that by the body of a knignt in bright
armour, whose crest, though soiled and broken, still showed the marks
of rank and birth, there sat a female wrapped in a horseman's cloak, and
holding something pressed against her bosom, which he soon discovered to
be a child. He glanced towards the English. They advanced not, and the
continued and prolonged sound of their trumpets, with the shouts of
the leaders, announced that their powers would not be instantly
re-assembled. He had, therefore, a moment to look after this unfortunate
woman. He gave his horse to a spearman as he dismounted, and,
approaching the unhappy female, asked her, in the most soothing tone he
could assume, whether he could assist her in her distress. The mourner
made him no direct answer; but endeavouring, with a trembling and
unskilful hand, to undo the springs of the visor and gorget, said, in
a tone of impatient grief, "Oh, he would recover instantly could I but
give him air--land and living, life and honour, would I give for the
power of undoing these cruel iron platings that suffocate him!" He that
would soothe sorrow must not argue on the vanity of the most deceitful
hopes. The body lay as that of one whose last draught of vital air had
been drawn, and who must never more have concern with the nether sky.
But Halbert Glendinning failed not to raise the visor and cast loose
the gorget, when, to his great surprise, he recognized the pale face of
Julian Avenel. His last fight was over, the fierce and turbid spirit had
departed in the strife in which it had so long delighted.

"Alas! he is gone," said Halbert, speaking to the young woman, in whom
he had now no difficulty of knowing the unhappy Catherine.

"Oh, no, no, no!" she reiterated, "do not say so--he is not dead--he is
but in a swoon. I have lain as long in one myself--and then his voice
would arouse me, when he spoke kindly, and said, Catherine, look up
for my sake--And look up, Julian, for mine!" she said, addressing the
senseless corpse; "I know you do but counterfeit to frighten me, but I
am not frightened," she added, with an hysterical attempt to laugh; and
then instantly changing her tone, entreated him to "speak, were it but
to curse my folly. Oh, the rudest word you ever said to me would now
sound like the dearest you wasted on me before I gave you all. Lift him
up," she said, "lift him up, for God's sake!--have you no compassion? He
promised to wed me if I bore him a boy, and this child is so like to
its father!--How shall he keep his word, if you do not help me to awaken
him?--Christie of the Clinthill, Rowley, Hutcheon! ye were constant at
his feast, but ye fled from him at the fray, false villains as ye are!"

"Not I, by Heaven!" said a dying man, who made some shift to raise
himself on his elbow, and discovered to Halbert the well-known features
of Christie; "I fled not a foot, and a man can but fight while his
breath lasts--mine is going fast.--So, youngster," said he, looking at
Glendinning, and seeing his military dress, "thou hast ta'en the basnet
at last? it is a better cap to live in than die in. I would chance had
sent thy brother here instead--there was good in him--but thou art as
wild, and wilt soon be as wicked as myself."

"God forbid!" said Halbert, hastily.

"Marry, and amen, with all my heart," said the wounded man, "there will
be company enow without thee where I am going. But God be praised I had
no hand in that wickedness," said he, looking to poor Catherine; and
with some exclamation in his mouth, that sounded betwixt a prayer and
a curse, the soul of Christie of the Clinthill took wing to the last
account.

Deeply wrapt in the painful interest which these shocking events had
excited, Glendinning forgot for a moment his own situation and duties,
and was first recalled to them by a trampling of horse, and the cry of
Saint George for England, which the English soldiers still continued
to use. His handful of men, for most of the stragglers had waited for
Murray's coming up, remained on horseback, holding their lances upright,
having no command either to submit or resist.

"There stands our Captain," said one of them, as a strong party of
English came up, the vanguard of Foster's troop.

"Your Captain! with his sword sheathed, and on foot in the presence of
his enemy? a raw soldier, I warrant him," said the English leader. "So!
ho! young man, is your dream out, and will you now answer me if you will
fight or fly?"

"Neither," answered Halbert Glendinning, with great tranquillity.

"Then throw down thy sword and yield thee," answered the Englishman.

"Not till I can help myself no otherwise," said Halbert, with the same
moderation of tone and manner.

"Art thou for thine own hand, friend, or to whom dost thou owe service?"
demanded the English Captain.

"To the noble Earl of Murray."

"Then thou servest," said the Southron, "the most disloyal nobleman who
breathes--false both to England and Scotland."

"Thou liest," said Glendinning, regardless of all consequences.

"Ha! art thou so hot how, and wert so cold but a minute since? I lie, do
I? Wilt thou do battle with me on that quarrel?"

"With one to one--one to two--or two to five, as you list," said Halbert
Glendinning; "grant me but a fair field."

"That thou shalt have.--Stand back, my mates," said the brave
Englishman. "If I fall, give him fair play, and let him go off free with
his people."

"Long life to the noble Captain!" cried the soldiers, as impatient to
see the duel, as if it had been a bull-baiting.

"He will have a short life of it, though," said the sergeant, "if he,
an old man of sixty, is to fight, for any reason, or for no reason, with
every man he meets, and especially the young fellows he might be father
to.--And here comes the Warden besides to see the sword-play."

In fact, Sir John Foster came up with a considerable body of his
horsemen, just as his Captain, whose age rendered him unequal to the
combat with so strong and active a youth as Glendinning, was deprived of
his sword.

"Take it up for shame, old Stawarth Bolton," said the English Warden;
"and thou, young man, tell me who and what thou art?"

"A follower of the Earl of Murray, who bore his will to your honour,"
answered Glendinning,--"but here he comes to say it himself; I see the
van of his horsemen come over the hills."

"Get into order, my masters," said Sir John Foster to his followers;
"you that have broken your spears, draw your swords. We are something
unprovided for a second field, but if yonder dark cloud on the hill edge
bring us foul weather, we must bear as bravely as our broken cloaks
will bide it. Meanwhile, Stawarth, we have got the deer we have hunted
for--here is Piercie Shafton hard and fast betwixt two troopers."

"Who, that lad?" said Bolton; "he is no more Piercie Shafton than I am.
He hath his gay cloak indeed--but Piercie Shafton is a round dozen of
years older than that slip of roguery. I have known him since he was
thus high. Did you never see him in the tilt-yard or in the presence?"

"To the devil with such vanities!" said Sir John Foster; "when had I
leisure for them or any thing else? During my whole life has she kept me
to this hangman's office, chasing thieves one day and traitors another,
in daily fear of my life; the lance never hung up in the hall, the foot
never out of the stirrup, the saddles never off my nags' backs; and
now, because I have been mistaken in the person of a man I never saw,
I warrant me, the next letters from the Privy Council will rate me as I
were a dog--a man were better dead than thus slaved and harassed."

A trumpet interrupted Foster's complaints, and a Scottish pursuivant who
attended, declared "that the noble Earl of Murray desired, in all honour
and safety, a personal conference with Sir John Foster, midway between
their parties, with six of company in each, and ten free minutes to come
and go."

"And now," said the Englishman, "comes another plague. I must go speak
with yonder false Scot, and he knows how to frame his devices, to cast
dust in the eyes of a plain man, as well as ever a knave in the north.
I am no match for him in words, and for hard blows we are but too ill
provided.--Pursuivant, we grant the conference--and you, Sir Swordsman,"
(speaking to young Glendinning,) "draw off with your troopers to your
own party--march--attend your Earl's trumpet.--Stawarth Bolton, put
our troop in order, and be ready to move forward at the wagging of a
finger.--Get you gone to your own friends, I tell you, Sir Squire, and
loiter not here."

Notwithstanding this peremptory order, Halbert Glendinning could not
help stopping to cast a look upon the unfortunate Catherine, who lay
insensible of the danger and of the trampling of so many horses around
her, insensible, as the second glance assured him, of all and forever.
Glendinning almost rejoiced when he saw that the last misery of life
was over, and that the hoofs of the war-horses, amongst which he was
compelled to leave her, could only injure and deface a senseless
corpse. He caught the infant from her arms, half ashamed of the shout
of laughter which rose on all sides, at seeing an armed man in such a
situation assume such an unwonted and inconvenient burden.

"Shoulder your infant!" cried a harquebusier.

"Port your infant!" said a pikeman.

"Peace, ye brutes," said Stawarth Bolton, "and respect humanity in
others if you have none yourselves. I pardon the lad having done some
discredit to my gray hairs, when I see him take care of that helpless
creature, which ye would have trampled upon as if ye had been littered
of bitch-wolves, not born of women."

While this passed, the leaders on either side met in the neutral space
betwixt the forces of either, and the Earl accosted the English Warden:

"Is this fair or honest usage, Sir John, or for whom do you hold the
Earl of Morton and myself, that you ride in Scotland with arrayed
banner, fight, slay, and make prisoners at your own pleasure? Is it well
done, think you, to spoil our land and shed our blood, after the many
proofs we have given to your mistress of our devotion due to her will,
saving always the allegiance due to our own sovereign?"

"My Lord of Murray," answered Foster, "all the world knows you to be a
man of quick ingine and deep wisdom, and these several weeks you have
held me in hand with promising to arrest my sovereign mistress's rebel,
this Piercie Shafton of Wilverton, and you have never kept your word,
alleging turmoils in the west, and I wot not what other causes of
hinderance. Now, since he has had the insolence to return hither, and
live openly within ten miles of England, I could no longer, in plain
duty to my mistress and queen, tarry upon your successive delays, and
therefore I have used her force to take her rebel, by the strong hand,
wherever I can find him."

"And is Piercie Shafton in your hands, then?" said the Earl of Murray.
"Be aware that I may not, without my own great shame, suffer you to
remove him hence without doing battle."

"Will you, Lord Earl, after all the advantages you have received at the
hands of the Queen of England, do battle in the cause of her rebel?"
said Sir John Foster.

"Not so, Sir John," answered the Earl, "but I will fight to the death in
defence of the liberties of our free kingdom of Scotland."

"By my faith," said Sir John Foster, "I am well content--my sword is not
blunted with all it has done yet this day."

"By my honour, Sir John," said Sir George Heron of Chipchase, "there is
but little reason we should fight these Scottish Lords e'en now, for I
hold opinion with old Stawarth Bolton, and believe yonder prisoner to be
no more Piercie Shafton than he is the Earl of Northumberland; and you
were but ill advised to break the peace betwixt the countries for a
prisoner of less consequence than that gay mischief-maker."

"Sir George," replied Foster, "I have often heard you herons are afraid
of hawks--Nay, lay not hand on sword, man--I did but jest; and for this
prisoner, let him be brought up hither, that we may see who or what
he is--always under assurance, my Lords," he continued, addressing the
Scots.

"Upon our word and honour," said Morton, "we will offer no violence."

The laugh turned against Sir John Foster considerably, when the
prisoner, being brought up, proved not only a different person from Sir
Piercie Shafton, but a female in man's attire.

"Pluck the mantle from the quean's face, and cast her to the
horse-boys," said Foster; "she has kept such company ere now, I
warrant."

Even Murray was moved to laughter, no common thing with him, at the
disappointment of the English Warden; but he would not permit any
violence to be offered to the fair Molinara, who had thus a second time
rescued Sir Piercie Shafton at her own personal risk.

"You have already done more mischief than you can well answer," said the
Earl to the English Warden, "and it were dishonour to me should I permit
you to harm a hair of this young woman's head."

"My lord," said Morton, "if Sir John will ride apart with me but for
one moment, I will show him such reasons as shall make him content to
depart, and to refer this unhappy day's work to the judgment of the
Commissioners nominated to try offences on the Border."

He then led Sir John Foster aside, and spoke to him in this
manner:--"Sir John Foster, I much marvel that a man who knows your Queen
Elizabeth as you do, should not know that, if you hope any thing from
her, it must be for doing her useful service, not for involving her in
quarrels with her neighbours without any advantage. Sir Knight, I will
speak frankly what I know to be true. Had you seized the true Piercie
Shafton by this ill-advised inroad; and had your deed threatened, as
most likely it might, a breach betwixt the countries, your politic
princess and her politic council would rather have disgraced Sir John
Foster than entered into war in his behalf. But now that you have
stricken short of your aim, you may rely on it you will have little
thanks for carrying the matter farther. I will work thus far on the Earl
of Murray, that he will undertake to dismiss Sir Piercie Shafton from
the realm of Scotland.--Be well advised, and let the matter now pass
off--you will gain nothing by farther violence, for if we fight, you as
the fewer and the weaker through your former action, will needs have the
worse."

Sir John Foster listened with his head declining on his breast-plate.

"It is a cursed chance," he said, "and I shall have little thanks for my
day's work."

He then rode up to Murray, and said, that, in deference to his
Lordship's presence and that of my Lord of Morton, he had come to the
resolution of withdrawing himself, with his power, without farther
proceedings.

"Stop there, Sir John Foster," said Murray; "I cannot permit you
to retire in safety, unless you leave some one who may be surety to
Scotland, that the injuries you have at present done us may be fully
accounted for--you will reflect, that by permitting your retreat, I
become accountable to my Sovereign, who will demand a reckoning of me
for the blood of her subjects, if I suffer those who shed it to depart
so easily."

"It shall never be told in England," said the Warden, "that John Foster
gave pledges like a subdued man, and that on the very field on which he
stands victorious.--But," he added, after a moment's pause, "if Stawarth
Bolton wills to abide with you on his own free choice, I will say
nothing against it; and, as I bethink me, it were better he should stay
to see the dismissal of this same Piercie Shafton."

"I receive him as your hostage, nevertheless, and shall treat him as
such," said the Earl of Murray. But Foster, turning away as if to give
directions to Bolton and his men, affected not to hear this observation.

"There rides a faithful servant of his most beautiful and Sovereign
Lady," said Murray aside to Morton. "Happy man! he knows not whether the
execution of her commands may not cost him his head; and yet he is most
certain that to leave them unexecuted will bring disgrace and death
without reprieve. Happy are they who are not only subjected to the
caprices of Dame Fortune, but held bound to account and be responsible
for them, and that to a sovereign as moody and fickle as her humorous
ladyship herself!"

"We also have a female Sovereign, my lord," said Morton.

"We have so, Douglas," said the Earl,--with a suppressed sigh; "but it
remains to be seen how long a female hand can hold the reins of power
in a realm so wild as ours. We will now go on to Saint Mary's, and see
ourselves after the state of that House.--Glendinning, look to that
woman, and protect her.--What the fiend, man, hast thou got in thine
arms?--an infant as I live!--where couldst thou find such a charge, at
such a place and moment?"

Halbert Glendinning briefly told the story. The Earl rode forward to the
place where the body of Julian Avenel lay, with his unhappy companion's
arms wrapped around him like the trunk of an uprooted oak borne down by
the tempest with all its ivy garlands. Both were cold dead. Murray was
touched in an unwonted degree, remembering, perhaps, his own birth.
"What have they to answer for, Douglas," he said, "who thus abuse the
sweetest gifts of affection?"

The Earl of Morton, unhappy in his marriage, was a libertine in his
amours.

"You must ask that question of Henry Warden, my lord, or of John Knox--I
am but a wild counsellor in women's matters."

"Forward to Saint Mary's," said the Earl; "pass the word
on--Glendinning, give the infant to this same female cavalier, and let
it be taken charge of. Let no dishonour be done to the dead bodies,
and call on the country to bury or remove them.--Forward, I say, my
masters!"




Chapter the Thirty-Seventh.


  Gone to be married?--Gone to swear a peace!

KING JOHN

The news of the lost battle, so quickly carried by the fugitives to
the village and convent, had spread the greatest alarm among the
inhabitants. The Sacristan and other monks counselled flight; the
Treasurer recommended that the church plate should be offered as a
tribute to bribe the English officer; the Abbot alone was unmoved and
undaunted.

"My brethren," he said, "since God has not given our people victory
in the combat, it must be because he requires of us, his spiritual
soldiers, to fight the good fight of martyrdom, a conflict in which
nothing but our own faint-hearted cowardice can make us fail of
victory. Let us assume, then, the armour of faith, and prepare, if it
be necessary, to die under the ruin of these shrines, to the service
of which we have devoted ourselves. Highly honoured are we all in this
distinguished summons, from our dear brother Nicholas, whose gray hairs
have been preserved until they should be surrounded by the crown of
martyrdom, down to my beloved son Edward, who, arriving at the vineyard
at the latest hour of the day, is yet permitted to share its toils
with those who have laboured from the morning. Be of good courage, my
children. I dare not, like my sainted predecessors, promise to you that
you shall be preserved by miracle--I and you are alike unworthy of that
especial interposition, which, in earlier times, turned the sword of
sacrilege against the bosom of tyrants by whom it was wielded, daunted
the hardened hearts of heretics with prodigies, and called down hosts of
angels to defend the shrine of God and of the Virgin. Yet, by heavenly
aid, you shall this day see that your Father and Abbot will not disgrace
the mitre which sits upon his brow. Go to your cells, my children, and
exercise your private devotions. Array yourselves also in alb and cope,
as for our most solemn festivals, and be ready, when the tolling of the
largest bell announces the approach of the enemy, to march forth to
meet them in solemn procession. Let the church be opened to afford such
refuge as may be to those of our vassals, who, from their exertion in
this day's unhappy battle, or the cause, are particularly apprehensive
of the rage of the enemy. Tell Sir Piercie Shafton, if he has escaped
the fight--"

"I am here, most venerable Abbot," replied Sir Piercie; "and if it so
seemeth meet to you, I will presently assemble such of the men as have
escaped this escaramouche, and will renew the resistance, even unto
the death. Certes, you will learn from all, that I did my part in this
unhappy matter. Had it pleased Julian Avenel to have attended to my
counsel, specially in somewhat withdrawing of his main battle, even as
you may have marked the heron eschew the stoop of the falcon, receiving
him rather upon his beak than upon his wing, affairs, as I do conceive,
might have had a different face, and we might then, in a more bellacose
manner, have maintained that affray. Nevertheless, I would not be
understood to speak any thing in disregard of Julian Avenel, whom I saw
fall fighting manfully with his face to his enemy, which hath banished
from my memory the unseemly term of 'meddling coxcomb,' with which it
pleased him something rashly to qualify my advice, and for which, had
it pleased Heaven and the saints to have prolonged the life of that
excellent person, I had it bound upon my soul to have put him to death
with my own hand."

"Sir Piercie," said the Abbot, at length interrupting him, "our time
allows brief leisure to speak what might have been."

"You are right, most venerable Lord and Father," replied the
incorrigible Euphuist; "the preterite, as grammarians have it, concerns
frail mortality less than the future mood, and indeed our cogitations
respect chiefly the present. In a word, I am willing to head all who
will follow me, and offer such opposition as manhood and mortality may
permit, to the advance of the English, though they be my own countrymen;
and be assured, Piercie Shafton will measure his length, being five feet
ten inches, on the ground as he stands, rather than give two yards in
retreat, according to the usual motion in which we retrograde."

"I thank you, Sir Knight," said the Abbot, "and I doubt not that you
would make your words good; but it is not the will of Heaven that carnal
weapons should rescue us. We are called to endure, not to resist, and
may not waste the blood of our innocent commons in vain--Fruitless
opposition becomes not men of our profession; they have my commands to
resign the sword and the spear,--God and Our Lady have not blessed our
banner."

"Bethink you, reverend lord," said Piercie Shafton, very eagerly, "ere
you resign the defence that is in your power--there are many posts near
the entry of this village, where brave men might live or die to the
advantage; and I have this additional motive to make defence,--the
