perils of Bruce himself. It was thought that the waves had swallowed
them when they shipped themselves from the west; but know, that the
Bruce was determined with the present reviving spring to awaken his
pretensions, and that he retires not from Scotland again while he
lives, and while a single lord remains to set his foot by his
sovereign, in spite of all the power which has been so feloniously
employed against him."

"It is even too true," said the Welshman Meredith, "although it is said
by a proud Scotchman.--The Earl of Pembroke, completely defeated, is
unable to stir from Ayr, towards which he has retreated with great
loss: and he sends his instructions to Sir John de Walton, to make the
best terms he can for the surrender of the Castle of Douglas, and trust
nothing to his support."

The Scottish, who heard this unexpected news, joined in a shout so loud
and energetic, that the ruins of the ancient church seemed actually to
rock and threaten to fall on the heads of those who were crowded within
it.

The brow of De Walton was overclouded at the news of Pembroke's defeat,
although in some respects it placed him at liberty to take measures for
the safety of the Lady of Berkely. He could not, however, claim the
same honourable terms which had been offered to him by Douglas before
the news of the battle of Loudon Hill had arrived.

"Noble knight," he said, "it is entirely at your pleasure to dictate
the terms of surrender of your paternal castle; nor have I a right to
claim from you those conditions which, a little while since, your
generosity put in my offer. But I submit to my fate; and upon whatever
terms you think fit to grant me, I must be content to offer to
surrender to you the weapon, of which I now put the point in the earth,
in evidence that I will never more direct it against you until a fair
ransom shall place it once more at my own disposal."

"God forbid," answered the noble James of Douglas, "that I should take
such advantage of the bravest knight out of not a few who have found me
work in battle! I will take example from the Knight of Fleming, who has
gallantly bestowed his captive in guerdon upon a noble damsel here
present; and in like manner I transfer my claim upon the person of the
redoubted Knight of Walton, to the high and noble Lady Augusta Berkely,
who, I hope, will not scorn to accept from the Douglas a gift which the
chance of war has thrown into his hands."

Sir John de Walton, on hearing this unexpected decision, looked up like
the traveller who discovers the beams of the sun breaking through and
dispersing the tempest which has accompanied him for a whole morning.
The Lady of Berkely recollected what became her rank, and showed her
sense of the Douglas's chivalry. Hastily wiping off the tears which had
unwillingly flowed to her eyes, while her lover's safety and her own
were resting on the precarious issue of a desperate combat, she assumed
the look proper to a heroine of that age, who did not feel averse to
accept the importance which was conceded to her by the general voice of
the chivalry of the period. Stepping forward, bearing her person
gracefully, yet modestly, in the attitude of a lady accustomed to be
looked to in difficulties like the present, she addressed the audience
in a tone which might not have misbecome the Goddess of Battle
dispersing her influence at the close of a field covered with the dead
and the dying.

"The noble Douglas," she said, "shall not pass without a prize from the
field which he has so nobly won. This rich string of brilliants, which
my ancestor won from the Sultan of Trebisond, itself a prize of battle,
will be honoured by sustaining, under the Douglas's armour, a lock of
hair of the fortunate lady whom the victorious lord has adopted for his
guide in. chivalry; and if the Douglas, till he shall adorn it with
that lock, will permit the honoured lock of hair which it now bears to
retain its station, she on whose head it grew will hold it as a signal
that poor Augusta de Berkely is pardoned for having gaged any mortal
man in strife with the Knight of Douglas."

"Woman's love," replied the Douglas, "shall not divorce this locket
from my bosom, which I will keep till the last day of my life, as
emblematic of female worth and female virtue. And, not to encroach upon
the valued and honoured province of Sir John de Walton, be it known to
all men, that whoever shall say that the Lady Augusta of Berkely has,
in this entangled matter, acted otherwise than becomes the noblest of
her sex, he will do well to be ready to maintain such a proposition
with his lance, against James of Douglas, in a fair field."

This speech was heard with approbation on all sides; and the news
brought by Meredith of the defeat of the Earl of Pembroke, and his
subsequent retreat, reconciled the fiercest of the English soldiers to
the surrender of Douglas Castle. The necessary conditions were speedily
agreed on, which put the Scottish in possession of this stronghold,
together with the stores, both of arms and ammunition, of every kind
which it contained. The garrison had it to boast, that they obtained a
free passage, with their horses and arms, to return by the shortest and
safest route to the marches of England, without either suffering or
inflicting damage.

Margaret of Hautlieu was not behind in acting a generous part; the
gallant Knight of Valence was allowed to accompany his friend De Walton
and the Lady Augusta to England, and without ransom.

The venerable prelate of Glasgow, seeing what appeared at one time
likely to end in a general conflict, terminate so auspiciously for his
country, contented himself with bestowing his blessing on the assembled
multitude, and retiring with those who came to assist in the service of
the day.

This surrender of Douglas Castle upon the Palm Sunday of 19th March,
1306-7, was the beginning of a career of conquest which was
uninterrupted, in which the greater part of the strengths and
fortresses of Scotland were yielded to those who asserted the liberty
of their country, until the crowning mercy was gained in the celebrated
field of Bannockburn, where the English sustained a defeat more
disastrous than is mentioned upon any other occasion in their annals.

Little need be said of the fate of the persons of this story. King
Edward was greatly enraged at Sir John de Walton for having surrendered
the Castle of Douglas, securing at the same time his own object, the
envied hand of the heiress of Berkely. The knights to whom he referred
the matter as a subject of enquiry, gave it nevertheless as their
opinion that De Walton was void of all censure, having discharged his
duty in its fullest extent, till the commands of his superior officer
obliged him to surrender tho Dangerous Castle.

A singular renewal of intercourse took place, many months afterwards,
between Margaret of Hautlieu and her lover, Sir Malcolm Fleming. The
use which the lady made of her freedom, and of the doom of the Scottish
Parliament, which put her in possession of her father's inheritance,
was to follow her adventurous spirit through dangers not usually
encountered by those of her sex; and the Lady of Hautlieu was not only
a daring follower of the chase, but it was said that she was even not
daunted in the battlefield. She remained faithful to the political
principles which she had adopted at an early period; and it seemed as
if she had formed the gallant resolution of shaking the god Cupid from
her horse's mane, if not treading him beneath her horse's feet.

The Fleming, although he had vanished from the neighbourhood of the
counties of Lanark and Ayr, made an attempt to state his apology to the
Lady de Hautlieu herself, who returned his letter unopened, and
remained to all appearance resolved never again to enter upon the topic
of their original engagement. It chanced, however, at a later period of
the war with England, while Fleming was one night travelling upon the
Border, after the ordinary fashion of one who sought adventures, a
waiting-maid, equipped in a fantastic habit, asked the protection of
his arm in the name of her lady, who, late in the evening, had been
made captive, she said, by certain ill-disposed caitiffs, who were
carrying her by force through the forest. The Fleming's lance was, of
course, in its rest, and woe betide the faitour whose lot it was to
encounter its thrust; the first fell, incapable of further combat, and
another of the felons encountered the same fate with little more
resistance. The lady, released from the discourteous cord which
restrained her liberty, did not hesitate to join company with the brave
knight by whom she had been rescued; and although the darkness did not
permit her to recognise her old lover in her liberator, yet she could
not but lend a willing ear to the conversation with which he
entertained her, as they proceeded on the way. He spoke of the fallen
caitiffs as being Englishmen, who found a pleasure in exercising
oppression and barbarities upon the wandering damsels of Scotland, and
whose cause, therefore, the champions of that country were bound to
avenge while the blood throbbed in their veins. He spoke of the
injustice of the national quarrel which had afforded a pretence for
such deliberate oppression; and the lady, who herself had suffered so
much by the interference of the English in the affairs of Scotland,
readily acquiesced in the sentiments which he expressed on a subject
which she had so much reason for regarding as an afflicting one. Her
answer was given in the spirit of a person who would not hesitate, if
the times should call for such an example, to defend even with her hand
the rights which she asserted with her tongue.

Pleased with the sentiments which she expressed, and recognising in her
voice that secret charm, which, once impressed upon the human heart, is
rarely wrought out of the remembrance by a long train of subsequent
events, he almost persuaded himself that the tones were familiar to
him, and had at one time formed the key to his innermost affections. In
proceeding on their journey, the knight's troubled state of mind was
augmented instead of being diminished. The scenes of his earliest youth
were recalled by circumstances so slight, as would in ordinary cases
have produced no effect whatever; the sentiments appeared similar to
those which his life had been devoted to enforce, and he half persuaded
himself that the dawn of day was to be to him the beginning of a
fortune equally singular and extraordinary.

In the midst of this anxiety, Sir Malcolm Fleming had no anticipation
that the lady whom he had heretofore rejected was again thrown into his
path, after years of absence; still less, when daylight gave him a
partial view of his fair companion's countenance, was he prepared to
believe that he was once again to term himself the champion of Margaret
de Hautlieu, but it was so. The lady, on that direful morning when she
retired from the church of Douglas, had not resolved (indeed what lady
ever did?) to renounce, without some struggle, the beauties which she
had once possessed. A long process of time, employed under skilful
hands, had succeeded in obliterating the scars which remained as the
marks of her fall. These were now considerably effaced, and the lost
organ of sight no longer appeared so great a blemish, concealed, as it
was, by a black ribbon, and the arts of the tirewoman, who made it her
business to shadow it over by a lock of hair. In a word, he saw the
same Margaret de Hautlieu, with no very different style of expression
from that which her face, partaking of the high and passionate
character of her soul, had always presented. It seemed to both,
therefore, that their fate, by bringing them together after a
separation which appeared so decisive, had intimated its _fiat_ that
their fortunes were inseparable from each other. By the time that the
summer sun had climbed high in the heavens, the two travellers rode
apart from their retinue, conversing together with an eagerness which
marked the important matters of discussion between them; and in a short
time it was made generally known through Scotland, that Sir Malcolm
Fleming and the Lady Margaret de Hautlieu were to be united at the
court of the good King Robert, and the husband invested with the
honours of Biggar and Cumbernauld, an earldom so long known in the
family of Fleming.

The gentle reader is acquainted, that these are, in all probability,
the last tales which it will be the lot of the Author to submit to the
public. He is now on the eve of visiting foreign parts; a ship of war
is commissioned by its Royal Master to carry the Author of Waverley to
climates in which he may possibly obtain such a restoration of health
as may serve him to spin his thread to an end in his own country. Had
he continued to prosecute his usual literary labours, it seems indeed
probable, that at the term of years he has already attained, the bowl,
to use the pathetic language of Scripture, would have been broken at
the fountain; and little can one, who has enjoyed on the whole an
uncommon share of the most inestimable of worldly blessings, be
entitled to complain, that life, advancing to its period, should be
attended with its usual proportions of shadows and storms. They have
affected him at least in no more painful manner than is inseparable
from the discharge of this part of the debt of humanity. Of those whose
relation to him in the ranks of life might have ensured him their
sympathy under indisposition, many are now no more; and those who may
yet follow in his wake, are entitled to expect, in bearing inevitable
evils, an example of firmness and patience, more especially on the part
of one who has enjoyed no small good fortune during the course of his
pilgrimage.

The public have claims on his gratitude, for which the Author of
Waverley has no adequate means of expression; but he may be permitted
to hope, that the powers of his mind, such as they are, may not have a
different date from those of his body; and that he may again meet his
patronising friends, if not exactly in his old fashion of literature,
at least in some branch, which may not call forth the remark, that--

      "Superfluous lags the veteran on the stage."

ABBOTSFORD, _September_, 1831.

END OF CASTLE DANGEROUS.




MY AUNT MARGARET'S MIRROR

INTRODUCTION.--(1831.)

The species of publication--which has come to be generally known by the
title of _Annual_, being a miscellany of prose and verse, equipped with
numerous engravings, and put forth every year about Christmas, had
flourished for a long while in Germany, before it was imitated in this
country by an enterprising bookseller, a German by birth, Mr.
Ackermann. The rapid success of his work, as is the custom of the time,
gave birth to a host of rivals, and, among others, to an Annual styled
The Keepsake, the first volume of which appeared in 1828, and attracted
much notice, chiefly in consequence of the very uncommon splendour of
its illustrative accompaniments. The expenditure which the spirited
proprietors lavished on this magnificent volume, is understood to have
been not less than from ten to twelve thousand pounds sterling!

Various gentlemen, of such literary reputation that any one might think
it an honour to be associated with them, had been announced as
contributors to this Annual, before application was made to me to
assist in it; and I accordingly placed with much pleasure at the
Editor's disposal a few fragments, originally designed to have been
worked into the Chronicles of the Canongate, besides a MS. Drama, the
long-neglected performance of my youthful days,--the House of Aspen.

The Keepsake for 1828 included, however, only three of these little
prose tales--of which the first in order was that entitled "My Aunt
Margaret's Mirror." By way of _introduction_ to this, when now included
in a general collection of my lucubrations, I have only to say that it
is a mere transcript, or at least with very little embellishment, of a
story that I remembered being struck with in my childhood, when told at
the fireside by a lady of eminent virtues, and no inconsiderable share
of talent, one of the ancient and honourable house of Swinton. She was
a kind relation of my own, and met her death in a manner so shocking,
being killed in a fit of insanity by a female attendant who had been
attached to her person for half a lifetime, that I cannot now recall
her memory, child as I was when the catastrophe occurred, without a
painful reawakening of perhaps the first images of horror that the
scenes of real life stamped on my mind.

This good spinster had in her composition a strong vein of the
superstitious, and was pleased, among other fancies, to read alone in
her chamber by a taper fixed in a candlestick which she had formed out
of a human skull. One night, this strange piece of furniture acquired
suddenly the power of locomotion, and, after performing some odd
circles on her chimneypiece, fairly leaped on the floor, and continued
to roll about the apartment. Mrs. Swinton calmly proceeded to the
adjoining room for another light, and had the satisfaction to penetrate
the mystery on the spot. Rats abounded in the ancient building she
inhabited, and one of these had managed to ensconce itself within her
favourite _memento mori_. Though thus endowed with a more than feminine
share of nerve, she entertained largely that belief in supernaturals,
which in those times was not considered as sitting ungracefully on the
grave and aged of her condition; and the story of the Magic Mirror was
one for which she vouched with particular confidence, alleging indeed
that one of her own family had been an eye-witness of the incidents
recorded in it.

      "I tell the tale as it was told to me."

Stories enow of much the same cast will present themselves to the
recollection of such of my readers as have ever dabbled in a species of
lore to which I certainly gave more hours, at one period of my life,
than I should gain any credit by confessing.

_August_, 1831.




MY AUNT MARGARET'S MIRROR.

  "There are times
  When Fancy plays her gambols, in despite
  Even of our watchful senses, when in sooth
  Substance seems shadow, shadow substance seems
  When the broad, palpabale, and mark'd partition
  'Twixt that which is and is not, seems dissolved
  As if the mental eye gain'd power to gaze
  Beyond the limits of the existing world.
  Such hours of shadowy dreams I better love
  Than all the gross realities of life."
                              ANONYMOUS.

 My Aunt Margaret was one of that respected sisterhood, upon whom
devolve all the trouble and solicitude incidental to the possession of
children, excepting only that which attends their entrance into the
world. We were a large family, of very different dispositions and
constitutions. Some were dull and peevish--they were sent to Aunt
Margaret to be amused; some were rude, romping, and boisterous--they
were sent to Aunt Margaret to be kept quiet, or rather that their noise
might be removed out of hearing: those who were indisposed were sent
with the prospect of being nursed--those who were stubborn, with the
hope of their being subdued by the kindness of Aunt Margaret's
discipline; in short, she had all the various duties of a mother,
without the credit and dignity of the maternal character. The busy
scene of her various cares is now over--of the invalids and the robust,
the kind and the rough, the peevish and pleased children, who thronged
her little parlour from morning to night, not one now remains alive but
myself; who, afflicted by early infirmity, was one of the most delicate
of her nurslings, yet nevertheless, have outlived them all.

It is still my custom, and shall be so while I have the use of my
limbs, to visit my respected relation at least three times a-week. Her
abode is about half a mile from the suburbs of the town in which I
reside; and is accessible, not only by the high-road, from which it
stands at some distance, but by means of a greensward footpath, leading
through some pretty meadows. I have so little left to torment me in
life, that it is one of my greatest vexations to know that several of
these sequestered fields have been devoted as sites for building. In
that which is nearest the town, wheelbarrows have been at work for
several weeks in such numbers, that, I verily believe, its whole
surface, to the depth of at least eighteen inches, was mounted in these
monotrochs at the same moment, and in the act of being transported from
one place to another. Huge triangular piles of planks are also reared
in different parts of the devoted messuage; and a little group of
trees, that still grace the eastern end, which rises in a gentle
ascent, have just received warning to quit, expressed by a daub of
white paint, and are to give place to a curious grove of chimneys.

It would, perhaps, hurt others in my situation to reflect that this
little range of pasturage once belonged to my father, (whose family was
of some consideration in the world,) and was sold by patches to remedy
distresses in which he involved himself in an attempt by commercial
adventure to redeem, his diminished fortune. While the building scheme
was in full operation, this circumstance was often pointed out to me by
the class of friends who are anxious that no part of your misfortunes
should escape your observation. "Such pasture-ground!--lying at the
very town's end--in turnips and potatoes, the parks would bring 20_l_.
per acre, and if leased for building--Oh, it was a gold mine!--And all
sold for an old song out of the ancient possessor's hands!" My
comforters cannot bring me to repine much on this subject. If I could
be allowed to look back on the past without interruption, I could
willingly give up the enjoyment of present income, and the hope of
future profit, to those who have purchased what my father sold. I
regret the alteration of the ground only because it destroys
associations, and I would more willingly (I think) see the Earl's
Closes in the hands of strangers, retaining their silvan appearance,
than know them for my own, if torn up by agriculture, or covered with
buildings. Mine are the sensations of poor Logan:

    "The horrid plough has rased the green
     Where yet a child I stray'd;
     The axe has fell'd the hawthorn screen,
     The schoolboy's summer shade."

I hope, however, the threatened devastation will not be consummated in
my day. Although the adventurous spirit of times short while since
passed gave rise to the undertaking, I have been encouraged to think,
that the subsequent changes have so far damped the spirit of
speculation, that the rest of the woodland footpath leading to Aunt
Margaret's retreat will be left undisturbed for her time and mine. I am
interested in this, for every step of the way, after I have passed
through the green already mentioned, has for me something of early
remembrance :--There is the stile at which I can recollect a cross
child's-maid upbraiding me with my infirmity, as she lifted me coarsely
and carelessly over the flinty steps, which my brothers traversed with
shout and bound. I remember the suppressed bitterness of the mo-ment,
and, conscious of my own inferiority, the feeling of envy with which I
regarded the easy movements and elastic steps of my more happily formed
brethren. Alas! these goodly barks have all perished on life's wide
ocean, and only that which seemed so little seaworthy, as the naval
phrase goes, has reached the port when the tempest is over. Then there
is the pool, where, manoeuvring our little navy, constructed out of the
broad water flags, my elder brother fell in, and was scarce saved from
the watery element to die under Nelson's banner. There is the hazel
copse also, in which my brother Henry used to gather nuts, thinking
little that he was to die in an Indian jungle in quest of rupees.

There is so much more of remembrance about the little walk, that--as I
stop, rest on my crutch-headed cane, and look round with that species
of comparison between the thing I was and that which I now am--it
almost induces me to doubt my own identity; until I find myself in face
of the honeysuckle porch of Aunt Margaret's dwelling, with its
irregularity of front, and its odd projecting latticed windows; where
the workmen seem to have made a study that no one of them should
resemble another, in form, size, or in the old-fashioned stone
entablature and labels which adorn them. This tenement, once the
manor-house of Earl's Closes, we still retain a slight hold upon; for,
in some family arrangements, it had been settled upon Aunt Margaret
during the term of her life. Upon this frail tenure depends, in a great
measure, the last shadow of the family of Bothwell of Earl's Closes,
and their last slight connection with their paternal inheritance. The
only representative will then be an infirm old man, moving not
unwillingly to the grave, which has devoured all that were dear to his
aifections.

When I have indulged such thoughts for a minute or two, I enter the
mansion, which is said to have been the gatehouse only of the original
building, and find one being on whom time seems to have made little
impression; for the Aunt Margaret of to-day bears the same proportional
ago to the Aunt Margaret of my early youth, that the boy of ten years
old does to the man of (by'r Lady!) some fifty-six years. The old
lady's invariable costume has doubtless some share in confirming one in
the opinion, that time has stood still with Aunt Margaret.

The brown or chocolate-coloured silk gown, with ruffles of the same
stuff at the elbow, within which are others of Mechlin lace--the black
silk gloves, or mitts, the white hair combed back upon a roll, and the
cap of spotless cambric, which closes around the venerable countenance,
as they were not the costume of 1780, so neither were they that of
1826; they are altogether a style peculiar to the individual Aunt
Margaret. There she still sits, as she sat thirty years since, with her
wheel or the stocking, which she works by the fire in winter, and by
the window in summer; or, perhaps, venturing as far as the porch in an
unusually fine summer evening. Her frame, like some well-constructed
piece of mechanics, still performs the operations for which it had
seemed destined; going its round with an activity which is gradually
diminished, yet indicating no probability that it will soon come to a
period.

The solicitude and affection which had made Aunt Margaret the willing
slave to the inflictions of a whole nursery, have now for their object
the health and comfort of one old and infirm man, the last remaining
relative of her family, and the only one who can still find interest in
the traditional stores which she hoards as some miser hides the gold
which he desires that no one should enjoy after his death.

My conversation with Aunt Margaret generally relates little either to
the present or to the future: for the passing day we possess as much as
we require, and we neither of us wish for more; and for that which is
to follow we have on this side of the grave neither hopes, nor fears,
nor anxiety. We therefore naturally look back to the past; and forget
the present fallen fortunes and declined importance of our family, in
recalling the hours when it was wealthy and prosperous.

With this slight introduction, the reader will know as much of Aunt
Margaret and her nephew as is necessary to comprehend the following
conversation and narrative.

Last week, when, late in a summer evening, I went to call on the old
lady to whom my reader is now introduced, I was received by her with
all her usual affection and benignity; while, at the same time, she
seemed abstracted and disposed to silence. I asked her the reason.
"They have been clearing out the old chapel," she said; "John
Clayhudgeons having, it seems, discovered that the stuff within--being,
I suppose, the remains of our ancestors--was excellent for top-dressing
the meadows."

Here I started up with more alacrity than I have displayed for some
years; but sat down while my aunt added, laying her hand upon my
sleeve, "The chapel has been long considered as common ground, my dear,
and used for a penfold, and what objection can we have to the man for
employing what is his own, to his own profit? Besides, I did speak to
him, and he very readily and civilly promised, that, if he found bones
or monuments, they should be carefully respected and reinstated; and
what more could I ask? So, the first stone they found bore the name of
Margaret Bothwell, 1585, and I have caused it to be laid carefully
aside, as I think it betokens death; and having served my namesake two
hundred years, it has just been cast up in time to do me the same good
turn. My house has been long put in order, as far as the small earthly
concerns require it, but who shall say that their account with Heaven
is sufficiently revised?"

"After what you have said, aunt," I replied, "perhaps I ought to take
my hat and go away, and so I should, but that there is on this occasion
a little alloy mingled with our devotion. To think of death at all
times is a duty--to suppose it nearer, from the finding of an old
gravestone, is superstition; and you, with your strong useful common
sense, which was so long the prop of a fallen family, are the last
person whom I should have suspected of such weakness."

"Neither would I have deserved your suspicions, kinsman" answered Aunt
Margaret, "if we were speaking of any incident occurring in the actual
business of human life. But for all this I have a sense of superstition
about me, which I do not wish to part with. It is a feeling which
separates me from this age, and links me with that to which I am
hastening; and even when it seems, as now, to lead me to the brink of
the grave, and bids me gaze on it, I do not love that it should be
dispelled. It soothes my imagination, without influencing my reason or
conduct."

"I profess, my good lady," replied I, "that had any one but you made
such a declaration, I should have thought it as capricious as that of
the clergyman, who, without vindicating his false reading, preferred,
from habit's sake, his old Mumpsimus to the modern Sumpsimus."

"Well," answered my aunt, "I must explain my inconsistency in this
particular, by comparing it to another. I am, as you know, a piece of
that old-fashioned thing called a Jacobite; but I am so in sentiment
and feeling only; for a more loyal subject never joined in prayers, for
the health and wealth of George the Fourth, whom God long preserve! But
I dare say that kind-hearted sovereign would not deem that an old woman
did him, much injury if she leaned back in her arm-chair, just in such
a twilight as this, and thought of the high-mettled men, whose sense of
duty called them to arms against his grandfather; and how, in a cause
which they deemed that of their rightful prince and country,

    'They fought till their hands to the broadsword were glued,
    They fought against fortune with hearts unsubdued.'

do not come at such a moment, when my head is full of plaids, pibrochs,
and claymores, and ask my reason to admit what, I am afraid, it cannot
deny--I mean, that the public advantage peremptorily demanded that
these things should cease to exist. I cannot, indeed, refuse to allow
the justice of your reasoning; but yet, being convinced against my
will, you will gain little by your motion. You might as well read to an
infatuated lover the catalogue of his mistress's imperfections; for,
when he has been compelled to listen to the summary, you will only get
for answer, that, 'he lo'es her a' the better.'"

I was not sorry to have changed the gloomy train of Aunt Margaret's
thoughts, and replied in the same tone, "Well, I can't help being
persuaded that our good king is the more sure of Mrs. Bothwell's loyal
affection, that he has the Stuart right of birth, as well as the Act of
Succession in his favour."

"Perhaps my attachment, were its source of consequence, might be foumd
warmer for the union of the rights you mention," said Aunt Margaret?
"but, upon my word, it would be as sincere if the king's right were
founded only on the will of the nation, as declared at the Revolution.
I am none of your _jure divino_ folk."

"And a Jacobite notwithstanding."

"And a Jacobite notwithstanding; or rather, I will give you leave to
call me one of the party which, in Queen Anne's time, were called
_Whimsicals_; because they were sometimes operated upon by feelings,
sometimes by principle. After all, it is very hard that you will not
allow an old woman to be as inconsistent in her political sentiments,
as mankind in general show themselves in all the various courses of
life; since you cannot point out one of them, in which the passions and
prejudices of those who pursue it are not perpetually carrying us away
from the path which our reason points out."

"True, aunt; but you are a wilful wanderer, who should be forced back
into the right path."

"Spare me, I entreat you," replied Aunt Margaret. "You remember the
Gaelic song, though I dare say I mispronounce the words--

    'Hatil mohatil, na dowski mi.'
    'I am asleep, do not waken me.'

I tell you, kinsman, that the sort of waking dreams which my
imagination spins out, in what your favourite Wordsworth calls 'moods
of my own mind,' are worth all the rest of my more active days. Then,
instead of looking forwards as I did in youth, and forming for myself
fairy palaces, upon the verge of the grave, I turn my eyes backward
upon the days and manners of my better time; and the sad, yet soothing
recollections come so close and interesting, that I almost think it
sacrilege to be wiser, or more rational, or less prejudiced, than those
to whom I looked up in my younger years."

"I think I now understand what you mean," I answered, "and can
comprehend why you should occasionally prefer the twilight of illusion
to the steady light of reason."

"Where there is no task," she rejoined, "to be performed, we may sit in
the dark if we like it--if we go to work, we must ring for candles."

"And amidst such shadowy and doubtful light," continued I, "imagination
frames her enchanted and enchanting visions, and sometimes passes them
upon the senses for reality."

"Yes," said Aunt Margaret, who is a well-read woman, "to those who
resemble the translator of Tasso,

    'Prevailing poet, whose undoubting mind
     Believed the magic wonders which he sung.'

It is not required for this purpose, that you should be sensible of the
painful horrors which an actual belief in such prodigies inflicts--such
a belief, now-a-days, belongs only to fools and children. It is not
necessary that your ears should tingle, and your complexion change,
like that of Theodore, at the approach of the spectral huntsman. All
that is indispensable for the enjoyment of the milder feeling of
supernatural awe is, that you should be susceptible of the slight
shuddering which creeps over you when you hear a tale of terror--that
well-vouched tale which the narrator, having first expressed his
general disbelief of all such legendary lore, selects and produces, as
having something in it which he has been always obliged to give up as
inexplicable. Another symptom is, a momentary hesitation to look round
you, when the interest of the narrative is at the highest; and the
third, a desire to avoid looking into a mirror, when you are alone, in
your chamber, for the evening. I mean such are signs which indicate the
crisis, when a female imagination is in due temperature to enjoy a
ghost story. I do not pretend to describe those which express the same
disposition in a gentleman."

"This last symptom, dear aunt, of shunning the mirror, seems likely to
be a rare occurrence amongst the fair sex."

"You are a novice in toilet fashions, my dear kinsman. All women
consult the looking-glass with anxiety before they go into company; but
when they return home, the mirror has not the same charm. The die has
been cast-the party has been successful or unsuccessful, in the
impression which she desired to make. But, without going deeper into
the mysteries of the dressing-table, I will tell you that I myself,
like many other honest folk, do not like to see the blank black front
of a large mirror in a room dimly lighted, and where the reflection of
the candle seems rather to lose itself in the deep obscurity of the
glass, than to be reflected back again into the apartment. That space
of inky darkness seems to be a field for Fancy to play her revels in.
She may call up other features to meet us, instead of the reflection of
our own; or, as in the spells of Hallowe'en, which we learned in
childhood some unknown form may be seen peeping over our shoulder. In
short, when I am in a ghost-seeing humour, I make my handmaiden draw
the green curtains over the mirror, before I go into the room, so that
she may have the first shock of the apparition, if there be any to be
seen. But, to tell you the truth, this dislike to look into a mirror in
particular times and places, has, I believe, its original foundation in
a story which came to me by tradition from my grandmother, who was a
party concerned in the scene of which I will now tell you."




THE MIRROR.

CHAPTER THE FIRST.


You are fond (said my aunt) of sketches of the society which has passed
away. I wish I could describe to you Sir Philip Forester, the
"chartered libertine" of Scottish good company, about the end of the
last century. I never saw him indeed; but my mother's traditions were
full of his wit, gallantry and dissipation. This gay knight flourished
about the end of the 17th and beginning of the 18th century. He was the
Sir Charles Easy and the Lovelace of his day and country; renowned for
the number of duels he had fought, and the successful intrigues which
he had carried on. The supremacy which he had attained in the
fashionable world was absolute; and when we combine with it one or two
anecdotes, for which, "if laws were made for every degree," he ought
certainly to have been hanged, the popularity of such a person really
serves to show, either that the present times are much more decent, if
not more virtuous, than they formerly were; or, that high breeding then
was of more difficult attainment than that which is now so called; and,
consequently, entitled the successful professor to a proportionable
degree of plenary indulgences and privileges. No beau of this day could
have borne out so ugly a story as that of Pretty Peggy Grindstone, the
miller's daughter at Sillermills--it had well-nigh made work for the
Lord Advocate. But it hurt Sir Philip Forester no more than the hail
hurts the hearth-stone. He was as well received in society as ever, and
dined with the Duke of A---- the day the poor girl was buried. She died
of heart-break. But that has nothing to do with my story.

Now, you must listen to a single word upon kith, kin, and ally; I
promise you I will not be prolix. But it is necessary to the
authenticity of my legend, that you should know that Sir Philip
Forester, with his handsome person, elegant accomplishments, and
fashionable manners, married the younger Miss Falconer of King's
Copland. The elder sister of this lady had previously become the wife
of my grandfather, Sir Geoffrey Bothwell, and brought into our family a
good fortune. Miss Jemima, or Miss Jemmie Falconer, as she was usually
called, had also about ten thousand pounds sterling--then thought a
very handsome portion indeed.

The two sisters were extremely different, though each had their
admirers while they remained single. Lady Bothwell had some touch of
the old King's Copland blood about her. She was bold, though not to the
degree of audacity; ambitious, and desirous to raise her house and
family; and was, as has been said, a considerable spur to my
grandfather, who was otherwise an indolent man; but whom, unless he has
been slandered, his lady's influence involved in some political matters
which had been more wisely let alone. She was a woman of high
principle, however, and masculine good sense, as some of her letters
testify, which are still in my wainscot cabinet.

Jemmie Falconer was the reverse of her sister in every respect. Her
understanding did not reach above the ordinary pitch, if, indeed, she
could be said to have attained it. Her beauty, while it lasted,
consisted, in a great measure, of delicacy of complexion and regularity
of features, without any peculiar force of expression. Even these
charms faded under the sufferings attendant on an ill-sorted match. She
was passionately attached to her husband, by whom she was treated with
a callous, yet polite indifference, which, to one whose heart was as
tender as her judgment was weak, was more painful perhaps than absolute
ill-usage. Sir Philip was a voluptuary, that is, a completely selfish
egotist, whose disposition and character resembled the rapier he wore,
polished, keen, and brilliant, but inflexible and unpitying. As he
observed carefully all the usual forms towards his lady, he had the art
to deprive her even of the compassion of the world; and useless and
unavailing as that may be while actually possessed by the sufferer, it
is, to a mind like Lady Forester's, most painful to know she has it not.

The tattle of society did its best to place the peccant husband above
the suffering wife. Some called her a poor spiritless thing, and
declared, that, with a little of her sister's spirit, she might have
brought to reason any Sir Philip whatsoever, were it the termagant
Falconbridge himself. But the greater part of their acquaintance
affected candour, and saw faults on both sides; though, in fact, there
only existed the oppressor and the oppressed. The tone of such critics
was--"To be sure, no one will justify Sir Philip Forester, but then we
all know Sir Philip, and Jemmie Falconer might have known what she had
to expect from the beginning.--What made her set her cap at Sir
Philip?--He would never have looked at her if she had not thrown
herself at his head, with her poor ten thousand pounds. I am sure, if
it is money he wanted, she spoiled his market. I know where Sir Philip
could have done much better.--And then, if she _would_ have the man,
could not she try to make him more comfortable at home, and have his
friends oftener, and not plague him with the squalling children, and
take care all was handsome and in good style about the house? I declare
I think Sir Philip would have made a very domestic man, with a woman
who knew how to manage him."

Now these fair critics, in raising their profound edifice of domestic
felicity, did not recollect that the corner-stone was wanting; and that
to receive good company with good cheer, the means of the banquet ought
to have been furnished by Sir Philip; whose income (dilapidated as it
was) was not equal to the display of hospitality required, and, at the
same time, to the supply of the good knight's _menus plaisirs_. So, in
spite of all that was so sagely suggested by female friends, Sir Philip
carried his good-humour every where abroad, and left at home a solitary
mansion and a pining spouse.

At length, inconvenienced in his money affairs, and tired even of the
short time which he spent in his own dull house, Sir Philip Forester
determined to take a trip to the Continent, in the capacity of a
volunteer. It was then common for men of fashion to do so; and our
knight perhaps was of opinion that a touch of the military character,
just enough to exalt, but not render pedantic, his qualities as a _beau
garcon_, was necessary to maintain possession of the elevated situation
which he held in the ranks of fashion.

Sir Philip's resolution threw his wife into agonies of terror, by which
the worthy baronet was so much annoyed, that, contrary to his wont, he
took some trouble to soothe her apprehensions; and once more brought
her to shed tears, in which sorrow was not altogether unmingled with
pleasure. Lady Bothwell asked, as a favour, Sir Philip's permission to
receive her sister and her family into her own house during his absence
on the Continent. Sir Philip readily assented to a proposition which
saved expense, silenced the foolish people who might have talked of a
deserted wife and family, and gratified Lady Bothwell, for whom he felt
some respect, as for one who often spoke to him, always with freedom,
and sometimes with severity, without being deterred either by his
raillery, or the _prestige_ of his reputation.

A day or two before Sir Philip's departure, Lady Bothwell took the
liberty of asking him, in her sister's presence, the direct question,
which his timid wife had often desired, but never ventured, to put to
him.

"Pray, Sir Philip, what route do you take when you reach the Continent?"

"I go from Leith to Helvoet by a packet with advices."

"That I comprehend perfectly," said Lady Bothwell dryly; "but you do
not mean to remain long at Helvoet, I presume, and I should like to
know what is your next object?"

"You ask me, my dear lady," answered Sir Philip, "a question which I
have not dared to ask myself. The answer depends on the fate of war. I
shall, of course, go to headquarters, wherever they may happen to be
for the time; deliver my letters of introduction; learn as much of the
noble art of war as may suffice a poor interloping amateur; and then
take a glance at the sort of thing of which we read so much in the
Gazette."

"And I trust, Sir Philip," said Lady Bothwell, "that you will remember
that you are a husband and a father; and that though you think fit to
indulge this military fancy, you will not let it hurry you into dangers
which it is certainly unnecessary for any save professional persons to
encounter?"

"Lady Bothwell does me too much honour," replied the adventurous
knight, "in regarding such a circumstance with the slightest interest.
But to soothe your flattering anxiety, I trust your ladyship will
recollect, that I cannot expose to hazard the venerable and paternal
character which you so obligingly recommend to my protection, without
putting in some peril an honest fellow, called Philip Forester, with
whom I have kept company for thirty years, and with whom, though some
folk consider him a coxcomb, I have not the least desire to part."

"Well, Sir Philip, you are the best judge of your own affairs; I have
little right to interfere--you are not my husband."

"God forbid!"--said Sir Philip hastily; instantly adding, however, "God
forbid that I should deprive my friend Sir Geoffrey of so inestimable a
treasure."

"But you are my sister's husband," replied the lady; "and I suppose you
are aware of her present distress of mind--"

"If hearing of nothing else from morning to night can make me aware of
it," said Sir Philip, "I should know something of the matter."

"I do not pretend to reply to your wit, Sir Philip," answered Lady
Bothwell, "but you must be sensible that all this distress is on
account of apprehensions for your personal safety."

"In that case, I am surprised that Lady Bothwell, at least, should give
herself so much trouble upon so insignificant a subject."

"My sister's interest may account for my being anxious to learn
something of Sir Philip Forester's motions; about which otherwise, I
know, he would not wish me to concern myself. I have a brother's
safety, too, to be anxious for."

"You mean Major Falconer, your brother by the mother's side:--What can
he possibly have to do with our present agreeable conversation?"

"You have had words together, Sir Philip," said Lady Bothwell.

"Naturally; we are connections," replied Sir Philip, "and as such have
always had the usual intercourse."

"That is an evasion of the subject," answered the lady. "By words, I
mean angry words, on the subject of your usage of your wife."

"If," replied Sir Philip Forester, "you suppose Major Falconer simple
enough to intrude his advice upon me, Lady Bothwell, in my domestic
matters, you are indeed warranted in believing that I might possibly be
so far displeased with the interference, as to request him to reserve
his advice till it was asked."

"And, being on these terms, you are going to join the very army in
which my brother Falconer is now serving?"

"No man knows the path of honour better than Major Falconer," said Sir
Philip. "An aspirant after fame, like me, cannot choose a better guide
than his footsteps."

Lady Bothwell rose and went to the window, the tears gushing from her
eyes.

"And this heartless raillery," she said, "is all the consideration that
is to be given to our apprehensions of a quarrel which may bring on the
most terrible consequences? Good God! of what can men's hearts be made,
who can thus dally with the agony of others?"

Sir Philip Forester was moved; he laid aside the mocking tone in which
he had hitherto spoken.

"Dear Lady Bothwell," he said, taking her reluctant hand, "we are both
wrong:--you are too deeply serious; I, perhaps, too little. The dispute
I had with Major Falconer was of no earthly consequence. Had any thing
occurred betwixt us that ought to have been settled _par voie du fait_,
as we say in France, neither of us are persons that are likely to
postpone such a meeting. Permit me to say, that were it generally known
that you or my Lady Forester are apprehensive of such a catastrophe, it
might be the very means of bringing about what would not otherwise be
likely to happen. I know your good sense, Lady Bothwell, and that you
will understand me when I say, that really my affairs require my
absence for some months;--this Jemima cannot understand; it is a
perpetual recurrence of questions, why can you not do this, or that, or
the third thing; and, when you have proved to her that her expedients
are totally ineffectual, you have just to begin the whole round again.
Now, do you tell her, dear Lady Bothwell, that _you_ are satisfied. She
is, you must confess, one of those persons with whom authority goes
farther than reasoning. Do but repose a little confidence in me, and
you shall see how amply I will repay it."

Lady Bothwell shook her head, as one but half satisfied. "How difficult
it is to extend confidence, when the basis on which it ought to rest
has been so much shaken! But I will do my best to make Jemima easy; and
farther, I can only say, that for keeping your present purpose, I hold
you responsible both to God and man."

"Do not fear that I will deceive you," said Sir Philip; "the safest
conveyance to me will be through the general post-office, Helvoetsluys,
where I will take care to leave orders for forwarding my letters. As
for Falconer, our only encounter will be over a bottle of Burgundy! so
make yourself perfectly easy on his score."

Lady Bothwell could not make herself easy; yet she was sensible that
her sister hurt her own cause by _taking on_, as the maid-servants call
it, too vehemently; and by showing before every stranger, by manner,
and sometimes by words also, a dissatisfaction with her husband's
journey, that was sure to come to his ears, and equally certain to
displease him. But there was no help for this domestic dissension,
which ended only with the day of separation.

I am sorry I cannot tell, with precision, the year in which Sir Philip
Forester went over to Flanders; but it was one of those in which the
campaign opened with extraordinary fury; and many bloody, though
indecisive, skirmishes were fought between the French on the one side,
and the Allies on the other. In all our modern improvements, there are
none, perhaps, greater than in the accuracy and speed with which
intelligence is transmitted from any scene of action to those in this
country whom it may concern. During Marlborough's campaigns, the
sufferings of the many who had relations in, or along with, the army,
were greatly augmented by the suspense in which they were detained for
weeks, after they had heard of bloody battles in which, in all
probability, those for whom their bosoms throbbed with anxiety had been
personally engaged. Amongst those who were most agonized by this state
of uncertainty, was the--I had almost said deserted---wife of the gay
Sir Philip Forester. A single letter had informed her of his arrival on
the Continent--no others were received. One notice occurred in the
newspapers, in which Volunteer Sir Philip Forester was mentioned as
having been entrusted with a dangerous reconnoissance, which he had
executed with the greatest courage, dexterity, and intelligence, and
received the thanks of the commanding officer. The sense of his having
acquired distinction brought a momentary glow into the lady's pale
cheek; but it--was instantly lost in ashen whiteness at the
recollection of his danger. After this, they had no news whatever,
neither from Sir Philip, nor even from their brother Falconer. The case
of Lady Forester was not indeed different from that of hundreds in the
same situation; but a feeble mind is necessarily an irritable one, and
the suspense which some bear with constitutional indifference or
philosophical resignation, and some with a disposition to believe and
hope the best, was intolerable to Lady Forester, at once solitary and
sensitive, low-spirited, and devoid of strength of mind, whether
natural or acquired.

