him, and of the other by shooting his horse, and then continued his
flight to Bothwell Bridge, where, for his misfortune, he found the gates
shut and guarded. Turning from thence, he made for a place where the
river seemed passable, and plunged into the stream, the bullets from the
pistols and carabines of his pursuers whizzing around him. Two balls took
effect when he was past the middle of the stream, and he felt himself
dangerously wounded. He reined his horse round in the midst of the river,
and returned towards the bank he had left, waving his hand, as if with
the purpose of intimating that he surrendered. The troopers ceased firing
at him accordingly, and awaited his return, two of them riding a little
way into the river to seize and disarm him. But it presently appeared
that his purpose was revenge, not safety. As he approached the two
soldiers, he collected his remaining strength, and discharged a blow on
the head of one, which tumbled him from his horse. The other dragoon, a
strong, muscular man, had in the mean while laid hands on him. Burley, in
requital, grasped his throat, as a dying tiger seizes his prey, and both,
losing the saddle in the struggle, came headlong into the river, and were
swept down the stream. Their course might be traced by the blood which
bubbled up to the surface. They were twice seen to rise, the Dutchman
striving to swim, and Burley clinging to him in a manner that showed his
desire that both should perish. Their corpses were taken out about a
quarter of a mile down the river. As Balfour's grasp could not have been
unclenched without cutting off his hands, both were thrown into a hasty
grave, still marked by a rude stone and a ruder epitaph.

     [Gentle reader, I did request of mine honest friend Peter Proudfoot,
     travelling merchant, known to many of this land for his faithful and
     just dealings, as well in muslins and cambrics as in small wares, to
     procure me on his next peregrinations to that vicinage, a copy of
     the Epitaphion alluded to. And, according to his report, which I see
     no ground to discredit, it runneth thus:--

               Here lyes ane saint to prelates surly,
               Being John Balfour, sometime of Burley,
               Who stirred up to vengeance take,
               For Solemn League and Cov'nant's sake,
               Upon the Magus-Moor in Fife,
               Did tak James Sharpe the apostate's life;
               By Dutchman's hands was hacked and shot,
               Then drowned in Clyde near this saam spot.]

While the soul of this stern enthusiast flitted to its account, that of
the brave and generous Lord Evandale was also released. Morton had flung
himself from his horse upon perceiving his situation, to render his dying
friend all the aid in his power. He knew him, for he pressed his hand,
and, being unable to speak, intimated by signs his wish to be conveyed to
the house. This was done with all the care possible, and he was soon
surrounded by his lamenting friends. But the clamorous grief of Lady
Emily was far exceeded in intensity by the silent agony of Edith.

Unconscious even of the presence of Morton, she hung over the dying man;
nor was she aware that Fate, who was removing one faithful lover, had
restored another as if from the grave, until Lord Evandale, taking their
hands in his, pressed them both affectionately, united them together,
raised his face as if to pray for a blessing on them, and sunk back and
expired in the next moment.




                               CONCLUSION.

I had determined to waive the task of a concluding chapter, leaving to
the reader's imagination the arrangements which must necessarily take
place after Lord Evandale's death. But as I was aware that precedents are
wanting for a practice which might be found convenient both to readers
and compilers, I confess myself to have been in a considerable dilemma,
when fortunately I was honoured with an invitation to drink tea with Miss
Martha Buskbody, a young lady who has carried on the profession of
mantua-making at Ganderscleugh and in the neighbourhood, with great
success, for about forty years. Knowing her taste for narratives of this
description, I requested her to look over the loose sheets the morning
before I waited on her, and enlighten me by the experience which she must
have acquired in reading through the whole stock of three circulating
libraries, in Ganderscleugh and the two next market-towns. When, with a
palpitating heart, I appeared before her in the evening, I found her much
disposed to be complimentary.

"I have not been more affected," said she, wiping the glasses of her
spectacles, "by any novel, excepting the 'Tale of Jemmy and Jenny
Jessamy', which is indeed pathos itself; but your plan of omitting a
formal conclusion will never do. You may be as harrowing to our nerves as
you will in the course of your story, but, unless you had the genius
of the author of 'Julia de Roubignd,' never let the end be altogether
overclouded. Let us see a glimpse of sunshine in the last chapter; it is
quite essential."

"Nothing would be more easy for me, madam, than to comply with your
injunctions; for, in truth, the parties in whom you have had the goodness
to be interested, did live long and happily, and begot sons and
daughters."

"It is unnecessary, sir," she said, with a slight nod of reprimand, "to
be particular concerning their matrimonial comforts. But what is your
objection to let us have, in a general way, a glimpse of their future
felicity?"

"Really, madam," said I, "you must be aware that every volume of a
narrative turns less and less interesting as the author draws to a
conclusion,--just like your tea, which, though excellent hyson, is
necessarily weaker and more insipid in the last cup. Now, as I think the
one is by no means improved by the luscious lump of half-dissolved sugar
usually found at the bottom of it, so I am of opinion that a history,
growing already vapid, is but dully crutched up by a detail of
circumstances which every reader must have anticipated, even though the
author exhaust on them every flowery epithet in the language."

"This will not do, Mr. Pattieson," continued the lady; "you have, as I
may say, basted up your first story very hastily and clumsily at the
conclusion; and, in my trade, I would have cuffed the youngest apprentice
who had put such a horrid and bungled spot of work out of her hand. And
if you do not redeem this gross error by telling us all about the
marriage of Morton and Edith, and what became of the other personages of
the story, from Lady Margaret down to Goose-Gibbie, I apprise you that
you will not be held to have accomplished your task handsomely."

"Well, madam," I replied, "my materials are so ample that I think I can
satisfy your curiosity, unless it descend to very minute circumstances
indeed."

"First, then," said she, "for that is most essential,--Did Lady Margaret
get back her fortune and her castle?"

"She did, madam, and in the easiest way imaginable, as heir, namely, to
her worthy cousin, Basil Olifant, who died without a will; and thus, by
his death, not only restored, but even augmented, the fortune of her,
whom, during his life, he had pursued with the most inveterate malice.
John Gudyill, reinstated in his dignity, was more important than ever;
and Cuddie, with rapturous delight, entered upon the cultivation of the
mains of Tillietudlem, and the occupation of his original cottage. But,
with the shrewd caution of his character, he was never heard to boast of
having fired the lucky shot which repossessed his lady and himself in
their original habitations. 'After a',' he said to Jenny, who was his
only confidant, 'auld Basil Olifant was my leddy's cousin and a grand
gentleman; and though he was acting again the law, as I understand, for
he ne'er showed ony warrant, or required Lord Evandale to surrender, and
though I mind killing him nae mair than I wad do a muircock, yet it 's
just as weel to keep a calm sough about it.' He not only did so, but
ingeniously enough countenanced a report that old Gudyill had done the
deed,--which was worth many a gill of brandy to him from the old butler,
who, far different in disposition from Cuddie, was much more inclined to
exaggerate than suppress his exploits of manhood. The blind widow was
provided for in the most comfortable manner, as well as the little guide
to the Linn; and--"

"But what is all this to the marriage,--the marriage of the principal
personages?" interrupted Miss Buskbody, impatiently tapping her
snuff-box.

"The marriage of Morton and Miss Bellenden was delayed for several
months, as both went into deep mourning on account of Lord Evandale's
death. They were then wedded."

"I hope not without Lady Margaret's consent, sir?" said my fair critic.
"I love books which teach a proper deference in young persons to their
parents. In a novel the young people may fall in love without their
countenance, because it is essential to the necessary intricacy of the
story; but they must always have the benefit of their consent at last.
Even old Delville received Cecilia, though the daughter of a man of low
birth."

"And even so, madam," replied I, "Lady Margaret was prevailed on to
countenance Morton, although the old Covenanter, his father, stuck sorely
with her for some time. Edith was her only hope, and she wished to see
her happy; Morton, or Melville Morton, as he was more generally called,
stood so high in the reputation of the world, and was in every other
respect such an eligible match, that she put her prejudice aside, and
consoled herself with the recollection that marriage went by destiny, as
was observed to her, she said, by his most sacred Majesty, Charles the
Second of happy memory, when she showed him the portrait of her
grand-father Fergus, third Earl of Torwood, the handsomest man of his
time, and that of Countess Jane, his second lady, who had a hump-back
and only one. eye. This was his Majesty's observation, she said, on one
remarkable morning when he deigned to take his /disjune/--"

"Nay," said Miss Buskbody, again interrupting me, "if she brought such
authority to countenance her acquiescing in a misalliance, there was no
more to be said.--And what became of old Mrs. What's her name, the
housekeeper?"

"Mrs. Wilson, madam?" answered I. "She was perhaps the happiest of the
party; for once a year, and not oftener, Mr. and Mrs. Melville Morton
dined in the great wainscotted chamber in solemn state, the hangings
being all displayed, the carpet laid down, and the huge brass candlestick
set on the table, stuck round with leaves of laurel. The preparing the
room for this yearly festival employed her mind for six months before it
came about, and the putting matters to rights occupied old Alison the
other six, so that a single day of rejoicing found her business for all
the year round."

"And Niel Blane?" said Miss Buskbody.

"Lived to a good old age, drank ale and brandy with guests of all
persuasions, played Whig or Jacobite tunes as best pleased his customers,
and died worth as much money as married Jenny to a cock laird. I hope,
ma'am, you have no other inquiries to make, for really--"

"Goose-Gibbie, sir?" said my persevering friend,--"Goose-Gibbie, whose
ministry was fraught with such consequences to the personages of the
narrative?"

"Consider, my dear Miss Buskbody, (I beg pardon for the
familiarity),--but pray consider, even the memory of the renowned
Scheherazade, that Empress of Tale-tellers, could not preserve every
circumstance. I am not quite positive as to the fate of Goose-Gibbie,
but am inclined to think him the same with one Gilbert Dudden, alias
Calf-Gibbie, who was whipped through Hamilton for stealing poultry."

Miss Buskbody now placed her left foot on the fender, crossed her right
leg over her knee, lay back on the chair, and looked towards the ceiling.
When I observed her assume this contemplative mood, I concluded she was
studying some farther cross-examination, and therefore took my hat and
wished her a hasty good-night, ere the Demon of Criticism had supplied
her with any more queries. In like manner, gentle Reader, returning you
my thanks for the patience which has conducted you thus far, I take the
liberty to withdraw myself from you for the present.




                               PERORATION.

It was mine earnest wish, most courteous Reader, that the "Tales of my
Landlord" should have reached thine hands in one entire succession of
tomes, or volumes. But as I sent some few more manuscript quires,
containing the continuation of these most pleasing narratives, I was
apprised, somewhat unceremoniously, by my publisher that he did not
approve of novels (as he injuriously called these real histories)
extending beyond four volumes, and if I did not agree to the first four
being published separately, he threatened to decline the article. (Oh,
ignorance! as if the vernacular article of our mother English were
capable of declension.) Whereupon, somewhat moved by his remonstrances,
and more by heavy charges for print and paper, which he stated to have
been already incurred, I have resolved that these four volumes shall be
the heralds or avant-couriers of the Tales which are yet in my
possession, nothing doubting that they will be eagerly devoured, and the
remainder anxiously demanded, by the unanimous voice of a discerning
public. I rest, esteemed Reader, thine as thou shalt construe me,

JEDEDIAH CLEISHBOTHAM.
GANDERCLEUGH, Nov. 15, 1816.


[Illustration: Interior of Abbotsford--302]




GLOSSARY.

A', all.
A'body, everybody.
Aboon, abune, above.
Ae, one.
Aff, off.
Afore, before.
Again, against, until.
Ahint, behind.
Ain, own.
Ajee, awry.
Amaist, almost.
Amna, am not.
An, if, suppose.
Ane, one.
Anent, regarding.
Anes, once.
Anither, another.
Arles, earnest money.
Asteer, in confusion.
Atweel, aweel, well.
Aught, own, possessed of; also, eight.
Auld, old.
Awa', away.
Awe, to owe. "Awe a day in har'st," to owe a good turn.
Awsome, awful, terrible.

Bab, a bunch.
Back-cast, back-stroke.
Baith, both.
Bang, to beat.
Bannock, a scone.
Bawbee, a halfpenny.
Beild, shelter.
Bein, bien, well provided.
Belive, directly.
Bide, to wait, to suffer. "Bide a blink," stay a minute.
Birky, a lively young fellow.
Birl, to toss, to drink.
Bleeze, a blaze; also, to brag, to talk ostentatiously.
Blithe, happy.
Blude, bluid, blood.
Boddle, a small copper coin.
Branks, a kind of bridle.
Braw, fine, brave.
Brawly, cleverly.
Braws, fine clothes.
Breeks, breeches.
Brigg, a bridge.
Brogue, the Highland shoe.
Browst, a brewing.
Budget, a carabine-socket.
Busk, to deck up.
"By and out-taken," over and above and excepting.

Ca', to call. "Ca' the pleugh," to work the plough.
Canna, cannot. "Canna hear day nor door," as deaf as a post.
Canny, quiet, cautious, snug.
Carcage, a carcass.
Carena, care not.
Carline, an old woman, a witch.
Cast, chance, opportunity, fate.
"Cast o' a cart," chance use of a cart.
Certie! conscience!
Change-house, a small inn or alehouse.
Chield, a fellow.
Chimley, a chimney.
