Britons never joined in any of the attacks upon the country people
before we came hither. I have questioned many of the sufferers by
their depredations, and none of them had seen among the plunderers
any tall men with light hair. The only time that they have been seen
on the plains was a fortnight before we landed, when they entered
Castanium and carried off all the arms. The Britons were among that
party, and a Briton commanded it; but from the description it was
not Beric, but was, I think, his principal follower, a man with a
British name which I forget."

"Was it Boduoc?" Berenice asked. "I have often heard him speak of
a friend of his with such a name, and indeed he came once or twice
to see him when he was with us."

"That was the name--Boduoc," Pollio said. "They behaved with the
greatest gentleness, injuring no one and taking nothing, neither
jewels, nor ornaments, nor garments, but departing quietly after
taking possession of all the weapons in the town.

"Your father reported the fact to Rome, bringing into prominence
the fact that this was the first time the Britons had ever descended
from the mountains, and that the inhabitants of Castanium were filled
with gratitude and admiration for the treatment they received. Last
week he wrote to Rome saying that so far as he could learn all the
bands that had not been destroyed had gone north, save one composed
of Britons and Gauls, about fourscore in number, commanded by the
Briton Beric, and suggested that as months might pass before they
could be captured, he should be authorized to treat with them,
and to offer them full pardon if they would lay down their arms,
especially as they had taken no part whatever in the misdeeds of
the other gladiators, and had injured no one either in person or
property. I know that it was a great disappointment to him, as well
as to us, when the letter came yesterday saying that they were to
be hunted down and destroyed, and that all not killed in fighting
were to be crucified. But we had better go in, Berenice, the dew
is beginning to fall."

They entered the villa. The general was alone in the atrium.

"Is anything the matter, father?" Berenice asked, as she saw that
he looked disturbed.

"Yes, Berenice, I have received news that as a Roman general ought
to delight me, but which, as Caius Muro, your father and the father
in law of Pollio, vexes me greatly."

"What is it, father?"

"A man arrived half an hour since saying that he had news of
importance to communicate. He was brought in here. He told me he
was a cultivator whose farm lay far up on the hillside. For upwards
of a year he had, in fear of his life, as he said, been compelled
to sell food to the bandits in the mountains. He acknowledged
that he had been well paid, and that he had no cause of complaint
against them; but he now professed a desire to do service to Rome,
for which he evidently expected a handsome reward. I told him I
could not bargain with him. He had aided the enemies of Rome, and
by his own account his life was forfeited, seeing that for a year
he had been trafficking with them, instead of doing his duty and
reporting their first visit to the authorities here.

"He said that he was not alone, and that most of the farmers high
up on the hills had been compelled to do the same, and had kept
silence, knowing that the brigands would have burned their houses
and slain their wives and families had they reported aught against
them to the authorities, and that, indeed, they were altogether
ignorant of the position of the camp of the outlaws beyond the
fact that it was somewhere among the mountains. 'What, then, have
you to report?' I said angrily, for I hate to have to do with
traitors. 'It is this,' he said: 'for some months there has been
living a lady, supposed to be the wife of the chief of the outlaws,
at a farm next to mine, belonging to one Cornelius. The chief often
visits her and stays there; five of his followers live in an out
house adjoining the farm, and one of these is always on guard night
and day.

"'The chief himself is a very tall young man, and is called Beric
by his followers. Four of them are also of his race, tall and very
fair like him. There is also a youth who lives in the house. He
belongs to the band, but appears to be a native of Rome. He sometimes
comes down and makes purchases in Rhegium. The house cannot be
approached from below without an alarm being given, owing to the
strictness of the watch; but I could lead a body of troops high
up above it, so as to come down upon the rear of the house and cut
off all escape when another band comes up from below.' I told him
that his information was valuable, and that he was to come here
to-morrow evening at eight o'clock to lead a party of light armed
troops up into the hills."

"And you will send them, father?" Berenice broke in; "surely you
will not take advantage of this treachery."

"I have no choice but to do so," the general said gravely. "As
a father I would give my right hand to save the man who preserved
your life; as a Roman soldier my duty is to capture the outlaw,
Beric, by any means possible. Pollio will tell you the same."

Berenice looked at her husband, who stood in consternation and
grief at the news. "Do you say this too, Pollio?"

Pollio did not answer, but the general spoke for him. "He can say
nothing else, Berenice. To a Roman soldier duty is everything, and
were he ordered to arrest his own father and lead him to execution
he could not hesitate."

"But I am not a soldier--" Berenice began passionately.

The general held up his hand suddenly. "Hush, Berenice, not a word
farther! I am a Roman general. If you say one word that would clash
with my duty I should order you to your chamber and place a soldier
there on guard over you. Now I will leave you with your husband;"
and the general left the room.

"What do you say, Pollio? Will you suffer this man, who saved your
wife, who risked his life for your cousin, and is, as it seems,
your cousin by marriage, to be foully captured and crucified?"

"I am a soldier, Berenice; do not tempt me to break my duty. You
heard what your father said."

Berenice stamped her foot. "Does your duty go so far, Pollio, that
like my father you would place a guard at my door if I said aught
that would seem to run counter to your duty?"

"Not at all, Berenice," he said with a smile; "say aught you like.
I hear as a husband but not as a soldier."

"Well, that is something," Berenice said, mollified. "Well, Pollio,
if you will not warn Beric of his danger I will do so. Have I your
permission to act as I choose?"

"My full permission, dear. Do as you like; act as you choose; you
have beforehand my approval. If you fail and harm comes of it I
will stand by you and share your punishment; but tell me nothing
of what you would do beforehand. I trust you wholly, but for my
sake, if not for your own, be not rash. Remember, if by any means
it becomes known that you aided Beric to escape, both our lives
are surely forfeited."

"Thank you, Pollio," Berenice said, throwing her arms round his
neck, "that is spoken like my husband. You shall know nothing, and
I will save Beric."



CHAPTER XXI: OLD FRIENDS


Beric and Aemilia were sitting on the following day in the shade
in front of the house, where Porus had erected a verandah of boughs
to keep off the sun, when they observed a female peasant and an
elderly man ascending the hill. They were still some distance down,
and the man spoke to one of the farm men who was on his way down
the hill.

"They are coming this way," Aemilia said; "they have passed the
point where the paths fork. She seems to find that basket she is
carrying heavy, and no wonder, for it is a steep climb under the
midday sun."

Stopping once or twice to get breath the two peasants approached.

"She is a good looking girl, Beric," Aemilia said.

"Our host has two or three nieces down in the town," Beric replied;
"I expect it is one of them. Yes, she is certainly pretty, and not
so browned and sunburnt as most of these peasant girls are."

As they came close the girl stopped and looked at the house, and
then, instead of going to the entrance, left her companion and
walked across to the verandah. A smile came across her face.

"Shall I tell you your fortune?" she said abruptly to Aemilia.

"It is told," Aemilia said; "to be a farmer's wife. But what do
you know of fortunes?"

"I can tell you the past if not the future," the young woman said,
setting down her basket. "May I do so?"

"You are a strange girl," Aemilia said, "but tell me what you can."

"I can see an amphitheatre," the girl went on, "a great one, greater
than that across at Messina, and it is crowded with people. In the
front row there sits a man past middle age and a lady and a girl.
In the centre of the arena is a young girl in white."

"Hush, hush!" Aemilia cried, leaping to her feet, "say no more.
You know me, though how I cannot guess."

"I see another scene," the girl went on without heeding her; "it
is a hut. It must belong to some savage people. It is quite unlike
our cottages. There is an old woman there and a man and a young
girl. The old woman does not speak to them; she does not seem of
the same race; the other two are Romans. The mat at the door is
pushed aside and there enters a tall youth. Not so tall as this
man, not so strong; and yet like him, just as a boy might be to a
man.

"The girl jumps up and exclaims 'Beric.'"

Beric had risen to his feet also now. "Is it possible," he cried,
"that as the boy has grown into the man, so has the girl grown into--"
and he stopped.

"Into a young woman, Beric. Yes, don't you remember me now?"

"It is Berenice!" he exclaimed.

"It is indeed, Beric, the child you saved from death. And this is
your wife Aemilia, the daughter of Norbanus, who is the uncle of
my husband Pollio. And do you not know who that is standing there?"

"Why, surely it is my tutor and friend Nepo;" and running towards
him he embraced him with heartiness and then led him to the verandah,
where Berenice was talking with Aemilia.

"But why are you thus disguised, and how did you know that Aemilia
and I were here?"

"We have come to warn you, Beric. You have been betrayed, and tonight
there will be troops ranged along above the house to cut off your
retreat, and a company of soldiers will advance from below straight
upon the house. My father told me, I think, in order that I might
save you, though as a Roman general he could do nought save his duty.
Pollio, too, though he said he would willingly give his sanction,
knows not that I have come hither. He pretended that his duty as a
soldier prevented him from warning you, though I believe that had
not I been with him his friendship and gratitude would have been
too much for his duty. However, I was with him, and he gave me
permission to come; though, mind you, I should have come whether
he gave me permission or not. You did not ask permission of anyone
when you saved me, and even if Pollio had threatened to divorce me
if I disobeyed him I would have come; but as I needed a disguise,
and did not like to trust any of the slaves, I took Nepo into my
confidence, and he managed everything."

"We are, indeed, grateful to you," Aemilia cried, embracing Berenice
warmly. "It was brave of you indeed to come."

"It requires less bravery to come up here with a message, Aemilia,
than to run away from Rome with an outlaw who had just bearded
Caesar in his palace."

"I did not do that, Berenice. It was not because I was unwilling,
but because Beric would not take me with him. I stayed for months in
Rome, hidden in the Catacombs with the Christians, until Beric sent
for me to join him here; but come inside and take some refreshment,
for you must be weary indeed with your long walk up the hill."

"No one else must see me," Berenice said. "There may be inquiries
when they come tonight and find that you are gone, and I would not
that any should see me."

"No one will see you. The room is situated at the back of the
house, and though I shall take the slaves with us in our flight,
they shall not catch even a glimpse of your face. I will set them
some needlework to do."

They were soon seated in Aemilia's room, and Beric brought in fruit
and wine, goat's milk, cheese, and bread.

"There is no hurry for me to return," Berenice said. "The slaves
believe that I have gone out to pay some visits, and I do not wish
to get back until after sunset. There is so much for Beric to tell
us.

"You do not know, Beric, how often Nepo and I have talked about it,
and how we have longed to see you, and I believe that what drew me
first to Pollio was his praises of you. But before you begin there
is one thing I must tell you. My father has received private news
from Rome; there is a report there that the legions have proclaimed
Galba emperor, and that ere long he will be in Rome. At present it
is but a rumour, and of course at court all profess to disbelieve
it, and Nero openly scoffs at the pretensions of Galba; but the
friend who wrote to my father says that he believes it true. Now
my father is a great friend of Galba's. They were much together
as young men, and served together both in Gaul and Syria; and he
feels sure that if Galba comes to the throne he will be able to
obtain a pardon for you and those with you, since you have done no
one harm save when attacked. He attempted to procure it from Nero,
but altogether without success; with Galba it will be different,
especially as a new emperor generally begins his reign by acts of
clemency. Now, as I have given you my news, Beric, do you tell us,
while we are eating the fruit, everything that has happened to you
since I last saw you at that hut."

"So much has happened that it will be impossible to tell you all,
Berenice; but I will give you the outline of it. The principal
thing of all is, that I have taken a wife."

Berenice pouted. "It is lucky for you, Aemilia, that I was not at
Rome when Beric arrived, for I had as a girl always determined that
I should some day marry him and become a British chieftainess. He
had not seen you then except at Massilia, and I should have had
him all to myself at Rome, for you did not get there, Pollio tells
me, until months later."

Aemilia laughed. "I should not have entered the lists against you,
Berenice. It was not until after he saved Ennia from the lion in
the arena that I came to love him."

"Well, I must put up with Pollio," Berenice said. "He is your
cousin, and I have nothing to say against him as a husband; he is
kind and indulgent, and a brave soldier, and all one could want;
but he is not a hero like Beric."

Beric laughed. "You should have said a giant, Berenice, which
would have been much nearer the truth. And now I will tell you my
story;" and during the next two hours he gave her a sketch of all
that had passed since they had last parted in Britain.

"There, Cneius Nepo," Berenice said when he had finished. "You
never thought for a moment that your pupil, who used to pore with
you over those parchments, till I often wished I could throw them
in the fire when I wanted him to play with me, was to go through
such adventures--to match himself first against Suetonius, and then
against my father, both times with honour; to be Nero's bodyguard;
to say nothing of fighting in the arena, and getting up a revolt
in the palace of Caesar."

"I expected great things of him," Nepo said; "but not like these.
I fancied he would become a great chief among the British, and that
he might perhaps induce them to adopt something of our civilization.
I had fancied him as a wise ruler; and, seeing how fond he was of
the exercise of arms, I had thought long before the insurrection
broke out that some day he might lead his countrymen to battle
against us, and that, benefiting by his study of Caesar and other
military writers, he would give far more trouble to the Romans than
even Caractacus had done. But assuredly I never dreamt of him as
fighting a lion barehanded in a Roman arena in defence of a Roman
girl. As to marriages, I own that the thought crossed my mind that
the union of a great British chief with the daughter of a Roman of
rank like your father would be an augury of peace, and might lead
to better relations between the two countries."

"That dream must be given up," Berenice said seriously, "there are
two obstacles. But I have no doubt Aemilia would make quite as good
a chieftainess as I should have done. Some day, Aemilia, if you
return to Britain with Beric, as I hope you will do, and Pollio
becomes a commander of a legion, I will get him to apply for
service there. It is cold and foggy; but wood is a good deal more
plentiful and cheaper than it is at Rome, and with good fires one
can exist anywhere. And now it is time for us to be going. We will
take another path in returning down the hills, so that any one who
noticed us coming up will not see us as we descend. Nepo's toga and
my stola are hidden in a grove just outside the town, and it will
be dusk by the time we arrive there. Kiss me, Aemilia; I am glad
that I know you, for I have heard much of you from Pollio. I am
glad that Beric has chosen so well. Goodbye, Beric; I hope we may
meet again before long, and that without danger to any of us. You
may salute me if Aemilia does not object--I told Pollio I should
permit it;" and she laughingly lifted up her face to him. "He never
used to kiss me when I was a child," she said to Aemilia. "I always
thought it very unkind, and was greatly discontented at it. Now,
Nepo, let us be going."

Beric and his wife stood watching them until they were far down
the hill. "She makes light of it," Beric said; "but it is no common
risk she has run. Nero can punish women as well as men, and were it
to come to his ears that she has enabled me to escape his vengeance,
even the influence of her father might not avail to save her."

"I shall remember her always in my prayers," Aemilia said earnestly,
"and pray that she too may some day come to know the truth."

Beric did not answer. Aemilia had explained to him all that she knew
of her religion, but while admitting the beauty of its teaching,
and the loftiness of its morals, he had not yet been able to bring
himself to believe the great facts upon which it was based.

"We must be moving," he said, and summoned Philo, who had been much
surprised at Beric's being so long in conversation with strangers.

"Send Porus to me," he said, "and bid Cornelius also come here."

The two men came round to the verandah together. "We are betrayed,
Porus," he said, "and the Romans will be here this evening."

Porus grasped the handle of his dagger and looked menacingly at
the farmer. "Our good friend has nought to do with it, Porus; it
is some one from one of the other farms who has taken down the news
to Rhegium. Do you order the others to be in readiness to start
for the camp. But first strip down the hangings of our room, roll
them and the mats and all else in seven bundles, with all my wife's
clothing and belongings."

"We need leave little behind. We can take everything," Porus said.
"The six of us can carry well nigh as much as the same number of
horses, and Philo can take something. I will see about it immediately."

"Now, Cornelius," Beric went on when Porus had left, "you must
prepare your story, and see that your men and the rest of the
household stick to it. You will be sharply questioned. You have
only the truth to say, namely, that some of my band came down here
and threatened to burn your house and slay all in it unless you
agreed to sell us what things we required; that, seeing no other
way of preserving your lives, you agreed to do so. After a time
a young woman--do not say lady--came with two attendants, and
you were forced to provide her with a room; and as five men were
placed here constantly, you still dared give no information to the
authorities, because a watch was also set on you, and your family
would have been slain long before any troops could arrive here.
What you will be most closely questioned about is as to why we all
left you today. They will ask you if any one has been here. You
saw no one, did you?"

"No, my lord. I heard voices in your room, but it was no business
of mine who was with you."

"That is good," Beric said. "That is what you must say. You know
someone did come because you heard voices; but you saw nobody
either coming or going, and know not how many of them there were,
nor what was their age. You only know that I summoned you suddenly,
and told you I had been betrayed, and that the Romans would soon
be coming in search of me, and therefore I was obliged to take to
the mountains. But go first and inquire among the household, and
see if any of them noticed persons coming here."

"One of the men says that he saw an old peasant with a girl who
asked which was my farm."

"Then that man must go with us to the mountains. He shall return
safe and unharmed in a few days. The Romans must not know of this.
This is the one point on which you must be silent; on all others
speak freely. It is important to me that it should not be known
whether it was man or woman, old or young, who warned me.

"I do not threaten you. I know that you are true and honest; but,
to ensure silence among your household, tell them that I shall
certainly find out if the Roman soldiers learn here that it was
an old man and a girl who visited me, and that I will take dire
vengeance on whomsoever tells this to the Romans. Discharge your
man before we leave with him, so that you may say truly that those
the Romans find here are your whole household, and maintain that
not one of them saw who it was who came to me today."

"I can promise that, my lord. You and the Lady Aemilia have been
kind and good to us, and my wife, the female slave, and the hired
men would do anything for you. As for the children, they were not
present when Balbus said that he had been questioned by the old
man, and can tell nought, however closely they may be questioned,
save that Balbus was here and has gone."

"I had not thought of that," Beric said. "Better, then, tell the
soldiers the truth: you had two serving men, but we have carried
one away with us."

In half an hour all was ready for a start. The two female slaves,
although attached to their mistress, were terrified at the thoughts
of going away among the mountains, although Aemilia assured them
that no harm could happen to them there. Then, with a hearty adieu
to the farmer and his wife, Beric and his companions shouldered the
loads, and with Balbus, Philo, Aemilia, and the two female slaves
made their way up the mountain. As soon as they started, Beric gave
orders to Philo to go on with all speed to the camp, and to tell
Boduoc of the coming of Aemilia, and bid him order the men at
once to prepare a bower at some short distance from their camp.
Accordingly when the party arrived great fires were blazing, and
the outlaws received Aemilia with shouts of welcome.

"I thank you all," Beric said, "for my wife and myself. She knows
that in no place could she be so safe as here, guarded by the brave
men who have so faithfully followed her husband."

So heartily had the men laboured that in the hour and a half that
had elapsed since Philo had arrived a large hut had been erected a
hundred yards from the camp, with a small bower beside it for the
use of the female slaves. A great bonfire burnt in front, and the
interior was lighted by torches of resinous wood.

"Thanks, my friends," Beric said. "You have indeed built us a leafy
palace. I need not exhort the guards to be watchful tonight, for
it may be that the traitor who will guide the Romans to the house
where we have been stopping may know something of the mountains,
and guessing the direction of our camp may attempt to lead them to
it. Therefore, Boduoc, let the outposts be thrown out farther than
usual, and let some be placed fully three miles from here, in all
the ravines by which it is likely the enemy might make their way
hither."

Three days later Philo went down to learn what had passed. He was
ordered not to approach the house, as some soldiers might have been
left there to seize upon any one who came down, but to remain at
a distance until he saw the farmer or one of his household at work
in the fields. He brought back news that the Romans had arrived on
the night they had left, had searched the house and country round,
had closely questioned all there, even to the children, and had
carried off the farmer and his man. These had returned the next
evening. They had been questioned by the general, who had admonished
the farmer severely on his failure to report the presence of the
outlaws at whatever risk to his family and property; but on their
taking an oath that they were unable to give any information
whatever, either as to the outlaws' retreat or the persons who had
brought up the news of the intended attack by the Romans, they were
released.

Balbus was then sent back to the farm with presents for all there,
and it was agreed that the camp should be broken up. The general
would, in compliance with the orders of Nero, make fresh efforts to
hunt down the band; and as he knew now the neighbourhood in which
