died that same night, the other, three days after they reached Besancon.
The number of prisoners was therefore reduced to four; Morgan, who had
surrendered himself voluntarily and who was safe and sound, and Montbar,
Adler, and d'Assas, who were more or less wounded in the fight, though
none of them dangerously. These four aliases hid, as the reader will
remember, the real names of the Baron de Sainte-Hermine, the Comte de
Jayat, the Vicomte de Valensolle, and the Marquis de Ribier.

While the evidence was being taken against the four prisoners before
the military commission at Besancon, the time expired when under the
law such cases were tried by courts-martial. The prisoners became
accountable therefore to the civil tribunals. This made a great
difference to them, not only as to the penalty if convicted, but in the
mode of execution. Condemned by a court-martial, they would be shot;
condemned by the courts, they would be guillotined. Death by the first
was not infamous; death by the second was.

As soon as it appeared that their case was to be brought before a jury,
it belonged by law to the court of Bourg. Toward the end of March the
prisoners were therefore transferred from the prison of Besancon to that
of Bourg, and the first steps toward a trial were taken.

But here the prisoners adopted a line of defence that greatly
embarrassed the prosecuting officers. They declared themselves to be the
Baron de Sainte-Hermine, the Comte de Jayat, the Vicomte de Valensolle,
and the Marquis de Ribier, and to have no connection with the pillagers
of diligences, whose names were Morgan, Montbar, Adler, and d'Assas.
They acknowledged having belonged to armed bands; but these forces
belonged to the army of M. de Teyssonnet and were a ramification of the
army of Brittany intended to operate in the East and the Midi, while the
army of Brittany, which had just signed a peace, operated in the North.
They had waited only to hear of Cadoudal's surrender to do likewise, and
the despatch of the Breton leader was no doubt on its way to them when
they were attacked and captured.

It was difficult to disprove this. The diligences had invariably been
pillaged by masked, men, and, apart from Madame de Montrevel and Sir
John Tanlay, no one had ever seen the faces of the assailants.

The reader will recall those circumstances: Sir John, on the night they
had tried, condemned, and stabbed him; Madame de Montrevel, when the
diligence was stopped, and she, in her nervous struggle, had struck off
the mask of the leader.

Both had been summoned before the preliminary court and both had been
confronted with the prisoners; but neither Sir John nor Madame de
Montrevel had recognized any of them. How came they to practice this
deception? As for Madame de Montrevel, it was comprehensible. She felt a
double gratitude to the man who had come to her assistance, and who had
also forgiven, and even praised, Edouard's attack upon himself. But
Sir John's silence was more difficult to explain, for among the four
prisoners he must have recognized at least two of his assailants.

They had recognized him, and a certain quiver had run through their
veins as they did so, but their eyes were none the less resolutely fixed
upon him, when, to their great astonishment, Sir John, in spite of the
judge's insistence, had calmly replied: "I have not the honor of knowing
these gentlemen."

Amelie--we have not spoken of her, for there are sorrows no pen can
depict--Amelie, pale, feverish, almost expiring since that fatal night
when Morgan was arrested, awaited the return of her mother and Sir
John from the preliminary trial with dreadful anxiety. Sir John arrived
first. Madame de Montrevel had remained behind to give some orders to
Michel. As soon as Amelie saw him she rushed forward, crying out: "What
happened?"

Sir John looked behind him, to make sure that Madame de Montrevel could
neither see nor hear him, then he said: "Your mother and I recognized no
one."

"Ah! how noble you are I how generous! how good, my lord!" cried the
young girl, trying to kiss his hand.

But he, withdrawing his hand, said hastily: "I have only done as I
promised you; but hush--here is your mother."

Amelie stepped back. "Ah, mamma!" she said, "so you did not say anything
to compromise those unfortunate men?"

"What!" replied Madame de Montrevel; "would you have me send to the
scaffold a man who had helped me, and who, instead of punishing Edouard,
kissed him?"

"And yet," said Amelie, trembling, "you recognized him, did you not?"

"Perfectly," replied Madame de Montrevel. "He is the fair man with the
black eyebrows who calls himself the Baron de Sainte-Hermine."

Amelie gave a stifled cry. Then, making an effort to control herself,
she said: "Is that the end of it for Sir John and you? Will you be
called to testify again?"

"Probably not," replied Madame de Montrevel.

"In any case," observed Sir John, "as neither your mother nor I
recognized any one, she will persist in that declaration."

"Oh! most certainly," exclaimed Madame de Montrevel. "God keep me from
causing the death of that unhappy young man. I should never forgive
myself. It is bad enough that Roland should have been the one to capture
him and his companions."

Amelie sighed, but nevertheless her face assumed a calmer expression.
She looked gratefully at Sir John, and then went up to her room, where
Charlotte was waiting for her. Charlotte had become more than a maid,
she was now Amelie's friend. Every day since the four young men had
returned to the prison at Bourg she had gone there to see her father
for an hour or so. During these visits nothing was talked of but the
prisoners, whom the worthy jailer, royalist as he was, pitied with
all his heart. Charlotte made him tell her everything, even to their
slightest words, and later reported all to Amelie.

Matters stood thus when Madame de Montrevel and Sir John arrived at
Noires-Fontaines. Before leaving Paris, the First Consul had informed
Madame de Montrevel, both through Josephine and Roland, that he approved
of her daughter's marriage, and wished it to take place during his
absence, and as soon as possible. Sir John had declared to her that
his most ardent wishes were for this union, and that he only awaited
Amelie's commands to become the happiest of men. Matters having reached
this point, Madame de Montrevel, on the morning of the day on which
she and Sir John were to give their testimony, had arranged a private
interview between her daughter and Sir John.

The interview lasted over an hour, and Sir John did not leave Amelie
until the carriage came to the door which was to take Madame de
Montrevel and himself to the court. We have seen that his deposition was
all in the prisoners' favor, and we have also seen how Amelie received
him on his return.

That evening Madame de Montrevel had a long conversation with her
daughter. To her mother's pressing inquiries, Amelie merely replied that
the state of her health was such that she desired a postponement of her
marriage, and that she counted on Sir John's delicacy to grant it.

The next day Madame de Montrevel was obliged to return to Paris,
her position in Madame Bonaparte's household not admitting of longer
absence. The morning of her departure she urged Amelie to accompany her;
but again the young girl dwelt upon the feebleness of her health. The
sweetest and most reviving months in the year were just opening, and she
begged to be allowed to spend then in the country, for they were sure,
she said, to do her good.

Madame de Montrevel, always unable to deny Amelie anything, above all
where it concerned her health, granted her request.

On her return to Paris, Madame de Montrevel travelled as before, with
Sir John. Much to her surprise, during the two days' journey he did not
say anything to her about his marriage to Amelie. But Madame Bonaparte,
as soon as she saw her friend, asked the usual question: "Well, when
shall we marry Amelie and Sir John? You know how much the First Consul
desires it."

To which Madame de Montrevel replied: "It all depends on Sir John."

This response furnished Madame Bonaparte with much food for reflection.
Why should a man who had been so eager suddenly grow cold? Time alone
could explain the mystery.

Time went by, and the trial of the prisoners began. They were confronted
with all the travellers who had signed the various depositions, which,
as we have seen, were in the possession of the minister of police. No
one had recognized them, for no one had seen their faces uncovered.
Moreover, the travellers asserted that none of their property, either
money or jewels, had been taken. Jean Picot testified that the two
hundred louis which had been taken from him by accident had been
returned.

These preliminary inquiries lasted over two months. At the end of that
time the accused, against whom there was no evidence connecting them
with the pillage of the coaches, were under no accusation but that
of their own admissions; that is to say, of being affiliated with the
Breton and Vendean insurrection. They were simply one of the armed bands
roaming the Jura under the orders of M. de Teyssonnet.

The judges delayed the final trial as long as possible, hoping that some
more direct testimony might be discovered. This hope was balked. No one
had really suffered from the deeds imputed to these young men, except
the Treasury, whose misfortunes concerned no one. The trial could not be
delayed any longer.

The prisoners, on their side, had made the best of their time. By means,
as we have seen, of an exchange of passports, Morgan had travelled
sometimes as Ribier, and Ribier as Sainte-Hermine, and so with the
others. The result was a confusion in the testimony of the innkeepers,
which the entries in their books only served to increase. The arrival
of travellers, noted on the registers an hour too early or an hour too
late, furnished the prisoners with irrefutable alibis. The judges were
morally convinced of their guilt; but their conviction was impossible
against such testimony.

On the other hand, it must be said that public sympathy was wholly with
the prisoners.

The trial began. The prison at Bourg adjoins the courtroom. The
prisoners could be brought there through the interior passages. Large as
the hall was, it was crowded on the opening day. The whole population
of Bourg thronged about the doors, and persons came from Macon,
Sons-le-Saulnier, Besancon, and Nantua, so great was the excitement
caused by the stoppages, and so popular were the exploits of the
Companions of Jehu.

The entrance of the four prisoners was greeted by a murmur in which
there was nothing offensive. Public sentiment seemed equally divided
between curiosity and sympathy. Their presence, it must be admitted, was
well calculated to inspire both. Very handsome, dressed in the latest
fashion of the day, self-possessed without insolence, smiling toward the
audience, courteous to their judges, though at times a little sarcastic,
their personal appearance was their best defence.

The oldest of the four was barely thirty. Questioned as to their names,
Christian and family, their age, and places of birth, they answered as
follows:

"Charles de Sainte-Hermine, born at Tours, department of the
Indre-et-Loire, aged twenty-four."

"Louis-Andre de Jayat, born at Bage-le-Chateau, department of the Ain,
aged twenty-nine."

"Raoul-Frederic-Auguste de Valensolle, born at Sainte-Colombe,
department of the Rhone, aged twenty-seven."

"Pierre-Hector de Ribier, born at Bollene, department of Vaucluse, aged
twenty-six."

Questioned as to their social condition and state, all four said they
were of noble rank and royalists.

These fine young men, defending themselves against death on the
scaffold, not against a soldier's death before the guns--who asked the
death they claimed to have merited as insurrectionists, but a death
of honor--formed a splendid spectacle of youth, courage, and gallant
bearing.

The judges saw plainly that on the accusation of being insurrectionists,
the Vendee having submitted and Brittany being pacificated, they would
have to be acquitted. That was not a result to satisfy the minister of
police. Death awarded by a council of war would not have satisfied him;
he had determined that these men should die the death of malefactors, a
death of infamy.

The trial had now lasted three days without proceeding in the direction
of the minister's wishes. Charlotte, who could reach the courtroom
through the prison, was there each day, and returned each night to
Amelie with some fresh word of hope. On the fourth day, Amelie could
bear the suspense no longer. She dressed herself in a costume similar
to the one that Charlotte wore, except that the black lace of the
head-dress was longer and thicker than is usual with the Bressan peasant
woman. It formed a veil and completely hid her features.

Charlotte presented Amelie to her father as one of her friends who was
anxious to see the trial. The good man did not recognize Mademoiselle de
Montrevel, and in order to enable the young girls to see the prisoners
well he placed them in the doorway of the porter's room, which opened
upon the passage leading to the courtroom. This passage was so narrow
at this particular point that the four gendarmes who accompanied the
prisoners changed the line of march. First came two officers, then the
prisoners one by one, then the other two officers. The girls stood in
the doorway.

When Amelie heard the doors open she was obliged to lean upon
Charlotte's shoulder for support, the earth seemed to give way under
her feet and the wall at her back. She heard the sound of feet and the
rattle of the gendarmes' sabres, then the door of the prison opened.

First one gendarme appeared, then another, then Sainte-Hermine, walking
first, as though he were still Morgan, the captain of the Companions of
Jehu.

As he passed Amelie murmured: "Charles!"

The prisoner recognized the beloved voice, gave a faint cry, and felt
a paper slip into his hand. He pressed that precious hand, murmured her
name, and passed on.

The others who followed did not, or pretended not to, notice the two
girls. As for the gendarmes, they had seen and heard nothing.

As soon as the party stepped into the light, Morgan unfolded the note
and read as follows:

  Do not be anxious, my beloved Charles; I am and ever will be
  your faithful Amelie, in life or death. I have told all to Lord
  Tanlay. He is the most generous man on earth; he has promised me
  to break off the marriage and to take the whole responsibility
  on himself. I love you.

Morgan kissed the note and put it in his breast. Then he glanced down
the corridor and saw the two Bressan women leaning against the door.
Amelie had risked all to see him once more. It is true, however, that at
this last session of the court no additional witnesses were expected who
could injure the accused, and in the absence of proof it was impossible
to convict them.

The best lawyers in the department, those of Lyons and Besancon, had
been retained by the prisoners for their defence. Each had spoken in
turn, destroying bit by bit the indictment, as, in the tournaments of
the Middle Ages, a strong and dexterous knight was wont to knock off,
piece by piece, his adversary's armor. Flattering applause had followed
the more remarkable points of their arguments, in spite of the usher's
warnings and the admonitions of the judge.

Amelie, with clasped hands, was thanking God, who had so visibly
manifested Himself in the prisoners' favor. A dreadful weight was lifted
from her tortured breast. She breathed with joy, and looked through
tears of gratitude at the Christ which hung above the judge's head.

The arguments were all made, and the case about to be closed. Suddenly
an usher entered the courtroom, approached the judge, and whispered
something in his ear.

"Gentlemen," said the judge, "the court is adjourned for a time. Let the
prisoners be taken out."

There was a movement of feverish anxiety among the audience. What could
have happened? What unexpected event was about to take place? Every
one looked anxiously at his neighbor. Amelie's heart was wrung by a
presentiment. She pressed her hand to her breast; it was as though an
ice-cold iron had pierced it to the springs of life.

The gendarmes rose. The prisoners did likewise, and were then marched
back to their cells. One after the other they passed Amelie. The hands
of the lovers touched each other; those of Amelie were as cold as death.

"Whatever happens, thank you," said Charles, as he passed.

Amelie tried to answer, but the words died on her lips.

During this time the judge had risen and passed into the
council-chamber. There he found a veiled woman, who had just descended
from a carriage at the door of the courthouse, and had not spoken to any
one on her way in.

"Madame," said the judge, "I offer you many excuses for the way in which
I have brought you from Paris; but the life of a man depends upon it,
and before that consideration everything must yield."

"You have no need to excuse yourself, sir," replied the veiled lady, "I
know the prerogatives of the law, and I am here at your orders."

"Madame," said the judge, "the court and myself recognize the feeling of
delicacy which prompted you, when first confronted with the prisoners,
to decline to recognize the one who assisted you when fainting. At
that time the prisoners denied their identity with the pillagers of the
diligences. Since then they have confessed all; but it is our wish to
know the one who showed you that consideration, in order that we may
recommend him to the First Consul's clemency."

"What!" exclaimed the lady, "have they really confessed?"

"Yes, madame, but they will not say which of their number helped you,
fearing, no doubt, to contradict your testimony, and thus cause you
embarrassment."

"What is it you request of me, sir?"

"That you will save the gentleman who assisted you."

"Oh! willingly," said the lady, rising; "what am I to do?"

"Answer a question which I shall ask you."

"I am ready, sir."

"Wait here a moment. You will be sent for presently."

The judge went back into the courtroom. A gendarme was placed at each
door to prevent any one from approaching the lady. The judge resumed his
seat.

"Gentlemen," said he, "the session is reopened."

General excitement prevailed. The ushers called for silence, and silence
was restored.

"Bring in the witness," said the judge.

An usher opened the door of the council-chamber, and the lady, still
veiled, was brought into court. All eyes turned upon her. Who was she?
Why was she there? What had she come for? Amelie's eyes fastened upon
her at once.

"O my God!" she murmured, "grant that I be mistaken."

"Madame," said the judge, "the prisoners are about to be brought in.
Have the goodness to point out the one who, when the Geneva diligence
was stopped, paid you those attentions."

A shudder ran through the audience. They felt that some fatal trap had
been laid for the prisoners.

A dozen voices began to shout: "Say nothing!" but the ushers, at a sign
from the judge, cried out imperatively: "Silence!"

Amelie's heart turned deadly cold. A cold sweat poured from her
forehead. Her knees gave way and trembled under her.

"Bring in the prisoners," said the judge, imposing silence by a look
as the usher had with his voice. "And you, madame, have the goodness to
advance and raise your veil."

The veiled lady obeyed.

"My mother!" cried Amelie, but in a voice so choked that only those near
her heard the words.

"Madame de Montrevel!" murmured the audience.

At that moment the first gendarme appeared at the door, then the second.
After him came the prisoners, but not in the same order as before.
Morgan had placed himself third, so that, separated as he was from the
gendarmes by Montbar and Adler in front and d'Assas behind, he might be
better able to clasp Amelie's hand.

Montbar entered first.

Madame de Montrevel shook her head.

Then came Adler.

Madame de Montrevel made the same negative sign.

Just then Morgan passed before Amelie.

"We are lost!" she said.

He looked at her in astonishment as she pressed his hand convulsively.
Then he entered.

"That is he," said Madame de Montrevel, as soon as she saw Morgan--or,
if the reader prefers it, Baron Charles de Sainte-Hermine--who was
now proved one and the same man by means of Madame de Montrevel's
identification.

A long cry of distress burst from the audience. Montbar burst into a
laugh.

"Ha! by my faith!" he cried, "that will teach you, dear friend, to play
the gallant with fainting women." Then, turning to Madame de Montrevel,
he added: "With three short words, madame, you have decapitated four
heads."

A terrible silence fell, in the midst of which a groan was heard.

"Usher," said the judge, "have you warned the public that all marks of
approbation or disapproval are forbidden?"

The usher inquired who had disobeyed the order of the court. It was a
woman wearing the dress of a Bressan peasant, who was being carried into
the jailer's room.

From that moment the accused made no further attempt at denial; but,
just as Morgan had united with them when arrested, they now joined with
him. Their four heads should be saved, or fall together.

That same day, at ten in the evening, the jury rendered a verdict of
guilty, and the court pronounced the sentence of death.

Three days later, by force of entreaties, the lawyers obtained
permission for the accused to appeal their case; but they were not
admitted to bail.




CHAPTER LIII. IN WHICH AMELIE KEEPS HER WORD

The verdict rendered by the jury of the town of Bourg had a terrible
effect, not only in the courtroom, but throughout the entire town. The
four prisoners had shown such chivalric brotherhood, such noble bearing,
such deep conviction in the faith they professed, that their enemies
themselves admired the devotion which had made robbers and highwaymen of
men of rank and family.

Madame de Montrevel, overwhelmed by the part she had been made to play
at the crucial point of this drama, saw but one means of repairing the
evil she had done, and that was to start at once for Paris and fling
herself at the feet of the First Consul, imploring him to pardon the
four condemned men. She did not even take time to go to the Chateau des
Noires-Fontaines to see Amelie. She knew that Bonaparte's departure was
fixed for the first week in May, and this was already the 6th. When she
last left Paris everything had been prepared for that departure.

She wrote a line to Amelie explaining by what fatal deception she had
been instrumental in destroying the lives of four men, when she intended
to save the life of one. Then, as if ashamed of having broken the pledge
she had made to Amelie, and above all to herself, she ordered fresh
post-horses and returned to Paris.

She arrived there on the morning of the 8th of May. Bonaparte had
started on the evening of the 6th. He said on leaving that he was only
going to Dijon, possibly as far as Geneva, but in any case he should
not be absent more than three weeks. The prisoners' appeal, even if
rejected, would not receive final consideration for five or six weeks.
All hope need not therefore be abandoned.

But, alas! it became evident that the review at Dijon was only a
pretext, that the journey to Geneva had never been seriously thought of,
and that Bonaparte, instead of going to Switzerland, was really on his
way to Italy.

Then Madame de Montrevel, unwilling to appeal to her son, for she had
heard his oath when Lord Tanlay had been left for dead, and knew the
part he had played in the capture of the Companions of Jehu--then Madame
de Montrevel appealed to Josephine, and Josephine promised to write to
the First Consul. That same evening she kept her promise.

But the trial had made a great stir. It was not with these prisoners as
with ordinary men. Justice made haste, and thirty-five days after the
verdict had been rendered the appeal was rejected. This decision was
immediately sent to Bourg with an order to execute the prisoners within
twenty-four hours. But notwithstanding the haste of the minister of
police in forwarding this decision, the first intimation of the fatal
news was not received by the judicial authorities at Bourg. While the
prisoners were taking their daily walk in the courtyard a stone was
thrown over the outer wall and fell at their feet. Morgan, who still
retained in relation to his comrades the position of leader, picked
it up, opened the letter which inclosed the stone, and read it. Then,
turning to his friends, he said: "Gentlemen, the appeal has been
rejected, as we might have expected, and the ceremony will take place in
all probability to-morrow."

Valensolle and Ribier, who were playing a species of quoits with
crown-pieces and louis, left off their game to hear the news. Having
heard it they returned to their game without remark.

Jayat, who was reading "La Nouvelle Heloise," resumed his book, saying:
"Then, I shall not have time to finish M. Jean-Jacques Rousseau's
masterpiece, and upon my word I don't regret it, for it is the most
utterly false and wearisome book I ever read in my life!"

Sainte-Hermine passed his hand over his forehead, murmuring: "Poor
Amelie!" Then observing Charlotte, who was at the window of the jailer's
room overlooking the courtyard, he went to her. "Tell Amelie that she
must keep the promise she made me, to-night."

The jailer's daughter closed the window, kissed her father, and told him
that in all probability he would see her there again that evening. Then
she returned to Noires-Fontaines, a road she had taken twice every day
for the last two months, once at noon on her way to the prison, once in
the evening on returning to the chateau.

Every night she found Amelie in the same place, sitting at the window
which, in happier days, had given admittance to her beloved Charles.
Since the day she had fainted in the courtroom she had shed no tears,
and, we may almost add, had uttered no word. Unlike the marble of
antiquity awakening into life, she might have been compared to a living
woman petrifying into stone. Every day she grew paler.

Charlotte watched her with astonishment. Common minds, always impressed
by noisy demonstrations, that is to say, by cries and tears, are unable
to understand a mute sorrow. Dumbness to them means indifference. She
was therefore astonished at the calmness with which Amelie received the
message she was charged to deliver. She did not see in the dimness of
the twilight that Amelie's face from being pale grew livid. She did not
feel the deadly clutch which, like an iron wrench, had seized her heart.
She did not know that as her mistress walked to the door an automatic
stiffness was in her limbs. Nevertheless she followed her anxiously. But
at the door Amelie stretched out her hand.

"Wait for me there," she said.

Charlotte obeyed. Amelie closed the door behind her, and went up to
Roland's room.

Roland's room was veritably that of a soldier and a huntsman, and its
chief adornments were trophies and weapons. Arms of all kinds were here,
French and foreign, from the blue-barrelled pistol of Versailles to the
silver-handled pistol of Cairo, from the tempered blade of Catalonia to
the Turkish cimeter.

Amelie took down from this arsenal four daggers, sharp-edged and
pointed, and eight pistols of different shapes. She put balls in a bag
and powder in a horn. Thus supplied she returned to her own room. There
Charlotte assisted her in putting on the peasant gown. Then she waited
for the night.

Night comes late in June. Amelie stood motionless, mute, leaning against
the chimney-piece, and looking through the open window at the village
of Ceyzeriat, which was slowly disappearing in the gathering shades
of night. When she could no longer distinguish anything but the lights
which were being lighted one by one, she said:

"Come, it is time to go."

The two young girls went out. Michel paid no attention to Amelie,
supposing her to be some friend of Charlotte's, who had called to see
her and whom the jailer's daughter was now escorting home.

Ten o'clock was striking as they passed the church of Brou. It was
quarter past when Charlotte knocked at the prison door. Old Courtois
opened it.

We have already shown the political opinions of the worthy jailer. He
was a royalist. He therefore felt the deepest sympathy for the four
condemned men, and had hoped, like nearly every one in Bourg--like
Madame de Montrevel, whose despair at what she had done was known to
him--that the First Consul would pardon them. He had therefore mitigated
their captivity as much as possible, without failing in his duty, by
relieving them of all needless restrictions. On the other hand, it is
true that he had refused a gift of sixty thousand francs (a sum which
in those days was worth nearly treble what it is now) to allow them to
escape.

We have seen how, being taken into confidence by his daughter, he had
allowed Amelie, disguised as a Bressan peasant, to be present at the
trial. The reader will also remember the kindness the worthy man had
shown to Amelie and her mother when they themselves were prisoners.
This time, as he was still ignorant of the rejection of the appeal, he
allowed his feelings to be worked upon. Charlotte had told him that her
young mistress was to start that night for Paris to endeavor to hasten
the pardon, and that she desired before leaving to see the Baron de
Sainte-Hermine and obtain his last instructions.

There were five doors to break through to reach the street, a squad of
guards in the courtyard, and sentinels within and without the prison.
Consequently Pere Courtois felt no anxiety lest his prisoners escape. He
therefore consented that Amelie should see Morgan.

We trust our readers will excuse us if we use the names Morgan, Charles,
and the Baron de Sainte-Hermine, interchangeably, since they are aware
that by that triple appellation we intend to designate the same man.

Courtois took a light and walked before Amelie. The young girl, as
though prepared to start by the mail-coach at once on leaving the
prison, carried a travelling bag in her hand. Charlotte followed her
mistress.

"You will recognize the cell, Mademoiselle de Montrevel," said Courtois.
"It is the one in which you were confined with your mother. The leader
of these unfortunate young men, the Baron Charles de Sainte-Hermine,
asked me as a favor to put them in cage No. 1. You know that's the
name we give our cells. I did not think I ought to refuse him that
consolation, knowing how the poor fellow loved you. Oh, don't be
uneasy, Mademoiselle Amelie, I will never breathe your secret. Then he
questioned me, asking which had been your mother's bed, and which yours.
I told him, and then he wanted his to stand just where yours did. That
wasn't hard, for the bed was not only in the same place, but it was the
very one you had used. So, since the poor fellow entered your cell, he
has spent nearly all his time lying on your bed."

Amelie gave a sigh that resembled a groan. She felt--and it was long
since she had done so--a tear moisten her eyelids. Yes! she was loved as
she loved, and the lips of a disinterested stranger gave her the proof
of it. At this moment of eternal separation this conviction shone like a
diamond of light in its setting of sorrow.

The doors opened one by one before Pere Courtois. When they reached the
last one, Amelie laid her hand on the jailer's shoulder. She thought
she heard a chant. Listening attentively, she became aware that it was a
voice repeating verses.

But the voice was not Morgan's; it was unknown to her. Here is what it
said:

  I have bared all my heart to the God of the just,
    He has witnessed my penitent tears;
  He has stilled my remorse, He has armed me with trust,
    He has pitied and calmed all my fears.

  My enemies, scoffing, have said in their rage:
    "Let him die, be his mem'ry accursed!"
  Saith the merciful Father, my grief to assuage,
    "Their hatred hath now done its worst.

  "I have heard thy complaints, and I know that the ban
    Of remorse hath e'en brought thee so low;
  I can pity the soul of the penitent man
    That was weak in this valley of woe;

  "I will crown thy lost name with the just acclaim
    Of the slow-judging righteous years;
  Their pity and justice in time shall proclaim
    Thine honor; then layoff thy fears!"

  I bless thee, O God! who hast deigned to restore
    Mine honor that Thou hast made whole
  From shame and remorse; as I enter Death's door
    To Thee I commend my poor soul!

  To the banquet of life, an unfortunate guest,
    I came for a day, and I go--
  I die in my vigor; I sought not to rest
    In the grave where the weary lie low.

  Farewell to thee, earth! farewell, tender verdure
    Of woodland! Farewell, sunny shore!
  Green fields that I love, azure skies, smiling Nature,
    Farewell! I shall see thee no more.

  May thy beauty still gladden the friends that I love,
    Whom I long for--but stern fate denies;
  May they pass full of years, though I wait them above;
    May a last loving hand close their eyes.

The voice was silent; no doubt the last verse was finished. Amelie, who
would not interrupt the last meditations of the doomed men, and who had
recognized Gilbert's beautiful ode written on a hospital bed the night
before his death, now signed to the jailer to open the door. Pere
Courtois, jailer as he was, seemed to share the young girl's emotion,
for he put the key in the lock and turned it as softly as he could. The
door opened.

Amelie saw at a glance the whole interior of the cell, and the persons
in it.

Valensolle was standing, leaning against the wall, and still holding the
book from which he had just read the lines that Amelie had overheard.
Jayat was seated near a table with his head resting on his hands.
Ribier was sitting on the table itself. Near him, but further back,
Sainte-Hermine, his eyes closed as if in sleep, was lying on the bed. At
sight of the young girl, whom they knew to be Amelie, Ribier and Jayat
rose. Morgan did not move; he had heard nothing.

Amelie went directly to him, and, as if the love she felt for him were
sanctified by the nearness of death, she gave no heed to the presence of
his friends, but pressed her lips to his, murmuring: "Awake, my Charles,
it is I, Amelie. I have come to keep my promise."

Morgan gave a cry of joy and clasped her in his arms.

"Monsieur Courtois," said Montbar, "you are a worthy man. Leave those
poor young people alone. It would be sacrilege to trouble their last
moments together on earth by our presence."

Pere Courtois, without a word, opened the door of the adjoining cell.
Valensolle, Jayat and Ribier entered it, and the door was closed upon
them. Then, making a sign to Charlotte, Courtois himself went away. The
lovers were alone.

There are scenes that should not be described, words that must not be
repeated. God, who sees and hears them from his immortal throne, alone
knows what sombre joys, what bitter pleasures they contain.

At the end of an hour the two young people heard the key turn once
more in the lock. They were sad but calm. The conviction that their
separation would not be for long gave them a sweet serenity. The worthy
jailer seemed more grieved and distressed at his second appearance than
at his first; but Morgan and Amelie thanked him with a smile.

He went to the cell where the others were locked up and opened it,
murmuring to himself: "Faith! It would have been hard if they couldn't
have been alone together on their last night."

Valensolle, Jayat and Ribier returned. Amelie, with her left arm wound
around Morgan, held out her right hand to them. All three, one after the
other, kissed that cold, damp hand. Then Morgan led her to the door.

"Au revoir!" he said.

"Soon!" she answered.

And then this parting at the gates of death was sealed by a long kiss,
followed by a groan so terrible that it seemed to rend their hearts in
twain.

The door closed again, the bolts and bars shot into their places.

"Well?" cried Valensolle, Jayat and Ribier with one accord.

"Here!" replied Morgan, emptying the travelling bag upon the table.

The three young men gave a cry of joy as they saw the shining pistols
and gleaming blades. It was all that they desired next to liberty--the
joy, the dolorous precious joy of knowing themselves masters of their
own lives, and, if need be, that of others.

During this time the jailer led Amelie to the street. When they reached
it he hesitated a moment, then he touched Amelie's arm, saying as he did
so: "Mademoiselle de Montrevel, forgive me for causing you so much pain,
but it is useless for you to go to Paris."

"Because the appeal has been rejected and the execution takes place
to-morrow, I suppose you mean," said Amelie.

The jailer in his astonishment stepped back a pace.

"I knew it, my friend," said Amelie. Then turning to Charlotte, she
said: "Take me to the nearest church and come for me to-morrow after all
is over."

The nearest church was not far off. It was that of Sainte-Claire. For
the last three months it had been opened for public worship under the
decree of the First Consul. As it was now nearly midnight, the doors
were closed; but Charlotte knew where the sexton lived and she went to
wake him. Amelie waited, leaning against the walls as motionless as the
marble figures that adorned its frontal.

The sexton arrived at the end of half an hour. During that time the girl
had seen a dreadful sight. Three men had passed her, dragging a cart,
which she saw by the light of the moon was painted red. Within this cart
she perceived shapeless objects, long planks and singular ladders,
all painted the same color. They were dragging it toward the bastion
Montrevel, the place used for the executions. Amelie divined what it
was, and, with a cry, she fell upon her knees.

At that cry the men in black turned round. They fancied for a moment
that one of the sculptured figures of the porch had descended from
its niche and was kneeling there. The one who seemed to be the leader
stepped close to the young girl.

"Don't come near me!" she cried. "Don't come near me!"

The man returned humbly to his place and continued on his way. The cart
disappeared round the corner of the Rue des Prisons; but the noise of
its wheels still sounded on the stones and echoed in the girl's heart.

When the sacristan and Charlotte returned they found the young girl on
her knees. The man raised some objections against opening the church
at that hour of the night; but a piece of gold and Mademoiselle de
Montrevel's name dispelled his scruples. A second gold piece decided him
to light a little chapel. It was the one in which Amelie had made her
first communion. There, kneeling before the altar, she implored them to
leave her alone.

Toward three in the morning she saw the colored window above the altar
of the Virgin begin to lighten. It looked to the east, so that the first
ray of light came direct to her eyes as a messenger from God.

Little by little the town awoke. To Amelie the noise seemed louder than
ever before. Soon the vaulted ceiling of the church shook with the tramp
of a troop of horsemen. This troop was on its way to the prison.

A little before nine the young girl heard a great noise, and it seemed
to her that the whole town must be rushing in the same direction.
She strove to lose herself in prayer, that she might not hear these
different sounds that spoke to her in an unknown language of which her
anguish told her she understood every word.

In truth, a terrible thing was happening at the prison. It was no wonder
that the whole town had rushed thither.

At nine o'clock Pere Courtois entered the jail to tell the prisoners at
one and the same time that their appeal had been rejected and that they
must prepare for immediate death. He found the four prisoners armed to
the teeth.

The jailer, taken unawares, was pulled into the cell and the door locked
behind him. Then the young men, without any defence on his part,
so astonished was he, seized his keys, and passing through the door
opposite to the one by which he had entered they locked it on him.
Leaving him in their cell, they found themselves in the adjoining one,
in which he had placed three of them during Amelie's interview with
Morgan.

One of the keys on the jailer's bunch opened the other door of this
cell, and that door led to the inner courtyard of the prison. This
courtyard was closed by three massive doors, all of which led to a sort
