"Hum," soliloquized Hilyard, "they say that Friar Bungey is employed
by the witch duchess in everlasting diabolisms against her foes.  A
peep into his den might suffice me for a stirring tale to the people."

No sooner did this daring desire arise than the hardy Robin resolved
to gratify it; and stealing on tiptoe along the wall, he peered
cautiously through the aperture made by the sliding panel.  An
enormous stuffed lizard hung from the ceiling, and various strange
reptiles, dried into mummy, were ranged around, and glared at the spy
with green glass eyes.  A huge book lay open on a tripod stand, and a
caldron seethed over a slow and dull fire.  A sight yet more terrible
presently awaited the rash beholder.

"Adam," said the friar, laying his broad palm on the student's
reluctant shoulders, "inter sapentes."

"Sapientes, brother," groaned Adam.

"That's the old form, Adam," quoth the friar, superciliously,--
"sapentes is the last improvement.  I say, between wise men there is
no envy.  Our noble and puissant patroness, the Duchess of Bedford,
hath committed to me a task that promiseth much profit.  I have worked
at it night and day stotis filibus."

"O man, what lingo speakest thou?--stotis filibus!"

"Tush, if it is not good Latin, it does as well, son Adam.  I say I
have worked at it night and day, and it is now advanced eno' for
experiment.  But thou art going to sleep."

"Despatch! speak out! speak on!" said Adam, desperately,--"what is thy
achievement?"

"See!" answered the friar, majestically; and drawing aside a black
pall, he exhibited to the eyes of Adam, and to the more startled gaze
of Robin Hilyard, a pale, cadaverous, corpse-like image, of pigmy
proportions, but with features moulded into a coarse caricature of the
lordly countenance of the Earl of Warwick.

"There," said the friar, complacently, and rubbing his hands, "that is
no piece of bungling, eh?  As like the stout earl as one pea to
another."

"And for what hast thou kneaded up all this waste of wax?" asked Adam.
"Forsooth, I knew not you had so much of ingenious art; algates, the
toy is somewhat ghastly."

"Ho, ho!" quoth the friar, laughing so as to show a set of jagged,
discoloured fangs from ear to ear, "surely thou, who art so notable a
wizard and scholar, knowest for what purpose we image forth our
enemies.  Whatever the duchess inflicts upon this figure, the Earl of
Warwick, whom it representeth, will feel through his bones and
marrow,--waste wax, waste man!"

"Thou art a devil to do this thing, and a blockhead to think it, O
miserable friar!" exclaimed Adam, roused from all his gentleness.

"Ha!" cried the friar, no less vehemently, and his burly face purple
with passion, "dost thou think to bandy words with me?  Wretch!  I
will set goblins to pinch thee black and blue!  I will drag thee at
night over all the jags of Mount Pepanon, at the tail of a mad
nightmare!  I will put aches in all thy bones, and the blood in thy
veins shall run into sores and blotches.  Am I not Friar Bungey?  And
what art thou?"

At these terrible denunciations, the sturdy Robin, though far less
superstitious than most of his contemporaries, was seized with a
trembling from head to foot; and expecting to see goblins and imps
start forth from the walls, he retired hastily from his hiding-place,
and, without waiting for further commune with Warner, softly opened
the chamber door and stole down the stairs.  Adam, however, bore the
storm unquailingly, and when the holy man paused to take breath, he
said calmly,--

"Verily, if thou canst do these things, there must be secrets in
Nature which I have not yet discovered.  Howbeit, though thou art free
to try all thou canst against me, thy threats make it necessary that
this communication between us should be nailed up, and I shall so
order."

The friar, who was ever in want of Adam's aid, either to construe a
bit of Latin, or to help him in some chemical illusion, by no means
relished this quiet retort; and holding out his huge hand to Adam,
said, with affected cordiality,--

"Pooh! we are brothers, and must not quarrel.  I was over hot, and
thou too provoking; but I honour and love thee, man,--let it pass.  As
for this figure, doubtless we might pink it all over, and the earl be
never the worse.  But if our employers order these things and pay for
them, we cunning men make profit by fools!"

"It is men like thee that bring shame on science," answered Adam,
sternly; "and I will not listen to thee longer."

"Nay, but you must," said the friar, clutching Adam's robe, and
concealing his resentment by an affected grin.  "Thou thinkest me a
mere ignoramus--ha! ha!--I think the same of thee.  Why, man, thou
hast never studied the parts of the human body, 1'11 swear."

"I'm no leech," said Adam.  "Let me go."

"No, not yet.  I will convict thee of ignorance.  Thou dost not even
know where the liver is placed."

"I do," answered Adam, shortly; "but what then?"

"Thou dost?--I deny it.  Here is a pin; stick it into this wax, man,
where thou sayest the liver lies in the human frame."

Adam unsuspiciously obeyed.

"Well! the liver is there, eh?  Ah, but where are the lungs?"

"Why, here."

"And the midriff?"

"Here, certes."

"Right!--thou mayest go now," said the friar, dryly.  Adam disappeared
through the aperture, and closed the panel.

"Now I know where the lungs, midriff, and liver are," said the friar
to himself, "I shall get on famously.  'T is a useful fellow, that, or
I should have had him hanged long ago!"

Adam did not remark on his re-entrance that his visitor, Hilyard, had
disappeared, and the philosopher was soon reimmersed in the fiery
interest of his thankless labours.

It might be an hour afterwards, when, wearied and exhausted by
perpetual hope and perpetual disappointment, he flung himself on his
seat; and that deep sadness, which they who devote themselves in this
noisy world to wisdom and to truth alone can know, suffused his
thoughts, and murmured from his feverish lips.

"Oh, hard condition of my life!" groaned the sage,--"ever to strive,
and never to accomplish.  The sun sets and the sun rises upon my
eternal toils, and my age stands as distant from the goal as stood my
youth!  Fast, fast the mind is wearing out the frame, and my schemes
have but woven the ropes of sand, and my name shall be writ in water.
Golden dreams of my young hope, where are ye?  Methought once, that
could I obtain the grace of royalty, the ear of power, the command of
wealth, my path to glory was made smooth and sure; I should become the
grand inventor of my time and land; I should leave my lore a heritage
and blessing wherever labour works to civilize the round globe.  And
now my lodging is a palace, royalty my patron; they give me gold at my
desire; my wants no longer mar my leisure.  Well, and for what?  On
condition that I forego the sole task for which patronage, wealth, and
leisure were desired!  There stands the broken iron, and there simmers
the ore I am to turn to gold,--the iron worth more than all the gold,
and the gold never to be won!  Poor, I was an inventor, a creator, the
true magician; protected, patronized, enriched, I am but the
alchemist, the bubble, the dupe or duper, the fool's fool.  God, brace
up my limbs!  Let me escape! give me back my old dream, and die at
least, if accomplishing nothing, hoping all!"

He rose as he spoke; he strode across the chamber with majestic step,
with resolve upon his brow.  He stopped short, for a sharp pain shot
across his heart.  Premature age and the disease that labour brings
were at their work of decay within: the mind's excitement gave way to
the body's weakness, and he sank again upon his seat, breathing hard,
gasping, pale, the icy damps upon his brow.  Bubblingly seethed the
molten metals, redly glowed the poisonous charcoal, the air of death
was hot within the chamber where the victim of royal will pandered to
the desire of gold.  Terrible and eternal moral for Wisdom and for
Avarice, for sages and for kings,--ever shall he who would be the
maker of gold breathe the air of death!

"Father," said the low and touching voice of one who had entered
unperceived, and who now threw her arms round Adam's neck, "Father,
thou art ill, and sorely suffering--"

"At heart--yes, Sibyll.  Give me thine arm; let us forth and taste the
fresher air."

It was so seldom that Warner could be induced to quit his chamber,
that these words almost startled Sibyll, and she looked anxiously in
his face, as she wiped the dews from his forehead.

"Yes--air--air!" repeated Adam, rising.

Sibyll placed his bonnet over his silvered locks, drew his gown more
closely round him, and slowly and in silence they left the chamber,
and took their way across the court to the ramparts of the fortress-
palace.

The day was calm and genial, with a low but fresh breeze stirring
gently through the warmth of noon.  The father and child seated
themselves on the parapet, and saw, below, the gay and numerous
vessels that glided over the sparkling river, while the dark walls of
Baynard's Castle, the adjoining bulwark and battlements of Montfichet,
and the tall watch-tower of Warwick's mighty mansion frowned in the
distance against the soft blue sky.  "There," said Adam, quietly, and
pointing to the feudal roofs, "there seems to rise power, and yonder
