ones, seeing that the Church is as mighty as ever, and King Edward is
no friend to the Lollards, and that your uncle himself was at least a
sub-prior--"

"Had he been son to a baron, he had been a cardinal," interrupted
Nicholas, "for his head was the longest that ever came out of the north
country. But go on; you would say my father was a sturdy yeoman, and I
might have followed his calling?"

"You hit the mark, Master Nicholas."

"Hout, man. I crave pardon of your rank, Master Nevile. But a yeoman is
born a yeoman, and he dies a yeoman--I think it better to die Lord Mayor
of London; and so I craved my mother's blessing and leave, and a part
of the old hyde has been sold to pay for the first step to the red gown,
which I need not say must be that of the Flat-cap. I have already taken
my degrees, and no longer wear blue. I am headman to my master, and my
master will be sheriff of London."

"It is a pity," said the Nevile, shaking his head; "you were ever a
tall, brave lad, and would have made a very pretty soldier."

"Thank you, Master Marmaduke, but I leave cut and thrust to the gentles.
I have seen eno' of the life of a retainer. He goes out on foot with his
shield and his sword, or his bow and his quiver, while Sir Knight sits
on horseback, armed from the crown to the toe, and the arrow slants off
from rider and horse, as a stone from a tree. If the retainer is not
sliced and carved into mincemeat, he comes home to a heap of ashes,
and a handful of acres, harried and rivelled into a common; Sir Knight
thanks him for his valour, but he does not build up his house; Sir
Knight gets a grant from the king, or an heiress for his son, and Hob
Yeoman turns gisarme and bill into ploughshares. Tut, tut, there's no
liberty, no safety, no getting on, for a man who has no right to the
gold spurs, but in the guild of his fellows; and London is the place for
a born Saxon like Nicholas Alwyn."

As the young aspirant thus uttered the sentiments, which though others
might not so plainly avow and shrewdly enforce them, tended towards that
slow revolution, which, under all the stormy events that the superficial
record we call HISTORY alone deigns to enumerate, was working that great
change in the thoughts and habits of the people,--that impulsion of the
provincial citywards, that gradual formation of a class between knight
and vassal,--which became first constitutionally visible and distinct
in the reign of Henry VII., Marmaduke Nevile, inly half-regretting and
half-despising the reasonings of his foster-brother, was playing with
his dagger, and glancing at his silver arrow.

"Yet you could still have eno' of the tall yeoman and the stout retainer
about you to try for this bauble, and to break half a dozen thick heads
with your quarter-staff!"

"True," said Nicholas; "you must recollect we are only, as yet, between
the skin and the selle,--half-trader, half-retainer. The old leaven will
out,--'Eith to learn the cat to the kirn,' as they say in the North. But
that's not all; a man, to get on, must win respect from those who are
to jostle him hereafter, and it's good policy to show those roystering
youngsters that Nick Alwyn, stiff and steady though he be, has the old
English metal in him, if it comes to a pinch; it's a lesson to yon lords
too, save your quality, if they ever wish to ride roughshod over our
guilds and companies. But eno' of me.--Drawer, another stoup of the
clary--Now, gentle sir, may I make bold to ask news of yourself? I saw,
though I spake not before of it, that my Lord Montagu showed a cold face
to his kinsman. I know something of these great men, though I be but a
small one,--a dog is no bad guide in the city he trots through."

"My dear foster-brother," said the Nevile, "you had ever more brains
than myself, as is meet that you should have, since you lay by the steel
casque,--which, I take it, is meant as a substitute for us gentlemen
and soldiers who have not so many brains to spare; and I will willingly
profit by your counsels. You must know," he said, drawing nearer to the
table, and his frank, hardy face assuming a more earnest expression,
"that though my father, Sir Guy, at the instigation of his chief, the
Earl of Westmoreland, and of the Lord Nevile, bore arms at the first for
King Henry--"

"Hush! hush! for Henry of Windsor!"

"Henry of Windsor!--so be it! yet being connected, like the nobles I
have spoken of, with the blood of Warwick and Salisbury, it was ever
with doubt and misgiving, and rather in the hope of ultimate compromise
between both parties (which the Duke of York's moderation rendered
probable) than of the extermination of either. But when, at the battle
of York, Margaret of Anjou and her generals stained their victory by
cruelties which could not fail to close the door on all conciliation;
when the infant son of the duke himself was murdered, though a prisoner,
in cold blood; when my father's kinsman, the Earl of Salisbury, was
beheaded without trial; when the head of the brave and good duke,
who had fallen in the field, was, against all knightly and king-like
generosity, mockingly exposed, like a dishonoured robber, on the gates
of York, my father, shocked and revolted, withdrew at once from the
army, and slacked not bit or spur till he found himself in his hall at
Arsdale. His death, caused partly by his travail and vexation of spirit,
together with his timely withdrawal from the enemy, preserved his name
from the attainder passed on the Lords Westmoreland and Nevile; and my
eldest brother, Sir John, accepted the king's proffer of pardon, took
the oaths of allegiance to Edward, and lives safe, if obscure, in his
father's halls. Thou knowest, my friend, that a younger brother has but
small honour at home. Peradventure, in calmer times, I might have bowed
my pride to my calling, hunted my brother's dogs, flown his hawks,
rented his keeper's lodge, and gone to my grave contented. But to a
young man, who from his childhood had heard the stirring talk of
knights and captains, who had seen valour and fortune make the way to
distinction, and whose ears of late had been filled by the tales of
wandering minstrels and dissours, with all the gay wonders of Edward's
court, such a life soon grew distasteful. My father, on his death-bed
(like thy uncle, the sub-prior), encouraged me little to follow his own
footsteps. 'I see,' said he, 'that King Henry is too soft to rule his
barons, and Margaret too fierce to conciliate the commons; the only hope
of peace is in the settlement of the House of York. Wherefore, let not
thy father's errors stand in the way of thy advancement;' and therewith
he made his confessor--for he was no penman himself, the worthy old
knight!--indite a letter to his great kinsman, the Earl of Warwick,
commending me to his protection. He signed his mark, and set his seal to
this missive, which I now have at mine hostelrie, and died the same day.
My brother judged me too young then to quit his roof; and condemned me
to bear his humours till, at the age of twenty-three, I could bear no
more! So having sold him my scant share in the heritage, and turned,
like thee, bad land into good nobles, I joined a party of horse in their
journey to London, and arrived yesterday at Master Sackbut's hostelrie
in Eastchepe. I went this morning to my Lord of Warwick; but he was gone
to the king's, and hearing of the merry-makings here, I came hither
for kill-time. A chance word of my Lord of Montagu--whom Saint Dunstan
confound!--made me conceit that a feat of skill with the cloth-yard
might not ill preface my letter to the great earl. But, pardie! it
seems I reckoned without my host, and in seeking to make my fortunes too
rashly, I have helped to mar them." Wherewith he related the particulars
of his interview with Montagu.

Nicholas Alwyn listened to him with friendly and thoughtful interest,
and, when he had done, spoke thus,--

"The Earl of Warwick is a generous man, and though hot, bears little
malice, except against those whom he deems misthink or insult him; he is
proud of being looked up to as a protector, especially by those of his
own kith and name. Your father's letter will touch the right string,
and you cannot do better than deliver it with a plain story. A young
partisan like thee is not to be despised. Thou must trust to Lord
Warwick to set matters right with his brother; and now, before I say
further, let me ask thee, plainly, and without offence, Dost thou so
love the House of York that no chance could ever make thee turn sword
against it? Answer as I ask,--under thy breath; those drawers are
parlous spies!"

And here, in justice to Marmaduke Nevile and to his betters, it is
necessary to preface his reply by some brief remarks, to which we must
crave the earnest attention of the reader. What we call PATRIOTISM,
in the high and catholic acceptation of the word, was little if at all
understood in days when passion, pride, and interest were motives little
softened by reflection and education, and softened still less by the
fusion of classes that characterized the small States of old, and marks
the civilization of a modern age. Though the right by descent of the
House of York, if genealogy alone were consulted, was indisputably
prior to that of Lancaster, yet the long exercise of power in the latter
House, the genius of the Fourth Henry, and the victories of the Fifth,
would no doubt have completely superseded the obsolete claims of the
Yorkists, had Henry VI. possessed any of the qualities necessary for
the time. As it was, men had got puzzled by genealogies and cavils; the
sanctity attached to the king's name was weakened by his doubtful right
to his throne, and the Wars of the rival Roses were at last (with two
exceptions, presently to be noted) the mere contests of exasperated
factions, in which public considerations were scarcely even made the
blind to individual interest, prejudice, or passion.

Thus, instances of desertion, from the one to the other party, even by
the highest nobles, and on the very eve of battle, had grown so common
that little if any disgrace was attached to them; and any knight or
captain held an affront to himself an amply sufficient cause for the
transfer of his allegiance. It would be obviously absurd to expect in
any of the actors of that age the more elevated doctrines of party faith
and public honour, which clearer notions of national morality, and the
salutary exercise of a large general opinion, free from the passions of
single individuals, have brought into practice in our more enlightened
days. The individual feelings of the individual MAN, strong in
himself, became his guide, and he was free in much from the regular and
thoughtful virtues, as well as from the mean and plausible vices, of
those who act only in bodies and corporations. The two exceptions to
this idiosyncrasy of motive and conduct were, first, in the general
disposition of the rising middle class, especially in London, to connect
great political interests with the more popular House of York. The
commons in parliament had acted in opposition to Henry the Sixth, as
the laws they wrung from him tended to show, and it was a popular and
trading party that came, as it were, into power under King Edward. It
is true that Edward was sufficiently arbitrary in himself; but a
popular party will stretch as much as its antagonists in favour of
despotism,--exercised, on its enemies. And Edward did his best to
consult the interests of commerce, though the prejudices of the
merchants interpreted those interests in a way opposite to that in which
political economy now understands them. The second exception to the mere
hostilities of individual chiefs and feudal factions has, not less than
the former, been too much overlooked by historians. But this was a still
more powerful element in the success of the House of York. The hostility
against the Roman Church and the tenets of the Lollards were shared by
an immense part of the population. In the previous century an ancient
writer computes that one half the population were Lollards; and though
the sect were diminished and silenced by fear, they still ceased not to
exist, and their doctrines not only shook the Church under Henry VIII.,
but destroyed the throne by the strong arm of their children, the
Puritans, under Charles I. It was impossible that these men should not
have felt the deepest resentment at the fierce and steadfast persecution
they endured under the House of Lancaster; and without pausing to
consider how far they would benefit under the dynasty of York, they
had all those motives of revenge which are mistaken so often for the
counsels of policy, to rally round any standard raised against their
oppressors. These two great exceptions to merely selfish policy, which
it remains for the historian clearly and at length to enforce, these:
and these alone will always, to a sagacious observer, elevate the Wars
of the Roses above those bloody contests for badges which we are at
first sight tempted to regard them. But these deeper motives animated
very little the nobles and the knightly gentry; [Amongst many instances
of the self-seeking of the time, not the least striking is the
subservience of John Mowbray, the great Duke of Norfolk, to his old
political enemy, the Earl of Oxford, the moment the last comes into
power, during the brief restoration of Henry VI. John Paston, whose
family had been sufficiently harassed by this great duke, says, with
some glee, "The Duke and Duchess (of Norfolk) sue to him (Lord Oxford)
as humbly as ever I did to them."--Paston Letters, cccii.] and with them
the governing principles were, as we have just said, interest, ambition,
and the zeal for the honour and advancement of Houses and chiefs.

"Truly," said Marmaduke, after a short and rather embarrassed pause,
"I am little beholden as yet to the House of York. There where I see a
noble benefactor, or a brave and wise leader, shall I think my sword and
heart may best proffer allegiance."

"Wisely said," returned Alwyn, with a slight but half sarcastic smile;
"I asked thee the question because--draw closer--there are wise men in
our city who think the ties between Warwick and the king less strong
than a ship's cable; and if thou attachest thyself to Warwick, he will
be better pleased, it may be, with talk of devotion to himself than
professions of exclusive loyalty to King Edward. He who has little
silver in his pouch must have the more silk on his tongue. A word to a
Westmoreland or a Yorkshire man is as good as a sermon to men not born
so far north. One word more, and I have done. Thou art kind and affable
and gentle, my dear foster-brother, but it will not do for thee to be
seen again with the goldsmith's headman. If thou wantest me, send for
me at nightfall; I shall be found at Master Heyford's, in the Chepe. And
if," added Nicholas, with a prudent reminiscence, "thou succeedest at
court, and canst recommend my master,--there is no better goldsmith,--it
may serve me when I set up for myself, which I look to do shortly."

"But to send for thee, my own foster-brother, at nightfall, as if I were
ashamed!"

"Hout, Master Marmaduke, if thou wert not ashamed of me, I should be
ashamed to be seen with a gay springal like thee. Why, they would say in
the Chepe that Nick Alwyn was going to ruin. No, no. Birds of a feather
must keep shy of those that moult other colours; and so, my dear young
master, this is my last shake of the hand. But hold: dost thou know thy
way back?"

"Oh, yes,--never fear!" answered Marmaduke; "though I see not why so
far, at least, we may not be companions."

"No, better as it is; after this day's work they will gossip about both
of us, and we shall meet many who know my long visage on the way back.
God keep thee; avise me how thou prosperest."

So saying, Nicholas Alwyn walked off, too delicate to propose to pay his
share of the reckoning with a superior; but when he had gone a few paces
he turned back, and accosting the Nevile, as the latter was rebuckling
his mantle, said,--

"I have been thinking, Master Nevile, that these gold nobles, which it
has been my luck to bear off, would be more useful in thy gipsire
than mine. I have sure gains and small expenses; but a gentleman gains
nothing, and his hand must be ever in his pouch, so--"

"Foster-brother," said Marmaduke, haughtily, "a gentleman never
borrows,--except of the Jews, and with due interest. Moreover, I too
have my calling; and as thy stall to thee, so to me my good sword.
Saints keep thee! Be sure I will serve thee when I can."

"The devil's in these young strips of the herald's tree," muttered
Alwyn, as he strode off; "as if it were dishonest to borrow a broad
piece without cutting a throat for it! Howbeit, money is a prolific
mother: and here is eno' to buy me a gold chain against I am alderman
of London. Hout, thus goes the world,--the knight's baubles become the
alderman's badges--so much the better!"




CHAPTER IV. ILL FARES THE COUNTRY MOUSE IN THE TRAPS OF TOWN.

We trust we shall not be deemed discourteous, either, on the one hand,
to those who value themselves on their powers of reflection, or, on the
other, to those who lay claim to what, in modern phrenological jargon,
is called the Organ of Locality, when we venture to surmise that the two
are rarely found in combination; nay, that it seems to us a very evident
truism, that in proportion to the general activity of the intellect
upon subjects of pith and weight, the mind will be indifferent to those
minute external objects by which a less contemplative understanding will
note, and map out, and impress upon the memory, the chart of the road
its owner has once taken. Master Marmaduke Nevile, a hardy and acute
forester from childhood, possessed to perfection the useful faculty
of looking well and closely before him as he walked the earth; and
ordinarily, therefore, the path he had once taken, however intricate
and obscure, he was tolerably sure to retrace with accuracy, even at no
inconsiderable distance of time,--the outward senses of men are usually
thus alert and attentive in the savage or the semi-civilized state. He
had not, therefore, over-valued his general acuteness in the note and
memory of localities, when he boasted of his power to refind his way to
his hostelrie without the guidance of Alwyn. But it so happened that
the events of this day, so memorable to him, withdrew his attention from
external objects, to concentrate it within. And in marvelling and musing
over the new course upon which his destiny had entered, he forgot to
take heed of that which his feet should pursue; so that, after wandering
unconsciously onward for some time, he suddenly halted in perplexity
and amaze to find himself entangled in a labyrinth of scattered suburbs,
presenting features wholly different from the road that had conducted
him to the archery-ground in the forenoon. The darkness of the night had
set in; but it was relieved by a somewhat faint and mist-clad moon, and
some few and scattered stars, over which rolled, fleetly, thick clouds,
portending rain. No lamps at that time cheered the steps of the belated
wanderer; the houses were shut up, and their inmates, for the most part,
already retired to rest, and the suburbs did not rejoice, as the city,
in the round of the watchman with his drowsy call to the inhabitants,
"Hang out your lights!" The passengers, who at first, in various small
groups and parties, had enlivened the stranger's way, seemed to him,
unconscious as he was of the lapse of time, to have suddenly vanished
from the thoroughfares; and he found himself alone in places thoroughly
unknown to him, waking to the displeasing recollection that the
approaches to the city were said to be beset by brawlers and ruffians
of desperate characters, whom the cessation of the civil wars had flung
loose upon the skirts of society, to maintain themselves by deeds of
rapine and plunder. As might naturally be expected, most of these had
belonged to the defeated party, who had no claim to the good offices or
charity of those in power. And although some of the Neviles had sided
with the Lancastrians, yet the badge worn by Marmaduke was considered
a pledge of devotion to the reigning House, and added a new danger to
those which beset his path. Conscious of this--for he now called to mind
the admonitions of his host in parting from the hostelrie--he deemed it
but discreet to draw the hood of his mantle over the silver ornament;
and while thus occupied, he heard not a step emerging from a lane at his
rear, when suddenly a heavy hand was placed on his shoulder. He started,
turned, and before him stood a man, whose aspect and dress betokened
little to lessen the alarm of the uncourteous salutation. Marmaduke's
dagger was bare on the instant.

"And what wouldst thou with me?" he asked.

"Thy purse and thy dagger!" answered the stranger.

"Come and take them," said the Nevile, unconscious that he uttered a
reply famous in classic history, as he sprang backward a step or so, and
threw himself into an attitude of defence. The stranger slowly raised
a rude kind of mace, or rather club, with a ball of iron at the end,
garnished with long spikes, as he replied, "Art thou mad eno' to fight
for such trifles?"

"Art thou in the habit of meeting one Englishman who yields his goods
without a blow to another?" retorted Marmaduke. "Go to! thy club does
not daunt me." The stranger warily drew back a step, and applied a
whistle to his mouth. The Nevile sprang at him, but the stranger warded
off the thrust of the poniard with a light flourish of his heavy weapon;
and had not the youth drawn back on the instant, it had been good-night
and a long day to Marmaduke Nevile. Even as it was, his heart beat
quick, as the whirl of the huge weapon sent the air like a strong wind
against his face. Ere he had time to renew his attack, he was suddenly
seized from behind, and found himself struggling in the arms of two men.
From these he broke, and his dagger glanced harmless against the tough
jerkin of his first assailant. The next moment his right arm fell to his
side, useless and deeply gashed. A heavy blow on the head--the moon,
the stars reeled in his eyes--and then darkness,--he knew no more. His
assailants very deliberately proceeded to rifle the inanimate body, when
one of them, perceiving the silver badge, exclaimed, with an oath, "One
of the rampant Neviles! This cock at least shall crow no more." And
laying the young man's head across his lap, while he stretched back the
throat with one hand, with the other he drew forth a long sharp knife,
like those used by huntsmen in despatching the hart. Suddenly, and in
the very moment when the blade was about to inflict the fatal gash, his
hand was forcibly arrested, and a man, who had silently and unnoticed
joined the ruffians, said in a stern whisper, "Rise and depart from thy
brotherhood forever. We admit no murderer."

The ruffian looked up in bewilderment. "Robin--captain--thou here!" he
said falteringly.

"I must needs be everywhere, I see, if I would keep such fellows as thou
and these from the gallows. What is this?--a silver arrow--the young
archer--Um."

"A Nevile!" growled the would-be murderer.

"And for that very reason his life should be safe. Knowest thou not that
Richard of Warwick, the great Nevile, ever spares the commons? Begone!
I say." The captain's low voice grew terrible as he uttered the last
words. The savage rose, and without a word stalked away.

"Look you, my masters," said Robin, turning to the rest, "soldiers must
plunder a hostile country. While York is on the throne, England is a
hostile country to us Lancastrians. Rob, then, rifle, if ye will; but
he who takes life shall lose it. Ye know me!" The robbers looked down,
silent and abashed. Robin bent a moment over the youth. "He will live,"
he muttered. "So! he already begins to awaken. One of these houses will
give him shelter. Off, fellows, and take care of your necks!"

When Marmaduke, a few minutes after this colloquy, began to revive, it
was with a sensation of dizziness, pain, and extreme cold. He strove to
lift himself from the ground, and at length succeeded. He was alone;
the place where he had lain was damp and red with stiffening blood. He
tottered on for several paces, and perceived from a lattice, at a little
distance, a light still burning. Now reeling, now falling, he still
dragged on his limbs as the instinct attracted him to that sign of
refuge. He gained the doorway of a detached and gloomy house, and sank
on the stone before it to cry aloud; but his voice soon sank into deep
groans, and once more, as his efforts increased the rapid gush of the
blood, became insensible. The man styled Robin, who had so opportunely
saved his life, now approached from the shadow of a wall, beneath which
he had watched Marmaduke's movements. He neared the door of the house,
and cried, in a sharp, clear voice, "Open, for the love of Christ!"

A head was now thrust from the lattice, the light vanished; a minute
more, the door opened; and Robin, as if satisfied, drew hastily back,
and vanished, saying to himself, as he strode along, "A young man's
life must needs be dear to him; yet had the lad been a lord, methinks I
should have cared little to have saved for the people one tyrant more."

After a long interval, Marmaduke again recovered, and his eyes turned
with pain from the glare of a light held to his face.

"He wakes, Father,--he will live!" cried a sweet voice. "Ay, he will
live, child!" answered a deeper tone; and the young man muttered to
himself, half audibly, as in a dream, "Holy Mother be blessed! it is
sweet to live." The room in which the sufferer lay rather exhibited
the remains of better fortunes than testified to the solid means of the
present possessor. The ceiling was high and groined, and some tints
of faded but once gaudy painting blazoned its compartments and hanging
pendants. The walls had been rudely painted (for arras [Mr. Hallam
("History of the Middle Ages," chap. ix. part 2) implies a doubt whether
great houses were furnished with hangings so soon as the reign of Edward
IV.; but there is abundant evidence to satisfy our learned historian
upon that head. The Narrative of the "Lord of Grauthuse," edited by Sir
F. Madden, specifies the hangings of cloth of gold in the apartments in
which that lord was received by Edward IV.; also the hangings of white
silk and linen in the chamber appropriated to himself at Windsor.
But long before this period (to say nothing of the Bayeux
Tapestry),--namely, in the reign of Edward III. (in 1344),--a writ was
issued to inquire into the mystery of working tapestry; and in 1398 Mr.
Britton observes that the celebrated arras hangings at Warwick
Castle are mentioned. (See Britton's "Dictionary of Architecture
and Archaelogy," art. "Tapestry.")] then was rare, even among the
wealthiest); but the colours were half obliterated by time and damp. The
bedstead on which the wounded man reclined was curiously carved, with a
figure of the Virgin at the head, and adorned with draperies, in which
were wrought huge figures from scriptural subjects, but in the dress
of the date of Richard II.,--Solomon in pointed upturned shoes, and
Goliath, in the armour of a crusader, frowning grimly upon the sufferer.
By the bedside stood a personage, who, in reality, was but little past
the middle age, but whose pale visage, intersected with deep furrows,
whose long beard and hair, partially gray, gave him the appearance of
advanced age: nevertheless there was something peculiarly striking in
the aspect of the man. His forehead was singularly high and massive; but
the back of the head was disproportionately small, as if the intellect
too much preponderated over all the animal qualities for strength in
character and success in life. The eyes were soft, dark, and brilliant,
but dreamlike and vague; the features in youth must have been regular
and beautiful, but their contour was now sharpened by the hollowness of
the cheeks and temples. The form, in the upper part, was nobly shaped,
sufficiently muscular, if not powerful, and with the long throat and
falling shoulders which always gives something of grace and dignity to
the carriage; but it was prematurely bent, and the lower limbs were thin
and weak, as is common with men who have sparely used them; they seemed
disproportioned to that broad chest, and still more to that magnificent
and spacious brow. The dress of this personage corresponded with the
aspect of his abode. The materials were those worn by the gentry, but
they were old, threadbare, and discoloured with innumerable spots and
stains. His hands were small and delicate, with large blue veins, that
spoke of relaxed fibres; but their natural whiteness was smudged with
smoke-stains, and his beard--a masculine ornament utterly out of fashion
among the younger race in King Edward's reign, but when worn by the
elder gentry carefully trimmed and perfumed--was dishevelled into all
the spiral and tangled curls displayed in the sculptured head of some
old Grecian sage or poet.

On the other side of the bed knelt a young girl of about sixteen, with a
face exquisitely lovely in its delicacy and expression. She seemed
about the middle stature, and her arms and neck, as displayed by the
close-fitting vest, had already the smooth and rounded contour of
dawning womanhood, while the face had still the softness, innocence, and
inexpressible bloom of a child. There was a strong likeness between her
and her father (for such the relationship, despite the difference of
sex and years),--the same beautiful form of lip and brow, the same rare
colour of the eyes, dark-blue, with black fringing lashes; and perhaps
the common expression, at that moment, of gentle pity and benevolent
anxiety contributed to render the resemblance stronger.

"Father, he sinks again!" said the girl.

"Sibyll," answered the man, putting his finger upon a line in a
manuscript book that he held, "the authority saith, that a patient so
contused should lose blood, and then the arm must be tightly bandaged.
Verily we lack the wherewithal."

"Not so, Father!" said the girl, and blushing, she turned aside, and
took off the partelet of lawn, upon which holiday finery her young eyes
perhaps that morning had turned with pleasure, and white as snow was the
neck which was thus displayed; "this will suffice to bind his arm."

"But the book," said the father, in great perplexity--"the book telleth
us not how the lancet should be applied. It is easy to say, 'Do this and
do that;' but to do it once, it should have been done before. This is
not among my experiments."

Luckily, perhaps, for Marmaduke, at this moment there entered an old
woman, the solitary servant of the house, whose life, in those warlike
times, had made her pretty well acquainted with the simpler modes of
dealing with a wounded arm and a broken head. She treated with great
disdain the learned authority referred to by her master; she bound the
arm, plastered the head, and taking upon herself the responsibility to
promise a rapid cure, insisted upon the retirement of father and child,
and took her solitary watch beside the bed.

"If it had been any other mechanism than that of the vile human body!"
muttered the philosopher, as if apologizing to himself; and with that he
recovered his self-complacency and looked round him proudly.




CHAPTER V. WEAL TO THE IDLER, WOE TO THE WORKMAN.

As Providence tempers the wind to the shorn lamb, so it possibly might
conform the heads of that day to a thickness suitable for the blows and
knocks to which they were variously subjected; yet it was not without
considerable effort and much struggling that Marmaduke's senses
recovered the shock received, less by his flesh-wound and the loss of
blood, than a blow on the seat of reason that might have despatched a
passable ox of these degenerate days. Nature, to say nothing of Madge's
leechcraft, ultimately triumphed, and Marmaduke woke one morning in full
possession of such understanding as Nature had endowed him with. He
was then alone, and it was with much simple surprise that he turned his
large hazel eyes from corner to corner of the unfamiliar room. He began
to retrace and weave together sundry disordered and vague reminiscences:
he commenced with the commencement, and clearly satisfied himself that
he had been grievously wounded and sorely bruised; he then recalled the
solitary light at the high lattice, and his memory found itself at
the porch of the large, lonely, ruinous old house; then all became a
bewildered and feverish dream. He caught at the vision of an old man
with a long beard, whom he associated, displeasingly, with recollections
of pain; he glanced off to a fair face, with eyes that looked tender
pity whenever he writhed or groaned under the tortures that, no doubt,
that old accursed carle had inflicted upon him. But even this face
did not dwell with pleasure in his memory,--it woke up confused and
labouring associations of something weird and witchlike, of sorceresses
and tymbesteres, of wild warnings screeched in his ear, of incantations
and devilries and doom. Impatient of these musings, he sought to leap
from his bed, and was amazed that the leap subsided into a tottering
crawl. He found an ewer and basin, and his ablutions refreshed and
invigorated him. He searched for his raiment, and discovered it all
except the mantle, dagger, hat, and girdle; and while looking for these,
his eye fell on an old tarnished steel mirror. He started as if he had
seen his ghost; was it possible that his hardy face could have waned
into that pale and almost femininely delicate visage? With the
pride (call it not coxcombry) that then made the care of person the
distinction of gentle birth, he strove to reduce into order the tangled
locks of the long hair, of which a considerable portion above a part
that seemed peculiarly sensitive to the touch had been mercilessly
clipped; and as he had just completed this task, with little
satisfaction and much inward chafing at the lack of all befitting
essences and perfumes, the door gently opened, and the fair face he had
dreamed of appeared at the aperture.

The girl uttered a cry of astonishment and alarm at seeing the patient
thus arrayed and convalescent, and would suddenly have retreated; but
the Nevile advanced, and courteously taking her hand--

"Fair maiden," said he, "if, as I trow, I owe to thy cares my tending
and cure--nay, it may be a life hitherto of little worth, save to
myself--do not fly from my thanks. May Our Lady of Walsingham bless and
reward thee!"

"Sir," answered Sibyll, gently withdrawing her hands from his clasp,
"our poor cares have been a slight return for thy generous protection to
myself."

"To thee! ah, forgive me--how could I be so dull? I remember thy face
now; and, perchance, I deserve the disaster I met with in leaving thee
so discourteously. My heart smote me for it as my light footfall passed
from thy side."

A slight blush, succeeded by a thoughtful smile--the smile of one who
recalls and caresses some not displeasing remembrance--passed over
Sibyll's charming countenance, as the sufferer said this with something
of the grace of a well-born man, whose boyhood had been taught to serve
God and the Ladies.

There was a short pause before she answered, looking down, "Nay, sir, I
was sufficiently beholden to you; and for the rest, all molestation was
over. But I will now call your nurse--for it is to our servant, not
us, that your thanks are due--to see to your state, and administer the
proper medicaments."

"Truly, fair damsel, it is not precisely medicaments that I hunger and
thirst for; and if your hospitality could spare me from the larder a
manchet, or a corner of a pasty, and from the cellar a stoup of wine
or a cup of ale, methinks it would tend more to restore me than those
potions which are so strange to my taste that they rather offend than
tempt it; and, pardie, it seemeth to my poor senses as if I had not
broken bread for a week!"

"I am glad to hear you of such good cheer," answered Sibyll; "wait but a
moment or so, till I consult your physician."

And, so saying, she closed the door, slowly descended the steps, and
pursued her way into what seemed more like a vault than a habitable
room, where she found the single servant of the household. Time, which
makes changes so fantastic in the dress of the better classes, has a
greater respect for the costume of the humbler; and though the
garments were of a very coarse sort of serge, there was not so great a
difference, in point of comfort and sufficiency, as might be supposed,
between the dress of old Madge and that of some primitive servant in
the North during the last century. The old woman's face was thin and
pinched; but its sharp expression brightened into a smile as she caught
sight, through the damps and darkness, of the gracious form of her young
mistress. "Ah, Madge," said Sibyll, with a sigh, "it is a sad thing to
be poor!"

"For such as thou, Mistress Sibyll, it is indeed. It does not matter for
the like of us. But it goes to my old heart when I see you shut up here,
or worse, going out in that old courtpie and wimple,--you, a knight's
grandchild; you, who have played round a queen's knees, and who might
have been so well-to-do, an' my master had thought a little more of the
gear of this world. But patience is a good palfrey, and will carry us
a long day. And when the master has done what he looks for, why, the
king--sith we must so call the new man on the throne--will be sure to
reward him; but, sweetheart, tarry not here; it's an ill air for your
young lips to drink in. What brings you to old Madge?"

"The stranger is recovered, and--"

"Ay, I warrant me, I have cured worse than he. He must have a spoonful
of broth,--I have not forgot it. You see I wanted no dinner myself--what
is dinner to old folks!--so I e'en put it all in the pot for him. The
broth will be brave and strong."

"My poor Madge, God requite you for what you suffer for us! But he has
asked"--here was another sigh, and a downcast look that did not dare to
face the consternation of Madge, as she repeated, with a half-smile--"he
has asked--for meat, and a stoup of wine, Madge!"

"Eh, sirs! And where is he to get them? Not that it will be bad for the
lad, either. Wine! There's Master Sancroft of the Oak will not trust us
a penny, the seely hilding, and--"

"Oh, Madge, I forgot!--we can still sell the gittern for something. Get
on your wimple, Madge--quick,--while I go for it."

"Why, Mistress Sibyll, that's your only pleasure when you sit all alone,
the long summer days."

"It will be more pleasure to remember that it supplied the wants of my
father's guest," said Sibyll; and retracing the way up the stairs, she
returned with the broken instrument, and despatched Madge with it, laden
with instructions that the wine should be of the best. She then once
more mounted the rugged steps, and halting a moment at Marmaduke's
door, as she heard his feeble step walking impatiently to and fro, she
ascended higher, where the flight, winding up a square, dilapidated
turret, became rougher, narrower, and darker, and opened the door of her
father's retreat.

It was a room so bare of ornament and furniture that it seemed merely
wrought out of the mingled rubble and rough stones which composed the
walls of the mansion, and was lighted towards the street by a narrow
slit, glazed, it is true,--which all the windows of the house were
not,--but the sun scarcely pierced the dull panes and the deep walls
in which they were sunk. The room contained a strong furnace and a rude
laboratory. There were several strange-looking mechanical contrivances
scattered about, several manuscripts upon some oaken shelves, and
a large pannier of wood and charcoal in the corner. In that
poverty-stricken house, the money spent on fuel alone, in the height
of summer, would have comfortably maintained the inmates; but neither
Sibyll nor Madge ever thought to murmur at this waste, dedicated to what
had become the vital want of a man who drew air in a world of his own.
This was the first thing to be provided for; and Science was of more
imperative necessity than even Hunger.

Adam Warner was indeed a creature of remarkable genius,--and genius, in
an age where it is not appreciated, is the greatest curse the iron Fates
can inflict on man. If not wholly without the fond fancies which led the
wisdom of the darker ages to the philosopher's stone and the elixir, he
had been deterred from the chase of a chimera by want of means to pursue
it! for it required the resources or the patronage of a prince or noble
to obtain the costly ingredients consumed in the alchemist's crucible.
In early life, therefore, and while yet in possession of a competence
derived from a line of distinguished and knightly ancestors, Adam
Warner had devoted himself to the surer and less costly study of the
mathematics, which then had begun to attract the attention of the
learned, but which was still looked upon by the vulgar as a branch
of the black art. This pursuit had opened to him the insight into
discoveries equally useful and sublime. They necessitated a still more
various knowledge; and in an age when there was no division of labour
and rare and precarious communication among students, it became
necessary for each discoverer to acquire sufficient science for his own
collateral experiments.

In applying mathematics to the practical purposes of life, in
recognizing its mighty utilities to commerce and civilization, Adam
Warner was driven to conjoin with it, not only an extensive knowledge
of languages, but many of the rudest tasks of the mechanist's art;
and chemistry was, in some of his researches, summoned to his aid.
By degrees, the tyranny that a man's genius exercises over his life,
abstracted him from all external objects. He had loved his wife
tenderly, but his rapid waste of his fortune in the purchase of
instruments and books, then enormously dear, and the neglect of all
things not centred in the hope to be the benefactor of the world, had
ruined her health and broken her heart. Happily Warner perceived not her
decay till just before her death; happily he never conceived its cause,
for her soul was wrapped in his. She revered, and loved, and never
upbraided him. Her heart was the martyr to his mind. Had she foreseen
the future destinies of her daughter, it might have been otherwise. She
could have remonstrated with the father, though not with the husband.
But, fortunately, as it seemed to her, she (a Frenchwoman by birth) had
passed her youth in the service of Margaret of Anjou, and that haughty
queen, who was equally warm to friends and inexorable to enemies, had,
on her attendant's marriage, promised to ensure the fortunes of her
offspring. Sibyll at the age of nine--between seven and eight years
before the date the story enters on, and two years prior to the fatal
field of Towton, which gave to Edward the throne of England--had been
admitted among the young girls whom the custom of the day ranked amidst
the attendants of the queen; and in the interval that elapsed before
Margaret was obliged to dismiss her to her home, her mother died. She
died without foreseeing the reverses that were to ensue, in the hope
that her child, at least, was nobly provided for, and not without
the belief (for there is so much faith in love!) that her husband's
researches, which in his youth had won favour of the Protector Duke of
Gloucester, the most enlightened prince of his time, would be crowned at
last with the rewards and favours of his king. That precise period was,
indeed, the fairest that had yet dawned upon the philosopher. Henry VI.,
slowly recovering from one of those attacks which passed for imbecility,
had condescended to amuse himself with various conversations with
Warner, urged to it first by representations of the unholy nature of
the student's pursuits; and, having satisfied his mind of his learned
subject's orthodoxy, the poor monarch had taken a sort of interest, not
so much, perhaps, in the objects of Warner's occupations, as in that
complete absorption from actual life which characterized the subject,
and gave him in this a melancholy resemblance to the king. While the
House of Lancaster was on the throne, the wife felt that her husband's
pursuits would be respected, and his harmless life safe from the fierce
prejudices of the people; and the good queen would not suffer him to
starve, when the last mark was expended in devices how to benefit his
country:--and in these hopes the woman died!

A year afterwards, all at court was in disorder,--armed men supplied the
service of young girls, and Sibyll, with a purse of broad pieces, soon
converted into manuscripts, was sent back to her father's desolate home.
There had she grown a flower amidst ruins, with no companion of her own
age, and left to bear, as her sweet and affectionate nature well did,
the contrast between the luxuries of a court and the penury of a hearth
which, year after year, hunger and want came more and more sensibly to
invade.

Sibyll had been taught, even as a child, some accomplishments little
vouchsafed then to either sex,--she could read and write; and Margaret
had not so wholly lost, in the sterner North, all reminiscence of
the accomplishments that graced her father's court as to neglect the
education of those brought up in her household. Much attention was given
to music, for it soothed the dark hours of King Henry; the blazoning of
missals or the lives of saints, with the labours of the loom, were also
among the resources of Sibyll's girlhood, and by these last she had,
from time to time, served to assist the maintenance of the little
family of which, child though she was, she became the actual head. But
latterly--that is, for the last few weeks--even these sources failed
her; for as more peaceful times allowed her neighbours to interest
themselves in the affairs of others, the dark reports against Warner had
revived. His name became a by-word of horror; the lonely light at the
lattice burning till midnight, against all the early usages and habits
of the day; the dark smoke of the furnace, constant in summer as in
winter, scandalized the religion of the place far and near. And finding,
to their great dissatisfaction, that the king's government and the
Church interfered not for their protection, and unable themselves
to volunteer any charges against the recluse (for the cows in the
neighbourhood remained provokingly healthy), they came suddenly, and,
as it were by one of those common sympathies which in all times the huge
persecutor we call the PUBLIC manifests when a victim is to be crushed,
to the pious resolution of starving where they could not burn. Why buy
the quaint devilries of the wizard's daughter?--no luck could come of
it. A missal blazoned by such hands, an embroidery worked at such a
loom, was like the Lord's Prayer read backwards. And one morning, when
poor Sibyll stole out as usual to vend a month's labour, she was driven
from door to door with oaths and curses.

Though Sibyll's heart was gentle, she was not without a certain strength
of mind. She had much of the patient devotion of her mother, much of the
quiet fortitude of her father's nature. If not comprehending to the full
the loftiness of Warner's pursuits, she still anticipated from them an
ultimate success which reconciled her to all temporary sacrifices. The
violent prejudices, the ignorant cruelty, thus brought to bear against
existence itself, filled her with sadness, it is true, but not unmixed
with that contempt for her persecutors, which, even in the meekest
tempers, takes the sting from despair. But hunger pressed. Her father
was nearing the goal of his discoveries, and in a moment of that pride
which in its very contempt for appearances braves them all, Sibyll
had stolen out to the pastime-ground,--with what result has been seen
already. Having thus accounted for the penury of the mansion, we return
to its owner.

Warner was contemplating with evident complacency and delight the
model of a machine which had occupied him for many years, and which he
imagined he was now rapidly bringing to perfection. His hands and
face were grimed with the smoke of his forge, and his hair and beard,
neglected as usual, looked parched and dried up, as if with the constant
fever that burned within.

"Yes, yes!" he muttered, "how they will bless me for this! What Roger
Bacon only suggested I shall accomplish! How it will change the face of
the globe! What wealth it will bestow on ages yet unborn!"

"My father," said the gentle voice of Sibyll, "my poor father, thou hast
not tasted bread to-day."

Warner turned, and his face relaxed into a tender expression as he saw
his daughter.

"My child," he said, pointing to his model, "the time comes when it will
live! Patience! patience!"

"And who would not have patience with thee, and for thee, Father?" said
Sibyll, with enthusiasm speaking on every feature. "What is the valour
of knight and soldier--dull statues of steel--to thine? Thou, with
thy naked breast, confronting all dangers,--sharper than the lance and
glaive, and all--"

"All to make England great!"

"Alas! what hath England merited from men like thee? The people, more
savage than their rulers, clamour for the stake, the gibbet, and the
dungeon, for all who strive to make them wiser. Remember the death of
Bolingbroke, [A mathematician accused as an accomplice, in sorcery, of
Eleanor Cobham, wife of Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, and hanged upon
that charge. His contemporary (William Wyrcestre) highly extols his
learning.]--a wizard, because, O Father!--because his pursuits were
thine!"

Adam, startled by this burst, looked at his daughter with more attention
than he usually evinced to any living thing. "Child," he said at length,
shaking his head in grave reproof, "let me not say to thee, 'O thou of
little faith!' There were no heroes were there no martyrs!"

"Do not frown on me, Father," said Sibyll, sadly; "let the world
frown,--not thou! Yes, thou art right. Thou must triumph at last."
And suddenly, her whole countenance changing into a soft and caressing
endearment, she added, "But now come, Father. Thou hast laboured
well for this morning. We shall have a little feast for thee in a few
minutes. And the stranger is recovered, thanks to our leechcraft. He is
impatient to see and thank thee."

"Well, well, I come, Sibyll," said the student, with a regretful,
lingering look at his model, and a sigh to be disturbed from its
contemplation; and he slowly quitted the room with Sibyll.

"But not, dear sir and father, not thus--not quite thus--will you go to
the stranger, well-born like yourself? Oh, no! your Sibyll is proud,
you know,--proud of her father." So saying, she clung to him fondly,
and drew him mechanically, for he had sunk into a revery, and heeded her
not, into an adjoining chamber, in which he slept. The comforts even of
the gentry, of men with the acres that Adam had sold, were then few
and scanty. The nobles and the wealthy merchants, indeed, boasted many
luxuries that excelled in gaud and pomp those of their equals now.
But the class of the gentry who had very little money at command were
contented with hardships from which a menial of this day would revolt.
What they could spend in luxury was usually consumed in dress and the
table they were obliged to keep. These were the essentials of dignity.
Of furniture there was a woful stint. In many houses, even of knights,
an edifice large enough to occupy a quadrangle was composed more of
offices than chambers inhabited by the owners; rarely boasting more than
three beds, which were bequeathed in wills as articles of great value.
The reader must, therefore, not be surprised that Warner's abode
contained but one bed, properly so called, and that was now devoted to
Nevile. The couch which served the philosopher for bed was a wretched
pallet, stretched on the floor, stuffed with straw,--with rough say,
or serge, and an old cloak for the coverings. His daughter's, in a room
below, was little better. The walls were bare; the whole house boasted
but one chair, which was in Marmaduke's chamber; stools or settles of
rude oak elsewhere supplied their place. There was no chimney except in
Nevile's room, and in that appropriated to the forge.

To this chamber, then, resembling a dungeon in appearance, Sibyll drew
the student, and here, from an old worm-eaten chest, she carefully
extracted a gown of brown velvet, which his father, Sir Armine, had
bequeathed to him by will,--faded, it is true, but still such as the
low-born wore not, [By the sumptuary laws only a knight was entitled to
wear velvet.] trimmed with fur, and clasped with a brooch of gold. And
then she held the ewer and basin to him, while, with the docility of a
child, he washed the smoke-soil from his hands and face. It was
touching to see in this, as in all else, the reverse of their natural
position,--the child tending and heeding and protecting, as it were, the
father; and that not from his deficiency, but his greatness; not because
he was below the vulgar intelligences of life, but above them. And
certainly, when, his patriarchal hair and beard smoothed into order,
and his velvet gown flowing in majestic folds around a figure tall and
commanding, Sibyll followed her father into Marmaduke's chamber, she
might well have been proud of his appearance; and she felt the innocent
vanity of her sex and age in noticing the half-start of surprise with
which Marmaduke regarded his host, and the tone of respect in which he
proffered him his salutations and thanks. Even his manner altered to
Sibyll; it grew less frank and affable, more courtly and reserved: and
when Madge came to announce that the refection was served, it was with a
blush of shame, perhaps, at his treatment of the poor gittern-player
on the pastime-ground, that the Nevile extended his left hand, for his
right was still not at his command, to lead the damsel to the hall.

This room, which was divided from the entrance by a screen, and, except
a small closet that adjoined it, was the only sitting-room in a day
when, as now on the Continent, no shame was attached to receiving
visitors in sleeping apartments, was long and low; an old and very
narrow table, that might have feasted thirty persons, stretched across
a dais raised upon a stone floor; there was no rere-dosse, or fireplace,
which does not seem at that day to have been an absolute necessity in
the houses of the metropolis and its suburbs, its place being supplied
by a movable brazier. Three oak stools were placed in state at the
board, and to one of these Marmaduke, in a silence unusual to him,
conducted the fair Sibyll.

"You will forgive our lack of provisions," said Warner, relapsing into
