Flint had sold all he had and escaped to Nova Scotia to join one of the
numerous colonies of deported Tories which had been formed there. Jabez
was down on his luck.

"I've hed enough o' rebellin," he declared. "I've tried both sides on't.
In the fust rebellion I wuz agin' the rebels, an the rebels licked. This
ere time I tuk sides agin' the govment, an the govment hez licked. I'm
like a feller ez is fust kicked behind an then in the stummick. I be
done on both sides, like a pancake."

Israel Goodrich and Ezra Phelps, being excepted from the amnesties as
members of the rebel committee, had only escaped jailing because, as men
of some substance they had been able to give large bonds to await the
further disposition of the Boston government.

"I didn' mind so much 'bout that," said Israel, "but what come kinder
tough on me wuz a seein them poor white-livered pulin chaps tew my house
tuk back ter jail."

For the debtors whom the mob had released from Great Barrington jail,
including those to whom Israel had given asylum, had now been recaptured
and returned to the charge of Cephas Bement and his pretty wife. Reuben
Hamlin had been taken with the rest, though his stay in jail this
time did not promise to be a long one, for he had overdone his feeble
strength in that night walk through the snow to Lee, and since then had
declined rapidly. He was so far gone that it would scarcely have been
thought worth while to take him to jail if he could have remained at
home. But as the sheriff had now sold the Hamlin house at auction, and
Elnathan and his wife had been separated and boarded out as paupers,
this was out of the question.

There was one man in Stockbridge, however, who was more to be pitied
than Reuben. Peleg Bidwell found himself at the end of the rebellion
as at the opening of it, the debtor and thrall of Solomon Gleason, save
that his debt was greater, his means of paying it even less, while by
his insolent bearing toward Solomon during the rebellion, he had made
him not only his creditor but his enemy. The jail yawned before Peleg,
and of the jail he, as well as the people generally, had acquired a new
horror since the day when the mob had brought to light the secrets of
that habitation of cruelty. He felt that, come what might, he could not
go to a jail. And he did not. But his pretty wife stayed at home and
avoided her former acquaintances, and those who saw her said she was
pale and acted queer, and Peleg went about with a hangdog look, and
Solomon Gleason was a frequent caller, and the women of the neighborhood
whispered together.

Abner Rathbun and Meshech Little had fled across the border, and Abe
Konkapot would have done so but for the fact that he could not leave his
sweetheart Lu to be secured by his rival and brother, Jake. Jake, having
out of enmity to his brother sided with the government party, was now
in favor with the powers that were, and more preferred than ever by Lu's
mother. But Abe knew the girl liked him rather the better, and did not
let himself be discouraged. Jake, observing that he made little progress
in spite of his advantages, laid a plot against his brother. The latter
had acquired in the army a tendency to use profane language in moments
of excitement, and it was of this weakness that Jake took advantage.
Picking an opportunity when there were witnesses, he provoked Abe to
wrath, and having made him swear profusely, went straightway to Squire
Woodbridge and complained of him for blasphemy. Abe was promptly
arrested and brought before the magistrate. The Squire, not unwilling to
get a handle against so bad a rebel, observed that it was high time for
the authorities to make a head against the tide of blasphemy which had
swept over the state since the war, and to advertise to the rabble
that the statute against profanity was not a dead letter and thereupon
sentenced Abe to ten lashes at the whipping-post, to be at once laid on,
it chancing to be a Saturday afternoon. While Abe, frantic with rage,
was struggling with the constable and his assistants, Jake ran away to
the Widow Nimham's cottage and asking Lu to go to walk, managed to bring
her across the green in time to see the sentence carried into execution.
Jake had understood what he was about. There were no doubt white
girls in Stockbridge who might have married a lover whom they had seen
publicly whipped, but for Lu, with an Indian's intense sensitiveness to
a personal indignity, it would have been impossible. Abe needed no one
to tell him that. As he was unbound and walked away from the post, his
blood-shotten eyes had taken her in standing there with Jake. He did
not even make an effort to see her afterwards and next Sunday Jake's and
Lu's banns were called in meeting. Abe had been drunk pretty much all
the time since, lying about the tavern floor. Widow Bingham said she
hadn't a heart to refuse him rum, and in truth the poor fellow's
manhood was so completely broken down, that he must have been a resolute
teetotaler, indeed, who would not have deemed it an act of common
humanity to help him temporarily to forget himself.

Such then are the events that were taking place in the community
about her while Desire was lying on her sick bed, or making her first
appearances as a convalescent downstairs. Only faint and occasional
echoes of them had reached her ears. She had been told, indeed, that
the rebellion was now all over and peace and order restored, but of the
details and incidents of the process she knew nothing. To be precise it
was during the latter part of the afternoon of the twenty-sixth day of
February, that Dr. Partridge was entertaining her as aforesaid with his
humorous version of the Lee affair. The Dr. and Mrs. Partridge had
come to tea, and to spend the evening, and just here, lest any modern
housewife should object that it is not a New England country practice
to invite company on washing-day, I would mention that in those days
of inexhaustible stores of linen, washing-day rarely came over once a
fortnight. After tea in the evening the Doctor and Squire Edwards sat
talking politics over their snuff-boxes, while Mrs. Partridge and Mrs.
Edwards discussed the difficulty of getting good help, now that the
negroes were beginning to feel the oats of their new liberty, and
the farmers' daughters, since the war and the talk about liberty and
equality, thought themselves as good as their betters. Now that the
insurrection had still further stirred up their jealousy of gentlefolk,
it was to be expected that they would be quite past getting on with at
all, and for all Mrs. Edwards could see, ladies must make up their minds
to do their own work pretty soon.

Desire sat in an armchair, her hands folded in her lap, musingly gazing
into the glowing bed of coals upon the hearth, and listening half
absently to the talk about her. She had been twice to meeting the
day before, and considered herself as now quite well, but she had not
disused the invalid's privilege of sitting silent in company.

"I marvel," said Squire Edwards, contemplatively tapping his snuff-box,
"at the working of Providence, when I consider that so lately the
Commonwealth, and especially this county, was in turmoil, the rebels
having everything their own way, and we scarcely daring to call our
souls our own, and behold them now scattered, fled over the border,
in prison, or disarmed and trembling, and the authority of law and the
courts everywhere established."

"Yes," replied the Doctor, "we have reason to be thankful indeed, and
yet I cannot help compassionating the honester among the rebels. It is
the pity of an uprising like this, that while one must needs sympathize
with the want and suffering of the rebels, it is impossible to condemn
too strongly the mad plans they urge as remedies. Ezra Phelps was
telling me the other day, that their idea, had they succeeded, was to
cause so many bills to be printed and scattered abroad, that the
poorest could get enough to pay all their debts and taxes. Some were for
repudiating public and private debts altogether, but Ezra said that
this would not be honest. He was in favor of printing bills enough
so everything could be paid. I tried to show him that one plan was as
dishonest as the other; that they might just as well refuse payment, as
pay in worthless bits of printed paper, and that the morality of the two
schemes being the same, that of refusing outright the payment of dues,
was preferable practically, because at least, it would not further
derange trade by putting a debased and valueless currency in
circulation. But I fear he did not see it at all, if he even gave me
credit for sincerity, and yet he is an honest, well-meaning chap, and
more intelligent than the common run of the rebels."

"That is the trouble nowadays," said Edwards, "these numskulls must
needs have matters of government explained to them, and pass their own
judgment on public affairs. And when they cannot understand them, then
forsooth comes a rebellion. I think none can deny seeing in these
late troubles the first fruits of those pestilent notions of equality,
whereof we heard so much from certain quarters, during the late war of
independence. I would that Mr. Jefferson and some of the other writers
of pestilent democratic rhetoric might have been here in the state the
past winter, to see the outcome of their preaching."

"It may yet prove," said Dr. Partridge, "that these troubles are to work
providentially to incline the people of this state to favor a closer
union with the rest of the continent for mutual protection, if the
forthcoming convention at Philadelphia shall devise a practicable
scheme. By reason of the preponderant strength of our Commonwealth we
have deemed ourselves less in need of such a union than are our sister
colonies, but this recent experience must teach us that even we are not
strong enough to stand alone."

"You are right there, sir," said Edwards. "It is plain that if we keep
on as we are, Massachusetts will ere long split into as many states as
we have counties, or at least into several. What have these troubles
been but a revolt of the western counties against the eastern, and had
we gentlemen gone with the rebels, the state would have been by
this time divided, and you know well," here Edwards' voice became
confidential, "we have in the main, no great cause to be beholden to
the Bostonians. They treat our western counties as if they were but
provinces."

Desire's attention had lapsed as the gentlemen's talk got into the
political depths, but some time after it was again aroused by hearing
the mention of Perez Hamlin's name. The doctor was saying:

"They say he is lurking just over the York border at Lebanon. There are
four or five score ruffians with him, who breathe out threatenings and
slaughter against us Stockbridge people but I think we need lose no
sleep on that account for the knaves will scarcely care to risk their
necks on Massachusetts soil."

"It is possible," said Edwards, "that they may make some descents on
Egremont or Sheffield or other points just across the line, but they
will never venture so far inland as Stockbridge for fear of being cut
off, and if they do our militia is quite able for them. What mischief
they can do safely they will do, but nothing else for they are arrant
cowards when all's said."

The talk of the gentlemen branched off upon other topics, but Desire did
not follow it further, finding in what had just been said quite enough
to engross her thoughts. Of course there could be no real danger that
Hamlin would venture a visit to Stockbridge, since both her father and
the doctor scouted the idea; but there was in the mere suggestion enough
to be very agitating. To avoid the possibility of a meeting with
Hamlin, as well as to acquit her conscience of a goading conviction of
unfairness to him, she had already once risked compromising herself
by sending that midnight warning to Lee, nor did she grudge the three
weeks' sickness it cost her, seeing it had succeeded. Nor was the idea
of meeting him any less terrifying now. The result of her experiences
in the last few months had been that all her old self-reliance was gone.
When she recalled what she had done and felt, and imagined what she
might have gone on to do, she owned in all humility that she could no
longer take care of herself or answer for herself. Desire Edwards was
after all capable of being as big a fool as any other girl. Especially
at the thought of meeting Hamlin again, this sense of insecurity
became actual panic. It was not that she feared her heart. She was not
conscious of loving him but of dreading him. Her imagination invested
him with some strange, irrestible magnetic power over her, the magnetism
of a tremendous passion, against which, demoralized by the memory of
her former weakness, she could not guarantee herself. And the upshot was
that just because she chanced to overhear that reference to Perez in the
gentlemen's talk, she lay awake nervous and miserable for several hours
after going to bed that night. In fact she had finally to take herself
seriously to task about the folly of scaring herself to death about such
a purely fanciful danger, before she could go to sleep.

She woke hours after with a stifled scream, for her mother was standing
in the door of the room, half dressed, the candle she held revealing a
pale and frightened face, while the words Desire heard were:

"Quick, get up and dress, or you'll be murdered in bed! An army of
Shayites is in the village."

"Four o'clock in the morning courage," that steadiness of nerve which is
not shaken when, suddenly roused from the relaxation and soft languor of
sleep, one is called to face pressing, deadly, and undreamed of peril in
the weird and chilling hour before dawn, was described by Napoleon as a
most rare quality among soldiers, and such being the case it is hardly
to be looked for among women. With chattering teeth and random motions,
half-distraught with incoherent terrors, Desire made a hasty, incomplete
toilet in the dark of her freezing bedroom, and ran downstairs. In the
living-room she found her mother and the smaller children with the negro
servants and Keziah Pixley, the white domestic. Downstairs in the
cellar her father and Jonathan were at work burying the silver and other
valuables, that having been the first thought when a fugitive from the
tavern where the rebels had first halted, brought the alarm. There
were no candles lit in the living-room lest their light should attract
marauders, and the faint light of the just breaking dawn made the faces
seem yet paler and ghastlier with fear than they were. From the street
without could be heard the noise of a drum, shouts, and now and then
musket shots, and having scraped away the thick frost from one of the
panes, Desire could see parties of men with muskets going about and
persons running across the green as if for their lives. As she looked
she saw a party fire their muskets after one of these fugitives, who
straightway came back and gave himself up. In the room it was bitterly
cold, for though the ashes had been raked off the coals no wood had been
put on lest the smoke from the chimney should draw attention.

The colored servants were in a state of abject terror, but the white
"help" made no attempt to conceal her exultation. They were her friends
the Shayites, and her sweetheart she declared was among them. He'd sent
her a hint that they were coming, she volubly declared, and yesterday
when Mrs. Edwards was "so high 'n mighty with her a makin her sweep the
kitchen twicet over she was goodamiter tell her ez haow she'd see the
time she'd wisht she'd a kep the right side on her."

"I've always tried to do right by you Keziah. I don't think you have any
call to be revengeful," said the poor lady, trembling.

"Mebbe I hain't and mebbe I hev," shrilled Keziah, tossing her head
disdainfully. "I guess I know them ez loves me from them ez don't. I
s'pose ye think I dunno wat yer husbun an Jonathan be a buryin daown
stairs."

"I'm sure you won't betray us, Keziah," said Mrs. Edwards. "You've had a
good place with us, Keziah. And there's that dimity dress of mine. It's
quite good yet. You could have it made over for you."

"Oh yes," replied Keziah, scornfully. "It's all well nuff ter talk bout
givin some o' yer things away wen yer likely to lose em all."

With that, turning her back upon her terrified mistress, with the air of
a queen refusing a petition, she patronizingly assured Desire that
she had met with more favor in her eyes than her mother, and she would
accordingly protect her. "Though," she added, "I guess ye won't need my
helpin for Cap'n Hamlin 'll see nobuddy teches ye cept hisself."

"Is he here?" gasped Desire, her dismay suddenly magnified into utter
panic.

"Fer sartain, my sweetheart ez sent me word 's under him," replied
Keziah.

A noise of voices and tramp of feet at the outside door interrupted her.
The marauders had come. The door was barred and this having been tested,
there was a hail of gunstock blows upon it with orders to open and
blasphemous threats as to the consequences of refusal. There was a dead
silence within, but for Mrs. Edwards' hollow whisper, "Don't open." With
staring eyes and mouths apart the terrified women and children looked at
one another motionless, barely daring to breathe. But as the volley of
blows and threats was renewed with access of violence, Keziah exclaimed:

"Ef they hain't yeur frens they be mine, an I hain't gonter see em kep
aout in the cold no longer fer nobuddy," and she went to the door and
took hold of the bar.

"Don't you do it," gasped Mrs. Edwards springing forward to arrest her.
But she had done it, and instantly Meshech Little with three or four
followers burst into the room, wearing the green insignia of rebellion
in their caps and carrying muskets with bayonets fixed.

"Why didn' ye open that ar door, afore?" demanded Meshech, angrily.

"What do you want?" asked Mrs. Edwards tremblingly confronting him.

"Wat dew we want ole woman?" replied Meshech. "Wal, we want most
evrything, but I guess we kin help oursels. Hey boys?"

"Callate we kin make aout tew," echoed one of his followers, not a
Stockbridge man, and then as his eye caught Desire, as she stood pale
and beautiful, with wild eyes and disheveled hair, by her mother, he
made a dive at her saying: "Guess I'll take a kiss tew begin with."

"Let the gal 'lone," said Meshech, catching him by the shoulder. "Hands
orfen her. She's the Duke's doxy, an he'll run ye through the body ef ye
tech her."

"Gosh, she hain't, though, is she?" said the fellow, refraining from
further demonstration but regarding her admiringly. "I hearn baout she.
Likely lookin gal, tew, hain't she? On'y leetle tew black, mebbe."

"Did'n ye know, ye dern fool, it's along o' her the Duke sent us here,
tew see nobuddy took nothin till he could come raoun?" said Meshech.
"But I callate the on'y way to keep other fellers from takin anything
tidday is ter take it yerself. We'll hev suthin tew drink, anyhaow.
Hello, ole cock," he added as Edwards, coming up from down cellar,
entered the room. "Ye be jess'n time. Come on, give us some rum," and
neither daring nor able to make resistance, the storekeeper was hustled
into the store. Keziah's sweetheart had remained behind. In the midst
of their mutual endearments, she had found opportunity to whisper to him
something, of which Mrs. Edwards caught the words, "cellar, nuff tew buy
us a farm an a haouse," and guessed the drift. As Keziah and her young
man, who responded to her suggestion with alacrity, were moving toward
the cellar door, Mrs. Edwards barred their way. The fellow was about to
lay hands on her, when one of the drinkers, coming back from the store,
yelled: "Look out, thar's the cap'n," and Perez entered.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVENTH

SOME REAL FIGHTING


At sight of his commander the soldier who had been about to lay hands
on Mrs. Edwards to thrust her out of his path to the cellar, giving over
his design, slunk into the store to join his comrades there, and was
followed by the faithful Keziah. Mrs. Edwards, who had faced the ruffian
only in the courage of desperation, sank trembling upon a settle, and
the children throwing themselves upon her, bawled in concert. Without
bestowing so much as a glance on any other object in the room Perez
crossed it to where Desire stood, and taking her nerveless hand in both
his, devoured her face with glowing eyes. She did not flush or show any
confusion; neither did she try to get away. She stood as if fascinated,
unresponsive but unresisting.

"Were you frightened?" he asked.

"Yes," she replied in a mechanical tone corresponding with her
appearance.

"Didn't you know I was here? I told you I would come back for you, and I
have come. You have been sick. I heard of it. Are you well now?"

"Yes."

"Reuben told me you came on foot through the snow to bring word so he
might warn me the night before the Lee battle. Was it that made you
sick?"

"Yes."

"What is that, Desire? What do you mean about sending him warning?"
cried Mrs. Edwards amazedly. Desire made no reply but Perez did:

"It is thanks to her I was not caught in my bed by your men that
morning. It is thanks to her I am not in jail today, disgraced by the
lash and waiting for the hangman. Oh my dear, how glad I am to owe it
to you," and he caught the end of one of the long strands of jetty hair
that fell down her neck and touched it to his lips.
