keep them out. And in order that my point may be understood, let me
state the basis upon which active membership to this book of history was
considered.

There was but one rule. "Did the country or the person in question
produce a new idea or perform an original act without which the history
of the entire human race would have been different?" It was not a
question of personal taste. It was a matter of cool, almost mathematical
judgment. No race ever played a more picturesque role in history than
the Mongolians, and no race, from the point of view of achievement or
intelligent progress, was of less value to the rest of mankind.

The career of Tiglath-Pileser, the Assyrian, is full of dramatic
episodes. But as far as we are concerned, he might just as well never
have existed at all. In the same way, the history of the Dutch Republic
is not interesting because once upon a time the sailors of de Ruyter
went fishing in the river Thames, but rather because of the fact
that this small mud-bank along the shores of the North Sea offered a
hospitable asylum to all sorts of strange people who had all sorts of
queer ideas upon all sorts of very unpopular subjects.

It is quite true that Athens or Florence, during the hey-day of their
glory, had only one tenth of the population of Kansas City. But our
present civilisation would be very different had neither of these two
little cities of the Mediterranean basin existed. And the same (with due
apologies to the good people of Wyandotte County) can hardly be said of
this busy metropolis on the Missouri River.

And since I am being very personal, allow me to state one other fact.

When we visit a doctor, we find out before hand whether he is a surgeon
or a diagnostician or a homeopath or a faith healer, for we want to know
from what angle he will look at our complaint. We ought to be as careful
in the choice of our historians as we are in the selection of our
physicians. We think, "Oh well, history is history," and let it go
at that. But the writer who was educated in a strictly Presbyterian
household somewhere in the backwoods of Scotland will look differently
upon every question of human relationships from his neighbour who as
a child, was dragged to listen to the brilliant exhortations of Robert
Ingersoll, the enemy of all revealed Devils. In due course of time, both
men may forget their early training and never again visit either church
or lecture hall. But the influence of these impressionable years stays
with them and they cannot escape showing it in whatever they write or
say or do.

In the preface to this book, I told you that I should not be an
infallible guide and now that we have almost reached the end, I
repeat the warning. I was born and educated in an atmosphere of the
old-fashioned liberalism which had followed the discoveries of Darwin
and the other pioneers of the nineteenth century. As a child, I happened
to spend most of my waking hours with an uncle who was a great collector
of the books written by Montaigne, the great French essayist of the
sixteenth century. Because I was born in Rotterdam and educated in the
city of Gouda, I ran continually across Erasmus and for some unknown
reason this great exponent of tolerance took hold of my intolerant
self. Later I discovered Anatole France and my first experience with
the English language came about through an accidental encounter with
Thackeray's "Henry Esmond," a story which made more impression upon me
than any other book in the English language.

If I had been born in a pleasant middle western city I probably
should have a certain affection for the hymns which I had heard in
my childhood. But my earliest recollection of music goes back to the
afternoon when my Mother took me to hear nothing less than a Bach
fugue. And the mathematical perfection of the great Protestant master
influenced me to such an extent that I cannot hear the usual hymns of
our prayer-meetings without a feeling of intense agony and direct pain.

Again, if I had been born in Italy and had been warmed by the sunshine
of the happy valley of the Arno, I might love many colourful and sunny
pictures which now leave me indifferent because I got my first artistic
impressions in a country where the rare sun beats down upon the
rain-soaked land with almost cruel brutality and throws everything into
violent contrasts of dark and light.

I state these few facts deliberately that you may know the personal bias
of the man who wrote this history and may understand his point-of-view.
The bibliography at the end of this book, which represents all sorts
of opinions and views, will allow you to compare my ideas with those of
other people. And in this way, you will be able to reach your own final
conclusions with a greater degree of fairness than would otherwise be
possible.

After this short but necessary excursion, we return to the history of
the last fifty years. Many things happened during this period but very
little occurred which at the time seemed to be of paramount importance.
The majority of the greater powers ceased to be mere political agencies
and became large business enterprises. They built railroads. They
founded and subsidized steam-ship lines to all parts of the world. They
connected their different possessions with telegraph wires. And they
steadily increased their holdings in other continents. Every available
bit of African or Asiatic territory was claimed by one of the rival
powers. France became a colonial nation with interests in Algiers and
Madagascar and Annam and Tonkin (in eastern Asia). Germany claimed parts
of southwest and east Africa, built settlements in Kameroon on the
west coast of Africa and in New Guinea and many of the islands of the
Pacific, and used the murder of a few missionaries as a welcome excuse
to take the harbour of Kisochau on the Yellow Sea in China. Italy tried
her luck in Abyssinia, was disastrously defeated by the soldiers of
the Negus, and consoled herself by occupying the Turkish possessions in
Tripoli in northern Africa. Russia, having occupied all of Siberia, took
Port Arthur away from China. Japan, having defeated China in the war of
1895, occupied the island of Formosa and in the year 1905 began to
lay claim to the entire empire of Corea. In the year 1883 England, the
largest colonial empire the world has ever seen, undertook to "protect"
Egypt. She performed this task most efficiently and to the great
material benefit of that much neglected country, which ever since the
opening of the Suez canal in 1868 had been threatened with a foreign
invasion. During the next thirty years she fought a number of colonial
wars in different parts of the world and in 1902 (after three years of
bitter fighting) she conquered the independent Boer republics of the
Transvaal and the Orange Free State. Meanwhile she had encouraged Cecil
Rhodes to lay the foundations for a great African state, which reached
from the Cape almost to the mouth of the Nile, and had faithfully picked
up such islands or provinces as had been left without a European owner.

The shrewd king of Belgium, by name Leopold, used the discoveries of
Henry Stanley to found the Congo Free State in the year 1885. Originally
this gigantic tropical empire was an "absolute monarchy." But after many
years of scandalous mismanagement, it was annexed by the Belgian people
who made it a colony (in the year 1908) and abolished the terrible
abuses which had been tolerated by this very unscrupulous Majesty, who
cared nothing for the fate of the natives as long as he got his ivory
and rubber.

As for the United States, they had so much land that they desired no
further territory. But the terrible misrule of Cuba, one of the last of
the Spanish possessions in the western hemisphere, practically forced
the Washington government to take action. After a short and rather
uneventful war, the Spaniards were driven out of Cuba and Puerto Rico
and the Philippines, and the two latter became colonies of the United
States.

This economic development of the world was perfectly natural. The
increasing number of factories in England and France and Germany needed
an ever increasing amount of raw materials and the equally increasing
number of European workers needed an ever increasing amount of food.
Everywhere the cry was for more and for richer markets, for more
easily accessible coal mines and iron mines and rubber plantations and
oil-wells, for greater supplies of wheat and grain.

The purely political events of the European continent dwindled to mere
insignificance in the eyes of men who were making plans for steamboat
lines on Victoria Nyanza or for railroads through the interior of
Shantung. They knew that many European questions still remained to be
settled, but they did not bother, and through sheer indifference and
carelessness they bestowed upon their descendants a terrible inheritance
of hate and misery. For untold centuries the south-eastern corner
of Europe had been the scene of rebellion and bloodshed. During the
seventies of the last century the people of Serbia and Bulgaria and
Montenegro and Roumania were once more trying to gain their freedom and
the Turks (with the support of many of the western powers), were trying
to prevent this.

After a period of particularly atrocious massacres in Bulgaria in the
year 1876, the Russian people lost all patience. The Government was
forced to intervene just as President McKinley was obliged to go to Cuba
and stop the shooting-squads of General Weyler in Havana. In April of
the year 1877 the Russian armies crossed the Danube, stormed the Shipka
pass, and after the capture of Plevna, marched southward until they
reached the gates of Constantinople. Turkey appealed for help to
England. There were many English people who denounced their government
when it took the side of the Sultan. But Disraeli (who had just made
Queen Victoria Empress of India and who loved the picturesque Turks
while he hated the Russians who were brutally cruel to the Jewish people
within their frontiers) decided to interfere. Russia was forced to
conclude the peace of San Stefano (1878) and the question of the Balkans
was left to a Congress which convened at Berlin in June and July of the
same year.

This famous conference was entirely dominated by the personality of
Disraeli. Even Bismarck feared the clever old man with his well-oiled
curly hair and his supreme arrogance, tempered by a cynical sense
of humor and a marvellous gift for flattery. At Berlin the British
prime-minister carefully watched over the fate of his friends the Turks.
Montenegro, Serbia and Roumania were recognised as independent kingdoms.
The principality of Bulgaria was given a semi-independent status under
Prince Alexander of Battenberg, a nephew of Tsar Alexander II. But none
of those countries were given the chance to develop their powers and
their resources as they would have been able to do, had England been
less anxious about the fate of the Sultan, whose domains were necessary
to the safety of the British Empire as a bulwark against further Russian
aggression.

To make matters worse, the congress allowed Austria to take Bosnia and
Herzegovina away from the Turks to be "administered" as part of the
Habsburg domains. It is true that Austria made an excellent job of it.
The neglected provinces were as well managed as the best of the British
colonies, and that is saying a great deal. But they were inhabited by
many Serbians. In older days they had been part of the great Serbian
empire of Stephan Dushan, who early in the fourteenth century had
defended western Europe against the invasions of the Turks and whose
capital of Uskub had been a centre of civilisation one hundred and fifty
years before Columbus discovered the new lands of the west. The Serbians
remembered their ancient glory as who would not? They resented the
presence of the Austrians in two provinces, which, so they felt, were
theirs by every right of tradition.

And it was in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, that the archduke
Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne, was murdered on June 28 of the
year 1914. The assassin was a Serbian student who had acted from purely
patriotic motives.

But the blame for this terrible catastrophe which was the immediate,
though not the only cause of the Great World War did not lie with the
half-crazy Serbian boy or his Austrian victim. It must be traced back
to the days of the famous Berlin Conference when Europe was too busy
building a material civilisation to care about the aspirations and
the dreams of a forgotten race in a dreary corner of the old Balkan
peninsula.




A NEW WORLD

THE GREAT WAR WHICH WAS REALLY THE STRUGGLE FOR A NEW AND BETTER WORLD


THE Marquis de Condorcet was one of the noblest characters among the
small group of honest enthusiasts who were responsible for the outbreak
of the great French Revolution. He had devoted his life to the cause
of the poor and the unfortunate. He had been one of the assistants of
d'Alembert and Diderot when they wrote their famous Encyclopedie. During
the first years of the Revolution he had been the leader of the Moderate
wing of the Convention.

His tolerance, his kindliness, his stout common sense, had made him an
object of suspicion when the treason of the king and the court
clique had given the extreme radicals their chance to get hold of the
government and kill their opponents. Condorcet was declared "hors de
loi," or outlawed, an outcast who was henceforth at the mercy of every
true patriot. His friends offered to hide him at their own peril.
Condorcet refused to accept their sacrifice. He escaped and tried to
reach his home, where he might be safe. After three nights in the
open, torn and bleeding, he entered an inn and asked for some food. The
suspicious yokels searched him and in his pockets they found a copy of
Horace, the Latin poet. This showed that their prisoner was a man of
gentle breeding and had no business upon the highroads at a time when
every educated person was regarded as an enemy of the Revolutionary
state. They took Condorcet and they bound him and they gagged him and
they threw him into the village lock-up, but in the morning when the
soldiers came to drag him back to Paris and cut his head off, behold! he
was dead.

This man who had given all and had received nothing had good reason to
despair of the human race. But he has written a few sentences which ring
as true to-day as they did one hundred and thirty years ago. I repeat
them here for your benefit.

"Nature has set no limits to our hopes," he wrote, "and the picture of
the human race, now freed from its chains and marching with a firm tread
on the road of truth and virtue and happiness, offers to the philosopher
a spectacle which consoles him for the errors, for the crimes and the
injustices which still pollute and afflict this earth."

The world has just passed through an agony of pain compared to which the
French Revolution was a mere incident. The shock has been so great that
it has killed the last spark of hope in the breasts of millions of
men. They were chanting a hymn of progress, and four years of slaughter
followed their prayers for peace. "Is it worth while," so they ask,
"to work and slave for the benefit of creatures who have not yet passed
beyond the stage of the earliest cave men?"

There is but one answer.

That answer is "Yes!"

The World War was a terrible calamity. But it did not mean the end of
things. On the contrary it brought about the coming of a new day.

It is easy to write a history of Greece and Rome or the Middle Ages.
The actors who played their parts upon that long-forgotten stage are
all dead. We can criticize them with a cool head. The audience that
applauded their efforts has dispersed. Our remarks cannot possibly hurt
their feelings.

But it is very difficult to give a true account of contemporary events.
The problems that fill the minds of the people with whom we pass through
life, are our own problems, and they hurt us too much or they please us
too well to be described with that fairness which is necessary when we
are writing history and not blowing the trumpet of propaganda. All the
same I shall endeavour to tell you why I agree with poor Condorcet when
he expressed his firm faith in a better future.

Often before have I warned you against the false impression which is
created by the use of our so-called historical epochs which divide the
story of man into four parts, the ancient world, the Middle Ages, the
Renaissance and the Reformation, and Modern Time. The last of these
terms is the most dangerous. The word "modern" implies that we, the
people of the twentieth century, are at the top of human achievement.
Fifty years ago the liberals of England who followed the leadership of
Gladstone felt that the problem of a truly representative and democratic
form of government had been solved forever by the second great Reform
Bill, which gave workmen an equal share in the government with their
employers. When Disraeli and his conservative friends talked of a
dangerous "leap in the dark" they answered "No." They felt certain of
their cause and trusted that henceforth all classes of society would
co-operate to make the government of their common country a success.
Since then many things have happened, and the few liberals who are still
alive begin to understand that they were mistaken.

There is no definite answer to any historical problem.

Every generation must fight the good fight anew or perish as those
sluggish animals of the prehistoric world have perished.

If you once get hold of this great truth you will get a new and much
broader view of life. Then, go one step further and try to imagine
yourself in the position of your own great-great-grandchildren who will
take your place in the year 10,000. They too will learn history. But
what will they think of those short four thousand years during which we
have kept a written record of our actions and of our thoughts? They will
think of Napoleon as a contemporary of Tiglath Pileser, the Assyrian
conqueror. Perhaps they will confuse him with Jenghiz Khan or Alexander
the Macedonian. The great war which has just come to an end will
appear in the light of that long commercial conflict which settled the
supremacy of the Mediterranean when Rome and Carthage fought during one
hundred and twenty-eight years for the mastery of the sea. The Balkan
troubles of the 19th century (the struggle for freedom of Serbia and
Greece and Bulgaria and Montenegro) to them will seem a continuation of
the disordered conditions caused by the Great Migrations. They will look
at pictures of the Rheims cathedral which only yesterday was destroyed
by German guns as we look upon a photograph of the Acropolis ruined
two hundred and fifty years ago during a war between the Turks and the
Venetians. They will regard the fear of death, which is still common
among many people, as a childish superstition which was perhaps natural
in a race of men who had burned witches as late as the year 1692. Even
our hospitals and our laboratories and our operating rooms of which we
are so proud will look like slightly improved workshops of alchemists
and mediaeval surgeons.

And the reason for all this is simple. We modern men and women are not
"modern" at all. On the contrary we still belong to the last generations
of the cave-dwellers. The foundation for a new era was laid but
yesterday. The human race was given its first chance to become
truly civilised when it took courage to question all things and made
"knowledge and understanding" the foundation upon which to create a more
reasonable and sensible society of human beings. The Great War was the
"growing-pain" of this new world.

For a long time to come people will write mighty books to prove that
this or that or the other person brought about the war. The Socialists
will publish volumes in which they will accuse the "capitalists" of
having brought about the war for "commercial gain." The capitalists
will answer that they lost infinitely more through the war than they
made--that their children were among the first to go and fight and be
killed--and they will show how in every country the bankers tried their
very best to avert the outbreak of hostilities. French historians will
go through the register of German sins from the days of Charlemagne
until the days of William of Hohenzollern and German historians will
return the compliment and will go through the list of French horrors
from the days of Charlemagne until the days of President Poincare. And
then they will establish to their own satisfaction that the other fellow
was guilty of "causing the war." Statesmen, dead and not yet dead, in
all countries will take to their typewriters and they will explain how
they tried to avert hostilities and how their wicked opponents forced
them into it.

The historian, a hundred years hence, will not bother about these
apologies and vindications. He will understand the real nature of the
underlying causes and he will know that personal ambitions and personal
wickedness and personal greed had very little to do with the final
outburst. The original mistake, which was responsible for all this
misery, was committed when our scientists began to create a new world of
steel and iron and chemistry and electricity and forgot that the human
mind is slower than the proverbial turtle, is lazier than the well-known
sloth, and marches from one hundred to three hundred years behind the
small group of courageous leaders.

A Zulu in a frock coat is still a Zulu. A dog trained to ride a bicycle
and smoke a pipe is still a dog. And a human being with the mind of a
sixteenth century tradesman driving a 1921 Rolls-Royce is still a human
being with the mind of a sixteenth century tradesman.

If you do not understand this at first, read it again. It will become
clearer to you in a moment and it will explain many things that have
happened these last six years.

Perhaps I may give you another, more familiar, example, to show you what
I mean. In the movie theatres, jokes and funny remarks are often thrown
upon the screen. Watch the audience the next time you have a chance. A
few people seem almost to inhale the words. It takes them but a second
to read the lines. Others are a bit slower. Still others take from
twenty to thirty seconds. Finally those men and women who do not read
any more than they can help, get the point when the brighter ones among
the audience have already begun to decipher the next cut-in. It is not
different in human life, as I shall now show you.

In a former chapter I have told you how the idea of the Roman Empire
continued to live for a thousand years after the death of the last Roman
Emperor. It caused the establishment of a large number of "imitation
empires." It gave the Bishops of Rome a chance to make themselves the
head of the entire church, because they represented the idea of Roman
world-supremacy. It drove a number of perfectly harmless barbarian
chieftains into a career of crime and endless warfare because they were
for ever under the spell of this magic word "Rome." All these people,
Popes, Emperors and plain fighting men were not very different from you
or me. But they lived in a world where the Roman tradition was a vital
issue something living--something which was remembered clearly both
by the father and the son and the grandson. And so they struggled and
sacrificed themselves for a cause which to-day would not find a dozen
recruits.

In still another chapter I have told you how the great religious
wars took place more than a century after the first open act of the
Reformation and if you will compare the chapter on the Thirty Years War
with that on Inventions, you will see that this ghastly butchery took
place at a time when the first clumsy steam engines were already
puffing in the laboratories of a number of French and German and English
scientists. But the world at large took no interest in these strange
contraptions, and went on with a grand theological discussion which
to-day causes yawns, but no anger.

And so it goes. A thousand years from now, the historian will use the
same words about Europe of the out-going nineteenth century, and he
will see how men were engaged upon terrific nationalistic struggles
while the laboratories all around them were filled with serious folk who
cared not one whit for politics as long as they could force nature to
surrender a few more of her million secrets.

You will gradually begin to understand what I am driving at. The
engineer and the scientist and the chemist, within a single generation,
filled Europe and America and Asia with their vast machines, with their
telegraphs, their flying machines, their coal-tar products. They
created a new world in which time and space were reduced to complete
insignificance. They invented new products and they made these so cheap
that almost every one could buy them. I have told you all this before
but it certainly will bear repeating.

To keep the ever increasing number of factories going, the owners, who
had also become the rulers of the land, needed raw materials and coal.
Especially coal. Meanwhile the mass of the people were still thinking in
terms of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and clinging to the
old notions of the state as a dynastic or political organisation. This
clumsy mediaeval institution was then suddenly called upon to handle the
highly modern problems of a mechanical and industrial world. It did
its best, according to the rules of the game which had been laid down
centuries before. The different states created enormous armies and
gigantic navies which were used for the purpose of acquiring new
possessions in distant lands. Whereever{sic} there was a tiny bit of
land left, there arose an English or a French or a German or a Russian
colony. If the natives objected, they were killed. In most cases they
did not object, and were allowed to live peacefully, provided they did
not interfere with the diamond mines or the coal mines or the oil mines
