
The winds had ever seemed malignant to Margaret of Anjou, but never more
than now. So long a continuance of stormy and adverse weather was never
known in the memory of man; and we believe that it has scarcely its
parallel in history.

The earl's promise to restore King Henry was fulfilled in October. From
November to the following April, Margaret, with the young and royal
pair, and the Countess of Warwick, lay at the seaside, waiting for
a wind. [Fabyan, 502.] Thrice, in defiance of all warnings from the
mariners of Harfleur, did she put to sea, and thrice was she driven back
on the coast of Normandy, her ships much damaged. Her friends protested
that this malice of the elements was caused by sorcery, [Hall, Warkworth
Chronicle]--a belief which gained ground in England, exhilarated the
Duchess of Bedford, and gave new fame to Bungey, who arrogated all
the merit, and whose weather wisdom, indeed, had here borne out his
predictions. Many besought Margaret not to tempt Providence, not to
trust the sea; but the queen was firm to her purpose, and her son
laughed at omens,--yet still the vessels could only leave the harbour to
be driven back upon the land.

Day after day the first question of Warwick, when the sun rose, was,
"How sets the wind?" Night after night, ere he retired to rest, "Ill
sets the wind!" sighed the earl. The gales that forbade the coming of
the royal party sped to the unwilling lingerers courier after courier,
envoy after envoy; and at length Warwick, unable to bear the sickening
suspense at distance, went himself to Dover [Hall], and from its white
cliffs looked, hour by hour, for the sails which were to bear "Lancaster
and its fortunes." The actual watch grew more intolerable than the
distant expectation, and the earl sorrowfully departed to his castle
of Warwick, at which Isabel and Clarence then were. Alas! where the old
smile of home?




CHAPTER IV. THE RETURN OF EDWARD OF YORK.

And the winds still blew, and the storm was on the tide, and Margaret
came not when, in the gusty month of March, the fishermen of the Humber
beheld a single ship, without flag or pennon, and sorely stripped and
rivelled by adverse blasts, gallantly struggling towards the shore. The
vessel was not of English build, and resembled in its bulk and fashion
those employed by the Easterlings in their trade, half merchantman, half
war-ship.

The villagers of Ravenspur,--the creek of which the vessel now rapidly
made to,--imagining that it was some trading craft in distress, grouped
round the banks, and some put out their boats: But the vessel held on
its way, and, as the water was swelled by the tide, and unusually deep,
silently cast anchor close ashore, a quarter of a mile from the crowd.

The first who leaped on land was a knight of lofty stature, and in
complete armour richly inlaid with gold arabesques. To him succeeded
another, also in mail, and, though well guilt and fair proportioned, of
less imposing presence. And then, one by one, the womb of the dark ship
gave forth a number of armed soldiers, infinitely larger than it could
have been supposed to contain, till the knight who first landed stood
the centre of a group of five hundred men. Then were lowered from the
vessel, barbed and caparisoned, some five score horses; and, finally,
the sailors and rowers, armed but with steel caps and short swords, came
on shore, till not a man was left on board.

"Now praise," said the chief knight, "to God and Saint George that we
have escaped the water! and not with invisible winds but with bodily
foes must our war be waged."

"Beau sire," cried one knight, who had debarked immediately after the
speaker, and who seemed, from his bearing and equipment, of higher rank
than those that followed, "beau sire, this is a slight army to reconquer
a king's realm! Pray Heaven that our bold companions have also escaped
the deep!"

"Why, verily, we are not eno' at the best, to spare one man," said the
chief knight, gayly, "but, lo! we are not without welcomers." And he
pointed to the crowd of villagers who now slowly neared the warlike
group, but halting at a little distance, continued to gaze at them in
some anxiety and alarm.

"Ho there! good fellows!" cried the leader, striding towards the throng,
"what name give you to this village?"

"Ravenspur, please your worship," answered one of the peasants.

"Ravenspur, hear you that, lords and friends? Accept the omen! On this
spot landed from exile Henry of Bolingbroke, known afterwards in our
annals as King Henry IV.! Bare is the soil of corn and of trees,--it
disdains meaner fruit; it grows kings! Hark!" The sound of a bugle was
heard at a little distance, and in a few moments a troop of about a
hundred men were seen rising above an undulation in the ground, and
as the two bands recognized each other, a shout of joy was given and
returned.

As this new reinforcement advanced, the peasantry and fishermen,
attracted by curiosity and encouraged by the peaceable demeanour of the
debarkers, drew nearer, and mingled with the first comers.

"What manner of men be ye, and what want ye?" asked one of the
bystanders, who seemed of better nurturing than the rest, and who,
indeed, was a small franklin.

No answer was returned by those he more immediately addressed; but the
chief knight heard the question, and suddenly unbuckling his helmet,
and giving it to one of those beside him, he turned to the crowd a
countenance of singular beauty at once animated and majestic, and said
in a loud voice, "We are Englishmen, like you, and we come here to claim
our rights. Ye seem tall fellows and honest.--Standard bearer, unfurl
our flag!" And as the ensign suddenly displayed the device of a sun in
a field azure, the chief continued, "March under this banner, and for
every day ye serve, ye shall have a month's hire."

"Marry!" quoth the franklin, with a suspicious, sinister look, "these
be big words. And who are you, Sir Knight, who would levy men in King
Henry's kingdom?"

"Your knees, fellows!" cried the second knight. "Behold your true liege
and suzerain, Edward IV.! Long live King Edward!"

The soldiers caught up the cry, and it was re-echoed lustily by the
smaller detachment that now reached the spot; but no answer came from
the crowd. They looked at each other in dismay, and retreated rapidly
from their place amongst the troops. In fact, the whole of the
neighbouring district was devoted to Warwick, and many of the peasantry
about had joined the former rising under Sir John Coniers. The franklin
alone retreated not with the rest; he was a bluff, plain, bold fellow,
with good English blood in his veins. And when the shout ceased, he said
shortly, "We hereabouts know no king but King Henry. We fear you would
impose upon us. We cannot believe that a great lord like him you call
Edward IV. would land with a handful of men to encounter the armies of
Lord Warwick. We forewarn you to get into your ship and go back as fast
as ye came, for the stomach of England is sick of brawls and blows; and
what ye devise is treason!"

Forth from the new detachment stepped a youth of small stature, not in
armour, and with many a weather-stain on his gorgeous dress. He laid his
hand upon the franklin's shoulder. "Honest and plain-dealing fellow,"
said he, "you are right: pardon the foolish outburst of these brave men,
who cannot forget as yet that their chief has worn the crown. We come
back not to disturb this realm, nor to effect aught against King Henry,
whom the saints have favoured. No, by Saint Paul, we come but back to
claim our lands unjustly forfeit. My noble brother here is not king of
England, since the people will it not, but he is Duke of York, and he
will be contented if assured of the style and lands our father left him.
For me, called Richard of Gloucester, I ask nothing but leave to spend
my manhood where I have spent my youth, under the eyes of my renowned
godfather, Richard Nevile, Earl of Warwick. So report of us. Whither
leads yon road?"

"To York," said the franklin, softened, despite his judgment, by the
irresistible suavity of the voice that addressed him.

"Thither will we go, my lord duke and brother, with your leave," said
Prince Richard, "peaceably and as petitioners. God save ye, friends and
countrymen, pray for us, that King Henry and the parliament may do us
justice. We are not over rich now, but better times may come. Largess!"
and filling both hands with coins from his gipsire, he tossed the bounty
among the peasants.

"Mille tonnere! What means he with this humble talk of King Henry and
the parliament?" whispered Edward to the Lord Say, while the crowd
scrambled for the largess, and Richard smilingly mingled amongst them,
and conferred with the franklin.

"Let him alone, I pray you, my liege; I guess his wise design. And now
for our ships. What orders for the master?"

"For the other vessels, let them sail or anchor as they list. But
for the bark that has borne Edward king of England to the land of his
ancestors there is no return!"

The royal adventurer then beckoned the Flemish master of the ship, who,
with every sailor aboard, had debarked, and the loose dresses of the
mariners made a strong contrast to the mail of the warriors with whom
they mingled.

"Friend," said Edward, in French, "thou hast said that thou wilt share
my fortunes, and that thy good fellows are no less free of courage and
leal in trust."

"It is so, sire. Not a man who has gazed on thy face, and heard thy
voice, but longs to serve one on whose brow Nature has written king."

"And trust me," said Edward, "no prince of my blood shall be dearer to
me than you and yours, my friends in danger and in need. And sith it
be so, the ship that hath borne such hearts and such hopes should, in
sooth, know no meaner freight. Is all prepared?"

"Yes, sire, as you ordered. The train is laid for the brennen."

"Up, then, with the fiery signal, and let it tell, from cliff to
cliff, from town to town, that Edward the Plantagenet, once returned to
England, leaves it but for the grave!"

The master bowed, and smiled grimly. The sailors, who had been prepared
for the burning, arranged before between the master and the prince, and
whose careless hearts Edward had thoroughly won to his person and his
cause, followed the former towards the ship, and stood silently grouped
around the shore. The soldiers, less informed, gazed idly on, and
Richard now regained Edward's side.

"Reflect," he said, as he drew him apart, "that, when on this spot
landed Henry of Bolingbroke, he gave not out that he was marching to the
throne of Richard II. He professed but to claim his duchy,--and men were
influenced by justice, till they became agents of ambition. This be
your policy; with two thousand men you are but Duke of York; with ten
thousand men you are King of England! In passing hither, I met with
many, and sounding the temper of the district, I find it not ripe to
share your hazard. The world soon ripens when it hath to hail success!"

"O young boy's smooth face! O old man's deep brain!" said Edward,
admiringly, "what a king hadst thou made!" A sudden flush passed over
the prince's pale cheek, and, ere it died away, a flaming torch was
hurled aloft in the air; it fell whirling into the ship--a moment, and a
loud crash; a moment, and a mighty blaze! Up sprung from the deck, along
the sails, the sheeted fire,--

    "A giant beard of flame."  [Aeschylus: Agamemnon, 314]

It reddened the coast, the skies, from far and near; it glowed on the
faces and the steel of the scanty army; it was seen, miles away, by the
warders of many a castle manned with the troops of Lancaster; it brought
the steed from the stall, the courier to the selle; it sped, as of old
the beacon fire that announced to Clytemnestra the return of the Argive
king. From post to post rode the fiery news, till it reached Lord
Warwick in his hall, King Henry in his palace, Elizabeth in her
sanctuary. The iron step of the dauntless Edward was once more pressed
upon the soil of England.




CHAPTER V. THE PROGRESS OF THE PLANTAGENET.

A few words suffice to explain the formidable arrival we have just
announced. Though the Duke of Burgundy had by public proclamation
forbidden his subjects to aid the exiled Edward, yet, whether moved
by the entreaties of his wife, or wearied by the remonstrances of his
brother-in-law, he at length privately gave the dethroned monarch fifty
thousand florins to find troops for himself, and secretly hired Flemish
and Dutch vessels to convey him to England. [Comines, Hall, Lingard, S.
Turner] But so small was the force to which the bold Edward trusted his
fortunes, that it almost seemed as if Burgundy sent him forth to his
destruction. He sailed from the coast of Zealand; the winds, if less
unmanageable than those that blew off the seaport where Margaret and her
armament awaited a favouring breeze, were still adverse. Scared from the
coast of Norfolk by the vigilance of Warwick and Oxford, who had filled
that district with armed men, storm and tempest drove him at last to
Humber Head, where we have seen him land, and whence we pursue his
steps.

The little band set out upon its march, and halted for the night at a
small village two miles inland. Some of the men were then sent out on
horseback for news of the other vessels, that bore the remnant of the
invading force. These had, fortunately, effected a landing in various
places; and, before daybreak, Anthony Woodville, and the rest of the
troops, had joined the leader of an enterprise that seemed but the
rashness of despair, for its utmost force, including the few sailors
allured to the adventurer's standard, was about two thousand men.
[Fifteen hundred, according to the Croyland historian.] Close and
anxious was the consultation then held. Each of the several detachments
reported alike of the sullen indifference of the population, which
each had sought to excite in favour of Edward. Light riders [Hall]
were despatched in various directions, still further to sound the
neighbourhood. All returned ere noon, some bruised and maltreated by the
stones and staves of the rustics, and not a voice had been heard to echo
the cry, "Long live King Edward!" The profound sagacity of Gloucester's
guileful counsel was then unanimously recognized. Richard despatched a
secret letter to Clarence; and it was resolved immediately to proceed
to York, and to publish everywhere along the road that the fugitive had
returned but to claim his private heritage, and remonstrate with the
parliament which had awarded the duchy of York to Clarence, his younger
brother.

"Such a power," saith the Chronicle, "hath justice ever among men, that
all, moved by mercy or compassion, began either to favour or not
to resist him." And so, wearing the Lancastrian Prince of Wales's
cognizance of the ostrich feather, crying out as they marched, "Long
live King Henry!" the hardy liars, four days after their debarkation,
arrived at the gates of York.

Here, not till after much delay and negotiation, Edward was admitted
only as Duke of York, and upon condition that he would swear to be a
faithful and loyal servant to King Henry; and at the gate by which he
was to enter, Edward actually took that oath, "a priest being by to
say Mass in the Mass tyme, receiving the body of our blessed Saviour!"
[Hall.]

Edward tarried not long in York; he pushed forward. Two great nobles
guarded those districts,--Montagu and the Earl of Northumberland, to
whom Edward had restored his lands and titles, and who, on condition of
retaining them, had re-entered the service of Lancaster. This last, a
true server of the times, who had sided with all parties, now judged it
discreet to remain neutral. [This is the most favourable interpretation
of his conduct: according to some he was in correspondence with Edward,
who showed his letters.] But Edward must pass within a few miles of
Pontefract castle, where Montagu lay with a force that could destroy him
at a blow. Edward was prepared for the assault, but trusted to deceive
the marquis, as he had deceived the citizens of York,--the more for the
strong personal love Montagu had ever shown him. If not, he was prepared
equally to die in the field rather than eat again the bitter bread of
the exile. But to his inconceivable joy and astonishment, Montagu,
like Northumberland, lay idle and supine. Edward and his little troop
threaded safely the formidable pass. Alas! Montagu had that day received
a formal order from the Duke of Clarence, as co-protector of the realm,
[Our historians have puzzled their brains in ingenious conjectures
of the cause of Montagu's fatal supineness at this juncture, and have
passed over the only probable solution of the mystery, which is to be
found simply enough stated thus in Stowe's Chronicle: "The Marquess
Montacute would have fought with King Edward, but that he had received
letters from the Duke of Clarence that he should not fight till hee
came." This explanation is borne out by the Warkworth Chronicler and
others, who, in an evident mistake of the person addressed, state that
Clarence wrote word to Warwick not to fight till he came. Clarence could
not have written so to Warwick, who, according to all authorities, was
mustering his troops near London, and not in the way to fight Edward;
nor could Clarence have had authority to issue such commands to his
colleague, nor would his colleague have attended to them, since we have
the amplest testimony that Warwick was urging all his captains to attack
Edward at once. The duke's order was, therefore, clearly addressed to
Montagu.] to suffer Edward to march on, provided his force was small,
and he had taken the oaths to Henry, and assumed but the title of Duke
of York,--"for your brother the earl hath had compunctious visitings,
and would fain forgive what hath passed, for my father's sake, and unite
all factions by Edward's voluntary abdication of the throne; at all
hazards, I am on my way northward, and you will not fight till I come."
The marquis,--who knew the conscientious doubts which Warwick had
entertained in his darker hours, who had no right to disobey the
co-protector, who knew no reason to suspect Lord Warwick's son-in-law,
and who, moreover, was by no means anxious to be, himself, the
executioner of Edward, whom he had once so truly loved,--though a little
marvelling at Warwick's softness, yet did not discredit the letter, and
the less regarded the free passage he left to the returned exiles, from
contempt for the smallness of their numbers, and his persuasion that
if the earl saw fit to alter his counsels, Edward was still more in his
power the farther he advanced amidst a hostile population, and towards
the armies which the Lords Exeter and Oxford were already mustering.

But that free passage was everything to Edward! It made men think that
Montagu, as well as Northumberland, favoured his enterprise; that
the hazard was less rash and hopeless than it had seemed; that Edward
counted upon finding his most powerful allies among those falsely
supposed to be his enemies. The popularity Edward had artfully acquired
amongst the captains of Warwick's own troops, on the march to Middleham,
now bestead him. Many of them were knights and gentlemen residing in the
very districts through which he passed. They did not join him, but they
did not oppose. Then rapidly flocked to "the Sun of York," first the
adventurers and condottieri who in civil war adopt any side for pay;
next came the disappointed, the ambitious, and the needy. The hesitating
began to resolve, the neutral to take a part. From the state of
petitioners supplicating a pardon, every league the Yorkists marched
advanced them to the dignity of assertors of a cause. Doncaster first,
then Nottingham, then Leicester,--true to the town spirit we have before
described,--opened their gates to the trader prince.

Oxford and Exeter reached Newark with their force. Edward marched on
them at once. Deceived as to his numbers, they took panic and fled.
When once the foe flies, friends ever start up from the very earth!
Hereditary partisans--gentlemen, knights, and nobles--now flocked fast
round the adventurer. Then came Lovell and Cromwell and D'Eyncourt, ever
true to York; and Stanley, never true to any cause. Then came the brave
knights Parr and Norris and De Burgh; and no less than three thousand
retainers belonging to Lord Hastings--the new man--obeyed the summons of
his couriers and joined their chief at Leicester.

Edward of March, who had landed at Ravenspur with a handful of brigands,
now saw a king's army under his banner. [The perplexity and confusion
which involve the annals of this period may be guessed by this,--that
two historians, eminent for research (Lingard and Sharon Turner), differ
so widely as to the numbers who had now joined Edward, that Lingard
asserts that at Nottingham he was at the head of fifty or sixty thousand
men; and Turner gives him, at the most, between six and seven thousand.
The latter seems nearer to the truth. We must here regret that Turner's
partiality to the House of York induces him to slur over Edward's
detestable perjury at York, and to accumulate all rhetorical arts to
command admiration for his progress,--to the prejudice of the salutary
moral horror we ought to feel for the atrocious perfidy and violation
of oath to which he owed the first impunity that secured the after
triumph.] Then the audacious perjurer threw away the mask; then, forth
went--not the prayer of the attainted Duke of York--but the proclamation
of the indignant king. England now beheld two sovereigns, equal in their
armies. It was no longer a rebellion to be crushed; it was a dynasty to
be decided.




CHAPTER VI. LORD WARWICK, WITH THE FOE IN THE FIELD AND THE TRAITOR AT
THE HEARTH.

Every precaution which human wisdom could foresee had Lord Warwick taken
to guard against invasion, or to crush it at the onset. [Hall.] All the
coasts on which it was most probable Edward would land had been strongly
guarded. And if the Humber had been left without regular troops, it was
because prudence might calculate that the very spot where Edward did
land was the very last he would have selected,--unless guided by fate to
his destruction,--in the midst of an unfriendly population, and in face
of the armies of Northumberland and of Montagu. The moment the earl
heard of Edward's reception at York,--far from the weakness which the
false Clarence (already in correspondence with Gloucester) imputed to
him,--he despatched to Montagu, by Marmaduke Nevile, peremptory orders
to intercept Edward's path, and give him battle before he could advance
farther towards the centre of the island. We shall explain presently why
this messenger did not reach the marquis. But Clarence was some hours
before him in his intelligence and his measures.

When the earl next heard that Edward had passed Pontefract with
impunity, and had reached Doncaster, he flew first to London, to arrange
for its defence; consigned the care of Henry to the Archbishop of
York, mustered a force already quartered in the neighbourhood of the
metropolis, and then marched rapidly back towards Coventry, where he
had left Clarence with seven thousand men; while he despatched new
messengers to Montagu and Northumberland, severely rebuking the former
for his supineness, and ordering him to march in all haste to attack
Edward in the rear. The earl's activity, promptitude, all-provident
generalship, form a mournful contrast to the errors, the pusillanimity,
and the treachery of others, which hitherto, as we have seen, made all
his wisest schemes abortive. Despite Clarence's sullenness, Warwick had
discovered no reason, as yet, to doubt his good faith. The oath he had
taken--not only to Henry in London, but to Warwick at Amboise--had been
the strongest which can bind man to man. If the duke had not gained all
he had hoped, he had still much to lose and much to dread by desertion
to Edward. He had been the loudest in bold assertions when he heard of
the invasion; and above all, Isabel, whose influence over Clarence
at that time the earl overrated, had, at the tidings of so imminent a
danger to her father, forgot all her displeasure and recovered all her
tenderness.

During Warwick's brief absence, Isabel had indeed exerted her utmost
power to repair her former wrongs, and induce Clarence to be faithful to
his oath. Although her inconsistency and irresolution had much weakened
her influence with the duke, for natures like his are governed but
by the ascendancy of a steady and tranquil will, yet still she so far
prevailed, that the duke had despatched to Richard a secret courier,
informing him that he had finally resolved not to desert his
father-in-law.

This letter reached Gloucester as the invaders were on their march to
Coventry, before the strong walls of which the Duke of Clarence lay
encamped. Richard, after some intent and silent reflection, beckoned to
him his familiar Catesby.

"Marmaduke Nevile, whom our scouts seized on his way to Pontefract, is
safe, and in the rear?"

"Yes, my lord; prisoners but encumber us; shall I give orders to the
provost to end his captivity?"

"Ever ready, Catesby!" said the duke, with a fell smile. "No; hark ye,
Clarence vacillates. If he hold firm to Warwick, and the two forces
fight honestly against us, we are lost; on the other hand, if Clarence
join us, his defection will bring not only the men he commands, all of
whom are the retainers of the York lands and duchy, and therefore free
from peculiar bias to the earl, and easily lured back to their proper
chief; but it will set an example that will create such distrust and
panic amongst the enemy, and give such hope of fresh desertions to our
own men, as will open to us the keys of the metropolis. But Clarence,
I say, vacillates; look you, here is his letter from Amboise to King
Edward; see, his duchess, Warwick's very daughter, approves the promise
it contains! If this letter reach Warwick, and Clarence knows it is in
his hand, George will have no option but to join us. He will never dare
to face the earl, his pledge to Edward once revealed--"

"Most true; a very legal subtlety, my lord," said the lawyer Catesby,
admiringly.

"You can serve us in this. Fall back; join Sir Marmaduke; affect to
sympathize with him; affect to side with the earl; affect to make terms
for Warwick's amity and favour; affect to betray us; affect to have
stolen this letter. Give it to young Nevile, artfully effect his escape,
as if against our knowledge, and commend him to lose not an hour--a
moment--in gaining the earl, and giving him so important a forewarning
of the meditated treason of his son-in-law."

"I will do all,--I comprehend; but how will the duke learn in time that
the letter is on its way to Warwick?"

"I will seek the duke in his own tent."

"And how shall I effect Sir Marmaduke's escape?"

"Send hither the officer who guards the prisoner; I will give him orders
to obey thee in all things."

The invaders marched on. The earl, meanwhile, had reached Warwick,
hastened thence to throw himself into the stronger fortifications of
the neighbouring Coventry, without the walls of which Clarence was
still encamped; Edward advanced on the town of Warwick thus vacated;
and Richard, at night, rode along to the camp of Clarence. [Hall, and
others.]

The next day, the earl was employed in giving orders to his lieutenants
to march forth, join the troops of his son-in-law, who were a mile from
the walls, and advance upon Edward, who had that morning quitted Warwick
town, when suddenly Sir Marmaduke Nevile rushed into his presence, and,
faltering out, "Beware, beware!" placed in his hands the fatal letter
which Clarence had despatched from Amboise.

Never did blow more ruthless fall upon man's heart! Clarence's
perfidy--that might be disdained; but the closing lines, which revealed
a daughter's treachery--words cannot express the father's anguish.

The letter dropped from his hand, a stupor seized his senses, and, ere
yet recovered, pale men hurried into his presence to relate how, amidst
joyous trumpets and streaming banners, Richard of Gloucester had led
the Duke of Clarence to the brotherly embrace of Edward. [Hall. The
chronicler adds: "It was no marvell that the Duke of Clarence with so
small persuasion and less exhorting turned from the Earl of Warwick's
party, for, as you have heard before, this marchandise was laboured,
conducted, and concluded by a damsell, when the duke was in the French
court, to the earl's utter confusion." Hume makes a notable mistake in
deferring the date of Clarence's desertion to the battle of Barnet.]

Breaking from these messengers of evil news, that could not now
surprise, the earl strode on, alone, to his daughter's chamber.

He placed the letter in her hands, and folding his arms said, "What
sayest thou of this, Isabel of Clarence?" The terror, the shame, the
remorse, that seized upon the wretched lady, the death-like lips, the
suppressed shriek, the momentary torpor, succeeded by the impulse which
made her fall at her father's feet and clasp his knees,--told the earl,
if he had before doubted, that the letter lied not; that Isabel had
known and sanctioned its contents.

He gazed on her (as she grovelled at his feet) with a look that her eyes
did well to shun.

"Curse me not! curse me not!" cried Isabel, awed by his very silence.
"It was but a brief frenzy. Evil counsel, evil passion! I was maddened
that my boy had lost a crown. I repented, I repented! Clarence shall yet
be true. He hath promised it, vowed it to me; hath written to Gloucester
to retract all,--to--"

"Woman! Clarence is in Edward's camp!"

Isabel started to her feet, and uttered a shriek so wild and despairing,
that at least it gave to her father's lacerated heart the miserable
solace of believing the last treason had not been shared. A softer
expression--one of pity, if not of pardon--stole over his dark face.

"I curse thee not," he said; "I rebuke thee not. Thy sin hath its own
penance. Ill omen broods on the hearth of the household traitor! Never
more shalt thou see holy love in a husband's smile. His kiss shall have
the taint of Judas. From his arms thou shalt start with horror, as from
those of thy wronged father's betrayer,--perchance his deathsman! Ill
omen broods on the cradle of the child for whom a mother's ambition
was but a daughter's perfidy. Woe to thee, wife and mother! Even my
forgiveness cannot avert thy doom!"

"Kill me! kill me!" exclaimed Isabel, springing towards him; but seeing
his face averted, his arms folded on his breast,--that noble breast,
never again her shelter,--she fell lifeless on the floor. [As our
narrative does not embrace the future fate of the Duchess of Clarence,
the reader will pardon us if we remind him that her first-born (who bore
his illustrious grandfather's title of Earl of Warwick) was cast into
prison on the accession of Henry VII., and afterwards beheaded by that
king. By birth, he was the rightful heir to the throne. The ill-fated
Isabel died young (five years after the date at which our tale has
arrived). One of her female attendants was tried and executed on the
charge of having poisoned her. Clarence lost no time in seeking to
supply her place. He solicited the hand of Mary of Burgundy, sole
daughter and heir of Charles the Bold. Edward's jealousy and fear
forbade him to listen to an alliance that might, as Lingard observes,
enable Clarence "to employ the power of Burgundy to win the crown of
England;" and hence arose those dissensions which ended in the secret
murder of the perjured duke.]

The earl looked round, to see that none were by to witness his weakness,
took her gently in his arms, laid her on her couch, and, bending over
her a moment, prayed to God to pardon her.

He then hastily left the room, ordered her handmaids and her litter, and
while she was yet unconscious, the gates of the town opened, and forth
through the arch went the closed and curtained vehicle which bore the
ill-fated duchess to the new home her husband had made with her father's
foe! The earl watched it from the casement of his tower, and said to
himself,--

"I had been unmanned, had I known her within the same walls. Now forever
I dismiss her memory and her crime. Treachery hath done its worst, and
my soul is proof against all storms!"

At night came messengers from Clarence and Edward, who had returned
to Warwick town, with offers of pardon to the earl, with promises of
favour, power, and grace. To Edward the earl deigned no answer; to the
messenger of Clarence he gave this: "Tell thy master I had liefer be
always like myself than like a false and a perjured duke, and that I
am determined never to leave the war till I have lost mine own life, or
utterly extinguished and put down my foes." [Hall.]

After this terrible defection, neither his remaining forces, nor the
panic amongst them which the duke's desertion had occasioned, nor
the mighty interests involved in the success of his arms, nor the
irretrievable advantage which even an engagement of equivocal result
with the earl in person would give to Edward, justified Warwick in
gratifying the anticipations of the enemy,--that his valour and wrath
would urge him into immediate and imprudent battle.

Edward, after the vain bravado of marching up to the walls of Coventry,
moved on towards London. Thither the earl sent Marmaduke, enjoining the
Archbishop of York and the lord mayor but to hold out the city for three
days, and he would come to their aid with such a force as would insure
lasting triumph. For, indeed, already were hurrying to his banner
Montagu, burning to retrieve his error, Oxford and Exeter, recovered
from, and chafing at, their past alarm. Thither his nephew, Fitzhugh,
led the earl's own clansmen of Middleham; thither were spurring Somerset
from the west, [Most historians state that Somerset was then in London;
but Sharon Turner quotes "Harleian Manuscripts," 38, to show that he had
left the metropolis "to raise an army from the western counties," and
ranks him amongst the generals at the battle of Barnet.] and Sir Thomas
Dymoke from Lincolnshire, and the Knight of Lytton, with his hardy
retainers, from the Peak. Bold Hilyard waited not far from London, with
a host of mingled yeomen and bravos, reduced, as before, to discipline
under his own sturdy energies and the military craft of Sir John
Coniers. If London would but hold out till these forces could unite,
Edward's destruction was still inevitable.




BOOK XII. THE BATTLE OF BARNET.




CHAPTER I. A KING IN HIS CITY HOPES TO RECOVER HIS REALM--A WOMAN IN HER
CHAMBER FEARS TO FORFEIT HER OWN.

Edward and his army reached St. Alban's. Great commotion, great joy,
were in the Sanctuary of Westminster! The Jerusalem Chamber, therein,
was made the high council-hall of the friends of York. Great commotion,
great terror, were in the city of London. Timid Master Stokton had been
elected mayor; horribly frightened either to side with an Edward or
a Henry, timid Master Stokton feigned or fell ill. Sir Thomas Cook, a
wealthy and influential citizen, and a member of the House of Commons,
had been appointed deputy in his stead. Sir Thomas Cook took fright
also, and ran away. [Fabyan.] The power of the city thus fell into the
hands of Ureswick, the Recorder, a zealous Yorkist. Great commotion,
great scorn, were in the breasts of the populace, as the Archbishop of
York, hoping thereby to rekindle their loyalty, placed King Henry
on horseback, and paraded him through the streets from Chepeside to
Walbrook, from Walbrook to St. Paul's; for the news of Edward's arrival,
and the sudden agitation and excitement it produced on his enfeebled
frame, had brought upon the poor king one of the epileptic attacks to
which he had been subject from childhood, and which made the cause of
his frequent imbecility; and, just recovered from such a fit,--his eyes
vacant, his face haggard, his head drooping,--the spectacle of such
an antagonist to the vigorous Edward moved only pity in the few and
ridicule in the many. Two thousand Yorkist gentlemen were in the various
Sanctuaries; aided and headed by the Earl of Essex, they came forth
armed and clamorous, scouring the streets, and shouting, "King Edward!"
with impunity. Edward's popularity in London was heightened amongst the
merchants by prudent reminiscences of the vast debts he had incurred,
which his victory only could ever enable him to repay to his good
citizens. [Comines.] The women, always, in such a movement, active
partisans, and useful, deserted their hearths to canvass all strong arms
and stout hearts for the handsome woman-lover. [Comines.] The Yorkist
Archbishop of Canterbury did his best with the ecclesiastics, the
Yorkist Recorder his best with the flat-caps. Alwyn, true to his
anti-feudal principles, animated all the young freemen to support the
merchant-king, the favourer of commerce, the man of his age! The city
authorities began to yield to their own and the general metropolitan
predilections. But still the Archbishop of York had six thousand
soldiers at his disposal, and London could be yet saved to Warwick, if
the prelate acted with energy and zeal and good faith. That such was his
first intention is clear, from his appeal to the public loyalty in King
Henry's procession; but when he perceived how little effect that pageant
had produced; when, on re-entering the Bishop of London's palace, he
saw before him the guileless, helpless puppet of contending factions,
gasping for breath, scarcely able to articulate, the heartless prelate
turned away, with a muttered ejaculation of contempt.

"Clarence had not deserted," said he to himself, "unless he saw greater
profit with King Edward!" And then he began to commune with himself, and
to commune with his brother-prelate of Canterbury; and in the midst
of all this commune arrived Catesby, charged with messages to the
archbishop from Edward,--messages full of promise and affection on the
one hand, of menace and revenge upon the other. Brief: Warwick's cup of
bitterness had not yet been filled; that night the archbishop and the
mayor of London met, and the Tower was surrendered to Edward's friends.
The next day Edward and his army entered, amidst the shouts of the
populace; rode to St. Paul's, where the archbishop [Sharon Turner. It is
a comfort to think that this archbishop was, two years afterwards,
first robbed, and then imprisoned, by Edward IV.; nor did he recover
his liberty till a few weeks before his death, in 1476 (five years
subsequently to the battle of Barnet).] met him, leading Henry by the
hand, again a captive; thence Edward proceeded to Westminster Abbey,
and, fresh from his atrocious perjury at York, offered thanksgiving for
its success. The Sanctuary yielded up its royal fugitives, and, in joy
and in pomp, Edward led his wife and her new-born babe, with Jacquetta
and his elder children, to Baynard's Castle.

The next morning (the third day), true to his promise, Warwick marched
towards London with the mighty armament he had now collected. Treason
had done its worst,--the metropolis was surrendered, and King Henry in
the Tower.

"These things considered," says the Chronicler, "the earl saw that all
calculations of necessity were brought to this end,--that they must now
be committed to the hazard and chance of one battle." [Hall.] He halted,
therefore, at St. Alban's, to rest his troops; and marching thence
towards Barnet, pitched his tents on the upland ground, then called the
Heath or Chase of Gladsmoor, and waited the coming foe.

Nor did Edward linger long from that stern meeting. Entering London on
the 11th of April, he prepared to quit it on the 13th. Besides the force
he had brought with him, he had now recruits in his partisans from the
Sanctuaries and other hiding-places in the metropolis, while London
furnished him, from her high-spirited youths, a gallant troop of bow
and bill men, whom Alwyn had enlisted, and to whom Edward willingly
appointed, as captain, Alwyn himself,--who had atoned for his submission
to Henry's restoration by such signal activity on behalf of the young
king, whom he associated with the interests of his class, and the weal
of the great commercial city, which some years afterwards rewarded his
affection by electing him to her chief magistracy. [Nicholas Alwyn,
the representative of that generation which aided the commercial and
anti-feudal policy of Edward IV. and Richard III., and welcomed its
consummation under their Tudor successor, rose to be Lord Mayor of
London in the fifteenth year of the reign of Henry VII.--FABYAN.]

It was on that very day, the 13th of April, some hours before the
departure of the York army, that Lord Hastings entered the Tower, to
give orders relative to the removal of the unhappy Henry, whom Edward
had resolved to take with him on his march.

And as he had so ordered and was about to return, Alwyn, emerging from
one of the interior courts, approached him in much agitation, and
said thus: "Pardon me, my lord, if in so grave an hour I recall your
attention to one you may haply have forgotten."

"Ah, the poor maiden; but you told me, in the hurried words that we have
already interchanged, that she was safe and well."

"Safe, my lord,--not well. Oh, hear me. I depart to battle for your
cause and your king's. A gentleman in your train has advised me that you
are married to a noble dame in the foreign land. If so, this girl whom
I have loved so long and truly may yet forget you, may yet be mine. Oh,
give me that hope to make me a braver soldier."

"But," said Hastings, embarrassed, and with a changing countenance, "but
time presses, and I know not where the demoiselle--"

"She is here," interrupted Alwyn; "here, within these walls, in yonder
courtyard. I have just left her. You, whom she loves, forgot her! I,
whom she disdains, remembered. I went to see to her safety, to counsel
her to rest here for the present, whatever betides; and at every word I
said, she broke in upon me with but one name,--that name was thine! And
when stung, and in the impulse of the moment, I exclaimed, 'He deserves
not this devotion. They tell me, Sibyll, that Lord Hastings has found a
wife in exile.' Oh, that look! that cry! they haunt me still. 'Prove it,
prove it, Alwyn,' she cried. 'And--' I interrupted, 'and thou couldst
yet, for thy father's sake, be true wife to me?'"

"Her answer, Alwyn?"

"It was this, 'For my father's sake only, then, could I live on; and--'
her sobs stopped her speech, till she cried again, 'I believe it not!
thou hast deceived me. Only from his lips will I hear the sentence.' Go
to her, manfully and frankly, as becomes you, high lord,--go! It Is but
a single sentence thou hast to say, and thy heart will be the lighter,
and thine arm the stronger for those honest words."

Hastings pulled his cap over his brow, and stood a moment as if in
reflection; he then said, "Show me the way; thou art right. It is due to
her and to thee; and as by this hour to-morrow my soul may stand before
the Judgment-seat, that poor child's pardon may take one sin from the
large account."




CHAPTER II. SHARP IS THE KISS OF THE FALCON'S BEAR.

Hastings stood in the presence of the girl to whom he had pledged his
truth. They were alone; but in the next chamber might be heard the
peculiar sound made by the mechanism of the Eureka. Happy and lifeless
mechanism, which moves, and toils, and strives on, to change the destiny
of millions, but hath neither ear nor eye, nor sense nor heart,--the
avenues of pain to man! She had--yes, literally--she had recognized her
lover's step upon the stair, she had awakened at once from that dull and
icy lethargy with which the words of Alwyn had chained life and soul.
She sprang forward as Hastings entered; she threw herself in delirious
joy upon his bosom. "Thou art come, thou art! It is not true, not true.
Heaven bless thee! thou art come!" But sudden as the movement was the
recoil. Drawing herself back, she gazed steadily on his face, and said,
"Lord Hastings, they tell me thy hand is another's. Is it true?"

"Hear me!" answered the nobleman. "When first I--"

"O God! O God! he answers not, he falters! Speak! Is it true?"

"It is true. I am wedded to another."

Sibyll did not fall to the ground, nor faint, nor give vent to noisy
passion. But the rich colour, which before had been varying and fitful,
deserted her cheek, and left it of an ashen whiteness; the lips, too,
grew tightly compressed, and her small fingers, interlaced, were clasped
with strained and convulsive energy, so that the quivering of the very
arms was perceptible. In all else she seemed composed, as she said,
"I thank you, my lord, for the simple truth; no more is needed. Heaven
bless you and yours! Farewell!"

"Stay! you shall--you must hear me on. Thou knowest how dearly in youth
I loved Katherine Nevile. In manhood the memory of that love haunted me,
but beneath thy sweet smile I deemed it at last effaced; I left thee
to seek the king, and demand his assent to our union. I speak not of
obstacles that then arose; in the midst of them I learned Katherine was
lone and widowed,--was free. At her own summons I sought her
presence, and learned that she had loved me ever,--loved me still. The
intoxication of my early dream returned; reverse and exile followed
close; Katherine left her state, her fortunes, her native land, and
followed the banished man; and so memory and gratitude and destiny
concurred, and the mistress of my youth became my wife. None other could
have replaced thy image; none other have made me forget the faith I
pledged thee. The thought of thee has still pursued me,--will pursue me
to the last. I dare not say now that I love thee still, but yet--" He
paused, but rapidly resumed, "Enough, enough! dear art thou to me, and
honoured,--dearer, more honoured than a sister. Thank Heaven, at least,
and thine own virtue, my falsehood leaves thee pure and stainless. Thy
hand may yet bless a worthier man. If our cause triumphs, thy fortunes,
thy father's fate, shall be my fondest care. Never, never will my sleep
be sweet, and my conscience laid to rest, till I hear thee say, as
honoured wife--perchance, as blessed and blessing mother--'False one, I
am happy!'"

A cold smile, at these last words, flitted over the girl's face,--the
smile of a broken heart; but it vanished, and with that strange mixture
of sweetness and pride,--mild and forgiving, yet still spirited and
firm,--which belonged to her character, she nerved herself to the last
and saddest effort to preserve dignity and conceal despair. "Farther
words, my lord, are idle; I am rightly punished for a proud folly. Let
not woman love above her state. Think no more of my destiny."

"No, no," interrupted the remorseful lord, "thy destiny must haunt me
till thou hast chosen one with a better right to protect thee."

At the repetition of that implied desire to transfer her also to
another, a noble indignation came to mar the calm for which she had
hitherto not vainly struggled. "Oh, man!" she exclaimed, with
passion, "does thy deceit give me the right to deceive another? I--I
wed!--I--I--vow at the altar--a love dead, dead forever--dead as my own
heart! Why dost thou mock me with the hollow phrase, 'Thou art pure and
stainless?' Is the virginity of the soul still left? Do the tears I have
shed for thee; doth the thrill of my heart when I heard thy voice;
doth the plighted kiss that burns, burns now into my brow, and on my
lips,--do these, these leave me free to carry to a new affection the
cinders and ashes of a soul thou hast ravaged and deflowered? Oh, coarse
and rude belief of men, that naught is lost if the mere form be pure!
The freshness of the first feelings, the bloom of the sinless thought,
the sigh, the blush of the devotion--never, never felt but once! these,
these make the true dower a maiden should bring to the hearth to which
she comes as wife. Oh, taunt! Oh, insult! to speak to me of happiness,
of the altar! Thou never knewest, lord, how I really loved thee!" And
for the first time, a violent gush of tears came to relieve her heart.

Hastings was almost equally overcome. Well experienced as he was in
those partings when maids reproach and gallants pray for pardon, but
still sigh, "Farewell,"--he had now no words to answer that burst of
uncontrollable agony; and he felt at once humbled and relieved, when
Sibyll again, with one of those struggles which exhaust years of
life, and almost leave us callous to all after-trial, pressed back the
scalding tears, and said, with unnatural sweetness: "Pardon me, my lord,
I meant not to reproach; the words escaped me,--think of them no more. I
would fain, at least, part from you now as I had once hoped to part
from you at the last hour of life,--without one memory of bitterness and
anger, so that my conscience, whatever its other griefs, might say, 'My
lips never belied my heart, my words never pained him!' And now then,
Lord Hastings, in all charity, we part. Farewell forever, and forever!
Thou hast wedded one who loves thee, doubtless, as tenderly as I had
done. Ah, cherish that affection! There are times even in thy career
when a little love is sweeter than much fame. If thou thinkest I have
aught to pardon thee, now with my whole heart I pray, as while life is
mine that prayer shall be murmured, 'Heaven forgive this man, as I do!
Heaven make his home the home of peace, and breathe into those now near
and dear to him, the love and the faith that I once--'" She stopped, for
the words choked her, and, hiding her face, held out her hand, in sign
of charity and of farewell.

"Ah, if I dared pray like thee," murmured Hastings, pressing his
lips upon that burning hand, "how should I weary Heaven to repair,
by countless blessings, the wrong which I have done thee! And Heaven
will--oh, it surely will!" He pressed the hand to his heart, dropped it,
and was gone.

In the courtyard he was accosted by Alwyn--

"Thou hast been frank, my lord?"

"I have."

"And she bears it, and--"

"See how she forgives, and how I suffer!" said Hastings, turning his
face towards his rival; and Alwyn saw that the tears were rolling
down his cheeks--"Question me no more." There was a long silence.
They quitted the precincts of the Tower, and were at the river-side.
Hastings, waving his hand to Alwyn, was about to enter the boat which
was to bear him to the war council assembled at Baynard's Castle, when
the trader stopped him, and said anxiously,--

"Think you not, for the present, the Tower is the safest asylum
for Sibyll and her father? If we fail and Warwick returns, they are
protected by the earl; if we triumph, thou wilt insure their safety from
all foes?"

"Surely; in either case, their present home is the most secure."

The two men then parted. And not long afterwards, Hastings, who led the
on-guard, was on his way towards Barnet; with him also went the foot
volunteers under Alwyn. The army of York was on its march. Gloucester,
to whose vigilance and energy were left the final preparations, was
necessarily the last of the generals to quit the city. And suddenly,
while his steed was at the gate of Baynard's Castle, he entered, armed
cap-a-pie, into the chamber where the Duchess of Bedford sat with her
grandchildren.

