


CHAPTER IV.

M. Mauleon was somewhat surprised by Raoul's visit the next morning. He
had no great liking for a kinsman whose politely distant reserve towards
him, in contrast to poor Euguerrand's genial heartiness, had much
wounded his sensitive self-respect; nor could he comprehend the
religious scruples which forbade Raoul to take a soldier's share in the
battle-field, though in seeking there to save the lives of others so
fearlessly hazarding his own life.

"Pardon," said Raoul, with his sweet mournful smile, "the unseasonable
hour at which I disturb you. But your duties on the ramparts and mine
in the hospital begin early, and I have promised the Abbe Vertpre to
communicate a message of a nature which perhaps you may deem pressing."
He proceeded at once to repeat what the Abbe had communicated to him the
night before relative to the illness and the request of the nun.

"Louise Duval!" exclaimed the Vicomte, "discovered at last, and a
religieuse! Ah! I now understand why she never sought me out when I
reappeared at Paris. Tidings of that sort do not penetrate the walls of
a convent. I am greatly obliged to you, M. de Vandemar, for the trouble
you have so kindly taken. This poor nun is related to me, and I will at
once obey the summons. But this convent des ------- I am ashamed to say
I know not where it is. A long way off, I suppose?"

"Allow me to be your guide," said Raoul; "I should take it as a favour
to be allowed to see a little more of a man whom my lost brother held in
such esteem."

Victor was touched by this conciliatory speech, and in a few minutes
more the two men were on their way to the convent on the other side of
the Seine.

Victor commenced the conversation by a warm and heartfelt tribute to
Euguerrand's character and memory. "I never," he said, "knew a nature
more rich in the most endearing qualities of youth; so gentle, so
high-spirited, rendering every virtue more attractive, and redeeming
such few faults or foibles as youth so situated and so tempted cannot
wholly escape, with an urbanity not conventional, not artificial, but
reflected from the frankness of a genial temper and the tenderness of a
generous heart. Be comforted for his loss, my kinsman. A brave death was
the proper crown of that beautiful life."

Raoul made no answer, but pressed gratefully the arm now linked within
his own. The companions walked on in silence; Victor's mind settling on
the visit he was about to make to the niece so long mysteriously lost,
and now so unexpectedly found. Louise had inspired him with a certain
interest from her beauty and force of character, but never with any warm
affection. He felt relieved to find that her life had found its close in
the sanctuary of the convent. He had never divested himself of a certain
fear, inspired by Louvier's statement that she might live to bring
scandal and disgrace on the name he had with so much difficulty, and
after so lengthened an anguish, partially cleared in his own person.

Raoul left De Mauleon at the gate of the convent, and took his way
towards the hospitals where he visited, and the poor whom he relieved.

Victor was conducted silently into the convent parloir; and, after
waiting there several minutes, the door opened, and the Superieure
entered. As she advanced towards him, with stately step and solemn
visage, De Mauleon recoiled, and uttered a half-suppressed exclamation
that partook both of amaze and awe. Could it be possible? Was this
majestic woman, with the grave impassible aspect, once the ardent girl
whose tender letters he had cherished through stormy years, and only
burned on the night before the most perilous of his battle-fields? This
the one, the sole one, whom in his younger dreams he had seen as his
destined wife? It was so--it was. Doubt vanished when he heard her
voice; and yet how different every tone, every accent, from those of the
low, soft, thrilling music that had breathed in the voice of old!

"M. de Mauleon," said the Superieure, calmly, "I grieve to sadden you by
very mournful intelligence. Yesterday evening, when the Abbe undertook
to convey to you the request of our Sister Ursula, although she was
beyond mortal hope of recovery--as otherwise you will conceive that I
could not have relaxed the rules of this house so as to sanction your
visit--there was no apprehension of immediate danger. It was believed
that her sufferings would be prolonged for some days. I saw her late
last night before retiring to my cell, and she seemed even stronger than
she had been for the last week. A sister remained at watch in her cell.
Towards morning she fell into apparently quiet sleep, and in that sleep
she passed away." The Superieure here crossed herself, and murmured
pious words in Latin. "Dead! my poor niece!" said Victor, feelingly,
roused from his stun at the first sight of the Superieure by her
measured tones, and the melancholy information she so composedly
conveyed to him. "I cannot, then, even learn why she so wished to see me
once more,--or what she might have requested at my hands!"

"Pardon, M. le Vicomte. Such sorrowful consolation I have resolved to
afford you, not without scruples of conscience, but not without sanction
of the excellent Abbe Vertpre, whom I summoned early this morning to
decide my duties in the sacred office I hold. As soon as Sister Ursula
heard of your return to Paris, she obtained my permission to address to
you a letter, subjected, when finished, to my perusal and sanction. She
felt that she had much on her mind which her feeble state might forbid
her to make known to you in conversation with 'sufficient fulness; and
as she could only have seen you in presence of one of the sisters
she imagined that there would also be less restraint in a written
communication. In fine, her request was that, when you called, I might
first place this letter in your hands, and allow you time to read it,
before being admitted to her presence; when a few words conveying your
promise to attend to the wishes with which you would then be acquainted,
would suffice for an interview in her exhausted condition. Do I make
myself understood?"

"Certainly, Madame,--and the letter?"

"She had concluded last evening; and when I took leave of her later in
the night, she placed it in my hands for approval. M. le Vicomte, it
pains me to say that there is much in the tone of that letter which I
grieve for and condemn. And it was my intention to point this out to our
sister at morning, and tell her that passages must be altered before
I could give to you the letter. Her sudden decease deprived me of this
opportunity. I could not, of course, alter or erase a line--a word.
My only option was to suppress the letter altogether, or give it you
intact. The Abbe thinks that, on the whole, my duty does not forbid the
dictate of my own impulse--my own feelings; and I now place this letter
in your hands."

De Mauleon took a packet, unsealed, from the thin white fingers of
the Superieure; and as he bent to receive it, lifted towards her eyes
eloquent with sorrowful, humble pathos, in which it was impossible for
the heart of a woman who had loved not to see a reference to the past
which the lips did not dare to utter.

A faint, scarce-perceptible blush stole over the marble cheek of the
nun. But, with an exquisite delicacy, in which survived the woman while
reigned the nun, she replied to the appeal.

"M. Victor de Mauleon, before, having thus met, we part for ever, permit
a poor religieuse to say with what joy--a joy rendered happier because
it was tearful--I have learned through the Abbe Vertpre that the honour
which, as between man and man, no one who had once known you could ever
doubt, you have lived to vindicate from calumny."

"Ah; you have heard that--at last, at last!"

"I repeat--of the honour thus deferred, I never doubted." The Superieure
hurried on. "Greater joy it has been to me to hear from the same
venerable source that, while found bravest among the defenders of your
country, you are clear from all alliance with the assailants of your
God. Continue so, continue so, Victor de Mauleon."

She retreated to the door, and then turned towards him with a look in
which all the marble had melted away, adding, with words more formally
nunlike, yet unmistakably womanlike, than those which had gone before,
"That to the last you may be true to God, is a prayer never by me
omitted."

She spoke, and vanished.

In a kind of dim and dreamlike bewilderment, Victor de Mauleon found
himself without the walls of the convent. Mechanically, as a man
does when the routine of his life is presented to him, from the first
Minister of State to the poor clown at a suburban theatre, doomed
to appear at their posts, to prose on a Beer Bill, or grin through a
horse-collar, though their hearts are bleeding at every pore with some
household or secret affliction,--mechanically De Mauldon went his way
towards the ramparts, at a section of which he daily drilled his raw
recruits. Proverbial for his severity towards those who offended,
for the cordiality of his praise of those who pleased his soldierly
judgment, no change of his demeanour was visible that morning, save
that he might be somewhat milder to the one, somewhat less hearty to the
other. This routine duty done, he passed slowly towards a more deserted
because a more exposed part of the defences, and seated himself on
the frozen sward alone. The cannon thundered around him. He heard
unconsciously: from time to time an obus hissed and splintered close at
his feet;--he saw with abstracted eye. His soul was with the past; and,
brooding over all that in the past lay buried there, came over him a
conviction of the vanity of the human earth-bounded objects for which
we burn or freeze, far more absolute than had grown out of the worldly
cynicism connected with his worldly ambition. The sight of that face,
associated with the one pure romance of his reckless youth, the face
of one so estranged, so serenely aloft from all memories of youth, of
romance, of passion, smote him in the midst of the new hopes of the new
career, as the look on the skull of the woman he had so loved and so
mourned, when disburied from her grave, smote the brilliant noble
who became the stern reformer of La Trappe. And while thus gloomily
meditating, the letter of the poor Louise Duval was forgotten. She whose
existence had so troubled, and crossed, and partly marred the lives of
others,--she, scarcely dead, and already forgotten by her nearest kin.
Well--had she not forgotten, put wholly out of her mind, all that was
due to those much nearer to her than is an uncle to a niece?

The short, bitter, sunless day was advancing towards its decline before
Victor roused himself with a quick impatient start from his reverie, and
took forth the letter from the dead nun.

It began with expressions of gratitude, of joy at the thought that she
should see him again before she died, thank him for his past kindness,
and receive, she trusted, his assurance that he would attend to her
last remorseful injunctions. I pass over much that followed in the
explanation of events in her life sufficiently known to the reader. She
stated, as the strongest reason why she had refused the hand of Louvier,
her knowledge that she should in due time become a mother--a fact
concealed from Victor, secure that he would then urge her not to annul
her informal marriage, but rather insist on the ceremonies that would
render it valid. She touched briefly on her confidential intimacy with
Madame Marigny, the exchange of name and papers, her confinement in
the neighbourhood of Aix, the child left to the care of the nurse,
the journey to Munich to find the false Louise Duval was no more. The
documents obtained through the agency of her easy-tempered kinsman, the
late Marquis de Rochebriant, and her subsequent domestication in the
house of the von Rudesheims,--all this it is needless to do more here
than briefly recapitulate. The letter then went on: "While thus kindly
treated by the family with whom nominally a governess, I was on the
terms of a friend with Signor Ludovico Cicogna, an Italian of noble
birth. He was the only man I ever cared for. I loved him with frail
human passion. I could not tell him, my true history. I could not tell
him that I had a child; such intelligence would have made him renounce
me at once. He had a daughter, still but an infant, by a former
marriage, then brought up in France. He wished to take her to his house,
and his second wife to supply the place of her mother. What was I to
do with the child I had left near Aix? While doubtful and distracted, I
read an advertisement in the journals to the effect that a French lady,
then staying in Coblentz, wished to adopt a female child not exceeding
the age of six: the child to be wholly resigned to her by the parents,
she undertaking to rear and provide for it as her own. I resolved to go
to Coblentz at once. I did so. I saw this lady. She seemed in affluent
circumstances, yet young, but a confirmed invalid, confined the greater
part of the day to her sofa by some malady of the spine. She told me
very frankly her story. She had been a professional dancer on the stage,
had married respectably, quitted the stage, become a widow, and shortly
afterwards been seized with the complaint that would probably for life
keep her a secluded prisoner in her room. Thus afflicted, and without
tie, interest, or object in the world, she conceived the idea of
adopting a child that she might bring up to tend and cherish her as a
daughter. In this, the imperative condition was that the child should
never be sought by the parents. She was pleased by my manner and
appearance: she did not wish her adopted daughter to be the child of
peasants. She asked me for no references,--made no inquiries. She
said cordially that she wished for no knowledge that, through any
indiscretion of her own, communicated to the child might lead her to
seek the discovery of her real parents. In fine, I left Coblentz on the
understanding that I was to bring the infant, and if it pleased Madame
Surville, the agreement was concluded.

"I then repaired to Aix. I saw the child. Alas! unnatural mother that I
was, the sight only more vividly brought before me the sense of my own
perilous position. Yet the child was lovely! a likeness of myself, but
lovelier far, for it was a pure, innocent, gentle loveliness. And they
told her to call me 'Maman.' Oh, did I not relent when I heard that
name? No; it jarred on my ear as a word of reproach and shame. In
walking with the infant towards the railway station, imagine my dismay
when suddenly I met the man who had been taught to believe me dead. I
soon discovered that his dismay was equal to my own,--that I had nothing
to fear from his desire to claim me. It did occur to me for a moment
to resign his child to him. But when he shrank reluctantly from a half
suggestion to that effect, my pride was wounded, my conscience absolved.
And, after all, it might be unsafe to my future to leave with him any
motive for tracing me. I left him hastily. I have never seen nor heard
of him more. I took the child to Coblentz. Madame Surville was charmed
with its prettiness and prattle,--charmed still more when I rebuked the
poor infant for calling me 'Maman,' and said, 'Thy real mother is here.'
Freed from my trouble, I returned to the kind German roof I had quitted,
and shortly after became the wife of Ludovico Cicogna.

"My punishment soon began. His was a light, fickle, pleasure-hunting
nature. He soon grew weary of me. My very love made me unamiable to him.
I became irritable, jealous, exacting. His daughter, who now came to
live with us, was another subject of discord. I knew that he loved her
better than me. I became a harsh step-mother; and Ludovico's reproaches,
vehemently made, nursed all my angriest passions. But a son of this new
marriage was born to myself. My pretty Luigi! how my heart became wrapt
up in him! Nursing him, I forgot resentment against his father. Well,
poor Cicogna fell ill and died. I mourned him sincerely; but my boy was
left. Poverty then fell on me,--poverty extreme. Cicogna's sole income
was derived from a post in the Austrian dominion in Italy, and ceased
with it. He received a small pension in compensation; that died with
him.

"At this time, an Englishman, with whom Ludovico had made acquaintance
in Venice, and who visited often at our house in Verona, offered me his
hand. He had taken an extraordinary liking to Isaura, Cicogna's daughter
by his first marriage. But I think his proposal was dictated partly by
compassion for me, and more by affection for her. For the sake of my boy
Luigi I married him. He was a good man, of retired learned habits with
which I had no sympathy. His companionship overwhelmed me with ennui.
But I bore it patiently for Luigi's sake. God saw that my heart was as
much as ever estranged from Him, and He took away my all on earth--my
boy. Then in my desolation I turned to our Holy Church for comfort. I
found a friend in the priest, my confessor. I was startled to learn
from him how guilty I had been--was still. Pushing to an extreme the
doctrines of the Church, he would not allow that my first marriage,
though null by law, was void in the eyes of Heaven. Was not the death of
the child I so cherished a penalty due to my sin towards the child I had
abandoned?

"These thoughts pressed on me night and day. With the consent and
approval of the good priest, I determined to quit the roof of M. Selby,
and to devote myself to the discovery of my forsaken Julie.

"I had a painful interview with M. Selby. I announced my intention to
separate from him. I alleged as a reason my conscientious repugnance
to live with a professed heretic--an enemy to our Holy Church. When M.
Selby found that he could not shake my resolution, he lent himself to
it with the forbearance and generosity which he had always exhibited. On
our marriage he had settled on me five thousand pounds, to be absolutely
mine in the event of his death. He now proposed to concede to me the
interest on that capital during his life, and he undertook the charge
of my step-daughter Isaura, and secured to her all the rest he had to
leave; such landed property as he possessed in England passing to a
distant relative.

"So we parted, not with hostility--tears were shed on both sides. I
set out for Coblentz. Madame Surville had long since quitted that town,
devoting some years to the round of various mineral spas in vain hope of
cure. Not without some difficulty I traced her to her last residence
in the neighbourhood of Paris, but she was then no more--her death
accelerated by the shock occasioned by the loss of her whole fortune,
which she had been induced to place in one of the numerous fraudulent
companies by which so many have been ruined. Julie, who was with her at
the time of her death, had disappeared shortly after it--none could tell
me whither; but from such hints as I could gather, the poor child, thus
left destitute, had been betrayed into sinful courses.

"Probably I might yet by searching inquiry have found her out; you will
say it was my duty at least to institute such inquiry. No doubt; I
now remorsefully feel that it was. I did not think so at the time. The
Italian priest had given me a few letters of introduction to French
ladies with whom, when they had sojourned at Florence, he had made
acquaintance. These ladies were very strict devotees, formal observers
of those decorums by which devotion proclaims itself to the world. They
had received me not only with kindness but with marked respect. They
chose to exalt into the noblest self-sacrifice the act of my leaving
M. Selby's house. Exaggerating the simple cause assigned to it in the
priest's letter, they represented me as quitting a luxurious home and
an idolising husband rather than continue intimate intercourse with the
enemy of my religion. This new sort of flattery intoxicated me with its
fumes. I recoiled from the thought of shattering the pedestal to which I
had found myself elevated. What if I should discover my daughter in one
from the touch of whose robe these holy women would recoil as from
the rags of a leper! No; it would be impossible for me to own
her--impossible for me to give her the shelter of my roof. Nay, if
discovered to hold any commune with such an outcast, no explanation, no
excuse short of the actual truth, would avail with these austere judges
of human error. And the actual truth would be yet deeper disgrace. I
reasoned away my conscience. If I looked for example in the circles
in which I had obtained reverential place, I could find no instance
in which a girl who had fallen from virtue was not repudiated by her
nearest relatives. Nay, when I thought of my own mother, had not her
father refused to see her, to acknowledge her child, from no other
offence than that of a misalliance which wounded the family pride? That
pride, alas! was in my blood--my sole inheritance from the family I
sprang from.

"Thus it went on, till I had grave symptoms of a disease which rendered
the duration of my life uncertain. My conscience awoke and tortured me.
I resolved to take the veil. Vanity and pride again! My resolution was
applauded by those whose opinion had so swayed my mind and my conduct.
Before I retired into the convent from which I write, I made legal
provision as to the bulk of the fortune which, by the death of M. Selby,
has become absolutely at my disposal. One thousand pounds amply sufficed
for dotation to the convent: the other four thousand pounds are given in
trust to the eminent notary, M. Nadaud, Rue -------. On applying to him,
you will find that the sum, with the accumulated interest, is bequeathed
to you,--a tribute of gratitude for the assistance you afforded me in
the time of your own need, and the kindness with which you acknowledged
our relationship and commiserated my misfortunes.

"But oh, my uncle, find out--a man can do so with a facility not
accorded to a woman--what has become of this poor Julie, and devote
what you may deem right and just of the sum thus bequeathed to place her
above want and temptation. In doing so, I know you will respect my name:
I would not have it dishonour you, indeed.

"I have been employed in writing this long letter since the day I heard
you were in Paris. It has exhausted the feeble remnants of my strength.
It will be given to you before the interview I at once dread and long
for, and in that interview you will not rebuke me. Will you, my kind
uncle? No, you will only soothe and pity!

"Would that I were worthy to pray for others, that I might add, 'May
the Saints have you in their keeping and lead you to faith in the Holy
Church, which has power to absolve from sins those who repent as I do.'"

The letter dropped from Victor's hand. He took it up, smoothed it
mechanically, and with a dim, abstracted, be wildered, pitiful wonder.
Well might the Superieure have hesitated to allow confessions, betraying
a mind so little regulated by genuine religious faith, to pass into
other hands. Evidently it was the paramount duty of rescuing from want
or from sin the writer's forsaken child, that had overborne all other
considerations in the mind of the Woman and the Priest she consulted.

Throughout that letter, what a strange perversion of understanding! what
a half-unconscious confusion of wrong and right!--the duty marked out so
obvious and so neglected; even the religious sentiment awakened by the
conscience so dividing itself from the moral instinct! the dread of
being thought less religious by obscure comparative strangers stronger
than the moral obligation to discover and reclaim the child for whose
errors, if she had erred, the mother who so selfishly forsook her was
alone responsible! even at the last, at the approach of death, the love
for a name she had never made a self-sacrifice to preserve unstained;
and that concluding exhortation,--that reliance on a repentance in which
there was so qualified a reparation!

More would Victor de Mauldon have wondered had he known those points
of similarity in character, and in the nature of their final bequests,
between Louise Duval and the husband she had deserted. By one of those
singular coincidences which, if this work be judged by the ordinary
rules presented to the ordinary novel-reader, a critic would not
unjustly impute to defective invention in the author, the provision for
this child, deprived of its natural parents during their lives, is left
to the discretion and honour of trustees, accompanied on the part of
the consecrated Louise and "the blameless King," with the injunction
of respect to their worldly reputations--two parents so opposite in
condition, in creed, in disposition, yet assimilating in that point of
individual character in which it touches the wide vague circle of human
opinion. For this, indeed, the excuses of Richard King are strong,
inasmuch as the secrecy he sought was for the sake, not of his own
memory, but that of her whom the world knew only as his honoured wife.
The conduct of Louise admits no such excuse; she dies as she had lived;
an Egotist. But, whatever the motives of the parents, what is the fate
of the deserted child? What revenge does the worldly opinion, which the
parents would escape for themselves, inflict on the innocent infant
to whom the bulk of their worldly possessions is to be clandestinely
conveyed? Would all the gold of Ophir be compensation enough for her?

Slowly De Mauleon roused himself, and turned from the solitary place
where he had been seated to a more crowded part of the ramparts. He
passed a group of young Moblots, with flowers wreathed round their
gun-barrels. "If," said one of them gaily, "Paris wants bread, it never
wants flowers." His companions laughed merrily, and burst out into a
scurrile song in ridicule of St. Trochu. Just then an obus fell a few
yards before the group. The sound only for a moment drowned the song,
but the splinters struck a man in a coarse, ragged dress, who had
stopped to listen to the singers. At his sharp cry, two men hastened
to his side: one was Victor de Mauleon; the other was a surgeon, who
quitted another group of idlers--National Guards--attracted by the
shriek that summoned his professional aid. The poor man was terribly
wounded. The surgeon, glancing at De Mauleon, shrugged his shoulders,
and muttered, "Past help!" The sufferer turned his haggard eyes on the
Vicomte, and gasped out, "M. de Mauleon?"

"That is my name," answered Victor, surprised, and not immediately
recognising the sufferer.

"Hist, Jean Lebeau!--look at me: you recollect me now,--Mart le Roux,
concierge to the Secret Council. Ay, I found out who you were long
ago--followed you home from the last meeting you broke up. But I did not
betray you, or you would have been murdered long since. Beware of
the old set--beware of--of--" Here his voice broke off into shrill
exclamations of pain. Curbing his last agonies with a powerful effort,
he faltered forth, "You owe me a service--see to the little one at
home--she is starving." The death-rale came on; in a few moments he was
no more.

Victor gave orders for the removal of the corpse, and hurried away. The
surgeon, who had changed countenance when he overheard the name in
which the dying man had addressed De Mauleon, gazed silently after De
Mauleon's retreating form, and then, also quitting the dead, rejoined
the group he had quitted. Some of those who composed it acquired evil
renown later in the war of the Communists, and came to disastrous ends:
among that number the Pole Loubinsky and other members of the Secret
Council. The Italian Raselli was there too, but, subtler than his
French confreres, he divined the fate of the Communists, and glided
from it--safe now in his native land, destined there, no doubt, to the
funereal honours and lasting renown which Italy bestows on the dust
of her sons who have advocated assassination out of love for the human
race.

Amid this group, too, was a National Guard, strayed from his proper
post, and stretched on the frozen ground; and, early though the hour, in
the profound sleep of intoxication.

"So," said Loubinsky, "you have found your errand in vain, Citizen le
Noy; another victim to the imbecility of our generals."

"And partly one of us," replied the Medecin des Pauvres. "You remember
poor le Roux, who kept the old baraque where the Council of Ten used to
meet? Yonder he lies."

"Don't talk of the Council of Ten. What fools and dupes we were made by
that vieux gredin, Jean Lebeau! How I wish I could meet him again!"

Gaspard le Noy smiled sarcastically. "So much the worse for you, if you
did. A muscular and a ruthless fellow is that Jean Lebeau!" Therewith he
turned to the drunken sleeper and woke him up with a shake and a kick.
"Armand--Armand Monnier, I say, rise, rub your eyes. What if you are
called to your post? What if you are shamed as a deserter and a coward?"

Armand turned, rose with an effort from the recumbent to the sitting
posture, and stared dizzily in the face of the Medecin des Pauvres.

"I was dreaming that I had caught by the throat," said Armand, wildly,
"the aristo who shot my brother; and lo, there were two men, Victor de
Mauleon and Jean Lebeau."

"Ah! there is something in dreams," said the surgeon. "Once in a
thousand times a dream comes true."




CHAPTER V.

The time now came when all provision of food or of fuel failed the
modest household of Isaura; and there was not only herself and the
Venosta to feed and warm--there were the servants whom they had brought
from Italy, and had not the heart now to dismiss to the 'certainty of
famine. True, one of the three, the man, had returned to his native land
before the commencement of the siege; but the two women had remained.
They supported themselves now as they could on the meagre rations
accorded by the Government. Still Isaura attended the ambulance to which
she was attached. From the ladies associated with her she could readily
have obtained ample supplies: but they had no conception of her real
state of destitution; and there was a false pride generally prevalent
among the respectable classes, which Isaura shared, that concealed
distress lest alms should be proffered.

The destitution of the household had been carefully concealed from the
parents of Gustave Rameau, until, one day, Madame Rameau, entering at
the hour at which she generally, and her husband sometimes, came for
a place by the fireside and a seat at the board, found on the one only
ashes, on the other a ration of the black nauseous compound which had
become the substitute for bread.

Isaura was absent on her duties at the ambulance hospital,--purposely
absent, for she shrank from the bitter task of making clear to the
friends of her betrothed the impossibility of continuing the aid to
their support which their son had neglected to contribute; and still
more from the comment which she knew they would make on his conduct, in
absenting himself so wholly of late, and in the time of such trial and
pressure, both from them and from herself. Truly, she rejoiced at
that absence so far as it affected herself. Every hour of the day she
silently asked her conscience whether she were not now absolved from
a promise won from her only by an assurance that she had power to
influence for good the life that now voluntarily separated itself from
her own. As she had never loved Gustave, so she felt no resentment at
the indifference his conduct manifested. On the contrary, she hailed it
as a sign that the annulment of their betrothal would be as welcome
to him as to herself. And if so, she could restore to him the sort of
compassionate friendship she had learned to cherish in the hour of his
illness and repentance. She had resolved to seize the first opportunity
he afforded to her of speaking to him with frank and truthful plainness.
But, meanwhile, her gentle nature recoiled from the confession of
her resolve to appeal to Gustave himself for the rupture of their
engagement.

Thus the Venosta alone received Madame Rameau; and while that lady was
still gazing round her with an emotion too deep for immediate utterance,
her husband entered with an expression of face new to him--the look of
a man who has been stung to anger, and who has braced his mind to some
stern determination. This altered countenance of the good-tempered
bourgeois was not, however, noticed by the two women. The Venosta
did not even raise her eyes to it, as with humbled accents she said,
"Pardon, dear Monsieur, pardon, Madame, our want of hospitality; it
is not our hearts that fail. We kept our state from you as long as we
could. Now it speaks for itself; 'la fame e una bretta festin.'"

"Oh, Madame! and oh, my poor Isaura!" cried Madame Rameau, bursting into
tears. "So we have been all this time a burden on you,--aided to bring
such want on you! How can we ever be forgiven? And my son--to leave us
thus,--not even to tell us where to find him!"

"Do not degrade us, my wife," said M. Rameau, with unexpected dignity,
"by a word to imply that we would stoop to sue for support to our
ungrateful child. No, we will not starve! I am strong enough still to
find food for you. I will apply for restoration to the National Guard.
They have augmented the pay to married men; it is now nearly two francs
and a half a-day to a pere de famille, and on that pay we all can at
least live. Courage, my wife! I will go at once for employment. Many
men older than I am are at watch on the ramparts, and will march to the
battle on the next sortie."

"It shall not be so," exclaimed Madame Rameau, vehemently, and winding
her arm round her husband's neck. "I loved my son better than thee
once--more shame to me. Now, I would rather lose twenty such sons than
peril thy life, my Jacques! Madame," she continued, turning to the
Venosta, "thou wert wiser than I. Thou wert ever opposed to the union
between thy young friend and my son. I felt sore with thee for it--a
mother is so selfish when she puts herself in the place of her child. I
thought that only through marriage with one so pure, so noble, so
holy, Gustave could be saved from sin and evil. I am deceived. A man so
heartless to his parents, so neglectful of his affianced, is not to be
redeemed. I brought about this betrothal: tell Isaura that I release her
from it. I have watched her closely since she was entrapped into it.
I know how miserable the thought of it has made her, though, in her
sublime devotion to her plighted word, she sought to conceal from me the
real state of her heart. If the betrothal bring such sorrow, what would
the union do! Tell her this from me. Come, Jacques, come away!"

"Stay, Madame!" exclaimed the Venosta, her excitable nature much
affected by this honest outburst of feeling. "It is true that I did
oppose, so far as I could, my poor Piccola's engagement with M. Gustave.
But I dare not do your bidding. Isaura would not listen to me. And let
us be just! M. Gustave may be able satisfactorily to explain his seeming
indifference and neglect. His health is always very delicate; perhaps
he may be again dangerously ill. He serves in the National Guard;
perhaps--" she paused, but the mother conjectured the word left unsaid,
and, clasping her hands, cried out in anguish, "Perhaps dead!--and
we have wronged him! Oh, Jacques, Jacques! how shall we find out-how
discover our boy? Who can tell us where to search? at the hospital--or
in the cemeteries?" At the last word she dropped into a seat, and her
whole frame shook with her sobs.

Jacques approached her tenderly, and kneeling by her side, said:

"No, m'amie, comfort thyself, if it be indeed comfort to learn that thy
son is alive and well. For my part, I know not if I would not rather he
had died in his innocent childhood. I have seen him--spoken to him. I
know where he is to be found."

"You do, and concealed it from me? Oh, Jacques!"

"Listen to me, wife, and you, too, Madame; for what I have to say should
be made known to Mademoiselle Cicogna. Some time since, on the night
of the famous sortie, when at my post on the ramparts, I was told that
Gustave had joined himself to the most violent of the Red Republicans,
and had uttered at the Club de la Vengeance sentiments, of which I will
only say that I, his father and a Frenchman, hung my head with shame
when they were repeated to me. I resolved to go to the club myself.
I did. I heard him speak--heard him denounce Christianity as the
instrument of tyrants."

"Ah!" cried the two women, with a simultaneous shudder.

"When the assembly broke up, I waylaid him at the door. I spoke to him
seriously. I told him what anguish such announcement of blasphemous
opinions would inflict on his pious mother. I told him I should deem it
my duty to inform Mademoiselle Cicogna, and warn her against the union
on which he had told us his heart was bent. He appeared sincerely moved
by what I said; implored me to keep silence towards his mother and his
betrothed; and promised, on that condition, to relinquish at once
what he called 'his career as an orator,' and appear no more at such
execrable clubs. On this understanding I held my tongue. Why, with such
other causes of grief and suffering, should I tell thee, poor wife, of a
sin that I hoped thy son had repented and would not repeat? And Gustave
kept his word. He has never, so far as I know, attended, at least
spoken, at the Red clubs since that evening."

"Thank heaven so far," murmured Madame Rameau.

"So far, yes; but hear more. A little time after I thus met him he
changed his lodging, and did not confide to us his new address, giving
as a reason to us that he wished to avoid a clue to his discovery by
that pertinacious Mademoiselle Julie."

Rameau had here sunk his voice into a whisper, intended only for his
wife, but the ear of the Venosta was fine enough to catch the sound, and
she repeated, "Mademoiselle Julie! Santa Maria! who is she?"

"Oh!" said M. Rameau, with a shrug of his shoulders, and with true
Parisian sangfroid as to such matters of morality, "a trifle not worth
considering. Of course, a good-looking garcon like Gustave must have
his little affairs of the heart before he settles for life. Unluckily,
amongst those of Gustave was one with a violent-tempered girl who
persecuted him when he left her, and he naturally wished to avoid all
chance of a silly scandal, if only out of respect to the dignity of his
fiancee. But I found that was not the true motive, or at least the only
one, for concealment. Prepare yourself, my poor wife. Thou hast heard of
these terrible journals which the decheance has let loose upon us. Our
unhappy boy is the principal writer of one of the worst of them, under
the name of 'Diderot le Jeune."'

"What!" cried the Venosta. "That monster! The good Abbe Vertpre was
telling us of the writings with that name attached to them. The Abbe
himself is denounced by name as one of those meddling priests who are to
be constrained to serve as soldiers or pointed out to the vengeance of
the canaille. Isaura's fiancee a blasphemer!"

"Hush, hush!" said Madame Rameau, rising, very pale but self-collected.
"How do you know this, Jacques?"

"From the lips of Gustave himself. I heard first of it yesterday from
one of the young reprobates with whom he used to be familiar, and who
even complimented me on the rising fame of my son, and praised the
eloquence of his article that day. But I would not believe him. I bought
the journal--here it is; saw the name and address of the printer--went
this morning to the office--was there told that 'Diderot le Jeune' was
within revising the press--stationed myself by the street door, and when
Gustave came out I seized his arm, and asked him to say Yes or No if he
was the author of this infamous article,--this, which I now hold in my
hand. He owned the authorship with pride; talked wildly of the great
man he was--of the great things he was to do; said that, in hitherto
concealing his true name, he had done all he could to defer to the
bigoted prejudices of his parents and his fiancee; and that if genius,
like fire, would find its way out, he could not help it; that a time was
rapidly coming when his opinions would be uppermost; that since October
the Communists were gaining ascendancy, and only waited the end of the
siege to put down the present Government, and with it all hypocrisies
and shams, religious or social. My wife, he was rude to me, insulting!
but he had been drinking--that made him incautious: and he continued to
walk by my side towards his own lodging, on reaching which he ironically
invited me to enter, saying, 'I should meet there men who would soon
argue me out of my obsolete notions.' You may go to him, wife, now, if
you please. I will not, nor will I take from him a crust of bread. I
came hither, determined to tell the young lady all this, if I found her
at home. I should be a dishonoured man if I suffered her to be cheated
into misery.

"There, Madame Venosta, there! Take that journal, show it to
Mademoiselle; and report to her all I have said."

M. Rameau, habitually the mildest of men, had, in talking, worked
himself up into positive fury.

His wife, calmer but more deeply affected, made a piteous sign to the
Venosta not to say more; and without other salutation or adieu took her
husband's arm, and led him from the house.




CHAPTER VI.

Obtaining from her husband Gustave's address, Madame Rameau hastened
to her son's apartment alone through the darkling streets. The house in
which he lodged was in a different quarter from that in which Isaura had
visited him. Then, the street selected was still in the centre of the
beau monde--now, it was within the precincts of that section of the
many-faced capital in which the beau monde was held in detestation or
scorn; still the house had certain pretensions, boasting a courtyard and
a porter's lodge. Madame Rameau, instructed to mount au second, found
the door ajar, and, entering, perceived on the table of the little salon
the remains of a feast which, however untempting it might have been
in happier times, contrasted strongly with the meagre fare of which
Gustave's parents had deemed themselves fortunate to partake at the
board of his betrothed; remnants of those viands which offered to
the inquisitive epicure an experiment in food much too costly for the
popular stomach--dainty morsels of elephant, hippopotamus, and wolf,
interspersed with half-emptied bottles of varied and high-priced
wines. Passing these evidences of unseasonable extravagance with a mute
sentiment of anger and disgust, Madame Rameau penetrated into a small
cabinet, the door of which was also ajar, and saw her son stretched
on his bed half dressed, breathing heavily in the sleep which follows
intoxication. She did not attempt to disturb him. She placed herself
quietly by his side, gazing mournfully on the face which she had once so
proudly contemplated, now haggard and faded,--still strangely beautiful,
though it was the beauty of ruin.

From time to time he stirred uneasily, and muttered broken words, in
which fragments of his own delicately-worded verse were incoherently
mixed up with ribald slang, addressed to imaginary companions. In
his dreams he was evidently living over again his late revel, with
episodical diversions into the poet-world, of which he was rather a
vagrant nomad than a settled cultivator. Then she would silently
bathe his feverish temples with the perfumed water she found on his
dressing-table. And so she watched till, in the middle of the night,
he woke up, and recovered the possession of his reason with a quickness
that surprised Madame Rameau. He was, indeed, one of those men in whom
excess of drink, when slept off, is succeeded by extreme mildness, the
effect of nervous exhaustion, and by a dejected repentance, which, to
his mother, seemed a propitious lucidity of the moral sense.

Certainly on seeing her he threw himself on her breast, and began to
shed tears. Madame Rameau had not the heart to reproach him sternly. But
by gentle degrees she made him comprehend the pain he had given to his
father, and the destitution in which he had deserted his parents and
his affianced. In his present mood Gustave was deeply affected by these
representations. He excused himself feebly by dwelling on the excitement
of the times, the preoccupation of his mind, the example of his
companions; but with his excuses he mingled passionate expressions of
remorse, and before daybreak mother and son were completely reconciled.
Then he fell into a tranquil sleep; and Madame Rameau, quite worn out,
slept also in the chair beside him, her arm around his neck. He awoke
before she did at a late hour in the morning; and stealing from her arm,
went to his escritoire, and took forth what money he found there, half
of which he poured into her lap, kissing her till she awoke.

"Mother," he said, "henceforth I will work for thee and my father. Take
this trifle now; the rest I reserve for Isaura."

"Joy! I have found my boy again. But Isaura, I fear that she will not
take thy money, and all thought of her must also be abandoned."

Gustave had already turned to his looking-glass, and was arranging with
care his dark ringlets: his personal vanity--his remorse appeased by
this pecuniary oblation--had revived.

"No," he said gaily, "I don't think I shall abandon her; and it is not
likely, when she sees and hears me, that she can wish to abandon me! Now
let us breakfast, and then I will go at once to her."

In the mean while, Isaura, on her return to her apartment at the wintry
nightfall, found a cart stationed at the door, and the Venosta on
the threshold, superintending the removal of various articles of
furniture--indeed, all such articles as were not absolutely required.

"Oh, Piccola!" she said, with an attempt at cheerfulness, "I did not
expect thee back so soon. Hush! I have made a famous bargain. I have
found a broker to buy these things which we don't want just at present,
and can replace by new and prettier things when the siege is over and we
get our money. The broker pays down on the nail and thou wilt not go
to bed without supper. There are no ills which are not more supportable
after food."

Isaura smiled faintly, kissed the Venosta's cheek, and ascended with
weary steps to the sitting-room. There she seated herself quietly,
looking with abstracted eyes round the bare dismantled space by the
light of the single candle.

When the Venosta re-entered, she was followed by the servants, bringing
in a daintier meal than they had known for days--a genuine rabbit,
potatoes, marrons glaces, a bottle of wine, and a pannier of wood. The
fire was soon lighted, the Venosta plying the bellows. It was not till
this banquet, of which Isaura, faint as she was, scarcely partook, had
been remitted to the two Italian women-servants, and another log been
thrown on the hearth, that the Venosta opened the subject which was
pressing on her heart. She did this with a joyous smile, taking both
Isaura's hands in her own, and stroking them fondly.

"My child, I have such good news for thee! Thou hast escaped--thou art
free!" and then she related all that M. Rameau had said, and finished by
producing the copy of Gustave's unhallowed journal.

When she had read the latter, which she did with compressed lips and
varying colour, the girl fell on her knees--not to thank Heaven that she
would now escape a union from which her soul so recoiled--not that she
was indeed free, but to pray, with tears rolling down her cheeks, that
God would yet save to Himself, and to good ends, the soul that she had
failed to bring to Him. All previous irritation against Gustave was
gone: all had melted into an ineffable compassion.




CHAPTER VII.

When, a little before noon, Gustave was admitted by the servant into
Isaura's salon, its desolate condition, stripped of all its pretty
feminine elegancies, struck him with a sense of discomfort to himself
which superseded any more remorseful sentiment. The day was intensely
cold: the single log on the hearth did not burn; there were only two
or three chairs in the room; even the carpet, which had been of gaily
coloured Aubusson, was gone. His teeth chattered; and he only replied
by a dreary nod to the servant who informed him that Madame Venosta was
gone out, and Mademoiselle had not yet quitted her own room.

If there be a thing which a true Parisian of Rameau's stamp associates
with love of woman, it is a certain sort of elegant surroundings, a
pretty boudoir, a cheery hearth, an easy fauteuil. In the absence of
such attributes, "fuyit retro Venus." If the Englishman invented the
word comfort, it is the Parisian who most thoroughly comprehends the
thing. And he resents the loss of it in any house where he has been
accustomed to look for it, as a personal wrong to his feelings.

Left for some minutes alone, Gustave occupied himself with kindling the
log, and muttering, "Par tous les diables, quel chien de rhume je vais
attraper?" He turned as he heard the rustle of a robe and a light slow
step. Isaura stood before him. Her aspect startled him. He had come
prepared to expect grave displeasure and a frigid reception. But the
expression of Isaura's face was more kindly, more gentle, more tender,
than he had seen it since the day she had accepted his suit.

Knowing from his mother what his father had said to his prejudice, he
thought within himself, "After all, the poor girl loves me better than I
thought. She is sensible and enlightened; she cannot pretend to dictate
an opinion to a man like me."

He approached with a complacent self-assured mien, and took her
hand, which she yielded to him quietly, leading her to one of the few
remaining chairs, and seating himself beside her.

"Dear Isaura," he said, talking rapidly all the while he performed this
ceremony, "I need not assure you of my utter ignorance of the state to
which the imbecility of our Government, and the cowardice, or rather
the treachery, of our generals, has reduced you. I only heard of it late
last night from my mother. I hasten to claim my right to share with you
the humble resources which I have saved by the intellectual labours that
have absorbed all such moments as my military drudgeries left to the
talents which, even at such a moment, paralysing minds less energetic,
have sustained me:"--and therewith he poured several pieces of gold and
silver on the table beside her chair.

"Gustave," then said Isaura, "I am well pleased that you thus prove
that I was not mistaken when I thought and said that, despite all
appearances, all errors, your heart was good. Oh, do but follow its true
impulses, and--"

"Its impulses lead me ever to thy feet," interrupted Gustave, with a
fervour which sounded somewhat theatrical and hollow.

The girl smiled, not bitterly, not mockingly; but Gustave did not like
the smile.

"Poor Gustave," she said, with a melancholy pathos in her soft voice,
"do you not understand that the time has come when such commonplace
compliments ill suit our altered positions to each other? Nay, listen
to me patiently; and let not my words in this last interview pain you
to recall. If either of us be to blame in the engagement hastily
contracted, it is I. Gustave, when you, exaggerating in your imagination
the nature of your sentiments for me, said with such earnestness that
on my consent to our union depended your health, your life, your career;
that if I withheld that consent you were lost, and in despair would seek
distraction from thought in all from which your friends, your mother,
the duties imposed upon Genius for the good of Man to the ends of God,
should withhold and save you--when you said all this, and I believed it,
I felt as if Heaven commanded me not to desert the soul which appealed
to me in the crisis of its struggle and peril. Gustave, I repent; I was
to blame."

"How to blame?"

"I overrated my power over your heart: I overrated still more, perhaps,
my power over my own."

"Ah, your own! I understand now. You did not love me?"
