when thus by sea and land the war was urged. In truth, the same camp
often contained the foot and the horse and the marines, all intermixed,
and rejoicing in common, severally magnifying their own feats, their
own hazards and adventures: here were displayed the horrors of steep
mountains and dismal forests; there the outrages of waves and tempests.
These boasted their exploits by land and against the foe: those the
vanquished ocean; all vying together according to the usual vaunts and
ostentation of soldiers. Upon the Britons also, as from the captives was
learned, the sight of the fleet brought much consternation and dismay;
as if, now that their solitary ocean and recesses of the deep were
disclosed and invaded, the last refuge of the vanquished was cut off. To
action and arms, the several people inhabiting Caledonia had immediate
recourse, and advanced with great parade, made still greater by common
rumour (as usual in things that are unknown), for that they daringly
assailed our forts, and by thus insulting and defying us, created much
fear and alarm. Nay, there were some who covering real cowardice under
the guise of prudence and counsel, exhorted a return to the nether side
of Bodotria, [Footnote: To retreat south of the Forth.] for that it
were more eligible to retire back than to be driven. He was apprised the
while, that the enemy meant to attack him in divers bands: so that, as
they surpassed him in numbers and in the knowledge of the country, he
too divided his army into three parts, and thus marched, to prevent
their surrounding him.

As soon as this disposition of his was known to the enemy, they suddenly
changed theirs, and all in a body proceeded to fall upon the ninth
legion as the least sufficient and weakest of all; and, as the assault
was in the night they slew the guards and entered the trenches, aided
by the general sleep or general dismay there. They were already pursuing
the fight in the camp itself, when Agricola having from his spies learnt
what route the enemy had taken, and closely following their track,
commanded the lightest of his foot and cavalry to charge them, whilst
yet engaged, in the rear, and the whole army presently after to give a
mighty shout. Moreover at break of day, the Roman banners were beheld
refulgent. Thus were the Britons dismayed with double peril and
distress; and to the Romans their courage returned. Hence seeing their
lives secure, they now maintained the conflict for glory. They even
returned the attack upon the enemy: insomuch that in the very gates of
the camp a bloody encounter ensued, till the enemy were quite routed;
for both these our armies exerted their might, the one contending to
show that they had brought relief, the other to appear not to have
wanted assistance. Indeed, had not the woods and marshes served for
shelter to the fugitives, by this victory the war had been determined.

By this success, with such valour gained, and followed with such renown,
the army was become elated and resolute. With fierce din they cried,
"That to their bravery nothing could prove insurmountable. They must
penetrate into the heart of Caledonia, and advance in a continual
succession of battles, till they had at last found the utmost limits of
Britain." Thus it was that they, who a little before had been so wary
and so wise, were now, after the event was determined, grown full of
boasts and intrepidity. Such is the lot of warfare, very unequal and
unjust: in success all men assume part: the disasters are all imputed
to one. Now the Britons, conjecturing the victory to proceed not from
superior courage, but from circumstances improved and the address of
our General, lost nothing of their spirit and defiance, but armed their
young men, removed their wives and children into places of security, and
in general conventions of their several communities engaged them in a
league ratified by solemn sacrifices. And thus they mutually retired for
the winter, with minds on both sides abundantly irritated.

During the same summer, a cohort of Usipians levied in Germany and
thence transported to Britain, adventured upon a feat very desperate and
memorable. When they had slain the Centurion and soldiers placed amongst
them for training them in discipline, and to serve them for patterns
and directors, they embarked in three pinnaces, forcing the pilots to
conduct them; and since one of these forsook them and fled away, they
suspected and therefore killed the other two. As the attempt was not
yet divulged, their launching into the deep was beheld as a wonder. Anon
they were tossed hither and thither at the mercy of the waves: and, as
they often engaged for spoil with several of the Britons, obliging
them to defend their property thus invaded, in which conflicts they
frequently proved victorious, and were sometimes defeated, they were
at last reduced to want so pressing, as to feed upon one another, first
upon the weakest, then upon whomsoever the lot fell. In this manner were
they carried round about Britain, and having lost their vessels through
ignorance how to manage them, they were accounted robbers and pirates,
and fell into the hands first of the Suevians, afterwards of the
Frisians. Nay, as they were bought and sold for slaves, some of them,
through change of masters, were brought over to our side of the Rhine,
and grew famous from the discovery of an adventure so extraordinary.

A.D. 84. In the beginning of the summer, Agricola suffered a sore blow
in his family, by losing his son born about a year before. A misfortune
which he neither bore with an ostentation of firmness and unconcern,
like many other men of magnanimity, nor with lamentations and tears
worthy only of women. Besides that for this affliction, war proved one
of his remedies. When therefore he had sent forward the navy, which by
committing devastations in several places, would not fail to spread a
mighty and perplexing terror, he put himself at the head of his army
lightly equipped, and to it had added some of the bravest Britons, such
as had been well proved through a long course of peace. Thus he arrived
at the Grampian Hills, upon which the enemy were already encamped. For,
the Britons, nothing daunted by the issue of the former battle, and
boldly waiting either to take vengeance or to suffer bondage, taught
withal at last, that a general union was the best way to repel common
danger, had by embassies and confederacies drawn together the forces of
all their communities. Even then were to be seen thirty thousand men in
arms, and their youth from every quarter were still continuing to flock
in, as were also such of their elderly men as were yet vigorous and
hale, they who were signal in war, and now carried with them their
several ensigns of honour formerly gained in the field. And now
Galgacus, he who amongst their several leaders surpassed all in valour
and descent, is said to have spoke in this strain to the multitude all
very pressing for battle,

"Whenever I contemplate the causes of the war, and the necessity to
which we are reduced, great is my confidence that this day and this
union of yours will prove the beginning of universal liberty to Britain.
For, besides that bondage is what we have never borne, we are so beset
that beyond us there is no further land; nor in truth is there any
security left us from the sea whilst the Roman fleet is hovering upon
our coasts. Thus the same expedient which proves honourable to brave
men, is to cowards too become the safest of all others, even present
recourse to battle and arms. The other Britons, in their past conflicts
with the Romans, whence they found various success, had still a
remaining source of hope and succour in this our nation. For, of all the
people of Britain we are the noblest, and thence placed in its innermost
regions, and, as we behold not so much as the coasts of such as are
slaves, we thus preserve even our eyes free and unprofaned by the sight
of lawless and usurped rule. To us who are the utmost inhabitants of the
earth, to us the last who enjoy liberty, this extremity of the globe,
this remote tract unknown even to common fame, has to this day proved
the only protection and defence. At present the utmost boundary of
Britain is laid open; and to conquer parts unknown, is thought matter of
great pomp and boasting. Beyond us no more people are found, nor aught
save seas and rocks; and already the Romans have advanced into the heart
of our country. Against their pride and domineering you will find it
in vain to seek a remedy or refuge from any obsequiousness or humble
behaviour of yours. Plunderers of the earth these, who in their
universal devastations finding countries to fail them, investigate and
rob even the sea. If the enemy be wealthy, he inflames their avarice;
if poor, their ambition. They are general spoilers, such as neither the
eastern world nor the western can satiate. They only of all men thirst
after acquisitions both poor and rich, with equal avidity and passion.
To spoil, to butcher, and to commit every kind of violence, they style
by a lying name, _Government_; and when they have spread a general
desolation, they call it _Peace_. [Footnote: "Ubi solitudinem faciunt,
pacem appellant."]

"Dearest to every man are his children and kindred, by the contrivance
and designation of nature. These are snatched from us for recruits, and
doomed to bondage in other parts of the earth. Our wives and sisters,
however they escape rapes and violence as from open enemies, are
debauched under the appearance and privilege of friendship and
hospitality. Our fortunes and possessions they exhaust for tribute, our
grain for their provisions. Even our bodies and limbs are extenuated
and wasted, while we are doomed to the drudgery of making cuts through
woods, and drains in bogs, under continual blows and outrages. Such as
are born to be slaves are but once sold, and thenceforward nourished by
their lords. Britain is daily paying for its servitude, is daily feeding
it. Moreover, as in a tribe of household slaves, he who comes last
serves for sport to all his fellows; so in this ancient state of slavery
to which the world is reduced, we, as the freshest slaves and thence
held the most contemptible, are now designed to destruction. For, we
have no fields to cultivate, nor mines to dig, nor ports to make; works
for which they might be tempted to spare us alive: besides that ever
distasteful to rulers is magnanimity and a daring spirit in their
subjects. Indeed our very situation, so solitary and remote, the more
security it affords to us, does but raise the greater jealousy in them.
Seeing therefore you are thus bereft of all hopes of mercy, rouse now at
last all your courage, both you to whom life is dearest, and you to whom
glory. The Brigantes, even under the leading of a woman, burned
their colony, stormed their entrenchments, and, had not such success
degenerated into sloth, might have quite cast off the yoke of slavery.
Let us who still preserve our forces entire, us who are still unsubdued,
and want not to acquire liberty but only to secure it, manifest at once,
upon the first encounter, what kind of men they are that Caledonia has
reserved for her own vindication and defence.

"Do you indeed believe the Romans to be equally brave and vigorous in
war, as during peace they are vicious and dissolute? From our quarrels
and divisions it is that they have derived their renown, and thus
convert the faults of their enemies to the glory of their own army;
an army compounded of many nations so different, that as it is success
alone which holds them together, misfortunes and disasters will surely
dissolve them. Unless you suppose that the Germans there, that the
Gauls, and many of the Britons (whom with shame I mention), men who
however have been all much longer their enemies than their slaves,
are yet attached to them by any real fidelity and affection, whilst
presenting their blood to establish a domination altogether foreign
and unnatural to them all. What restrains them is no more than awe and
terror, frail bonds of endearment; and when these are removed, such who
cease to fear, will immediately begin to manifest their hate. Amongst us
is found whatever can stimulate men to victory. The Romans have no wives
to hearten and to urge them. They have here no fathers and mothers to
upbraid them for flying. Many of them have no country at all, or at
least their country is elsewhere. But a few in number they are, ignorant
of the region and thence struck with dread, whilst to their eyes,
whatever they behold around them, is all wild and strange, even the air
and sky, with the woods and the sea; so that the Gods have in some sort
delivered them enclosed and bound into our hands.

"Be not dismayed with things of mere show, and with a glare of gold and
of silver: this is what can neither wound, nor save. In the very host
of the enemy we shall find bands of our own. The Britons will own and
espouse their own genuine cause. The Gauls will recollect their former
liberty. What the Usipians have lately done, the other Germans will do,
and abandon the Romans. Thereafter nothing remains to be feared. Their
forts are ungarrisoned; their colonies replenished with the aged and
infirm; and between the people and their magistrates, whilst the
former are averse to obedience, and the latter rule with injustice, the
municipal cities are weakened and full of dissensions. Here you see a
general, here an army: there you may behold tributes and the mines, with
all the other train of calamities and curses ever pursuing men enslaved.
Whether all these are to be for ever imposed, or whether we forthwith
avenge ourselves for the attempt, this very field must determine. As
therefore you advance to battle, look back upon your ancestors, look
forward to your posterity."

They received his speech joyfully, with chantings, and terrible din, and
many dissonant shouts, after the manner of barbarians. Already too their
bands moved, and the glittering of their arms appeared, as all the most
resolute were running to the front: moreover the army was forming
in battle array; when Agricola; who indeed saw his soldiers full of
alacrity, and hardly to be restrained even by express cautions, yet
chose to discourse to them in the following strain. "It is now the
eighth year, my fellow-soldiers, since through the virtue and auspicious
fortune of the Roman Empire, and by your own services and fidelity you
have been pursuing the conquest of Britain. In so many expeditions that
you have undertaken, in so many battles as you have fought, you have
still had constant occasion either to be exerting your bravery against
the foe, or your patience and pains even against the obstacles of
nature. Neither, during all these struggles, have we found any cause
of mutual regret, I to have conducted such soldiers, or you to have
followed such a captain. We have both passed the limits which we found,
I those known to the ancient governors, you those of former armies; and
we possess the very extremity of Britain, not only in the bruitings of
fame and vulgar rumour, but possess it with our camps and arms. Britain
is entirely discovered, and entirely subdued. In truth, as the army has
been marching, whilst in passing morasses and mountains and rivers
you have been fatigued and distressed, I was wont to hear every man
remarkably brave ask, _When shall we see the enemy, when be led to
battle?_ Already they are come, roused from their fastnesses and lurking
holes. Here you see the end of all your wishes, here scope for all your
valour, and all things promising and propitious, if you conquer; but
all cross and disastrous, should you be vanquished. For, as to have
thus marched over a tract of country so immense, to have passed through
gloomy forests, to have crossed arms of the deep, is matter of glory and
applause whilst we advance against the enemy; so if we fly before them,
whatever is now most in our favour, will then prove most to our peril.
We know not the situation of the country so well as they know it; we
have not provisions so abundant as they have: but we have limbs and
arms; and in these, all things. For myself; it is a rule long since
settled by me, that safety there is none either to the army or to the
general, in turning their backs upon the foe. Hence it is not only more
eligible to lose life honourably than to save it basely, but security
and renown both arise from the same source. Neither would it be a fate
void of glory to fall in this the utmost verge of earth and of nature.

"Were the people now arrayed against you such as were new to you, were
you to engage with bands never before tried, I should animate you by the
examples of other armies. At present, only recollect and enumerate your
own signal exploits, only ask and consult your own eyes. These are they
whom but the last year you utterly discomfited, only by the terror of
your shouting, when, trusting to the darkness of the night, they by
stealth attacked a single legion. These are they who of all the Britons
are the most abandoned to fear and flight, and thence happen thus long
to survive all the rest. It is with us as with those who make inroads
into woods and forests. As beasts of the greatest strength there, are
driven thence by the superior force of such as pursue them, and as the
timorous and spiritless fly even at the cry of the pursuers: in like
manner, all the bravest Britons are long since fallen by the sword.
They that remain are only a crowd, fearful and effeminate: nor can you
consider them as men whom you have therefore reached, because they have
persisted to oppose you, but as such whom you have surprised as the last
and forlorn of all, who struck with dread and bereft of spirit, stand
benumbed in yonder field, whence you may gain over them a glorious and
memorable victory. Here complete all your expeditions and efforts: here
close a struggle of fifty years with one great and important day, so
that to the army may not be imputed either the procrastination of the
war, or any cause for reviving it."

Apparent, even whilst Agricola spoke, was the ardour of the soldiers,
mighty their transport and applause at the end of his speech, and
instantly they flew to their arms. Thus inflamed and urging to engage,
he formed them so that the strong band of auxiliary foot, who were eight
thousand men, composed the centre. The wings were environed with three
thousand horse. The legions without advancing stood embattled just
without the entrenchment; for that mighty would be the glory of the
victory, were it, by sparing them, gained without spilling any Roman
blood; and they were still a sure stay and succour, should the rest be
repulsed. The British host was ranged upon the rising grounds, at once
for show and terror, in such sort that the first band stood upon the
plain, and the rest rose successively upon the brows of the hills, one
rank close above another, as if they had been linked together. Their
cavalry and chariots of war filled the interjacent field with great
tumult and boundings to and fro. Agricola then, fearing from the
surpassing multitude of the enemy, that he might be beset at once in
the front and on each flank, opened and extended his host. Yet, though
thence his ranks must prove more relaxed, and many advised him to bring
on the legions, he, who rather entertained a spirit of hope, and in all
difficulties was ever firm, dismissed his horse and advanced on foot
before the banners.

In the beginning of the onset the conflict was maintained at a distance.
The Britons, they who were possessed at once of bravery and skill, armed
with their huge swords and small bucklers, quite eluded our missive
weapons, or beat them quite off, whilst of their own they poured a
torrent upon us, till Agricola encouraged three Batavian cohorts and
two of the Tungrians, to close with the enemy and bring them to an
engagement hand to hand; as what was with those veteran soldiers a
long practice, and become familiar, but to the enemy very uneasy and
embarrassing, as they were armed with very little targets and with
swords of enormous size. For, the swords of the Britons, which are blunt
at the end, are unfit for grapling and cannot support a close encounter.
Hence the Batavians thickened their blows, wounded them with the iron
bosses of their bucklers, mangled their faces, and, bearing down all who
withstood them upon the plain, were already carrying the attack up to
the hills: insomuch that the rest of the cohorts, incited by emulation
and sudden ardour, joined with those and made havoc of all whom they
encountered. Nay, such was the impetuosity and hurry of the victory,
that many were left behind but half dead, others not so much as wounded.
In the meantime their troops of cavalry took to flight: the chariots of
war mingled with the battalions of foot; and though they had so lately
struck terror, were now themselves beset and entangled with our thick
bands, as also with the unevenness and intricacy of the place. Of
a combat of cavalry this bore not the least appearance: since here,
standing obstinately foot to foot, they pressed to overthrow each other
by the weight and bodies of their horses. Moreover the war-chariots, now
abandoned and straggling, as also the horses destitute of managers and
thence wild and affrighted, were running hither and thither just as the
next fright drove them; insomuch that all of their own side, who met
them or crossed their way, were beaten down by them.

Now those of the Britons who were lodged upon the ridges of the hills
and had hitherto no share in the encounter, like men yet pressed by no
peril looked with scorn upon our forces as but few in number, and began
to descend softly and to surround them in the rear, whilst they were
urging their victory. But Agricola, who had apprehended this very
design, despatched to engage them four squadrons of horse, such as he
