
"I will. All I know of him, uncle, is that he used to tell me stories,
when I was a boy, of enchanters, and knights, and dragons, and such
like, and got into trouble for filling my head with such fancies. Now
let him tell his story in peace."

"He shall; but I misdoubt the fellow very much. He talks as if he knew
Latin; and what business has a foot-running slave to do that?"

So Martin went on, somewhat abashed. "'And,' said your father, 'justice
I will have, and leave injustice, and the overlooking of it, to those
who wish to profit thereby.'

"And at that Godwin smiled, and said to the King, 'The Earl is wise, as
usual, and speaks like a very Solomon. Your Majesty must, in spite of
your own tenderness of heart, have these letters of outlawry made out.'

"Then all our men murmured,--and I as loud as any. But old Surturbrand
the housecarle did more; for out he stepped to your father's side, and
spoke right up before the King.

"'Bonny times,' he said, 'I have lived to see, when a lad of Earl
Oslac's blood is sent out of the land, a beggar and a wolf's head,
for playing a boy's trick or two, and upsetting a shaveling priest!
We managed such wild young colts better, we Vikings who conquered the
Danelagh. If Canute had had a son like Hereward--as would to God he had
had!--he would have dealt with him as old Swend Forkbeard (God grant I
meet him in Valhalla, in spite of all priests!) did by Canute himself
when he was young, and kicked and plunged awhile at being first bitted
and saddled.'

"'What does the man say?' asked the King, for old Surturbrand was
talking broad Danish.

"'He is a housecarle of mine, Lord King, a good man and true; but old
age and rough Danish blood has made him forget that he stands before
kings and earls.'

"'By ----, Earl!' says Surturbrand, 'I have fought knee to knee beside a
braver king than that there, and nobler earls than ever a one here; and
was never afraid, like a free Dane, to speak my mind to them, by sea or
land. And if the King, with his French ways, does not understand a plain
man's talk, the two earls yonder do right well, and I say,--Deal by this
lad in the good old fashion. Give him half a dozen long ships, and what
crews he can get together, and send him out, as Canute would have done,
to seek his fortune like a Viking; and if he comes home with plenty of
wounds, and plenty of plunder, give him an earldom as he deserves. Do
you ask your Countess, Earl Godwin:--she is of the right Danish blood,
God bless her! though she is your wife,--and see if she does not know
how to bring a naughty lad to his senses.'

"Then Harold the Earl said: 'The old man is right. King, listen to what
he says.' And he told him all, quite eagerly."

"How did you know that? Can you understand French?"

"I am a poor idiot, give me a halfpenny," said Martin, in a doleful
voice, as he threw into his face and whole figure a look of helpless
stupidity and awkwardness, which set them both laughing.

But Hereward checked himself. "And you think he was in earnest?"

"As sure as there are holy crows in Crowland. But it was of no use. Your
father got a parchment, with an outlandish Norman seal hanging to it,
and sent me off with it that same night to give to the lawman. So wolf's
head you are, my lord, and there is no use crying over spilt milk."

"And Harold spoke for me? It will be as well to tell Abbot Leofric that,
in case he be inclined to turn traitor, and refuse to open the gates.
Once outside them, I care not for mortal man."

"My poor boy, there will be many a one whom thou hast wronged only too
ready to lie in wait for thee, now thy life is in every man's hand. If
the outlawry is published, thou hadst best start to-night, and get past
Lincoln before morning."

"I shall stay quietly here, and get a good night's rest; and then ride
out to-morrow morning in the face of the whole shire. No, not a word!
You would not have me sneak away like a coward?"

Brand smiled and shrugged his shoulders: being very much of the same
mind.

"At least, go north."

"And why north?"

"You have no quarrel in Northumberland, and the King's writ runs very
slowly there, if at all. Old Siward Digre may stand your friend."

"He? He is a fast friend of my father's."

"What of that? the old Viking will like you none the less for having
shown a touch of his own temper. Go to him, I say, and tell him that I
sent you."

"But he is fighting the Scots beyond the Forth."

"So much the better. There will be good work for you to do. And
Gislebert of Ghent is up there too, I hear, trying to settle himself
among the Scots. He is your mother's kinsman; and as for your being
an outlaw, he wants hard hitters and hard riders, and all is fish that
comes to his net. Find him out, too, and tell him I sent you."

"You are a good old uncle," said Hereward. "Why were you not a soldier?"

Brand laughed somewhat sadly.

"If I had been a soldier, lad, where would you have looked for a friend
this day? No. God has done what was merciful with me and my sins. May he
do the same by thee and thine."

Hereward made an impatient movement. He disliked any word which seemed
likely to soften his own hardness of heart. But he kissed his uncle
lovingly on both cheeks.

"By the by, Martin,--any message from my lady mother?"

"None!"

"Quite right and pious. I am an enemy to Holy Church and therefore to
her. Good night, uncle."

"Hey?" asked Brand; "where is that footman,--Martin you call him? I must
have another word with him."

But Martin was gone.

"No matter. I shall question him sharply enough to-morrow, I warrant."

And Hereward went out to his lodging; while the good Prior went to his
prayers.

When Hereward entered his room, Martin started out of the darkness, and
followed him in. Then he shut to the door carefully, and pulled out a
bag.

"There was no message from my lady: but there was this."

The bag was full of money.

"Why did you not tell me of this before?"

"Never show money before a monk."

"Villain! would you mistrust my uncle?"

"Any man with a shaven crown. St. Peter is his God and Lord and
conscience; and if he saw but the shine of a penny, for St. Peter he
would want it."

"And he shall have it," quoth Hereward; and flung out of the room, and
into his uncle's.

"Uncle, I have money. I am come to pay back what I took from
the Steward, and as much more into the bargain." And he told out
eight-and-thirty pieces.

"Thank God and all his saints!" cried Brand, weeping abundantly for joy;
for he had acquired, by long devotion, the _donum lachrymarum_,--that
lachrymose and somewhat hysterical temperament common among pious monks,
and held to be a mark of grace.

"Blessed St. Peter, thou art repaid; and thou wilt be merciful!"

Brand believed, in common with all monks then, that Hereward had robbed,
not merely the Abbey of Peterborough, but, what was more, St. Peter
himself; thereby converting into an implacable and internecine foe the
chief of the Apostles, the rock on which was founded the whole Church.

"Now, uncle," said Hereward, "do me one good deed in return. Promise me
that, if you can help it, none of my poor housecarles shall suffer
for my sins. I led them into trouble. I am punished. I have made
restitution,--at least to St. Peter. See that my father and mother,
if they be the Christians they call themselves, forgive and forget all
offences except mine."

"I will; so help me all saints and our Lord. O my boy, my boy, thou
shouldst have been a king's thane, and not an outlaw!"

And he hurried off with the news to the Abbot.

When Hereward returned to his room, Martin was gone.

"Farewell, good men of Peterborough," said Hereward, as he leapt into
the saddle next morning. "I had made a vow against you, and came to try
you; to see whether you would force me to fulfil it or not. But you have
been so kind that I have half repented of it; and the evil shall not
come in the days of Abbot Leofric, nor of Brand the Prior, though it may
come in the days of Herluin the Steward, if he live long enough."

"What do you mean, you incarnate fiend, only fit to worship Thor and
Odin?" asked Brand.

"That I would burn Goldenborough, and Herluin the Steward within it,
ere I die. I fear I shall do it; I fear I must do it. Ten years ago come
Lammas, Herluin bade light the peat-stack under me. Do you recollect?"

"And so he did, the hound!" quoth Brand. "I had forgotten that."

"Little Hereward never forgets foe or friend. Ever since, on Lammas
night,--hold still, horse!--I dream of fire and flame, and of
Goldenborough in the glare of it. If it is written in the big book,
happen it must; if not, so much the better for Goldenborough, for it is
a pretty place, and honest Englishmen in it. Only see that there be not
too many Frenchmen crept in when I come back, beside our French friend
Herluin; and see, too, that there be not a peat-stack handy: a word is
enough to wise men like you. Good by!"

"God help thee, thou sinful boy!" said the Abbot.

"Hereward, Hereward! Come back!" cried Brand.

But the boy had spurred his horse through the gateway, and was far down
the road.

"Leofric, my friend," said Brand, sadly, "this is my sin, and no man's
else. And heavy penance will I do for it, till that lad returns in
peace."

"Your sin?"

"Mine, Abbot. I persuaded his mother to send him hither to be a monk.
Alas! alas! How long will men try to be wiser than Him who maketh men?"

"I do not understand thee," quoth the Abbot. And no more he did.

It was four o'clock on a May morning, when Hereward set out to see the
world, with good armor on his back, good weapon by his side, good horse
between his knees, and good money in his purse. What could a lad of
eighteen want more, who under the harsh family rule of those times had
known nothing of a father's, and but too little of a mother's, love?
He rode away northward through the Bruneswald, over the higher land of
Lincolnshire, through primeval glades of mighty oak and ash, holly and
thorn, swarming with game, which was as highly preserved then as now,
under Canute's severe forest laws. The yellow roes stood and stared at
him knee-deep in the young fern; the pheasant called his hens out to
feed in the dewy grass; the blackbird and thrush sang out from every
bough; the wood-lark trilled above the high oak-tops, and sank down on
them as his song sank down. And Hereward rode on, rejoicing in it all.
It was a fine world in the Bruneswald. What was it then outside? Not to
him, as to us, a world circular, sailed round, circumscribed, mapped,
botanized, zoologized; a tiny planet about which everybody knows,
or thinks they know everything: but a world infinite, magical,
supernatural,--because unknown; a vast flat plain reaching no one knew
whence or where, save that the mountains stood on the four corners
thereof to keep it steady, and the four winds of heaven blew out of
them; and in the centre, which was to him the Bruneswald, such things
as he saw; but beyond, things unspeakable,--dragons, giants, rocs, orcs,
witch-whales, griffins, chimeras, satyrs, enchanters, Paynims, Saracen
Emirs and Sultans, Kaisers of Constantinople, Kaisers of Ind and of
Cathay, and beyond them again of lands as yet unknown. At the very least
he could go to Brittany, to the forest of Brocheliaunde, where (so all
men said) fairies might be seen bathing in the fountains, and possibly
be won and wedded by a bold and dexterous knight after the fashion of
Sir Gruelan. [Footnote: Wace, author of the "Roman de Rou," went to
Brittany a generation later, to see those same fairies: but had no
sport; and sang,--

   "Fol i alai, fol m'en revins;
    Folie quis, por fol me tins"]

What was there not to be seen and conquered? Where would he go? Where
would he not go? For the spirit of Odin the Goer, the spirit which has
sent his children round the world, was strong within him. He would go
to Ireland, to the Ostmen, or Irish Danes men at Dublin, Waterford, or
Cork, and marry some beautiful Irish Princess with gray eyes, and raven
locks, and saffron smock, and great gold bracelets from her native
hills. No; he would go off to the Orkneys, and join Bruce and Ranald,
and the Vikings of the northern seas, and all the hot blood which had
found even Norway too hot to hold it; and sail through witch-whales and
icebergs to Iceland and Greenland, and the sunny lands which they said
lay even beyond, across the all but unknown ocean. He would go up the
Baltic to the Jomsburg Vikings, and fight against Lett and Esthonian
heathen, and pierce inland, perhaps, through Puleyn and the bison
forests, to the land from whence came the magic swords and the
old Persian coins which he had seen so often in the halls of his
forefathers. No; he would go South, to the land of sun and wine; and
see the magicians of Cordova and Seville; and beard Mussulman hounds
worshipping their Mahomets; and perhaps bring home an Emir's daughter,--

  "With more gay gold about her middle,
   Than would buy half Northumberlee."

Or he would go up the Straits, and on to Constantinople and the great
Kaiser of the Greeks, and join the Varanger Guard, and perhaps, like
Harold Hardraade in his own days, after being cast to the lion for
carrying off a fair Greek lady, tear out the monster's tongue with his
own hands, and show the Easterns what a Viking's son could do. And as he
dreamed of the infinite world and its infinite wonders, the enchanters
he might meet, the jewels he might find, the adventures he might essay,
he held that he must succeed in all, with hope and wit and a strong arm;
and forgot altogether that, mixed up with the cosmogony of an infinite
flat plain called the Earth, there was joined also the belief in a flat
roof above called Heaven, on which (seen at times in visions through
clouds and stars) sat saints, angels, and archangels, forevermore
harping on their golden harps, and knowing neither vanity nor vexation
of spirit, lust nor pride, murder nor war;--and underneath a floor, the
name whereof was Hell; the mouths whereof (as all men knew) might be
seen on Hecla and Aetna and Stromboli; and the fiends heard within,
tormenting, amid fire, and smoke, and clanking chains, the souls of the
eternally lost.

As he rode on slowly though cheerfully, as a man who will not tire his
horse at the beginning of a long day's journey, and knows not where he
shall pass the night, he was aware of a man on foot coming up behind
him at a slow, steady, loping, wolf-like trot, which in spite of its
slowness gained ground on him so fast, that he saw at once that the man
could be no common runner.

The man came up; and behold, he was none other than Martin Lightfoot.

"What! art thou here?" asked Hereward, suspiciously, and half cross at
seeing any visitor from the old world which he had just cast off. "How
gottest thou out of St. Peter's last night?"

Martin's tongue was hanging out of his mouth like a running hound's, but
he seemed, like a hound, to perspire through his mouth, for he answered
without the least sign of distress, without even pulling in his
tongue,--

"Over the wall, the moment the Prior's back was turned. I was not going
to wait till I was chained up in some rat's-hole with a half-hundred
of iron on my leg, and flogged till I confessed that I was what I am
not,--a runaway monk."

"And why art here?"

"Because I am going with you."

"Going with me?" said Hereward; "what can I do for thee?"

"I can do for you," said Martin.

"What?"

"Groom your horse, wash your shirt, clean your weapons, find your inn,
fight your enemies, cheat your friends,--anything and everything. You
are going to see the world. I am going with you."

"Thou canst be my servant? A right slippery one, I expect," said
Hereward, looking down on him with some suspicion.

"Some are not the rogues they seem. I can keep my secrets and yours
too."

"Before I can trust thee with my secrets, I shall expect to know some of
thine," said Hereward.

Martin Lightfoot looked up with a cunning smile. "A servant can always
know his master's secrets if he likes. But that is no reason a master
should know his servant's."

"Thou shalt tell me thine, man, or I shall ride off and leave thee."

"Not so easy, my lord. Where that heavy horse can go, Martin Lightfoot
can follow. But I will tell you one secret, which I never told to living
man. I can read and write like any clerk."

"Thou read and write?"

"Ay, good Latin enough, and Irish too, what is more. And now, because I
love you, and because you I will serve, willy nilly, I will tell you all
the secrets I have, as long as my breath lasts, for my tongue is
rather stiff after that long story about the bell-wether. I was born in
Ireland, in Waterford town. My mother was an English slave, one of those
that Earl Godwin's wife--not this one that is now, Gyda, but the old
one, King Canute's sister--used to sell out of England by the score,
tied together with ropes, boys and girls from Bristol town. Her master,
my father that was (I shall know him again), got tired of her, and
wanted to give her away to one of his kernes. She would not have that;
so he hung her up hand and foot, and beat her that she died. There was
an abbey hard by, and the Church laid on him a penance,--all that they
dared get out of him,--that he should give me to the monks, being then a
seven-years' boy. Well, I grew up in that abbey; they taught me my fa
fa mi fa: but I liked better conning of ballads and hearing stories of
ghosts and enchanters, such as I used to tell you. I'll tell you plenty
more whenever you're tired. Then they made me work; and that I never
could abide at all. Then they beat me every day; and that I could abide
still less; but always I stuck to my book, for one thing I saw,--that
learning is power, my lord; and that the reason why the monks are
masters of the land is, they are scholars, and you fighting men are
none. Then I fell in love (as young blood will) with an Irish lass, when
I was full seventeen years old; and when they found out that, they held
me down on the floor and beat me till I was wellnigh dead. They put me
in prison for a month; and between bread-and-water and darkness I went
nigh foolish. They let me out, thinking I could do no more harm to
man or lass; and when I found out how profitable folly was, foolish I
remained, at least as foolish as seemed good to me. But one night I got
into the abbey church, stole therefrom that which I have with me now,
and which shall serve you and me in good stead yet,--out and away aboard
a ship among the buscarles, and off into the Norway sea. But after a
voyage or two, so it befell, I was wrecked in the Wash by Botulfston
Deeps, and, begging my way inland, met with your father, and took
service with him, as I have taken service now with you."

"Now, what has made thee take service with me?"

"Because you are you."

"Give me none of your parables and dark sayings, but speak out like a
man. What canst see in me that thou shouldest share an outlaw's fortune
with me?"

"I had run away from a monastery, so had you; I hated the monks, so did
you; I liked to tell stories,--since I found good to shut my mouth I
tell them to myself all day long, sometimes all night too. When I found
out you liked to hear them, I loved you all the more. Then they told me
not to speak to you; I held my tongue. I bided my time. I knew you would
be outlawed some day. I knew you would turn Viking and kempery-man, and
kill giants and enchanters, and win yourself honor and glory; and I knew
I should have my share in it. I knew you would need me some day; and
you need me now, and here I am; and if you try to cut me down with your
sword, I will dodge you, and follow you, and dodge you again, till I
force you to let me be your man, for with you I will live and die. And
now I can talk no more."

"And with me thou shalt live and die," said Hereward, pulling up his
horse, and frankly holding out his hand to his new friend.

Martin Lightfoot took his hand, kissed it, licked it almost as a dog
would have done. "I am your man," he said, "amen; and true man I will
prove to you, if you will prove true to me." And he dropped quietly back
behind Hereward's horse, as if the business of his life was settled, and
his mind utterly at rest.

"There is one more likeness between us," said Hereward, after a few
minutes' thought. "If I have robbed a church, thou hast robbed one too.
What is this precious spoil which is to serve me and thee in such mighty
stead?"

Martin drew from inside his shirt and under his waistband a small
battle-axe, and handed it up to Hereward. It was a tool the like of
which in shape Hereward had seldom seen, and never its equal in beauty.
The handle was some fifteen inches long, made of thick strips of black
whalebone, curiously bound with silver, and butted with narwhal ivory.
This handle was evidently the work of some cunning Norseman of old. But
who was the maker of the blade? It was some eight inches long, with a
sharp edge on one side, a sharp crooked pick on the other; of the finest
steel, inlaid with strange characters in gold, the work probably of some
Circassian, Tartar, or Persian; such a battle-axe as Rustum or Zohrab
may have wielded in fight upon the banks of Oxus; one of those magic
weapons, brought, men knew not how, out of the magic East, which were
hereditary in many a Norse family and sung of in many a Norse saga.

"Look at it," said Martin Lightfoot. "There is magic on it. It must
bring us luck. Whoever holds that must kill his man. It will pick a lock
of steel. It will crack a mail corslet as a nut-hatch cracks a nut.
It will hew a lance in two at a single blow. Devils and spirits forged
it,--I know that; Virgilius the Enchanter, perhaps, or Solomon the
Great, or whosoever's name is on it, graven there in letters of gold.
Handle it, feel its balance; but no,--do not handle it too much. There
is a devil in it, who would make you kill me. Whenever I play with it I
long to kill a man. It would be so easy,--so easy. Give it me back, my
lord, give it me back, lest the devil come through the handle into your
palm, and possess you."

Hereward laughed, and gave him back his battle-axe. But he had hardly
less doubt of the magic virtues of such a blade than had Martin himself.

"Magical or not, thou wilt not have to hit a man twice with that,
Martin, my lad. So we two outlaws are both well armed; and having
neither wife nor child, land nor beeves to lose, ought to be a match for
any six honest men who may have a grudge against us, and sound reasons
at home for running away."

And so those two went northward through the green Bruneswald, and
northward again through merry Sherwood, and were not seen in that land
again for many a year.




CHAPTER II.

HOW HEREWARD SLEW THE BEAR.


Of Hereward's doings for the next few months naught is known. He may
very likely have joined Siward in the Scotch war. He may have looked,
wondering, for the first time in his life, upon the bones of the old
world, where they rise at Dunkeld out of the lowlands of the Tay; and
have trembled lest the black crags of Birnam should topple on his head
with all their pines. He may have marched down from that famous leaguer
with the Gospatricks and Dolfins, and the rest of the kindred of Crinan
(abthane or abbot,--let antiquaries decide),--of Dunkeld, and of Duncan,
and of Siward, and of the outraged Sibilla. He may have helped himself
to bring Birnam Wood to Dunsinane, "on the day of the Seven Sleepers,"
and heard Siward, when his son Asbiorn's corpse was carried into camp,
[Footnote: Shakespeare makes young Siward his son. He, too, was slain
in the battle: but he was Siward's nephew.] ask only, "Has he all his
wounds in front?" He may have seen old Siward, after Macbeth's defeat
(not death, as Shakespeare relates the story), go back to Northumbria
"with such booty as no man had obtained before,"--a proof, if the fact
be fact, that the Scotch lowlands were not, in the eleventh century, the
poor and barbarous country which some have reported them to have been.

All this is not only possible, but probable enough, the dates
considered: the chroniclers, however, are silent. They only say that
Hereward was in those days beyond Northumberland with Gisebert of Ghent.

Gisebert, Gislebert, Gilbert, Guibert, Goisbricht, of Ghent, who
afterwards owned, by chance of war, many a fair manor about Lincoln
city, was one of those valiant Flemings who settled along the east and
northeast coast of Scotland in the eleventh century. They fought with
the Celtic princes, and then married with their daughters; got to
themselves lands "by the title-deed of the sword"; and so became--the
famous "Freskin the Fleming" especially--the ancestors of the finest
aristocracy, both physically and intellectually, in the world. They had
their connections, moreover, with the Norman court of Rouen, through
the Duchess Matilda, daughter of their old Seigneur, Baldwin, Marquis
of Flanders; their connections, too, with the English Court, through
Countess Judith, wife of Earl Tosti Godwinsson, another daughter of
Baldwin's. Their friendship was sought, their enmity feared, far
and wide throughout the north. They seem to have been civilizers and
cultivators and traders,--with the instinct of true Flemings,--as
well as conquerors; they were in those very days bringing to order and
tillage the rich lands of the north-east, from the Frith of Moray to
that of Forth; and forming a rampart for Scotland against the invasions
of Sweyn, Hardraade, and all the wild Vikings of the northern seas.

Amongst them, in those days, Gilbert of Ghent seems to have been a
notable personage, to judge from the great house which he kept, and the
_milites tyrones,_ or squires in training for the honor of knighthood,
who fed at his table. Where he lived, the chroniclers report not. To
them the country "ultra Northumbriam," beyond the Forth, was as Russia
or Cathay, where

  "Geographers on pathless downs
   Put elephants for want of towns."

As indeed it was to that French map-maker who, as late as the middle of
the eighteenth century (not having been to Aberdeen or Elgin), leaves
all the country north of the Tay a blank, with the inscription: "_Terre
inculte et sauvage, habitee par les Higlanders._"

Wherever Gilbert lived, however, he heard that Hereward was outlawed,
and sent for him, says the story. And there he lived, doubtless happily
enough, fighting Highlanders and hunting deer, so that as yet the pains
and penalties of exile did not press very hardly upon him. The handsome,
petulant, good-humored lad had become in a few weeks the darling
of Gilbert's ladies, and the envy of all his knights and gentlemen.
Hereward the singer, harp-player, dancer, Hereward the rider and hunter,
was in all mouths; but he himself was discontented at having as yet
fallen in with no adventure worthy of a man, and looked curiously and
longingly at the menagerie of wild beasts enclosed in strong wooden
cages, which Gilbert kept in one corner of the great court-yard, not for
any scientific purposes, but to try with them, at Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsuntide, the mettle of the young gentlemen who were candidates for
the honor of knighthood. But after looking over the bulls and stags,
wolves and bears, Hereward settled it in his mind that there was none
worthy of his steel, save one huge white bear, whom no man had yet dared
to face, and whom Hereward, indeed, had never seen, hidden as he was
all day within the old oven-shaped Pict's house of stone, which had been
turned into his den. There was a mystery about the uncanny brute which
charmed Hereward. He was said to be half-human, perhaps wholly human; to
be the son of the Fairy Bear, near kinsman, if not uncle or cousin, of
Siward Digre. He had, like his fairy father, iron claws; he had human
intellect, and understood human speech, and the arts of war,--at least
so all in the place believed, and not as absurdly as at first sight
seems.

For the brown bear, and much more the white, was, among the Northern
nations, in himself a creature magical and superhuman. "He is God's
dog," whispered the Lapp, and called him "the old man in the fur cloak,"
afraid to use his right name, even inside the tent, for fear of his
overhearing and avenging the insult. "He has twelve men's strength, and
eleven men's wit," sang the Norseman, and prided himself accordingly,
like a true Norseman, on outwitting and slaying the enchanted monster.

Terrible was the brown bear: but more terrible "the white sea-deer," as
the Saxons called him; the hound of Hrymir, the whale's bane, the seal's
dread, the rider of the iceberg, the sailor of the floe, who ranged for
his prey under the six months' night, lighted by Surtur's fires, even
to the gates of Muspelheim. To slay him was a feat worthy of Beowulf's
self; and the greatest wonder, perhaps, among all the wealth of
Crowland, was the twelve white bear-skins which lay before the altars,
the gift of the great Canute. How Gilbert had obtained his white bear,
and why he kept him there in durance vile, was a mystery over which men
shook their heads. Again and again Hereward asked his host to let him
try his strength against the monster of the North. Again and again the
shrieks of the ladies, and Gilbert's own pity for the stripling youth,
brought a refusal. But Hereward settled it in his heart, nevertheless,
that somehow or other, when Christmas time came round, he would extract
from Gilbert, drunk or sober, leave to fight that bear; and then either
make himself a name, or die like a man.

Meanwhile Hereward made a friend. Among all the ladies of Gilbert's
household, however kind they were inclined to be to him, he took a fancy
but to one,--and that was to a little girl of eight years old. Alftruda
was her name. He liked to amuse himself with this child, without, as he
fancied, any danger of falling in love; for already his dreams of love
were of the highest and most fantastic; and an Emir's daughter, or a
Princess of Constantinople, were the very lowest game at which he meant
to fly. Alftruda was beautiful, too, exceedingly, and precocious, and,
it may be, vain enough to repay his attentions in good earnest. Moreover
she was English as he was, and royal likewise; a relation of Elfgiva,
daughter of Ethelred, once King of England, who, as all know, married
Uchtred, prince of Northumberland and grandfather of Gospatrick, Earl of
Northumberland, and ancestor of all the Dunbars. Between the English
lad then and the English maiden grew up in a few weeks an innocent
friendship, which had almost become more than friendship, through the
intervention of the Fairy Bear.

For as Hereward was coming in one afternoon from hunting, hawk on fist,
with Martin Lightfoot trotting behind, crane and heron, duck and hare,
slung over his shoulder, on reaching the court-yard gates he was aware
of screams and shouts within, tumult and terror among man and beast.
Hereward tried to force his horse in at the gate. The beast stopped
and turned, snorting with fear; and no wonder; for in the midst of the
court-yard stood the Fairy Bear; his white mane bristled up till he
seemed twice as big as any of the sober brown bears which Hereward yet
had seen: his long snake neck and cruel visage wreathed about in search
of prey. A dead horse, its back broken by a single blow of the paw, and
two or three writhing dogs, showed that the beast had turned (like
too many of his human kindred) "Berserker." The court-yard was utterly
empty: but from the ladies' bower came shrieks and shouts, not only of
women, but of men; and knocking at the bower door, adding her screams
to those inside, was a little white figure, which Hereward recognized
as Alftruda's. They had barricaded themselves inside, leaving the child
out; and now dared not open the door, as the bear swung and rolled
towards it, looking savagely right and left for a fresh victim.

Hereward leaped from his horse, and, drawing his sword, rushed forward
with a shout which made the bear turn round.

He looked once back at the child; then round again at Hereward: and,
making up his mind to take the largest morsel first, made straight at
him with a growl which there was no mistaking.

He was within two paces; then he rose on his hind legs, a head and
shoulders taller than Hereward, and lifted the iron talons high in air.
Hereward knew that there was but one spot at which to strike; and he
struck true and strong, before the iron paw could fall, right on the
muzzle of the monster.

He heard the dull crash of the steel; he felt the sword jammed tight. He
shut his eyes for an instant, fearing lest, as in dreams, his blow had
come to naught; lest his sword had turned aside, or melted like water in
his hand, and the next moment would find him crushed to earth, blinded
and stunned. Something tugged at his sword. He opened his eyes, and saw
the huge carcass bend, reel, roll slowly over to one side dead, tearing
out of his hand the sword, which was firmly fixed into the skull.

Hereward stood awhile staring at the beast like a man astonished at
what he himself had done. He had had his first adventure, and he had
conquered. He was now a champion in his own right,--a hero of the
heroes,--one who might take rank, if he went on, beside Beowulf, Frotho,
Ragnar Lodbrog, or Harald Hardraade. He had done this deed. What was
there after this which he might not do? And he stood there in the
fulness of his pride, defiant of earth and heaven, while in his heart
arose the thought of that old Viking who cried, in the pride of his
godlessness: "I never on earth met him whom I feared, and why should I
fear Him in heaven? If I met Odin, I would fight with Odin. If Odin were
the stronger, he would slay me; if I were the stronger, I would slay
him." And there he stood, staring, and dreaming over renown to come,--a
true pattern of the half-savage hero of those rough times, capable
of all vices except cowardice, and capable, too, of all virtues save
humility.

"Do you not see," said Martin Lightfoot's voice, close by, "that there
is a fair lady trying to thank you, while you are so rude or so proud
that you will not vouchsafe her one look?"
