corner; or fetches the hearse and plumes, and shovels them underground.
But when Mr. Random and Mr. Thomas Jones are married, is all over? Are
there no quarrels at home? Are there no Lady Bellastons abroad? are
there no constables to be outrun? no temptations to conquer us, or be
conquered by us? The Sirens sang after Ulysses long after his marriage,
and the suitors whispered in Penelope's ear, and he and she had many a
weary day of doubt and care, and so have we all. As regards money I was
put out of trouble by the inheritance I made: but does not Atra Cura
sit behind baronets as well as equites? My friends in London used to
congratulate me on my happiness. Who would not like to be master of a
good house and a good estate? But can Gumbo shut the hall-door upon blue
devils, or lay them always in a red sea of claret? Does a man sleep
the better who has four-and-twenty hours to doze in? Do his intellects
brighten after a sermon from the dull old vicar; a ten minutes' cackle
and flattery from the village apothecary; or the conversation of Sir
John and Sir Thomas with their ladies, who come ten moonlight muddy
miles to eat a haunch, and play a rubber? 'Tis all very well to
have tradesmen bowing to your carriage-door, room made for you at
quarter-sessions, and my lady wife taken down the second or the third to
dinner: but these pleasures fade--nay, have their inconveniences. In our
part of the country, for seven years after we came to Warrington Manor,
our two what they called best neighbours were my Lord Tutbury and Sir
John Mudbrook. We are of an older date than the Mudbrooks; consequently,
my Lady Tutbury always fell to my lot, when we dined together, who
was deaf and fell asleep after dinner; or if I had Lady Mudbrook, she
chattered with a folly so incessant and intense, that even my wife could
hardly keep her complacency (consummate hypocrite as her ladyship is),
knowing the rage with which I was fuming at the other's clatter. I come
to London. I show my tongue to Dr. Heberden. I pour out my catalogue of
complaints. "Psha, my dear Sir George!" says the unfeeling physician.
"Headaches, languor, bad sleep, bad temper--" ("Not bad temper: Sir
George has the sweetest temper in the world, only he is sometimes a
little melancholy," says my wife.) "--Bad sleep, bad temper," continues
the implacable doctor. "My dear lady, his inheritance has been his ruin,
and a little poverty and a great deal of occupation would do him all the
good in life."

No, my brother Harry ought to have been the squire, with remainder to
my son Miles, of course. Harry's letters were full of gaiety and good
spirits. His estate prospered: his negroes multiplied; his crops were
large; he was a member of our House of Burgesses; he adored his wife;
could he but have a child his happiness would be complete. Had Hal
been master of Warrington Manor-house, in my place, he would have been
beloved through the whole country; he would have been steward at all the
races, the gayest of all the jolly huntsmen, the bien venu at all the
mansions round about, where people scarce cared to perform the ceremony
of welcome at sight of my glum face. As for my wife, all the world liked
her, and agreed in pitying her. I don't know how the report got abroad,
but 'twas generally agreed that I treated her with awful cruelty, and
that for jealousy I was a perfect Bluebeard. Ah me! And so it is true
that I have had many dark hours; that I pass days in long silence; that
the conversation of fools and whipper-snappers makes me rebellious and
peevish, and that, when I feel contempt, I sometimes don't know how to
conceal it, or I should say did not. I hope as I grow older I grow more
charitable. Because I do not love bawling and galloping after a fox,
like the captain yonder, I am not his superior; but, in this respect,
humbly own that he is mine. He has perceptions which are denied me;
enjoyments which I cannot understand. Because I am blind the world is
not dark. I try now and listen with respect when Squire Codgers talks
of the day's run. I do my best to laugh when Captain Rattleton tells his
garrison stories. I step up to the harpsichord with old Miss Humby (our
neighbour from Beccles) and try and listen as she warbles her ancient
ditties. I play whist laboriously. Am I not trying to do the duties of
life? and I have a right to be garrulous and egotistical, because I have
been reading Montaigne all the morning.

I was not surprised, knowing by what influences my brother was led, to
find his name in the list of Virginia burgesses who declared that the
sole right of imposing taxes on the inhabitants of this colony is now,
and ever hath been, legally and constitutionally vested in the House
of Burgesses, and called upon the other colonies to pray for the Royal
interposition in favour of the violated rights of America. And it was
now, after we had been some three years settled in our English home,
that a correspondence between us and Madam Esmond began to take place.
It was my wife who (upon some pretext such as women always know how to
find) re-established the relations between us. Mr. Miles must need have
the small-pox, from which he miraculously recovered without losing
any portion of his beauty; and on his recovery the mother writes her
prettiest little wheedling letter to the grandmother of the fortunate
babe. She coaxes her with all sorts of modest phrases and humble
offerings of respect and goodwill. She narrates anecdotes of the
precocious genius of the lad (what hath subsequently happened, I wonder,
to stop the growth of that gallant young officer's brains?), and she
must have sent over to his grandmother a lock of the darling boy's hair,
for the old lady, in her reply, acknowledged the receipt of some such
present. I wonder, as it came from England, they allowed it to pass our
custom-house at Williamsburg. In return for these peace-offerings and
smuggled tokens of submission, comes a tolerably gracious letter from my
Lady of Castlewood. She inveighs against the dangerous spirit pervading
the colony: she laments to think that her unhappy son is consorting with
people who, she fears, will be no better than rebels and traitors. She
does not wonder, considering who his friends and advisers are. How can
a wife taken from an almost menial situation be expected to sympathise
with persons of rank and dignity who have the honour of the Crown at
heart? If evil times were coming for the monarchy (for the folks in
America appeared to be disinclined to pay taxes, and required that
everything should be done for them without cost), she remembered how
to monarchs in misfortune, the Esmonds--her father the Marquis
especially--had ever been faithful. She knew not what opinions (though
she might judge from my newfangled Lord Chatham) were in fashion in
England. She prayed, at least, she might hear that one of her sons was
not on the side of rebellion. When we came, in after days, to look over
old family papers in Virginia, we found "Letters from my daughter Lady
Warrington," neatly tied up with a ribbon. My Lady Theo insisted I
should not open them; and the truth, I believe, is, that they were so
full of praises of her husband that she thought my vanity would suffer
from reading them.

When Madam began to write, she gave us brief notices of Harry and his
wife. "The two women," she wrote, "still govern everything with my poor
boy at Fannystown (as he chooses to call his house). They must save
money there, for I hear but a shabby account of their manner of
entertaining. The Mount Vernon gentleman continues to be his great
friend, and he votes in the House of Burgesses very much as his
guide advises him. Why he should be so sparing of his money I cannot
understand: I heard, of five negroes who went with his equipages to my
Lord Bottetourt's, only two had shoes to their feet. I had reasons to
save, having sons for whom I wished to provide, but he hath no children,
wherein he certainly is spared from much grief, though, no doubt, Heaven
in its wisdom means our good by the trials which, through our children,
it causes us to endure. His mother-in-law," she added in one of her
letters, "has been ailing. Ever since his marriage, my poor Henry has
been the creature of these two artful women, and they rule him entirely.
Nothing, my dear daughter, is more contrary to common sense and to
Holy Scripture than this. Are we not told, Wives, be obedient to your
husbands? Had Mr. Warrington lived, I should have endeavoured to follow
up that sacred precept, holding that nothing so becomes a woman as
humility and obedience."

Presently we had a letter sealed with black, and announcing the death
of our dear good Mountain, for whom I had a hearty regret and affection,
remembering her sincere love for us as children. Harry deplored the
event in his honest way, and with tears which actually blotted his
paper. And Madam Esmond, alluding to the circumstance, said: "My late
housekeeper, Mrs. Mountain, as soon as she found her illness was fatal,
sent to me requesting a last interview on her deathbed, intending,
doubtless, to pray my forgiveness for her treachery towards me. I sent
her word that I could forgive her as a Christian, and heartily hope
(though I confess I doubt it) that she had a due sense of her crime
towards me. But our meeting, I considered, was of no use, and could
only occasion unpleasantness between us. If she repented, though at the
eleventh hour, it was not too late, and I sincerely trusted that she
was now doing so. And, would you believe her lamentable and hardened
condition? she sent me word through Dinah, my woman, whom I dispatched
to her with medicines for her soul's and her body's health, that she
had nothing to repent of as far as regarded her conduct to me, and
she wanted to be left alone! Poor Dinah distributed the medicine to my
negroes, and our people took it eagerly--whilst Mrs. Mountain, left to
herself, succumbed to the fever. Oh, the perversity of human kind! This
poor creature was too proud to take my remedies, and is now beyond the
reach of cure and physicians. You tell me your little Miles is subject
to fits of cholic. My remedy, and I will beg you to let me know if
effectual, is," etc. etc.--and here followed the prescription, which
thou didst not take, O my son, my heir, and my pride! because thy fond
mother had her mother's favourite powder, on which in his infantine
troubles our firstborn was dutifully nurtured. Did words not exactly
consonant with truth pass between the ladies in their correspondence? I
fear my Lady Theo was not altogether candid: else how to account for a
phrase in one of Madam Esmond's letters, who said: "I am glad to hear
the powders have done the dear child good. They are, if not on a first,
on a second or third application, almost infallible, and have been
the blessed means of relieving many persons round me, both infants and
adults, white and coloured. I send my grandson an Indian bow and arrows.
Shall these old eyes never behold him at Castlewood, I wonder, and is
Sir George so busy with his books and his politics that he can't afford
a few months to his mother in Virginia? I am much alone now. My son's
chamber is just as he left it: the same books are in the presses: his
little hanger and fowling-piece over the bed, and my father's picture
over the mantelpiece. I never allow anything to be altered in his room
or his brother's. I fancy the children playing near me sometimes, and
that I can see my dear father's head as he dozes in his chair. Mine is
growing almost as white as my father's. Am I never to behold my children
ere I go hence? The Lord's will be done."




CHAPTER LXXXVI. At Home


Such an appeal as this of our mother would have softened hearts much
less obdurate than ours; and we talked of a speedy visit to Virginia,
and of hiring all the Young Rachel's cabin accommodation. But our child
must fall ill, for whom the voyage would be dangerous, and from whom the
mother of course could not part; and the Young Rachel made her voyage
without us that year. Another year there was another difficulty, in my
worship's first attack of the gout (which occupied me a good deal, and
afterwards certainly cleared my wits and enlivened my spirits); and now
came another much sadder cause for delay in the sad news we received
from Jamaica. Some two years after our establishment at the Manor,
our dear General returned from his government, a little richer in the
world's goods than when he went away, but having undergone a loss for
which no wealth could console him, and after which, indeed, he did
not care to remain in the West Indies. My Theo's poor mother--the most
tender and affectionate friend (save one) I have ever had--died abroad
of the fever. Her last regret was that she should not be allowed to live
to see our children and ourselves in prosperity.

"She sees us, though we do not see her; and she thanks you, George, for
having been good to her children," her husband said.

He, we thought, would not be long ere he joined her. His love for her
had been the happiness and business of his whole life. To be away from
her seemed living no more. It was pitiable to watch the good man as
he sate with us. My wife, in her air and in many tones and gestures,
constantly recalled her mother to the bereaved widower's heart. What
cheer we could give him in his calamity we offered; but, especially,
little Hetty was now, under Heaven, his chief support and consolation.
She had refused more than one advantageous match in the Island, the
General told us; and on her return to England, my Lord Wrotham's heir
laid himself at her feet. But she loved best to stay with her father,
Hetty said. As long as he was not tired of her she cared for no husband.

"Nay," said we, when this last great match was proposed, "let the
General stay six months with us at the Manor here, and you can have him
at Oakhurst for the other six."

But Hetty declared her father never could bear Oakhurst again now that
her mother was gone; and she would marry no man for his coronet and
money--not she! The General, when we talked this matter over, said
gravely that the child had no desire for marrying, owing possibly to
some disappointment in early life, of which she never spoke; and we,
respecting her feelings, were for our parts equally silent. My brother
Lambert had by this time a college living near to Winchester, and a wife
of course to adorn his parsonage. We professed but a moderate degree of
liking for this lady, though we made her welcome when she came to us.
Her idea regarding our poor Hetty's determined celibacy was different
to that which I had. This Mrs. Jack was a chatterbox of a woman, in
the habit of speaking her mind very freely, and of priding herself
excessively on her skill in giving pain to her friends.

"My dear Sir George," she was pleased to say, "I have often and often
told our dear Theo that I wouldn't have a pretty sister in my house to
make tea for Jack when I was upstairs, and always to be at hand when I
was wanted in the kitchen or nursery, and always to be dressed neat and
in her best when I was very likely making pies or puddings or looking to
the children. I have every confidence in Jack, of course. I should like
to see him look at another woman, indeed! And so I have in Jemima but
they don't come together in my house when I'm upstairs--that I promise
you! And so I told my sister Warrington."

"Am I to understand," says the General, "that you have done my Lady
Warrington the favour to warn her against her sister, my daughter Miss
Hester?"

"Yes, pa, of course I have. A duty is a duty, and a woman is a woman,
and a man's a man, as I know very well. Don't tell me! He is a man.
Every man is a man, with all his sanctified airs!"

"You yourself have a married sister, with whom you were staying when my
son Jack first had the happiness of making your acquaintance?" remarks
the General.

"Yes, of course I have a married sister; every one knows that and I have
been as good as a mother to her children, that I have!"

"And am I to gather from your conversation that your attractions proved
a powerful temptation for your sister's husband?"

"Law, General! I don't know how you can go for to say I ever said any
such a thing!" cries Mrs. Jack, red and voluble.

"Don't you perceive, my dear madam, that it is you who have insinuated
as much, not only regarding yourself, but regarding my own two
daughters?"

"Never, never, never, as I'm a Christian woman! And it's most cruel of
you to say so, sir. And I do say a sister is best out of the house, that
I do! And as Theo's time is coming, I warn her, that's all."

"Have you discovered, my good madam, whether my poor Hetty has stolen
any of the spoons? When I came to breakfast this morning, my daughter
was alone, and there must have been a score of pieces of silver on the
table."

"Law, sir! who ever said a word about spoons? Did I ever accuse the poor
dear? If I did, may I drop down dead at this moment on this hearth-rug!
And I ain't used to be spoke to in this way. And me and Jack have both
remarked it; and I've done my duty, that I have." And here Mrs. Jack
flounces out of the room, in tears.

"And has the woman had the impudence to tell you this, my child?"
asks the General, when Theo (who is a little delicate) comes to the
tea-table.

"She has told me every day since she has been here. She comes into my
dressing-room to tell me. She comes to my nursery, and says, 'Ah, I
wouldn't have a sister prowling about my nursery, that I wouldn't.' Ah,
how pleasant it is to have amiable and well-bred relatives, say I."

"Thy poor mother has been spared this woman," groans the General.

"Our mother would have made her better, papa," says Theo, kissing him.

"Yes, dear." And I see that both of them are at their prayers.

But this must be owned, that to love one's relatives is not always an
easy task; to live with one's neighbours is sometimes not amusing. From
Jack Lambert's demeanour next day, I could see that his wife had given
him her version of the conversation. Jack was sulky, but not dignified.
He was angry, but his anger did not prevent his appetite. He preached a
sermon for us which was entirely stupid. And little Miles, once more in
sables, sate at his grandfather's side, his little hand placed in that
of the kind old man.

Would he stay and keep house for us during our Virginian trip? The
housekeeper should be put under the full domination of Hetty. The
butler's keys should be handed over to him; for Gumbo, not I thought
with an over good grace, was to come with us to Virginia: having,
it must be premised, united himself with Mrs. Molly in the bonds of
matrimony, and peopled a cottage in my park with sundry tawny Gumbos.
Under the care of our good General and his daughter we left our house,
then; we travelled to London, and thence to Bristol, and our obsequious
agent there had the opportunity of declaring that he should offer up
prayers for our prosperity, and of vowing that children so beautiful as
ours (we had an infant by this time to accompany Miles) were never seen
on any ship before. We made a voyage without accident. How strange the
feeling was as we landed from our boat at Richmond! A coach and a host
of negroes were there in waiting to receive us; and hard by a gentleman
on horseback, with negroes in our livery, too, who sprang from his horse
and rushed up to embrace us. Not a little charmed were both of us to see
our dearest Hal. He rode with us to our mother's door. Yonder she stood
on the steps to welcome us; and Theo knelt down to ask her blessing.

Harry rode in the coach with us as far as our mother's house; but would
not, as he said, spoil sport by entering with us. "She sees me," he
owned, "and we are pretty good friends; but Fanny and she are best
apart; and there is no love lost between 'em, I can promise you. Come
over to me at the Tavern, George, when thou art free. And to-morrow I
shall have the honour to present her sister to Theo. 'Twas only from
happening to be in town yesterday that I heard the ship was signalled,
and waited to see you. I have sent a negro boy home to my wife, and
she'll be here to pay her respects to my Lady Warrington." And Harry,
after this brief greeting, jumped out of the carriage, and left us to
meet our mother alone.

Since I parted from her I had seen a great deal of fine company, and
Theo and I had paid our respects to the King and Queen at St. James's;
but we had seen no more stately person than this who welcomed us, and
raising my wife from her knee, embraced her and led her into the house.
'Twas a plain, wood-built place, with a gallery round, as our Virginian
houses are; but if it had been a palace, with a little empress inside,
our reception could not have been more courteous. There was old Nathan,
still the major-domo, a score of kind black faces of blacks, grinning
welcome. Some whose names I remembered as children were grown out of
remembrance, to be sure, to be buxom lads and lasses; and some I had
left with black pates were grizzling now with snowy polls: and some who
were born since my time were peering at doorways with their great eyes
and little naked feet. It was, "I'm little Sip, Master George!" and "I'm
Dinah, Sir George!" and "I'm Master Miles's boy!" says a little chap in
a new livery and boots of nature's blacking. Ere the day was over the
whole household had found a pretext for passing before us, and grinning
and bowing and making us welcome. I don't know how many repasts were
served to us. In the evening my Lady Warrington had to receive all
the gentry of the little town, which she did with perfect grace and
good-humour, and I had to shake hands with a few old acquaintances--old
enemies I was going to say; but I had come into a fortune and was no
longer a naughty prodigal. Why, a drove of fatted calves was killed
in my honour! My poor Hal was of the entertainment, but gloomy and
crestfallen. His mother spoke to him, but it was as a queen to a
rebellious prince, her son who was not yet forgiven. We two slipped away
from the company, and went up to the rooms assigned to me: but there, as
we began a free conversation, our mother, taper in hand, appeared with
her pale face. Did I want anything? Was everything quite as I wished
it? She had peeped in at the dearest children, who were sleeping like
cherubs. How she did caress them, and delight over them! How she was
charmed with Miles's dominating airs, and the little Theo's smiles and
dimples! "Supper is just coming on the table, Sir George. If you like
our cookery better than the tavern, Henry, I beg you to stay." What a
different welcome there was in the words and tone addressed to each of
us! Hal hung down his head, and followed to the lower room. A clergyman
begged a blessing on the meal. He touched with not a little art and
eloquence upon our arrival at home, upon our safe passage across the
stormy waters, upon the love and forgiveness which awaited us in the
mansions of the Heavenly Parent when the storms of life were over.

Here was a new clergyman, quite unlike some whom I remembered about us
in earlier days, and I praised him, but Madam Esmond shook her head. She
was afraid his principles were very dangerous: she was afraid others had
adopted those dangerous principles. Had I not seen the paper signed by
the burgesses and merchants at Williamsburg the year before--the Lees,
Randolphs, Bassets, Washingtons, and the like, and oh, my dear, that
I should have to say it, our name, that is, your brother's (by what
influence I do not like to say), and this unhappy Mr. Belman's who
begged a blessing last night?

If there had been quarrels in our little colonial society when I left
home, what were these to the feuds I found raging on my return? We had
sent the Stamp Act to America, and been forced to repeal it. Then we
must try a new set of duties on glass, paper, and what not, and repeal
that Act too, with the exception of a duty on tea. From Boston to
Charleston the tea was confiscated. Even my mother, loyal as she was,
gave up her favourite drink; and my poor wife would have had to forgo
hers, but we had brought a quantity for our private drinking on board
ship, which had paid four times as much duty at home. Not that I for my
part would have hesitated about paying duty. The home Government must
have some means of revenue, or its pretensions to authority were idle.
They say the colonies were tried and tyrannised over; I say the home
Government was tried and tyrannised over. ('Tis but an affair of
argument and history, now; we tried the question, and were beat; and
the matter is settled as completely as the conquest of Britain by the
Normans.) And all along, from conviction I trust, I own to have
taken the British side of the quarrel. In that brief and unfortunate
experience of war which I had had in my early life, the universal cry of
the army and well-affected persons was, that Mr. Braddock's expedition
had failed, and defeat and disaster had fallen upon us in consequence
of the remissness, the selfishness, and the rapacity of many of the very
people for whose defence against the French arms had been taken up. The
colonists were for having all done for them, and for doing nothing, They
made extortionate bargains with the champions who came to defend them;
they failed in contracts; they furnished niggardly supplies; they
multiplied delays until the hour for beneficial action was past, and
until the catastrophe came which never need have occurred but for their
ill-will. What shouts of joy were there, and what ovations for the great
British Minister who had devised and effected the conquest of Canada!
Monsieur de Vaudreuil said justly that that conquest was the signal for
the defection of the North American colonies from their allegiance to
Great Britain; and my Lord Chatham, having done his best to achieve
the first part of the scheme, contributed more than any man in England
towards the completion of it. The colonies were insurgent, and he
applauded their rebellion. What scores of thousands of waverers must he
have encouraged into resistance! It was a general who says to an army
in revolt, "God save the king! My men, you have a right to mutiny!" No
wonder they set up his statue in this town, and his picture in t'other;
whilst here and there they hanged Ministers and Governors in effigy.
To our Virginian town of Williamsburg, some wiseacres must subscribe
to bring over a portrait of my lord, in the habit of a Roman orator
speaking in the Forum, to be sure, and pointing to the palace of
Whitehall, and the special window out of which Charles I. was beheaded!
Here was a neat allegory, and a pretty compliment to a British
statesman! I hear, however, that my lord's head was painted from a bust,
and so was taken off without his knowledge.

Now my country is England, not America or Virginia; and I take, or
rather took, the English side of the dispute. My sympathies had always
been with home, where I was now a squire and a citizen: but had my lot
been to plant tobacco, and live on the banks of James River or Potomac,
no doubt my opinions had been altered. When, for instance, I visited
my brother at his new house and plantation, I found him and his wife as
staunch Americans as we were British. We had some words upon the matter
in dispute,--who had not in those troublesome times?--but our argument
was carried on without rancour; even my new sister could not bring us to
that, though she did her best when we were together, and in the curtain
lectures which I have no doubt she inflicted on her spouse, like a
notable housewife as she was. But we trusted in each other so entirely
that even Harry's duty towards his wife would not make him quarrel with
his brother. He loved me from old times, when my word was law with him;
he still protested that he and every Virginian gentleman of his side
was loyal to the Crown. War was not declared as yet, and gentlemen of
different opinions were courteous enough to one another. Nay, at
our public dinners and festivals, the health of the King was still
ostentatiously drunk; and the assembly of every colony, though preparing
for Congress, though resisting all attempts at taxation on the part of
the home authorities, was loud in its expressions of regard for the King
our Father, and pathetic in its appeals to that paternal sovereign
to put away evil counsellors from him, and listen to the voice of
moderation and reason. Up to the last, our Virginian gentry were a
grave, orderly, aristocratic folk, with the strongest sense of their own
dignity and station. In later days, and nearer home, we have heard of
fraternisation and equality. Amongst the great folks of our Old World I
have never seen a gentleman standing more on his dignity and maintaining
it better than Mr. Washington: no--not the King against whom he took
arms. In the eyes of all the gentry of the French court, who gaily
joined in the crusade against us, and so took their revenge for Canada,
the great American chief always appeared as anax andron, and they
allowed that his better could not be seen in Versailles itself. Though
they were quarrelling with the Governor, the gentlemen of the House of
Burgesses still maintained amicable relations with him, and exchanged
dignified courtesies. When my Lord Bottetourt arrived, and held his
court at Williamsburg in no small splendour and state, all the gentry
waited upon him, Madam Esmond included. And at his death, Lord Dunmore,
who succeeded him, and brought a fine family with him, was treated with
the utmost respect by our gentry privately, though publicly the House of
Assembly and the Governor were at war.

Their quarrels are a matter of history, and concern me personally only
so far as this, that our burgesses being convened for the 1st of March
in the year after my arrival in Virginia, it was agreed that we should
all pay a visit to our capital, and our duty to the Governor. Since
Harry's unfortunate marriage Madam Esmond had not performed this duty,
though always previously accustomed to pay it; but now that her eldest
son was arrived in the colony, my mother opined that we must certainly
wait upon his Excellency the Governor, nor were we sorry, perhaps,
to get away from our little Richmond to enjoy the gaieties of the
provincial capital. Madam engaged, and at a great price, the best house
to be had at Richmond for herself and her family. Now I was rich, her
generosity was curious. I had more than once to interpose (her old
servants likewise wondering at her new way of life), and beg her not to
be so lavish. But she gently said, in former days she had occasion to
save, which now existed no more. Harry had enough, sure, with such a
wife as he had taken out of the housekeeper's room. If she chose to be a
little extravagant now, why should she hesitate? She had not her dearest
daughter and grandchildren with her every day (she fell in love with all
three of them, and spoiled them as much as they were capable of being
spoiled). Besides, in former days I could not accuse her of too much
extravagance, and this I think was almost the only allusion she made to
the pecuniary differences between us. So she had her people dressed in
their best, and her best wines, plate, and furniture from Castlewood by
sea at no small charge, and her dress in which she had been married in
George II.'s reign, and we all flattered ourselves that our coach made
the greatest figure of any except his Excellency's, and we engaged
Signor Formicalo, his Excellency's major-domo, to superintend the series
of feasts that were given in my honour; and more fleshpots were set
a-stewing in our kitchens in one month, our servants said, than had been
known in the family since the young gentlemen went away. So great was
Theo's influence over my mother, that she actually persuaded her, that
year, to receive our sister Fanny, Hal's wife, who would have stayed
upon the plantation rather than face Madam Esmond. But, trusting to
Theo's promise of amnesty, Fanny (to whose house we had paid more than
one visit) came up to town, and made her curtsey to Madam Esmond, and
was forgiven. And rather than be forgiven in that way, I own, for my
part, that I would prefer perdition or utter persecution.

"You know these, my dear?" says Madam Esmond, pointing to her fine
silver sconces. "Fanny hath often cleaned them when she was with me
at Castlewood. And this dress, too, Fanny knows, I dare say? Her poor
mother had the care of it. I always had the greatest confidence in her."

Here there is wrath flashing from Fanny's eyes, which our mother, who
has forgiven her, does not perceive--not she!

"Oh, she was a treasure to me!" Madam resumes. "I never should have
nursed my boys through their illnesses but for your mother's admirable
care of them. Colonel Lee, permit me to present you to my daughter,
my Lady Warrington. Her ladyship is a neighbour of your relatives the
Bunburys at home. Here comes his Excellency. Welcome, my lord!"

And our princess performs before his lordship one of those curtseys of
which she was not a little proud; and I fancy I see some of the company
venturing to smile.

"By George! madam," says Mr. Lee, "since Count Borulawski, I have not
seen a bow so elegant as your ladyship's."

"And pray, sir, who was Count Borulawski?" asks Madam.

"He was a nobleman high in favour with his Polish Majesty," replies Mr.
Lee. "May I ask you, madam, to present me to your distinguished son?"

"This is Sir George Warrington," says my mother, pointing to me.

"Pardon me, madam. I meant Captain Warrington, who was by Mr. Wolfe's
side when he died. I had been contented to share his fate, so I had been
near him."

And the ardent Lee swaggers up to Harry, and takes his hand with
respect, and pays him a compliment or two, which makes me, at least,
pardon him for his late impertinence; for my dearest Hal walks gloomily
through his mother's rooms in his old uniform of the famous corps which
he has quitted.

We had had many meetings, which the stern mother could not interrupt,
and in which that instinctive love which bound us to one another, and
which nothing could destroy, had opportunity to speak. Entirely unlike
each other in our pursuits, our tastes, our opinions--his life being one
of eager exercise, active sport, and all the amusements of the field,
while mine is to dawdle over books and spend my time in languid
self-contemplation--we have, nevertheless, had such a sympathy as almost
passes the love of women. My poor Hal confessed as much to me, for
his part, in his artless manner, when we went away without wives or
womankind, except a few negroes left in the place, and passed a week at
Castlewood together.

The ladies did not love each other. I know enough of my Lady Theo,
to see after a very few glances whether or not she takes a liking to
another of her amiable sex. All my powers of persuasion or command fail
to change the stubborn creature's opinion. Had she ever said a word
against Mrs. This or Miss That? Not she! Has she been otherwise than
civil? No, assuredly! My Lady Theo is polite to a beggar-woman, treats
her kitchenmaids like duchesses, and murmurs a compliment to the dentist
for his elegant manner of pulling her tooth out. She would black my
boots, or clean the grate, if I ordained it (always looking like a
duchess the while); but as soon as I say to her, "My dear creature, be
fond of this lady, or t'other!" all obedience ceases; she executes the
most refined curtseys; smiles and kisses even to order; but performs
that mysterious undefinable freemasonic signal, which passes between
women, by which each knows that the other hates her. So, with regard
to Fanny, we had met at her house, and at others. I remembered her
affectionately from old days, I fully credited poor Hal's violent
protests and tearful oaths, that, by George, it was our mother's
persecution which made him marry her. He couldn't stand by and see a
poor thing tortured as she was, without coming to her rescue; no,
by heavens, he couldn't! I say I believed all this; and had for my
sister-in-law a genuine compassion, as well as an early regard; and yet
I had no love to give her; and, in reply to Hal's passionate outbreaks
in praise of her beauty and worth, and eager queries to me whether I
did not think her a perfect paragon? I could only answer with faint
compliments or vague approval, feeling all the while that I was
disappointing my poor ardent fellow, and cursing inwardly that revolt
against flattery and falsehood into which I sometimes frantically rush.
Why should I not say, "Yes dear Hal, thy wife is a paragon; her singing
is delightful, her hair and shape are beautiful;" as I might have said
by a little common stretch of politeness? Why could I not cajole this
or that stupid neighbour or relative, as I have heard Theo do a thousand
times, finding all sorts of lively prattle to amuse them, whilst I sit
before them dumb and gloomy? I say it was a sin not to have more words
to say in praise of Fanny. We ought to have praised her, we ought to
have liked her. My Lady Warrington certainly ought to have liked her,
for she can play the hypocrite, and I cannot. And there was this young
creature--pretty, graceful, shaped like a nymph, with beautiful black
eyes--and we cared for them no more than for two gooseberries!
At Warrington my wife and I, when we pretended to compare notes,
elaborately complimented each other on our new sister's beauty. What
lovely eyes!--Oh yes! What a sweet little dimple on her chin!--Ah oui!
What wonderful little feet!--Perfectly Chinese! where should we in
London get slippers small enough for her? And, these compliments
exhausted, we knew that we did not like Fanny the value of one
penny-piece; we knew that we disliked her; we knew that we ha... Well,
what hypocrites women are! We heard from many quarters how eagerly my
brother had taken up the new anti-English opinion, and what a champion
he was of so-called American rights and freedom. "It is her doing, my
dear," says I to my wife. "If I had said so much, I am sure you
would have scolded me," says my Lady Warrington, laughing: and I did
straightway begin to scold her, and say it was most cruel of her to
suspect our new sister; and what earthly right had we to do so? But
I say again, I know Madam Theo so well, that when once she has got a
prejudice against a person in her little head, not all the king's horses
nor all the king's men will get it out again. I vow nothing would induce
her to believe that Harry was not henpecked--nothing.

Well, we went to Castlewood together without the women, and stayed at
the dreary, dear old place, where we had been so happy, and I, at least,
so gloomy. It was winter, and duck-time, and Harry went away to the
river, and shot dozens and scores and bushels of canvasbacks, whilst I
remained in my grandfather's library amongst the old mouldering books
which I loved in my childhood--which I see in a dim vision still resting
on a little boy's lap, as he sits by an old white-headed gentleman's
knee. I read my books; I slept in my own bed and room--religiously kept,
as my mother told me, and left as on the day when I went to Europe.
Hal's cheery voice would wake me, as of old. Like all men who love to
go a-field, he was an early riser: he would come and wake me, and sit
on the foot of the bed and perfume the air with his morning pipe, as
the house negroes laid great logs on the fire. It was a happy time! Old
Nathan had told me of cunning crypts where ancestral rum and claret
were deposited. We had had cares, struggles, battles, bitter griefs, and
disappointments; we were boys again as we sat there together. I am a boy
now even as I think of the time.

That unlucky tea-tax, which alone of the taxes lately imposed upon the
colonies, the home Government was determined to retain, was met with
defiance throughout America. 'Tis true we paid a shilling in the pound
at home, and asked only threepence from Boston or Charleston; but as a
question of principle, the impost was refused by the provinces, which
indeed ever showed a most spirited determination to pay as little as
they could help. In Charleston the tea-ships were unloaded, and the
cargoes stored in cellars. From New York and Philadelphia, the vessels
were turned back to London. In Boston (where there was an armed force,
whom the inhabitants were perpetually mobbing), certain patriots,
painted and disguised as Indians, boarded the ships, and flung the
obnoxious cargoes into the water. The wrath of our white Father was
kindled against this city of Mohocks in masquerade. The notable Boston
Port Bill was brought forward in the British House of Commons; the port
was closed, and the Custom House removed to Salem. The Massachusetts
Charter was annulled; and,--in just apprehension that riots might ensue,
in dealing with the perpetrators of which the colonial courts might be
led to act partially,--Parliament decreed that persons indicted for
acts of violence and armed resistance, might be sent home, or to
another colony, for trial. If such acts set all America in a flame, they
certainly drove all wellwisbers of our country into a fury. I might have
sentenced Master Miles Warrington, at five years old, to a whipping, and
he would have cried, taken down his little small-clothes and submitted:
but suppose I offered (and he richly deserving it) to chastise Captain
Miles of the Prince's Dragoons? He would whirl my paternal cane out of
my hand, box my hair-powder out of my ears. Lord a-mercy! I tremble at
the very idea of the controversy? He would assert his independence in
a word; and if, I say, I think the home Parliament had a right to levy
taxes in the colonies, I own that we took means most captious, most
insolent, most irritating, and, above all, most impotent, to assert our
claim.

My Lord Dunmore, our Governor of Virginia, upon Lord Bottetourt's death,
received me into some intimacy soon after my arrival in the colony,
being willing to live on good terms with all our gentry. My mother's
severe loyalty was no secret to him; indeed, she waved the king's banner
in all companies, and talked so loudly and resolutely, that Randolph and
Patrick Henry himself were struck dumb before her. It was Madam Esmond's
celebrated reputation for loyalty (his Excellency laughingly told me)
which induced him to receive her eldest son to grace.

"I have had the worst character of you from home," his lordship said.
"Little birds whisper to me, Sir George, that you are a man of the
most dangerous principles. You are a friend of Mr. Wilkes and Alderman
Beckford. I am not sure you have not been at Medmenham Abbey. You have
lived with players, poets, and all sorts of wild people. I have been
warned against you, sir, and I find you----"

"Not so black as I have been painted," I interrupted his lordship, with
a smile.

"Faith," says my lord, "if I tell Sir George Warrington that he seems to
me a very harmless, quiet gentleman, and that 'tis a great relief to me
to talk to him amidst these loud politicians; these lawyers with their
perpetual noise about Greece and Rome; these Virginian squires who are
for ever professing their loyalty and respect, whilst they are shaking
their fists in my face--I hope nobody overhears us," says my lord, with
an arch smile, "and nobody will carry my opinions home."

His lordship's ill opinion having been removed by a better knowledge of
me, our acquaintance daily grew more intimate; and, especially between
the ladies of his family and my own, a close friendship arose--between
them and my wife at least. Hal's wife, received kindly at the little
provincial court, as all ladies were, made herself by no means popular
there by the hot and eager political tone which she adopted. She
assailed all the Government measures with indiscriminating acrimony.
Were they lenient? She said the perfidious British Government was only
preparing a snare, and biding its time until it could forge heavier
chains for unhappy America. Were they angry? Why did not every American
citizen rise, assert his rights as a freeman, and serve every British
governor, officer, soldier, as they had treated the East India Company's
tea? My mother, on the other hand, was pleased to express her opinions
with equal frankness, and, indeed, to press her advice upon his
Excellency with a volubility which may have fatigued that representative
of the Sovereign. Call out the militia; send for fresh troops from New
York, from home, from anywhere; lock up the Capitol! (this advice
was followed, it must be owned) and send every one of the ringleaders
amongst those wicked burgesses to prison! was Madam Esmond's daily
counsel to the Governor by word and letter. And if not only the
burgesses, but the burgesses' wives could have been led off to
punishment and captivity, I think this Brutus of a woman would scarce
have appealed against the sentence.




CHAPTER LXXXVII. The Last of God Save the King


What perverse law of Fate is it that ever places me in a minority?
Should a law be proposed to hand over this realm to the Pretender of
Rome, or the Grand Turk, and submit it to the new sovereign's religion,
it might pass, as I should certainly be voting against it. At home in
Virginia, I found myself disagreeing with everybody as usual. By the
Patriots I was voted (as indeed I professed myself to be) a Tory; by the
Tories I was presently declared to be a dangerous Republican. The time
was utterly out of joint. O cursed spite! Ere I had been a year in
Virginia, how I wished myself back by the banks of the Waveney! But the
aspect of affairs was so troublous, that I could not leave my mother,
a lone lady, to face possible war and disaster, nor would she quit the
country at such a juncture, nor should a man of spirit leave it. At his
Excellency's table, and over his Excellency's plentiful claret, that
point was agreed on by numbers of the well-affected, that vow was vowed
over countless brimming bumpers. No: it was statue signum, signifer!
We Cavaliers would all rally round it; and at these times, our Governor
talked like the bravest of the brave.

Now, I will say, of all my Virginian acquaintance, Madam Esmond was the
most consistent. Our gentlefolks had come in numbers to Williamsburg;
and a great number of them proposed to treat her Excellency, the
Governor's lady, to a ball, when the news reached us of the Boston Port
Bill. Straightway the House of Burgesses adopts an indignant protest
against this measure of the British Parliament, and decrees a solemn day
of fast and humiliation throughout the country, and of solemn prayer to
Heaven to avert the calamity of Civil War. Meanwhile, the invitation to
my Lady Dunmore having been already given and accepted, the gentlemen
agreed that their ball should take place on the appointed evening, and
then sackcloth and ashes should be assumed some days afterwards.

"A ball!" says Madam Esmond. "I go to a ball which is given by a set of
rebels who are going publicly to insult his Majesty a week afterwards!
I will die sooner!" And she wrote to the gentlemen who were stewards for
the occasion to say, that viewing the dangerous state of the country,
she, for her part, could not think of attending a ball.

What was her surprise then, the next time she went abroad in her chair,
to be cheered by a hundred persons, white and black, and shouts of
"Huzzah, Madam!" "Heaven bless your ladyship!" They evidently thought
her patriotism had caused her determination not to go to the ball.

Madam, that there should be no mistake, puts her head out of the chair,
and cries out "God save the King" as loud as she can. The people cried
"God save the King," too. Everybody cried "God save the King" in those
days. On the night of that entertainment, my poor Harry, as a Burgess
of the House, and one of the givers of the feast, donned his uniform red
coat of Wolfe's (which he so soon was to exchange for another colour),
and went off with Madam Fanny to the ball. My Lady Warrington and her
humble servant, as being strangers in the country, and English people as
it were, were permitted by Madam to attend the assembly from which she
of course absented herself. I had the honour to dance a country-dance
with the lady of Mount Vernon, whom I found a most lively, pretty, and
amiable partner; but am bound to say that my wife's praises of her were
received with a very grim acceptance by my mother, when Lady Warrington
came to recount the events of the evening. Could not Sir George
Warrington have danced with my Lady Dunmore or her daughters, or with
anybody but Mrs. Washington; to be sure the Colonel thought so well of
himself and his wife, that no doubt he considered her the grandest lady
in the room; and she who remembered him a road-surveyor at a guinea a
day! Well, indeed! there was no measuring the pride of these provincial
upstarts, and as for this gentleman, my Lord Dunmore's partiality for
him had evidently turned his head. I do not know about Mr. Washington's
pride, I know that my good mother never could be got to love him or
anything that was his.

She was no better pleased with him for going to the ball, than with his
conduct three days afterwards, when the day of fast and humiliation
was appointed, and when he attended the service which our new clergyman
performed. She invited Mr. Belman to dinner that day, and sundry
colonial authorities. The clergyman excused himself. Madam Esmond tossed
up her head, and said he might do as he liked. She made a parade of a
dinner; she lighted her house up at night, when all the rest of the city
was in darkness and gloom; she begged Mr. Hardy, one of his Excellency's
aides-de-camp, to sing "God save the King," to which the people in
the street outside listened, thinking that it might be a part of some
religious service which Madam was celebrating; but then she called
for "Britons, strike home!" which the simple young gentleman just from
Europe began to perform, when a great yell arose in the street, and
a large stone, flung from some rebellious hand, plumped into the
punch-bowl before me, and scattered it and its contents about our
dining-room.

My mother went to the window nothing daunted. I can see her rigid little
figure now, as she stands with a tossed-up head, outstretched frilled
arms, and the twinkling stars for a background, and sings in chorus,
"Britons, strike home! strike home!" The crowd in front of the palings
shout and roar, "Silence! for shame! go back!" but she will not go back,
not she. "Fling more stones, if you dare!" says the brave little lady;
and more might have come, but some gentlemen issuing out of the Raley
Tavern interpose with the crowd. "You mustn't insult a lady," says a
voice I think I know. "Huzza, Colonel! Hurrah, Captain! God bless
your honour!" say the people in the street. And thus the enemies are
pacified.

My mother, protesting that the whole disturbance was over, would have
had Mr. Hardy sing another song, but he gave a sickly grin, and said,
"he really did not like to sing to such accompaniments," and the
concert for that evening was ended; though I am bound to say that some
scoundrels returned at night, frightened my poor wife almost out of
wits, and broke every single window in the front of our tenement.
"Britons, strike home!" was a little too much; Madam should have
contented herself with "God save the King." Militia was drilled,
bullets were cast, supplies of ammunition got ready, cunning plans for
disappointing the royal ordinances devised and carried out; but, to be
sure, "God save the King" was the cry everywhere, and in reply to my
objections to the gentlemen-patriots, "Why, you are scheming for a
separation; you are bringing down upon you the inevitable wrath of the
greatest power in the world!"--the answer to me always was, "We mean no
separation at all; we yield to no men in loyalty; we glory in the name
of Britons," and so forth, and so forth. The powder-barrels were heaped
in the cellar, the train was laid, but Mr. Fawkes was persistent in his
dutiful petitions to King and Parliament and meant no harm, not he!
'Tis true when I spoke of the power of our country, I imagined she
would exert it; that she would not expect to overcome three millions
of fellow-Britons on their own soil with a few battalions, a half-dozen
generals from Bond Street, and a few thousand bravos hired out of
Germany. As if we wanted to insult the thirteen colonies as well as to
subdue them, we must set upon them these hordes of Hessians, and the
murderers out of the Indian wigwams. Was our great quarrel not to be
fought without tali auxilio and istis defensoribus? Ah! 'tis easy, now
we are worsted, to look over the map of the great empire wrested from
us, and show how we ought not to have lost it. Long Island ought to
have exterminated Washington's army; he ought never to have come out of
Valley Forge except as a prisoner. The South was ours after the battle
of Camden, but for the inconceivable meddling of the Commander-in-Chief
at New York, who paralysed the exertions of the only capable British
General who appeared during the war, and sent him into that miserable
cul-de-sac at York Town, whence he could only issue defeated and a
prisoner. Oh, for a week more! a day more, an hour more of darkness
or light! In reading over our American campaigns from their unhappy
commencement to their inglorious end, now that we are able to see the
enemy's movements and conditions as well as our own, I fancy we can see
how an advance, a march, might have put enemies into our power who had
no means to withstand it, and changed the entire issue of the struggle.
But it was ordained by Heaven, and for the good, as we can now have no
doubt, of both empires, that the great Western Republic should separate
from us: and the gallant soldiers who fought on her side, their
indomitable and heroic Chief above all, had the glory of facing and
overcoming, not only veteran soldiers amply provided and inured to war,
but wretchedness, cold, hunger, dissensions, treason within their own
camp, where all must have gone to rack, but for the pure unquenchable
flame of patriotism that was for ever burning in the bosom of the
heroic leader. What a constancy, what a magnanimity, what a surprising
persistence against fortune! Washington before the enemy was no better
nor braver than hundreds that fought with him or against him (who has
not heard the repeated sneers against "Fabius" in which his factious
captains were accustomed to indulge?), but Washington the Chief of a
nation in arms, doing battle with distracted parties; calm in the midst
of conspiracy; serene against the open foe before him and the darker
enemies at his back; Washington inspiring order and spirit into troops
hungry and in rags; stung by ingratitude, but betraying no anger, and
ever ready to forgive; in defeat invincible, magnanimous in conquest,
and never so sublime as on that day when he laid down his victorious
sword and sought his noble retirement:--here indeed is a character to
admire and revere; a life without a stain, a fame without a flaw. Quando
invenies parem? In that more extensive work, which I have planned and
partly written on the subject of this great war, I hope I have done
justice to the character of its greatest leader. [And I trust that in
the opinions I have recorded regarding him, I have shown that I also
can be just and magnanimous towards those who view me personally with
no favour. For my brother Hal being at Mount Vernon, and always eager to
bring me and his beloved Chief on good terms, showed his Excellency some
of the early sheets of my History. General Washington (who read but
few books, and had not the slightest pretensions to literary taste)
remarked, "If you will have my opinion, my dear General, I think Sir
George's projected work, from the specimen I have of it, is certain
to offend both parties."--G. E. W.]. And this from the sheer force
of respect which his eminent virtues extorted. With the young Mr.
Washington of my own early days I had not the honour to enjoy much
sympathy: though my brother, whose character is much more frank and
affectionate than mine, was always his fast friend in early times, when
they were equals, as in latter days when the General, as I do own and
think, was all mankind's superior.

I have mentioned that contrariety in my disposition, and, perhaps, in my
brother's, which somehow placed us on wrong sides in the quarrel which
ensued, and which from this time forth raged for five years, until the
mother country was fain to acknowledge her defeat. Harry should have
been the Tory, and I the Whig. Theoretically my opinions were very
much more liberal than those of my brother, who, especially after
his marriage, became what our Indian nabobs call a Bahadoor--a person
ceremonious, stately, and exacting respect. When my Lord Dunmore, for
instance, talked about liberating the negroes, so as to induce them to
join the King's standard, Hal was for hanging the Governor and the Black
Guards (as he called them) whom his Excellency had crimped. "If you,
gentlemen are fighting for freedom," says I, "sure the negroes may
fight, too." On which Harry roars out, shaking his fist, "Infernal
villains, if I meet any of 'em, they shall die by this hand!" And
my mother agreed that this idea of a negro insurrection was the most
abominable and parricidal notion which had ever sprung up in her unhappy
country. She at least was more consistent than brother Hal. She would
have black and white obedient to the powers that be: whereas Hal only
could admit that freedom was the right of the latter colour.

As a proof of her argument, Madam Esmond and Harry too would point to
an instance in our own family in the person of Mr. Gumbo. Having got his
freedom from me, as a reward for his admirable love and fidelity to me
when times were hard, Gumbo, on his return to Virginia, was scarce a
welcome guest in his old quarters, amongst my mother's servants. He was
free, and they were not: he was, as it were, a centre of insurrection.
He gave himself no small airs of protection and consequence amongst
them; bragging of his friends in Europe ("at home," as he called it),
and his doings there; and for a while bringing the household round about
him to listen to him and admire him, like the monkey who had seen the
world. Now, Sady, Hal's boy, who went to America of his own desire,
was not free. Hence jealousies between him and Mr. Gum; and battles,
in which they both practised the noble art of boxing and butting, which
they had learned at Marybone Gardens and Hockley-in-the-Hole. Nor was
Sady the only jealous person: almost all my mother's servants hated
Signor Gumbo for the airs which he gave himself; and I am sorry to
say, that our faithful Molly, his wife, was as jealous as his old
fellow-servants. The blacks could not pardon her for having demeaned
herself so far as to marry one of their kind. She met with no respect,
could exercise no authority, came to her mistress with ceaseless
complaints of the idleness, knavery, lies, stealing of the black people;
and finally with a story of jealousy against a certain Dinah, or Diana,
who, I heartily trust, was as innocent as her namesake the moonlight
visitant of Endymion. Now, on the article of morality Madam Esmond was
a very Draconess; and a person accused was a person guilty. She made
charges against Mr. Gumbo to which he replied with asperity. Forgetting
that he was a free gentleman, my mother now ordered Gumbo to be whipped,
on which Molly flew at her ladyship, all her wrath at her husband's
infidelity vanishing at the idea of the indignity put upon him; there
was a rebellion in our house at Castlewood. A quarrel took place between
me and my mother, as I took my man's side. Hal and Fanny sided with her,
on the contrary; and in so far the difference did good, as it brought
about some little intimacy between Madam and her younger children.
This little difference was speedily healed; but it was clear that
the Standard of Insurrection must be removed out of our house; and we
determined that Mr. Gumbo and his lady should return to Europe.

My wife and I would willingly have gone with them, God wot, for our
boy sickened and lost his strength, and caught the fever in our swampy
country; but at this time she was expecting to lie in (of our son
Henry), and she knew, too, that I had promised to stay in Virginia. It
was agreed that we should send the two back; but when I offered Theo to
go, she said her place was with her husband;--her father and Hetty at
home would take care of our children; and she scarce would allow me to
see a tear in her eyes whilst she was making her preparations for the
departure of her little ones. Dost thou remember the time, madam, and
the silence round the worktables, as the piles of little shirts are made
ready for the voyage? and the stealthy visits to the children's chambers
whilst they are asleep and yet with you? and the terrible time of
parting, as our barge with the servants and children rows to the ship,
and you stand on the shore? Had the Prince of Wales been going on that
voyage, he could not have been better provided. Where, sirrah, is the
Tompion watch your grandmother gave you? and how did you survive the
boxes of cakes which the good lady stowed away in your cabin?

The ship which took out my poor Theo's children, returned with the
Reverend Mr. Hagan and my Lady Maria on board, who meekly chose to
resign her rank, and was known in the colony (which was not to be a
colony very long) only as Mrs. Hagan. At the time when I was in favour
with my Lord Dunmore, a living falling vacant in Westmoreland county, he
gave it to our kinsman, who arrived in Virginia time enough to christen
our boy Henry, and to preach some sermons on the then gloomy state of
affairs, which Madam Esmond pronounced to be prodigious fine. I think my
Lady Maria won Madam's heart by insisting on going out of the room after
her. "My father, your brother, was an earl, 'tis true," says she, "but
you know your ladyship is a marquis's daughter, and I never can think of
taking precedence of you!" So fond did Madam become of her niece, that
she even allowed Hagan to read plays--my own humble compositions amongst
others--and was fairly forced to own that there was merit in the tragedy
of Pocahontas, which our parson delivered with uncommon energy and fire.

Hal and his wife came but rarely to Castlewood and Richmond when the
chaplain and his lady were with us. Fanny was very curt and rude with
Maria, used to giggle and laugh strangely in her company, and repeatedly
remind her of her age, to our mother's astonishment, who would
often ask, was there any cause of quarrel between her niece and her
daughter-in-law? I kept my own counsel on these occasions, and was often
not a little touched by the meekness with which the elder lady bore her
persecutions. Fanny loved to torture her in her husband's presence
(who, poor fellow, was also in happy ignorance about his wife's early
history), and the other bore her agony, wincing as little as might be. I
sometimes would remonstrate with Madam Harry, and ask her was she a Red
Indian, that she tortured her victims so? "Have not I had torture
enough in my time?" says the young lady, and looked as though she was
determined to pay back the injuries inflicted on her.

"Nay," says I, "you were bred in our wigwam, and I don't remember
anything but kindness!"

"Kindness!" cries she. "No slave was ever treated as I was. The blows
which wound most, often are those which never are aimed. The people who
hate us are not those we have injured."

I thought of little Fanny in our early days, silent, smiling, willing to
run and do all our biddings for us, and I grieved for my poor brother,
who had taken this sly creature into his bosom.




CHAPTER LXXXVIII. Yankee Doodle comes to Town


One of the uses to which we put America in the days of our British
dominion was to make it a refuge for our sinners. Besides convicts and
assigned servants whom we transported to our colonies, we discharged
on their shores scapegraces and younger sons, for whom dissipation,
despair, and bailiffs made the old country uninhabitable. And as Mr.
Cook, in his voyages, made his newly discovered islanders presents of
English animals (and other specimens of European civilisation), we used
to take care to send samples of our black sheep over to the colonies,
there to browse as best they might, and propagate their precious breed.
I myself was perhaps a little guilty in this matter, in busying
myself to find a living in America for the worthy Hagan, husband of my
kinswoman,--at least was guilty in so far as this, that as we could get
him no employment in England, we were glad to ship him to Virginia, and
give him a colonial pulpit-cushion to thump. He demeaned himself there
as a brave honest gentleman, to be sure; he did his duty thoroughly by
his congregation, and his king too; and in so far did credit to my
small patronage. Madam Theo used to urge this when I confided to her my
scruples of conscience on this subject, and show, as her custom was and
is, that my conduct in this, as in all other matters, was dictated by
the highest principle of morality and honour. But would I have given
Hagan our living at home, and selected him and his wife to minister
to our parish? I fear not. I never had a doubt of our cousin's sincere
repentance; but I think I was secretly glad when she went to work it out
in the wilderness. And I say this, acknowledging my pride and my error.
Twice, when I wanted them most, this kind Maria aided me with her
sympathy and friendship. She bore her own distresses courageously, and
soothed those of others with admirable affection and devotion. And yet
I, and some of mine (not Theo), would look down upon her. Oh, for shame,
for shame on our pride!

My poor Lady Maria was not the only one of our family who was to be
sent out of the way to American wildernesses. Having borrowed, stolen,
cheated at home, until he could cheat, borrow, and steal no more, the
Honourable William Esmond, Esquire, was accommodated with a place at New
York; and his noble brother and royal master heartily desired that they
might see him no more. When the troubles began, we heard of the fellow
and his doings in his new habitation. Lies and mischief were his
avant-couriers wherever he travelled. My Lord Dunmore informed me that
Mr. Will declared publicly, that our estate of Castlewood was only ours
during his brother's pleasure; that his father, out of consideration for
Madam Esmond, his lordship's half-sister, had given her the place for
life, and that he, William, was in negotiation with his brother, the
present Lord Castlewood, for the purchase of the reversion of the
estate! We had the deed of gift in our strongroom at Castlewood, and it
was furthermore registered in due form at Williamsburg; so that we were
easy on that score. But the intention was everything; and Hal and
I promised, as soon as ever we met Mr. William, to get from him a
confirmation of this pretty story. What Madam Esmond's feelings and
expressions were when she heard it, I need scarcely here particularise.
"What! my father, the Marquis of Esmond, was a liar, and I am a cheat,
am I?" cries my mother. "He will take my son's property at my death,
will he?" And she was for writing, not only to Lord Castlewood in
England, but to his Majesty himself at St. James's, and was only
prevented by my assurance that Mr. Will's lies were notorious amongst
all his acquaintance, and that we could not expect, in our own case,
that he should be so inconsistent as to tell the truth. We heard of him
presently as one of the loudest amongst the Loyalists in New York, as
Captain, and presently Major of a corps of volunteers who were sending
their addresses to the well-disposed in all the other colonies, and
announcing their perfect readiness to die for the mother country.

We could not lie in a house without a whole window, and closing the
shutters of that unlucky mansion we had hired at Williamsburg, Madam
Esmond left our little capital, and my family returned to Richmond,
which also was deserted by the members of the (dissolved) Assembly.
Captain Hal and his wife returned pretty early to their plantation; and
I, not a little annoyed at the course which events were taking, divided
my time pretty much between my own family and that of our Governor, who
professed himself very eager to have my advice and company. There were
the strongest political differences, but as yet no actual personal
quarrel. Even after the dissolution of our House of Assembly (the
members of which adjourned to a tavern, and there held that famous
meeting where, I believe, the idea of a congress of all the colonies was
first proposed), the gentlemen who were strongest in opposition remained
good friends with his Excellency, partook of his hospitality, and joined
him in excursions of pleasure. The session over, the gentry went home
and had meetings in their respective counties; and the Assemblies in
most of the other provinces having been also abruptly dissolved, it was
agreed everywhere that a general congress should be held. Philadelphia,
as the largest and most important city on our continent, was selected as
the place of meeting; and those celebrated conferences began, which were
but the angry preface of war. We were still at God save the King; we
were still presenting our humble petitions to the throne; but when I
went to visit my brother Harry at Fanny's Mount (his new plantation
lay not far from ours, but with Rappahannock between us, and towards
Mattaponey River), he rode out on business one morning, and I in the
afternoon happened to ride too, and was told by one of the grooms that
master was gone towards Willis's Ordinary; in which direction, thinking
no harm, I followed. And upon a clear place not far from Willis's, as I
advance out of the wood, I come on Captain Hal on horseback, with three-
or four-and-thirty countrymen round about him, armed with every sort of
weapon, pike, scythe, fowling-piece, and musket; and the Captain, with
two or three likely young fellows as officers under him, putting the men
through their exercise. As I rode up a queer expression comes over Hal's
face. "Present arms!" says he (and the army tries to perform the salute
as well they could). "Captain Cade, this is my brother, Sir George
Warrington."

"As a relation of yours, Colonel," says the individual addressed
as captain, "the gentleman is welcome," and he holds out a hand
accordingly.

"And--and a true friend to Virginia," says Hal, with a reddening face.

"Yes, please God! gentlemen," say I, on which the regiment gives a
hearty huzzay for the Colonel and his brother. The drill over, the
officers, and the men too, were for adjourning to Willis's and taking
some refreshment, but Colonel Hal said he could not drink with them that
afternoon, and we trotted homewards together.

"So, Hal, the cat's out of the bag!" I said.

He gave me a hard look. "I guess there's wilder cats in it. It must come
to this, George. I say, you mustn't tell Madam," he adds.

"Good God!" I cried, "do you mean that with fellows such as those I
saw yonder, you and your friends are going to make fight against the
greatest nation and the best army in the world?"

"I guess we shall get an awful whipping," says Hal, "and that's the
fact. But then, George," he added, with his sweet kind smile, "we are
young, and a whipping or two may do us good. Won't it do us good, Dolly,
you old slut?" and he gives a playful touch with his whip to an old dog
of all trades, that was running by him.

I did not try to urge upon him (I had done so in vain many times
previously) our British side of the question, the side which appears to
me to be the best. He was accustomed to put off my reasons by saying,
"All mighty well, brother, you speak as an Englishman, and have cast in
your lot with your country, as I have with mine." To this argument I own
there is no answer, and all that remains for the disputants is to fight
the matter out, when the strongest is in the right. Which had the right
in the wars of the last century? The king or the parliament? The side
that was uppermost was the right, and on the whole much more humane
in their victory than the Cavaliers would have been had they won. Nay,
suppose we Tories had won the day in America; how frightful and bloody
that triumph would have been! What ropes and scaffolds one imagines,
what noble heads laid low! A strange feeling this, I own; I was on the
Loyalist side, and yet wanted the Whigs to win. My brother Hal, on the
other hand, who distinguished himself greatly with his regiment, never
allowed a word of disrespect against the enemy whom he opposed. "The
officers of the British army," he used to say, "are gentlemen: at least,
I have not heard that they are very much changed since my time. There
may be scoundrels and ruffians amongst the enemy's troops; I dare say
we could find some such amongst our own. Our business is to beat his
Majesty's forces, not call them names;--any rascal can do that."
And from a name which Mr. Lee gave my brother, and many of his rough
horsemen did not understand, Harry was often called "Chevaleer Baird" in
the Continental army. He was a knight, indeed, without fear and without
reproach.

As for the argument, "What could such people as those you were drilling
do against the British army?" Hal had as confident answer.

"They can beat them," says he, "Mr. George, that's what they can do."

"Great heavens!" I cry, "do you mean with your company of Wolfe's you
would hesitate to attack five hundred such?"

"With my company of the 67th, I would go anywhere. And, agreed with you,
that at this present moment I know more of soldiering than they;--but
place me on that open ground where you found us, armed as you please,
