plant his foot on the deck of the Long Serpent. Olaf Triggvison saw him
approaching, and again calling his Norsemen to follow him, he leapt
over the rail and landed on the enemy's deck. The son of Queen Sigrid
stood still on his forecastle. His face suddenly blanched, but he
gripped his sword, ready to encounter Norway's king. Here the two Olafs
met and crossed swords, and a desperate duel ensued. Scarcely had they
made half a dozen passes when Olaf Triggvison, with a quick movement of
his wrist, struck his opponent's sword from his grasp and it fell on
the deck.

"Too bold is Queen Sigrid's son," cried Olaf, "if he thinks to board
the Long Serpent. Now have I got you in my power and might put an end
to you and your worship of heathen idols. But never shall it be said
that Olaf Triggvison struck down a foe who was unarmed. Pick up your
blade, proud King of the Swedes, and let us see who is the better man,
you or I."

So when Swedish Olaf stood again on guard, the two crossed swords once
more.

"Now will I avenge the insult you offered my mother!" cried Olaf
Sigridson, "and you who struck her on the cheek with your glove shall
be struck dead with a weapon of well tempered steel instead of foxskin."

"Guard well your head," returned Triggvison, "lest I knock off your
helmet. The man who taught you the use of the sword might have been
better employed, for in truth he has taught you very little."

"He has taught me enough to enable me to slay such a man as you!" cried
the Swede, gathering his strength for a mighty blow.

"That remains to be proved," retorted Olaf Triggvison. "Wait! you have
got the wrong foot foremost!"

But without heeding, the Swede king brought down his sword with a great
sweep, aiming at Olaf Triggvison's head. As with a lightning flash Olaf
raised his sword to meet the blow. His opponent's blade was broken in
two halves, while at the same moment he fell severely wounded upon the
deck.

"Swedish sword blades are good," said Olaf Triggvison, "but the swords
of the Norsemen are better."

He thought that he had made an end of the King of Sweden. But some of
the Swedish soldiers who had been watching the duel rushed forward,
and, raising their fallen king, carried him off on board another of his
ships, while Olaf Triggvison went aft along the crowded decks, and men
fell beneath his blows, as the ripe grain falls before the mower's
scythe. It happened to the Swedes, as to the Danes, that
notwithstanding their superior numbers they found that they were ill
matched in skill and prowess with the Norsemen. Their picked champions
were speedily killed or wounded, their best ships were disabled, and
although they had indeed reduced Olaf Triggvison's forces by about
half, yet they had not succeeded in boarding any one of his ships, much
less in carrying any of them off as prizes. As King Sweyn had
retreated, so did King Olaf of Sweden. His ships were called off from
the combat and withdrawn out of range of the Norsemen's arrows. He had
won no fame by his daring attack, but only ignominious defeat, and he
was fain to escape alive, albeit very badly wounded.

Thus Olaf Triggvison had made both the Danes and the Swedes take to
flight, and it had all befallen as he had said.

And now it must be told how Earl Erik Hakonson fared in that fight.
True to the agreement which he and the two allied kings had come to
over their dice throwing on the morning of that same fateful day, he
had stood apart from the battle while Sweyn had vainly striven to make
a prize of the Long Serpent; and during the midday and until the
retreat of King Sweyn he had engaged no more in the conflict than to
direct his arrows from afar into the thick of Olaf Triggvison's host.
Now, Earl Erik was wise in warfare, and a man of keen judgment. He had
fought with his father in the great battle against Sigvaldi and the
vikings of Jomsburg, and from what he had seen on that day of Olaf
Triggvison's prowess, and from what he had since heard of Olaf's
warfare in England and other lands, he had made a very true estimate of
the man who now fought in defence of the Long Serpent. He had also seen
Sweyn Forkbeard in the thick of battle, and Olaf of Sweden no less. He
was, therefore, well able to judge that neither the king of the Danes
nor the king of the Swedes was capable of overcoming so brave and
mighty a warrior as the king of the Norsemen, or of wresting the Long
Serpent from the man who had built her and who knew so well how to
defend his own. Pride in his own countryman may have had some share in
the forming of this opinion. But Earl Erik had fought against the men
of every land in Scandinavia. He had a firm belief that the men of
Norway were braver and bolder, stronger in body, more skilful in the
use of their weapons, and had greater powers of endurance than any of
their neighbours. And it may be that in this he was right. He at least
saw cause for thinking that the only men who could succeed in
vanquishing King Olaf's Norsemen were the Norsemen of Earl Erik
Hakonson. Earl Erik's vikings and berserks, eagerly watching the fray,
had seen how the Danish ships had one after another been driven off,
disabled and defeated. They had watched every movement of the tall and
splendid form of the Norse king as he fought in his shining armour and
his bright red tunic on the Serpent's lypting. For a time they had not
been certain whether Olaf Triggvison was at the stem or on the poop of
his great dragonship, for it was seen that at each of these important
points there was a tall chief whose prowess and whose attire alike
distinguished him from all other men; and these two champions so
resembled one the other that it was not easy to tell which was Kolbiorn
Stallare and which King Olaf. But Earl Erik had not a moment's doubt.
He would have known Olaf Triggvison had a score of such men as Kolbiorn
been at his side. Earl Erik was the eldest son of the evil Earl Hakon
who had fled from Thrandheim at the time of Olaf's coming into Norway,
and been slain while taking refuge at the farmstead of Rimul, and Erik
had naturally hoped that on his father's death he would succeed to the
throne. Olaf Triggvison had shattered all his plans of future glory;
and during the five years that had already passed of King Olaf's reign
he thirsted for such an opportunity as now presented itself, not only
of avenging his father's death but also, it might be, of placing
himself upon the throne of Norway. His only uneasiness at the present
moment arose from his fear lest King Olaf should be overcome in the
battle ere he had himself encountered him face to face and hand to hand.

While the King of Sweden and his forces were engaged with their attack
upon Olaf's centre of battle, Earl Erik adopted a plan which, although
seemingly more hopeless, was in the end more successful than any that
had yet been attempted by either the Danes or the Swedes. He saw that
while the Long Serpent continued to be supported on either side by five
strong and well manned dragonships she was practically unassailable.
Her poop and her prow were the only points of her hull that were
exposed, and these towered so high above the bulwarks of all other
vessels that to attempt to board her was both useless and dangerous.
Herein lay the secret of Olaf's successful defence, the proof of his
forethought and wisdom in building the Serpent so much larger and
higher than all other vessels in his fleet. Earl Erik, indeed, had
observed that every ship that had approached her, either fore or aft,
had been in its turn completely cleared of men or forced to withdraw
out of the conflict.

Urging his rowers to their fullest speed, Erik bore down with his ships
upon the extreme of King Olaf's right wing. The heavy, iron bound bow
of the Ram crashed into the broadside of Olaf's outermost longship,
whose timber creaked and groaned under the impact. Vikings and berserks
leapt down upon her decks, and now Norseman met Norseman in a terrible,
deadly combat. The king's men were well nigh exhausted with the long
day's fighting under the hot sun; their bronzed faces streamed with
perspiration, their limbs moved wearily. But, however, tired and
thirsty they were, they could give themselves no respite. Every man
that fell or was disabled by wounds left a gap in the ranks that could
not be filled. The earl's men were fresh and vigorous; they had waited
for hours for their chief's orders to enter the fray, and now that
those orders had been given to them they fought with hot fury, yelling
their battle cries and cutting down their foemen with ponderous axe and
keen edged sword.

So fierce was the onslaught that many of Olaf's men, for the first time
that day, fell back in fear and clambered over the bulwarks of the next
ship. Very soon the decks of the first longship were completely cleared
of defenders. Then Earl Erik backed out with the Iron Ram, while the
seamen on his other ships cut away the lashings that had bound Olaf's
outermost vessel to her neighbour, and drew the conquered craft away
into the rear, leaving the next ship exposed.

Again Earl Erik advanced with the Ram and crashed as before into the
exposed broadside of the outermost ship. As before, the vikings leapt
on board and renewed the onset. Five of the viking ships lay with their
high prows overshadowing the broadside bulwarks, and their men swarmed
and clamoured upon the decks from stem to stern, clearing all before
them. Again the lashings were cut and the conquered longship was
withdrawn.

Two of King Olaf's dragons had now been captured by Earl Erik. It was
not very long ere yet two others followed; and then the Short Serpent
was exposed, even as her four companions had been. At this juncture
Earl Erik paused, for he saw that Thorkel Nefja's decks were densely
crowded with men who had retreated from vessel to vessel before the
onslaught of the vikings. With the caution which long years of viking
work had taught him, the earl decided that the Short Serpent might best
be assailed by means of arrows, fired from a safe distance, until her
numbers had been sufficiently diminished to warrant his attacking her
at closer quarters. So he arrayed six of his ships near hand and set
his archers to work, and for a long while this method of assault was
continued.

There was no lack of arrows on the Short Serpent, or indeed, on any
other of King Olaf's battleships. But it was noticed by the earl's
vikings that the larger number of the shafts that were shot at them by
the defenders were of Danish or Swedish make, and by this it was judged
that the king's men were using the arrows that had been fired upon them
by their enemies.

Leaving his six ships where he had stationed them, Earl Erik now rowed
the Iron Ram round to the left wing of Olaf Triggvison's array. Four of
his best longships followed him. He passed astern of the king's fleet.
As he rowed by under the poop of the Long Serpent he saw the majestic
figure of the King of Norway, looking brilliant in gold and scarlet as
he stood in flood of the afternoon sunlight, sword in hand and shield
at breast. The eyes of the two bravest of Norse warriors met. Waving
his sword in mock salute, Earl Erik cried aloud:

"Short will be Olaf's shrift when Erik boards the Long Serpent!"

King Olaf saw that near to where Erik stood, on the Iron Ram's forward
deck, the image of the god Thor was raised, and he cried aloud in
answer:

"Never shall Erik board the Serpent while Thor dwells in his stem!"

"A wise soothsayer is the king," said Earl Erik to one of his warriors
as he passed onward astern of the Crane. "And I have been thinking,
ever since this battle began that the great luck of Olaf may be due to
that sign of the cross that we see on all his banners and shields.
Often have I felt a wish to turn Christian, for it seems to me that all
Christian men have something noble and honest about them--a greatness
which we heathens can never achieve. Now do I swear upon the hilt of my
sword"--he raised his sword hilt to his lips--"that if I win this
battle and take the Long Serpent for my prize I will straightway allow
myself to be christened. And, to begin with, I will have that image of
Thor thrown overboard into the sea. It is ill made and cumbrous, and a
figure of the cross will take less room in our stem and bring us more
luck withal."

So speaking, Earl Erik stepped forward and, gripping the idol in his
strong arms, flung it over the bulwark. Then he lashed two spars
together, a long plank crossed with a shorter one, and raised this
rough made crucifix high in the stem of the Iron Ram. By this time his
vessel had passed beyond the extreme of King Olaf's left wing. He bade
his rowers stop their rowing on the starboard side. They did so, and
the ship turned about. Then at fullest speed he bore down upon the
king's outermost dragon, crashed into her side and renewed his
onslaught.

Erik dealt with the left wing as he had done with the right, and one
after another of the four ships was cleared and unlashed. And now the
Long Serpent lay with only two companions, the Short Serpent at her
starboard and the Crane at her larboard side.

Already the Short Serpent was greatly crippled. Her commander, Thorkel
Nefja, had fallen, and the larger number of her men had retreated on
board of Olaf's ship, driven thither by the vikings of the six vessels
that were now ranged close against her. Earl Erik now made a vigorous
attack upon the Crane. He boarded her with a vast crowd of his vikings.
On the mid deck he encountered her captain, Thorkel the Wheedler, and
the two engaged in a sharp hand to hand fight. Regardless of his own
life, Thorkel fought with savage fury. He knew how much depended upon
his preventing Erik from boarding the king's ship. But he had already
received a severe wound from a javelin across the fingers of his right
hand, and he was full weary from the heat and long fighting. His
assailant speedily overcame him, and he fell, calling upon God to save
the king. As Thorkel had fought, so fought his men--desperately,
furiously, but yet weakly, and at last both the Crane and the Short
Serpent were cleared; their lashings were unfastened, they were
withdrawn to the rear, and King Olaf's great dragonship stood alone
among her foes.



CHAPTER XXII: THE DEFENCE OF THE "LONG SERPENT"


The sun was sinking lower and lower to the sea; light clouds were
gathering in the western sky. But there would yet be three hours of
daylight, and Earl Erik deemed that this would be ample time in which
to win the Long Serpent. His own decks were thickly strewn with dead;
his men were weary and athirst, and he saw need for a respite from
fighting, if only for a very brief while. Also he saw on coming nearer
to King Olaf's ship that it would be no easy matter to win on board of
her; for the Iron Ram was but a third of her length, and her highest
bulwarks reached only to a level with the oar holes in the Serpent's
wales.

Erik blew his horns for a short truce. His ships were drawn off, and
for a time the battle ceased. In this interval the combatants on both
sides rested themselves and took food and drink. King Olaf had his
decks cleared of the dead, sent the wounded below into the shelter of
the holds, and arrayed his men anew. He was himself unwounded still,
but his silken tunic was tattered, so that the links of his coat of
mail showed through. His helmet was battered by the many spears and
swords that had struck upon it, and his shield bristled with broken
arrows.

When he had freshened himself and got together a new supply of arrows
and spears, he mounted to the poop deck, and there, standing in the
sunlight, looked around the bay. The water was strewn with wreckage, an
arrow floated on every wave. Small boats had been put out to pick up
the men who had fallen, or been thrust overboard from the ships. All
was silent now, save for the suppressed cries of the wounded and the
hoarse voices of the chiefs who were giving rapid orders to their men
for the renewal of the fight.

Earl Erik's ships, among which there were also some of the Swedes and
Danes, stood off from the Serpent at a distance of an easy arrow's
flight. They surrounded the Serpent like a pack of eager wolves held at
bay; and the most eager of all men there present was Earl Erik.

When he had prepared his men he said to a chief who stood near
him--Thorkel the High, it was, brother of Earl Sigvaldi:

"Many fierce battles have I fought; but never before have I found men
equally brave and so skilled in warfare as the men fighting for King
Olaf today; nor have I ever seen a ship so hard to win as the Long
Serpent. Now, as you are one of the wisest of men, Thorkel, give me the
best advice you know as to how that great ship may be won."

"I cannot give you sure advice," Thorkel answered: "but I can say what
seems to me the best; and I would say that you would do well, when we
presently come alongside, to take heavy timbers or such like weighty
things, and let them fall across the gunwale of the Serpent, so that
the ship will lean over. You will then find it easier to board her, for
she will be brought down by the weight to a level with our own
bulwarks."

"The advice is good," said Erik, "and I will follow it."

As he spoke, there came the loud blast of King Olaf's war horns,
calling to his foes to come on.

