else, by Heaven, shouldst thou escape him, thou escapest not ME!"

The savage tone in which this was whispered perhaps completed the
confusion of the Marquis's nerves, for he stumbled as he made to horse;
and though he recovered his feet, sprung to the saddle with his usual
agility, and displayed his address in horsemanship as he assumed his
position opposite to the challenger's, yet the accident did not escape
those who were on the watch for omens which might predict the fate of
the day.

The priests, after a solemn prayer that God would show the rightful
quarrel, departed from the lists. The trumpets of the challenger then
rung a flourish, and a herald-at-arms proclaimed at the eastern end of
the lists--"Here stands a good knight, Sir Kenneth of Scotland, champion
for the royal King Richard of England, who accuseth Conrade, Marquis of
Montserrat, of foul treason and dishonour done to the said King."

When the words Kenneth of Scotland announced the name and character
of the champion, hitherto scarce generally known, a loud and cheerful
acclaim burst from the followers of King Richard, and hardly,
notwithstanding repeated commands of silence, suffered the reply of
the defendant to be heard. He, of course, avouched his innocence,
and offered his body for battle. The esquires of the combatants now
approached, and delivered to each his shield and lance, assisting to
hang the former around his neck, that his two hands might remain free,
one for the management of the bridle, the other to direct the lance.

The shield of the Scot displayed his old bearing, the leopard, but
with the addition of a collar and broken chain, in allusion to his late
captivity. The shield of the Marquis bore, in reference to his title,
a serrated and rocky mountain. Each shook his lance aloft, as if to
ascertain the weight and toughness of the unwieldy weapon, and then laid
it in the rest. The sponsors, heralds, and squires now retired to the
barriers, and the combatants sat opposite to each other, face to face,
with couched lance and closed visor, the human form so completely
enclosed, that they looked more like statues of molten iron than
beings of flesh and blood. The silence of suspense was now general.
Men breathed thicker, and their very souls seemed seated in their eyes;
while not a sound was to be heard save the snorting and pawing of the
good steeds, who, sensible of what was about to happen, were impatient
to dash into career. They stood thus for perhaps three minutes, when,
at a signal given by the Soldan, a hundred instruments rent the air with
their brazen clamours, and each champion striking his horse with the
spurs, and slacking the rein, the horses started into full gallop,
and the knights met in mid space with a shock like a thunderbolt. The
victory was not in doubt--no, not one moment. Conrade, indeed, showed
himself a practised warrior; for he struck his antagonist knightly in
the midst of his shield, bearing his lance so straight and true that
it shivered into splinters from the steel spear-head up to the very
gauntlet. The horse of Sir Kenneth recoiled two or three yards and fell
on his haunches; but the rider easily raised him with hand and rein.
But for Conrade there was no recovery. Sir Kenneth's lance had pierced
through the shield, through a plated corselet of Milan steel, through a
SECRET, or coat of linked mail, worn beneath the corselet, had wounded
him deep in the bosom, and borne him from his saddle, leaving the
truncheon of the lance fixed in his wound. The sponsors, heralds, and
Saladin himself, descending from his throne, crowded around the wounded
man; while Sir Kenneth, who had drawn his sword ere yet he discovered
his antagonist was totally helpless, now commanded him to avow his
guilt. The helmet was hastily unclosed, and the wounded man, gazing
wildly on the skies, replied, "What would you more? God hath decided
justly--I am guilty; but there are worse traitors in the camp than I. In
pity to my soul, let me have a confessor!"

He revived as he uttered these words.

"The talisman--the powerful remedy, royal brother!" said King Richard to
Saladin.

"The traitor," answered the Soldan, "is more fit to be dragged from the
lists to the gallows by the heels, than to profit by its virtues. And
some such fate is in his look," he added, after gazing fixedly upon the
wounded man; "for though his wound may be cured, yet Azrael's seal is on
the wretch's brow."

"Nevertheless," said Richard, "I pray you do for him what you may, that
he may at least have time for confession. Slay not soul and body! To him
one half hour of time may be worth more, by ten thousandfold, than the
life of the oldest patriarch."

"My royal brother's wish shall be obeyed," said Saladin.--"Slaves, bear
this wounded man to our tent."

"Do not so," said the Templar, who had hitherto stood gloomily looking
on in silence. "The royal Duke of Austria and myself will not permit
this unhappy Christian prince to be delivered over to the Saracens, that
they may try their spells upon him. We are his sponsors, and demand that
he be assigned to our care."

"That is, you refuse the certain means offered to recover him?" said
Richard.

"Not so," said the Grand Master, recollecting himself. "If the Soldan
useth lawful medicines, he may attend the patient in my tent."

"Do so, I pray thee, good brother," said Richard to Saladin, "though the
permission be ungraciously yielded.--But now to a more glorious work.
Sound, trumpets--shout, England--in honour of England's champion!"

Drum, clarion, trumpet, and cymbal rung forth at once, and the deep and
regular shout, which for ages has been the English acclamation, sounded
amidst the shrill and irregular yells of the Arabs, like the diapason of
the organ amid the howling of a storm. There was silence at length.

"Brave Knight of the Leopard," resumed Coeur de Lion, "thou hast shown
that the Ethiopian may change his skin, and the leopard his spots,
though clerks quote Scripture for the impossibility. Yet I have more to
say to you when I have conducted you to the presence of the ladies, the
best judges and best rewarders of deeds of chivalry."

The Knight of the Leopard bowed assent.

"And thou, princely Saladin, wilt also attend them. I promise thee our
Queen will not think herself welcome, if she lacks the opportunity to
thank her royal host for her most princely reception."

Saladin bent his head gracefully, but declined the invitation.

"I must attend the wounded man," he said. "The leech leaves not his
patient more than the champion the lists, even if he be summoned to a
bower like those of Paradise. And further, royal Richard, know that the
blood of the East flows not so temperately in the presence of beauty as
that of your land. What saith the Book itself?--Her eye is as the edge
of the sword of the Prophet, who shall look upon it? He that would not
be burnt avoideth to tread on hot embers--wise men spread not the flax
before a flickering torch. He, saith the sage, who hath forfeited a
treasure, doth not wisely to turn back his head to gaze at it."

Richard, it may be believed, respected the motives of delicacy which
flowed from manners so different from his own, and urged his request no
further.

"At noon," said the Soldan, as he departed, "I trust ye will all accept
a collation under the black camel-skin tent of a chief of Kurdistan."

The same invitation was circulated among the Christians, comprehending
all those of sufficient importance to be admitted to sit at a feast made
for princes.

"Hark!" said Richard, "the timbrels announce that our Queen and her
attendants are leaving their gallery--and see, the turbans sink on the
ground, as if struck down by a destroying angel. All lie prostrate, as
if the glance of an Arab's eye could sully the lustre of a lady's
cheek! Come, we will to the pavilion, and lead our conqueror thither in
triumph. How I pity that noble Soldan, who knows but of love as it is
known to those of inferior nature!"

Blondel tuned his harp to his boldest measure, to welcome the
introduction of the victor into the pavilion of Queen Berengaria. He
entered, supported on either side by his sponsors, Richard and Thomas
Longsword, and knelt gracefully down before the Queen, though more than
half the homage was silently rendered to Edith, who sat on her right
hand.

"Unarm him, my mistresses," said the King, whose delight was in the
execution of such chivalrous usages; "let Beauty honour Chivalry! Undo
his spurs, Berengaria; Queen though thou be, thou owest him what marks
of favour thou canst give.--Unlace his helmet, Edith;--by this hand
thou shalt, wert thou the proudest Plantagenet of the line, and he the
poorest knight on earth!"

Both ladies obeyed the royal commands--Berengaria with bustling
assiduity, as anxious to gratify her husband's humour, and Edith
blushing and growing pale alternately, as, slowly and awkwardly, she
undid, with Longsword's assistance, the fastenings which secured the
helmet to the gorget.

"And what expect you from beneath this iron shell?" said Richard, as the
removal of the casque gave to view the noble countenance of Sir Kenneth,
his face glowing with recent exertion, and not less so with present
emotion. "What think ye of him, gallants and beauties?" said Richard.
"Doth he resemble an Ethiopian slave, or doth he present the face of an
obscure and nameless adventurer? No, by my good sword! Here terminate
his various disguises. He hath knelt down before you unknown, save by
his worth; he arises equally distinguished by birth and by fortune. The
adventurous knight, Kenneth, arises David, Earl of Huntingdon, Prince
Royal of Scotland!"

There was a general exclamation of surprise, and Edith dropped from her
hand the helmet which she had just received.

"Yes, my masters," said the King, "it is even so. Ye know how Scotland
deceived us when she proposed to send this valiant Earl, with a bold
company of her best and noblest, to aid our arms in this conquest of
Palestine, but failed to comply with her engagements. This noble youth,
under whom the Scottish Crusaders were to have been arrayed, thought
foul scorn that his arm should be withheld from the holy warfare,
and joined us at Sicily with a small train of devoted and faithful
attendants, which was augmented by many of his countrymen to whom the
rank of their leader was unknown. The confidants of the Royal Prince had
all, save one old follower, fallen by death, when his secret, but
too well kept, had nearly occasioned my cutting off, in a Scottish
adventurer, one of the noblest hopes of Europe.--Why did you not mention
your rank, noble Huntingdon, when endangered by my hasty and passionate
sentence? Was it that you thought Richard capable of abusing the
advantage I possessed over the heir of a King whom I have so often found
hostile?"

"I did you not that injustice, royal Richard," answered the Earl of
Huntingdon; "but my pride brooked not that I should avow myself Prince
of Scotland in order to save my life, endangered for default of loyalty.
And, moreover, I had made my vow to preserve my rank unknown till the
Crusade should be accomplished; nor did I mention it save IN ARTICULO
MORTIS, and under the seal of confession, to yonder reverend hermit."

"It was the knowledge of that secret, then, which made the good man so
urgent with me to recall my severe sentence?" said Richard. "Well did
he say that, had this good knight fallen by my mandate, I should have
wished the deed undone though it had cost me a limb. A limb! I should
have wished it undone had it cost me my life---since the world would
have said that Richard had abused the condition in which the heir of
Scotland had placed himself by his confidence in his generosity."

"Yet, may we know of your Grace by what strange and happy chance this
riddle was at length read?" said the Queen Berengaria.

"Letters were brought to us from England," said the King, "in which
we learned, among other unpleasant news, that the King of Scotland had
seized upon three of our nobles, when on a pilgrimage to Saint Ninian,
and alleged, as a cause, that his heir, being supposed to be fighting in
the ranks of the Teutonic Knights against the heathen of Borussia, was,
in fact, in our camp, and in our power; and, therefore, William proposed
to hold these nobles as hostages for his safety. This gave me the first
light on the real rank of the Knight of the Leopard; and my suspicions
were confirmed by De Vaux, who, on his return from Ascalon, brought back
with him the Earl of Huntingdon's sole attendant, a thick-skulled slave,
who had gone thirty miles to unfold to De Vaux a secret he should have
told to me."

"Old Strauchan must be excused," said the Lord of Gilsland. "He knew
from experience that my heart is somewhat softer than if I wrote myself
Plantagenet."

"Thy heart soft? thou commodity of old iron and Cumberland flint, that
thou art!" exclaimed the King.--"It is we Plantagenets who boast soft
and feeling hearts. Edith," turning to his cousin with an expression
which called the blood into her cheek, "give me thy hand, my fair
cousin, and, Prince of Scotland, thine."

"Forbear, my lord," said Edith, hanging back, and endeavouring to hide
her confusion under an attempt to rally her royal kinsman's credulity.
"Remember you not that my hand was to be the signal of converting to
the Christian faith the Saracen and Arab, Saladin and all his turbaned
host?"

"Ay, but the wind of prophecy hath chopped about, and sits now in
another corner," replied Richard.

"Mock not, lest your bonds be made strong," said the hermit stepping
forward. "The heavenly host write nothing but truth in their brilliant
records. It is man's eyes which are too weak to read their characters
aright. Know, that when Saladin and Kenneth of Scotland slept in my
grotto, I read in the stars that there rested under my roof a prince,
the natural foe of Richard, with whom the fate of Edith Plantagenet was
to be united. Could I doubt that this must be the Soldan, whose rank
was well known to me, as he often visited my cell to converse on the
revolutions of the heavenly bodies? Again, the lights of the firmament
proclaimed that this prince, the husband of Edith Plantagenet, should
be a Christian; and I--weak and wild interpreter!--argued thence the
conversion of the noble Saladin, whose good qualities seemed often to
incline him towards the better faith. The sense of my weakness hath
humbled me to the dust; but in the dust I have found comfort! I have not
read aright the fate of others--who can assure me but that I may
have miscalculated mine own? God will not have us break into His
council-house, or spy out His hidden mysteries. We must wait His time
with watching and prayer--with fear and with hope. I came hither the
stern seer--the proud prophet--skilled, as I thought, to instruct
princes, and gifted even with supernatural powers, but burdened with
a weight which I deemed no shoulders but mine could have borne. But
my bands have been broken! I go hence humble in mine ignorance,
penitent--and not hopeless."

With these words he withdrew from the assembly; and it is recorded that
from that period his frenzy fits seldom occurred, and his penances were
of a milder character, and accompanied with better hopes of the future.
So much is there of self-opinion, even in insanity, that the conviction
of his having entertained and expressed an unfounded prediction with so
much vehemence seemed to operate like loss of blood on the human frame,
to modify and lower the fever of the brain.

It is needless to follow into further particulars the conferences at the
royal tent, or to inquire whether David, Earl of Huntingdon, was as mute
in the presence of Edith Plantagenet as when he was bound to act under
the character of an obscure and nameless adventurer. It may be well
believed that he there expressed with suitable earnestness the passion
to which he had so often before found it difficult to give words.

The hour of noon now approached, and Saladin waited to receive the
Princes of Christendom in a tent, which, but for its large size,
differed little from that of the ordinary shelter of the common Kurdman,
or Arab; yet beneath its ample and sable covering was prepared a banquet
after the most gorgeous fashion of the East, extended upon carpets of
the richest stuffs, with cushions laid for the guests. But we cannot
stop to describe the cloth of gold and silver--the superb embroidery in
arabesque--the shawls of Kashmere and the muslins of India, which were
here unfolded in all their splendour; far less to tell the different
sweetmeats, ragouts edged with rice coloured in various manners, with
all the other niceties of Eastern cookery. Lambs roasted whole, and
game and poultry dressed in pilaus, were piled in vessels of gold, and
silver, and porcelain, and intermixed with large mazers of sherbet,
cooled in snow and ice from the caverns of Mount Lebanon. A magnificent
pile of cushions at the head of the banquet seemed prepared for the
master of the feast, and such dignitaries as he might call to share that
place of distinction; while from the roof of the tent in all quarters,
but over this seat of eminence in particular, waved many a banner and
pennon, the trophies of battles won and kingdoms overthrown. But amongst
and above them all, a long lance displayed a shroud, the banner
of Death, with this impressive inscription--"SALADIN, KING OF
KINGS--SALADIN, VICTOR OF VICTORS--SALADIN MUST DIE." Amid these
preparations, the slaves who had arranged the refreshments stood
with drooped heads and folded arms, mute and motionless as monumental
statuary, or as automata, which waited the touch of the artist to put
them in motion.

Expecting the approach of his princely guests, the Soldan, imbued, as
most were, with the superstitions of his time, paused over a horoscope
and corresponding scroll, which had been sent to him by the hermit of
Engaddi when he departed from the camp.

"Strange and mysterious science," he muttered to himself, "which,
pretending to draw the curtain of futurity, misleads those whom it seems
to guide, and darkens the scene which it pretends to illuminate! Who
would not have said that I was that enemy most dangerous to Richard,
whose enmity was to be ended by marriage with his kinswoman? Yet it now
appears that a union betwixt this gallant Earl and the lady will bring
about friendship betwixt Richard and Scotland, an enemy more dangerous
than I, as a wildcat in a chamber is more to be dreaded than a lion
in a distant desert. But then," he continued to mutter to
himself, "the combination intimates that this husband was to be
Christian.--Christian!" he repeated, after a pause. "That gave the
insane fanatic star-gazer hopes that I might renounce my faith! But me,
the faithful follower of our Prophet--me it should have undeceived.
Lie there, mysterious scroll," he added, thrusting it under the pile of
cushions; "strange are thy bodements and fatal, since, even when true in
themselves, they work upon those who attempt to decipher their meaning
all the effects of falsehood.--How now! what means this intrusion?"

He spoke to the dwarf Nectabanus, who rushed into the tent fearfully
agitated, with each strange and disproportioned feature wrenched by
horror into still more extravagant ugliness--his mouth open, his eyes
staring, his hands, with their shrivelled and deformed fingers, wildly
expanded.

"What now?" said the Soldan sternly.

"ACCIPE HOC!" groaned out the dwarf.

"Ha! sayest thou?" answered Saladin.

"ACCIPE HOC!" replied the panic-struck creature, unconscious,
perhaps, that he repeated the same words as before.

"Hence, I am in no vein for foolery," said the Emperor.

"Nor am I further fool," said the dwarf, "than to make my folly help out
my wits to earn my bread, poor, helpless wretch! Hear, hear me, great
Soldan!"

"Nay, if thou hast actual wrong to complain of," said Saladin, "fool or
wise, thou art entitled to the ear of a King. Retire hither with me;"
and he led him into the inner tent.

Whatever their conference related to, it was soon broken off by the
fanfare of the trumpets announcing the arrival of the various Christian
princes, whom Saladin welcomed to his tent with a royal courtesy well
becoming their rank and his own; but chiefly he saluted the young Earl
of Huntingdon, and generously congratulated him upon prospects which
seemed to have interfered with and overclouded those which he had
himself entertained.

"But think not," said the Soldan, "thou noble youth, that the Prince
of Scotland is more welcome to Saladin than was Kenneth to the solitary
Ilderim when they met in the desert, or the distressed Ethiop to the
Hakim Adonbec. A brave and generous disposition like thine hath a value
independent of condition and birth, as the cool draught, which I here
proffer thee, is as delicious from an earthen vessel as from a goblet of
gold."

The Earl of Huntingdon made a suitable reply, gratefully acknowledging
the various important services he had received from the generous Soldan;
but when he had pledged Saladin in the bowl of sherbet which the Soldan
had proffered to him, he could not help remarking with a smile, "The
brave cavalier Ilderim knew not of the formation of ice, but the
munificent Soldan cools his sherbet with snow."

"Wouldst thou have an Arab or a Kurdman as wise as a Hakim?" said the
Soldan. "He who does on a disguise must make the sentiments of his heart
and the learning of his head accord with the dress which he assumes.
I desired to see how a brave and single-hearted cavalier of Frangistan
would conduct himself in debate with such a chief as I then seemed; and
I questioned the truth of a well-known fact, to know by what arguments
thou wouldst support thy assertion."

While they were speaking, the Archduke of Austria, who stood a little
apart, was struck with the mention of iced sherbet, and took with
pleasure and some bluntness the deep goblet, as the Earl of Huntingdon
was about to replace it.

"Most delicious!" he exclaimed, after a deep draught, which the heat of
the weather, and the feverishness following the debauch of the preceding
day, had rendered doubly acceptable. He sighed as he handed the cup to
the Grand Master of the Templars. Saladin made a sign to the dwarf, who
advanced and pronounced, with a harsh voice, the words, ACCIPE HOC! The
Templar started, like a steed who sees a lion under a bush beside the
pathway; yet instantly recovered, and to hide, perhaps, his confusion,
raised the goblet to his lips. But those lips never touched that
goblet's rim. The sabre of Saladin left its sheath as lightning leaves
the cloud. It was waved in the air, and the head of the Grand Master
rolled to the extremity of the tent, while the trunk remained for a
second standing, with the goblet still clenched in its grasp, then fell,
the liquor mingling with the blood that spurted from the veins.

There was a general exclamation of treason, and Austria, nearest to
whom Saladin stood with the bloody sabre in his hand, started back as
if apprehensive that his turn was to come next. Richard and others laid
hand on their swords.

"Fear nothing, noble Austria," said Saladin, as composedly as if nothing
had happened,--"nor you, royal England, be wroth at what you have seen.
Not for his manifold treasons--not for the attempt which, as may
be vouched by his own squire, he instigated against King Richard's
life--not that he pursued the Prince of Scotland and myself in the
desert, reducing us to save our lives by the speed of our horses--not
that he had stirred up the Maronites to attack us upon this very
occasion, had I not brought up unexpectedly so many Arabs as rendered
the scheme abortive--not for any or all of these crimes does he now lie
there, although each were deserving such a doom--but because, scarce
half an hour ere he polluted our presence, as the simoom empoisons
the atmosphere, he poniarded his comrade and accomplice, Conrade of
Montserrat, lest he should confess the infamous plots in which they had
both been engaged."

"How! Conrade murdered?--And by the Grand Master, his sponsor and most
intimate friend!" exclaimed Richard. "Noble Soldan, I would not doubt
thee; yet this must be proved, otherwise--"

"There stands the evidence," said Saladin, pointing to the terrified
dwarf. "Allah, who sends the fire-fly to illuminate the night season,
can discover secret crimes by the most contemptible means."

The Soldan proceeded to tell the dwarf's story, which amounted to this.
In his foolish curiosity, or, as he partly confessed, with some thoughts
of pilfering, Nectabanus had strayed into the tent of Conrade, which had
been deserted by his attendants, some of whom had left the encampment
to carry the news of his defeat to his brother, and others were availing
themselves of the means which Saladin had supplied for revelling. The
wounded man slept under the influence of Saladin's wonderful talisman,
so that the dwarf had opportunity to pry about at pleasure until he was
frightened into concealment by the sound of a heavy step. He skulked
behind a curtain, yet could see the motions, and hear the words, of the
Grand Master, who entered, and carefully secured the covering of the
pavilion behind him. His victim started from sleep, and it would appear
that he instantly suspected the purpose of his old associate, for it was
in a tone of alarm that he demanded wherefore he disturbed him.

"I come to confess and to absolve thee," answered the Grand Master.

Of their further speech the terrified dwarf remembered little, save that
Conrade implored the Grand Master not to break a wounded reed, and that
the Templar struck him to the heart with a Turkish dagger, with the
words ACCIPE HOC!--words which long afterwards haunted the terrified
imagination of the concealed witness.
