"You wonder," continued she, "to hear me quote holy writ so glib. I have
pored over it this four years, and why? Not because God wrote it, but
because I saw it often in thy hands ere thou didst leave me. Heaven
forgive me, I am but a woman. What thinkest thou of this sentence? 'Let
your work so shine before men that they may see your good works and
glorify your Father which is in heaven!' What is a saint in a sink
better than 'a light under a bushel!'

"Therefore, since the sheep committed to thy charge bleat for thee and
cry, 'Oh desert us no longer, but come to Gouda manse;' since I, who
know thee ten times better than thou knowest thyself, do pledge my soul
it is for thy soul's weal to go to Gouda manse--since duty to thy child,
too long abandoned, calls thee to Gouda manse--since thy sovereign, whom
holy writ again bids thee honour, sends thee to Gouda manse--since the
Pope, whom the Church teaches thee to revere hath absolved thee of thy
monkish vows, and orders thee to Gouda manse--"

"Ah!"

"Since thy grey-haired mother watches for thee in dole and care, and
turneth oft the hour-glass and sigheth sore that thou comest so slow to
her at Gouda manse--since thy brother, withered by thy curse, awaits thy
forgiveness and thy prayers for his soul, now lingering in his body, at
Gouda manse--take thou in thine arms the sweet bird wi' crest of gold
that nestles to thy bosom, and give me thy hand; thy sweetheart erst and
wife, and now thy friend, the truest friend to thee this night that ere
man had, and come with me to Gouda manse!"

"IT IS THE VOICE OF AN ANGEL!" cried Clement loudly.

"Then hearken it, and come forth to Gouda manse!"

The battle was won.

Margaret lingered behind, cast her eye rapidly round the furniture, and
selected the Vulgate and the psaltery. The rest she sighed at, and let
it lie. The breastplate and the cilice of bristles she took and dashed
with feeble ferocity on the floor.

Then seeing Gerard watch her with surprise from the outside,
she coloured and said, "I am but a woman: 'little' will still be
'spiteful.'"

"Why encumber thyself with those? They are safe."

"Oh, she had a reason."

And with this they took the road to Gouda parsonage, The moon and stars
were so bright, it seemed almost as light as day.

Suddenly Gerard stopped. "My poor little birds!"

"What of them?"

"They will miss their food. I feed them every day."

"The child hath a piece of bread in his cowl, Take that, and feed them
now against the morn."

"I will. Nay, I will not, He is as innocent, and nearer to me and to
thee."

Margaret drew a long breath, "'Tis well, Hadst taken it, I might have
hated thee; I am but a woman."

When they had gone about a quarter of a mile, Gerard sighed.

"Margaret," said he, "I must e'en rest; he is too heavy for me."

"Then give him me, and take thou these. Alas! alas! I mind when thou
wouldst have run with the child on one shoulder, and the mother on
t'other."

And Margaret carried the boy.

"I trow," said Gerard, looking down, "overmuch fasting is not good for a
man."

"A many die of it each year, winter time," replied Margaret.

Gerard pondered these simple words, and eyed her askant, carrying the
child with perfect ease. When they had gone nearly a mile he said with
considerable surprise, "You thought it was but two butts' length."

"Not I."

"Why, you said so."

"That is another matter." She then turned on him the face of a Madonna.
"I lied," said she sweetly. "And to save your soul and body, I'd maybe
tell a worse lie than that, at need. I am but a woman, Ah, well, it is
but two butts' length from here at any rate."

"Without a lie?"

"Humph! Three, without a lie."

And sure enough, in a few minutes they came up to the manse.

A candle was burning in the vicar's parlour. "She is waking still,"
whispered Margaret.

"Beautiful! beautiful!" said Clement, and stopped to look at it.

"What, in Heaven's name?"

"That little candle, seen through the window at night. Look an it be
not like some fair star of size prodigious: it delighteth the eyes, and
warmeth the heart of those outside."

"Come, and I'll show thee something better," said Margaret, and led him
on tiptoe to the window.

They looked in, and there was Catherine kneeling on the hassock, with
her "hours" before her.

"Folk can pray out of a cave," whispered Margaret. "Ay and hit heaven
with their prayers; for 'tis for a sight of thee she prayeth, and thou
art here. Now, Gerard, be prepared; she is not the woman you knew her;
her children's troubles have greatly broken the brisk, light-hearted
soul. And I see she has been weeping e'en now; she will have given thee
up, being so late."

"Let me get to her," said Clement hastily, trembling all over.

"That door! I will bide here."

When Gerard was gone to the door, Margaret, fearing the sudden surprise,
gave one sharp tap at the window and cried, "Mother!" in a loud,
expressive voice that Catherine read at once. She clasped her hands
together and had half risen from her kneeling posture when the door
burst open and Clement flung himself wildly on his knees at her knees,
with his arms out to embrace her. She uttered a cry such as only a
mother could, "Ah! my darling, my darling!" and clung sobbing round his
neck. And true it was, she saw neither a hermit, a priest, nor a monk,
but just her child, lost, and despaired of, and in her arms, And after a
little while Margaret came in, with wet eyes and cheeks, and a holy calm
of affection settled by degrees on these sore troubled ones. And
they sat all three together, hand in hand, murmuring sweet and loving
converse; and he who sat in the middle drank right and left their true
affection and their humble but genuine wisdom, and was forced to eat a
good nourishing meal, and at daybreak was packed off to a snowy bed,
and by and by awoke, as from a hideous dream, friar and hermit no more,
Clement no more, but Gerard Eliassoen, parson of Gouda.

     (1) I think she means prejudice.



CHAPTER XCVI

Margaret went back to Rotterdam long ere Gerard awoke, and actually left
her boy behind her. She sent the faithful, sturdy Reicht off to Gouda
directly with a vicar's grey frock and large felt hat, and with minute
instructions how to govern her new master.

Then she went to Jorian Ketel; for she said to herself, "he is the
closest I ever met, so he is the man for me," and in concert with him
she did two mortal sly things; yet not, in my opinion, virulent, though
she thought they were; but if I am asked what were these deeds without
a name, the answer is, that as she, who was, 'but a woman,' kept them
secret till her dying day, I, who am a man--"Verbum non amplius addam."

She kept away from Gouda parsonage.

Things that pass little noticed in the heat of argument sometimes rankle
afterwards; and when she came to go over all that had passed, she was
offended at Gerard thinking she could ever forget the priest in the some
time lover, "For what did he take me?" said she. And this raised a great
shyness which really she would not otherwise have felt, being downright
innocent, And pride sided with modesty, and whispered, "Go no more to
Gouda parsonage."

She left little Gerard there to complete the conquest her maternal heart
ascribed to him, not to her own eloquence and sagacity, and to anchor
his father for ever to humanity.

But this generous stroke of policy cost her heart dear. She had never
yet been parted from her boy an hour, and she felt sadly strange as well
as desolate without him. After the first day it became intolerable; and
what does the poor soul do, but creep at dark up to Gouda parsonage, and
lurk about the premises like a thief till she saw Reicht Heynes in the
kitchen alone, Then she tapped softly at the window and said, "Reicht,
for pity's sake bring him out to me unbeknown." With Margaret the person
who occupied her thoughts at the time ceased to have a name, and sank to
a pronoun.

Reicht soon found an excuse for taking little Gerard out, and there was
a scene of mutual rapture, followed by mutual tears when mother and boy
parted again.

And it was arranged that Reicht should take him half way to Rotterdam
every day, at a set hour, and Margaret meet them. And at these meetings,
after the raptures, and after mother and child had gambolled together
like a young cat and her first kitten, the boy would sometimes amuse
himself alone at their feet, and the two women generally seized this
opportunity to talk very seriously about Luke Peterson, This began thus:

"Reicht," said Margaret, "I as good as promised him to marry Luke
Peterson. 'Say you the word,' quoth I, 'and I'll wed him.'"

"Poor Luke!"

"Prithee, why poor Luke?"

"To be bandied about so, atwixt yea and nay."

"Why, Reicht, you have not ever been so simple as to cast an eye of
affection on the boy, that you take his part?"

"Me?" said Reicht, with a toss of the head.

"Oh, I ask your pardon. Well, then, you can do me a good turn."

"Whisht! whisper! that little darling is listening to every word, and
eyes like saucers."

On this both their heads would have gone under one cap.

Two women plotting against one boy? Oh, you great cowardly serpents!

But when these stolen meetings had gone on for about five days Margaret
began to feel the injustice of it, and to be irritated as well as
unhappy.

And she was crying about it when a cart came to her door, and in it,
clean as a new penny, his beard close shaved, his hands white as snow,
and a little colour in his pale face, sat the Vicar of Gouda in the grey
frock and large felt hat she had sent him.

She ran upstairs directly, and washed away all traces of her tears,
and put on a cap, which being just taken out of the drawer was cleaner,
theoretically, than the one she had on, and came down to him.

He seized both her hands and kissed them, and a tear fell upon them. She
turned her head away at that to hide her own which started.

"My sweet Margaret," he cried, "why is this? Why hold you aloof from
your own good deed? we have been waiting for you every day, and no
Margaret."

"You said things."

"What! when I was a hermit, and a donkey."

"Ay! no matter, you said things. And you had no reason."

"Forget all I said there. Who hearkens the ravings of a maniac? for I
see now that in a few months more I should have been a gibbering idiot;
yet no mortal could have persuaded me away but you. Oh what an outlay of
wit and goodness was yours! But it is not here I can thank and bless
you as I ought. No, it is in the home you have given me, among the sheep
whose shepherd you have made me; already I love them dearly; there it
is I must thank 'the truest friend ever man had.' So now I say to you as
erst you said to me, come to Gouda manse."

"Humph! we will see about that."

"Why, Margaret, think you I had ever kept the dear child so long, but
that I made sure you would be back to him from day to day? Oh he curls
round my very heartstrings, but what is my title to him compared to
thine? Confess now, thou hast had hard thoughts of me for this."

"Nay, nay, not I. Ah! thou art thyself again; wast ever thoughtful of
others. I have half a mind to go to Gouda manse, for your saying that."

"Come then, with half thy mind, 'tis worth the whole of other folk's."

"Well, I dare say I will; but there is no such mighty hurry," said she
coolly (she was literally burning to go). "Tell me first how you agree
with your folk."

"Why, already my poor have taken root in my heart."

"I thought as much."

"And there are such good creatures among them; simple and rough, and
superstitious, but wonderfully good."

"Oh I leave you alone for seeing a grain of good among a bushel of ill."

"Whisht! whisht! And Margaret, two of them have been ill friends for
four years, and came to the manse each to get on my blind side. But give
the glory to God I got on their bright side, and made them friends, and
laugh at themselves for their folly."

"But are you in very deed their vicar? answer me that."

"Certes; have I not been to the bishop and taken the oath, and rung the
church bell, and touched the altar, the missal, and the holy cup before
the church-wardens? And they have handed me the parish seal; see, here
it is. Nay, 'tis a real vicar inviting a true friend to Gouda manse."

"Then my mind is at ease. Tell me oceans more."

"Well, sweet one, nearest to me of all my parish is a poor cripple that
my guardian angel and his (her name thou knowest even by this turning of
thy head away) hath placed beneath my roof. Sybrandt and I are that we
never were till now, brothers. 'Twould gladden thee, yet sadden thee to
hear how we kissed and forgave one another. He is full of thy praises,
and wholly in a pious mind; he says he is happier since his trouble than
e'er he was in the days of his strength. Oh! out of my house he ne'er
shall go to any place but heaven."

"Tell me somewhat that happened thyself, poor soul! All this is good,
but yet no tidings to me. Do I not know thee of old?"

"Well, let me see. At first I was much dazzled by the sun-light,
and could not go abroad (owl!), but that is passed; and good Reicht
Heynes--humph!"

"What of her?"

"This to thine ear only, for she is a diamond. Her voice goes through
me like a knife, and all voices seem loud but thine, which is so mellow
sweet. Stay, now I'll fit ye with tidings; I spake yesterday with an old
man that conceits he is ill-tempered, and sweats to pass for such with
others, but oh! so threadbare, and the best good heart beneath."

"Why, 'tis a parish of angels," said Margaret ironically.

"Then why dost thou keep out on't?" retorted Gerard. "Well, he was
telling me there was no parish in Holland where the devil hath such
power as at Gouda; and among his instances, says he, 'We had a hermit,
the holiest in Holland; but being Gouda, the devil came for him this
week, and took him, bag and baggage; not a ha'porth of him left but a
goodish piece of his skin, just for all the world like a hedgehog's, and
a piece o' old iron furbished up.'"

Margaret smiled.

"Ay, but," continued Gerard, "the strange thing is, the cave has verily
fallen in; and had I been so perverse as resist thee, it had assuredly
buried me dead there where I had buried myself alive. Therefore in
this I see the finger of Providence, condemning my late, approving my
present, way of life. What sayest thou?"

"Nay, can I pierce the like mysteries? I am but a woman."

"Somewhat more, methinks. This very tale proves thee my guardian angel,
and all else avouches it, so come to Gouda manse."

"Well, go you on, I'll follow."

"Nay, in the cart with me."

"Not so."

"Why?"

"Can I tell why and wherefore, being a woman? All I know is I seem--to
feel--to wish--to come alone."

"So be it then. I leave thee the cart, being, as thou sayest, a woman,
and I'll go a-foot, being a man again, with the joyful tidings of thy
coming."

When Margaret reached the manse the first thing she saw was the two
Gerards together, the son performing his capriccios on the plot, and the
father slouching on a chair, in his great hat, with pencil and paper,
trying very patiently to sketch him.

After a warm welcome he showed her his attempts. "But in vain I strive
to fix him," said he, "for he is incarnate quick silver, Yet do but note
his changes, infinite, but none ungracious; all is supple and easy; and
how he melteth from one posture to another," He added presently, "Woe to
illuminators I looking on thee, sir baby, I see what awkward, lopsided,
ungainly toads I and my fellows painted missals with, and called them
cherubs and seraphs," Finally he threw the paper away in despair, and
Margaret conveyed it secretly into her bosom.

At night when they sat round the peat fire he bade them observe how
beautiful the brass candlesticks and other glittering metals were in
the glow from the hearth. Catherine's eyes sparkled at this observation,
"And oh the sheets I lie in here," said he, "often my conscience
pricketh me, and saith, 'Who art thou to lie in lint like web of snow?'
Dives was ne'er so flaxed as I. And to think that there are folk in
the world that have all the beautiful things which I have here yet not
content. Let them pass six months in a hermit's cell, seeing no face of
man, then will they find how lovely and pleasant this wicked world is,
and eke that men and women are God's fairest creatures. Margaret was
always fair, but never to my eye so bright as now." Margaret shook her
head incredulously, Gerard continued, "My mother was ever good and kind,
but I noted not her exceeding comeliness till now."

"Nor I neither," said Catherine; "a score years ago I might pass in a
crowd, but not now."

Gerard declared to her that each age had its beauty. "See this mild grey
eye," said he, "that hath looked motherly love upon so many of us,
all that love hath left its shadow, and that shadow is a beauty which
defieth Time. See this delicate lip, these pure white teeth. See this
well-shaped brow, where comliness Just passeth into reverence. Art
beautiful in my eyes, mother dear."

"And that is enough for me, my darling, 'Tis time you were in bed,
child. Ye have to preach the morn."

And Reicht Heynes and Catherine interchanged a look which said, "We two
have an amiable maniac to superintend; calls everything beautiful."

The next day was Sunday, and they heard him preach in his own church. It
was crammed with persons, who came curious, but remained devout. Never
was his wonderful gift displayed more powerfully; he was himself deeply
moved by the first sight of all his people, and his bowels yearned over
this flock he had so long neglected. In a single sermon, which lasted
two hours and seemed to last but twenty minutes, he declared the whole
scripture: he terrified the impenitent and thoughtless, confirmed the
wavering, consoled the bereaved and the afflicted, uplifted the heart
of the poor, and when he ended, left the multitude standing rapt, and
unwilling to believe the divine music of his voice and soul had ceased.

Need I say that two poor women in a corner sat entranced, with streaming
eyes.

"Wherever gat he it all?" whispered Catherine, with her apron to her
eyes. "By our Lady not from me."

As soon as they were by themselves Margaret threw her arms round
Catherine's neck and kissed her.

"Mother, mother, I am not quite a happy woman, but oh I am a proud one."

And she vowed on her knees never by word or deed to let her love come
between this young saint and Heaven.

Reader, did you ever stand by the seashore after a storm, when the wind
happens to have gone down suddenly? The waves cannot cease with their
cause; indeed, they seem at first to the ear to lash the sounding shore
more fiercely than while the wind blew. Still we are conscious that
inevitable calm has begun, and is now but rocking them to sleep. So it
was with those true and tempest-tossed lovers from that eventful night
when they went hand in hand beneath the stars from Gouda hermitage to
Gouda manse.

At times a loud wave would every now and then come roaring, but it was
only memory's echo of the tempest that had swept their lives; the storm
itself was over, and the boiling waters began from that moment to go
down, down, down, gently, but inevitably.

This image is to supply the place of interminable details that would be
tedious and tame. What best merits attention at present is the general
situation, and the strange complication of feeling that arose from it.
History itself, though a far more daring story-teller than romance,
presents few things so strange(1) as the footing on which Gerard and
Margaret now lived for many years. United by present affection, past
familiarity, and a marriage irregular but legal; separated by Holy
Church and by their own consciences, which sided unreservedly with
Holy Church; separated by the Church, but united by a living pledge of
affection, lawful in every sense at its date.

And living but a few miles from one another, and she calling his mother
"mother," For some years she always took her boy to Gouda on Sunday,
returning home at dark, Go when she would, it was always fete at Gouda
manse, and she was received like a little queen. Catherine in these days
was nearly always with her, and Eli very often, Tergou had so little to
tempt them compared with Rotterdam; and at last they left it altogether,
and set up in the capital.

And thus the years glided; so barren now of striking incidents, so void
of great hopes, and free from great fears, and so like one another,
that without the help of dates I could scarcely indicate the progress of
time.

However, early next year, 1471, the Duchess of Burgundy, with the open
dissent, but secret connivance of the Duke, raised forces to enable her
dethroned brother, Edward the Fourth of England, to invade that kingdom;
our old friend Denys thus enlisted, and passing through Rotterdam to the
ships, heard on his way that Gerard was a priest, and Margaret alone. On
this he told Margaret that marriage was not a habit of his, but that as
his comrade had put it out of his own power to keep troth, he felt bound
to offer to keep it for him; "for a comrade's honour is dear to us as
our own," said he.

She stared, then smiled, "I choose rather to be still thy she-comrade,"
said she; "closer acquainted, we might not agree so well," And in her
character of she-comrade she equipped him with a new sword of Antwerp
make, and a double handful of silver. "I give thee no gold," said she,
"for 'tis thrown away as quick as silver, and harder to win back. Heaven
send thee safe out of all thy perils; there be famous fair women yonder
to beguile thee, with their faces, as well as men to hash thee with
their axes."

He was hurried on board at La Vere, and never saw Gerard at that time.

In 1473 Sybrandt began to fail. His pitiable existence had been
sweetened by his brother's inventive tenderness and his own contented
spirit, which, his antecedents considered, was truly remarkable, As for
Gerard, the day never passed that he did not devote two hours to him;
reading or singing to him, praying with him, and drawing him about in a
soft carriage Margaret and he had made between them. When the poor soul
found his end near, he begged Margaret might be sent for. She came
at once, and almost with his last breath he sought once more that
forgiveness she had long ago accorded. She remained by him till the
last; and he died, blessing and blessed, in the arms of the two true
lovers he had parted for life. Tantum religio scit suadere boni.

1474 there was a wedding in Margaret's house, Luke Peterson and Reicht
Heynes.

This may seem less strange if I give the purport of the dialogue
interrupted some time back.

Margaret went on to say, "Then in that case you can easily make him
fancy you, and for my sake you must, for my conscience it pricketh me,
and I must needs fit him with a wife, the best I know." Margaret then
instructed Reicht to be always kind and good-humoured to Luke; and she
would be a model of peevishness to him, "But be not thou so simple as
run me down," said she, "Leave that to me. Make thou excuses for me; I
will make myself black enow."

Reicht received these instructions like an order to sweep a room, and
obeyed them punctually.

When they had subjected poor Luke to this double artillery for a couple
of years, he got to look upon Margaret as his fog and wind, and Reicht
as his sunshine; and his affections transferred themselves, he scarce
knew how or when.

On the wedding day Reicht embraced Margaret, and thanked her almost
with tears. "He was always my fancy," said she, "from the first hour I
clapped eyes on him."

"Heyday, you never told me that. What, Reicht, are you as sly as the
rest?"

"Nay, nay," said Reicht eagerly; "but I never thought you would really
part with him to me. In my country the mistress looks to be served
before the maid."

Margaret settled them in her shop, and gave them half the profits.

1476 and 7 were years of great trouble to Gerard, whose conscience
compelled him to oppose the Pope. His Holiness, siding with the Grey
Friars in their determination to swamp every palpable distinction
between the Virgin Mary and her Son, bribed the Christian world into his
crotchet by proffering pardon of all sins to such as would add to
the Ave Mary this clause: "and blessed be thy Mother Anna, from whom,
without blot of sin, proceeded thy virgin flesh."

Gerard, in common with many of the northern clergy, held this sentence
to be flat heresy. He not only refused to utter it in his church, but
warned his parishioners against using it in private; and he refused to
celebrate the new feast the Pope invented at the same time, viz., "the
feast of the miraculous conception of the Virgin."

But this drew upon him the bitter enmity of the Franciscans, and they
were strong enough to put him into more than one serious difficulty, and
inflict many a little mortification on him. In emergencies he consulted
Margaret, and she always did one of two things, either she said, "I do
not see my way," and refused to guess; or else she gave him advice that
proved wonderfully sagacious. He had genius, but she had marvellous
tact.

And where affection came in and annihilated the woman's judgment, he
stepped in his turn to her aid. Thus though she knew she was spoiling
little Gerard, and Catherine was ruining him for life, she would not
part with him, but kept him at home, and his abilities uncultivated. And
there was a shrewd boy of nine years, instead of learning to work
and obey, playing about and learning selfishness from their infinite
unselfishness, and tyrannizing with a rod of iron over two women, both
of them sagacious and spirited, but reduced by their fondness for him to
the exact level of idiots.

Gerard saw this with pain, and interfered with mild but firm
remonstrance; and after a considerable struggle prevailed, and got
little Gerard sent to the best school in Europe, kept by one Haaghe at
Deventer: this was in 1477. Many tears were shed, but the great progress
the boy made at that famous school reconciled Margaret in some degree,
and the fidelity of Reicht Heynes, now her partner in business, enabled
her to spend weeks at a time hovering over her boy at Deventer.

And so the years glided; and these two persons, subjected to as strong
and constant a temptation as can well be conceived, were each other's
guardian angels, and not each other's tempters.

To be sure the well-greased morality of the next century, which taught
that solemn vows to God are sacred in proportion as they are reasonable,
had at that time entered no single mind; and the alternative to these
two minds was self-denial or sacrilege.

It was a strange thing to hear them talk with unrestrained tenderness to
one another of their boy, and an icy barrier between themselves all the
time.

Eight years had now passed thus, and Gerard, fairly compared with men in
general, was happy.

But Margaret was not.

The habitual expression of her face was a sweet pensiveness, but
sometimes she was irritable and a little petulant. She even snapped
Gerard now and then. And when she went to see him, if a monk was with
him she would turn her back and go home. She hated the monks for having
parted Gerard and her, and she inoculated her boy with a contempt for
them which lasted him till his dying day.

Gerard bore with her like an angel. He knew her heart of gold, and hoped
this ill gust would blow over.

He himself being now the right man in the right place this many years,
loving his parishioners, and beloved by them, and occupied from morn
till night in good works, recovered the natural cheerfulness of his
disposition. To tell the truth, a part of his jocoseness was a blind; he
was the greatest peace-maker, except Mr. Harmony in the play, that ever
was born. He reconciled more enemies in ten years than his predecessors
had done in three hundred; and one of his manoeuvres in the peacemaking
art was to make the quarrellers laugh at the cause of quarrel. So did
he undermine the demon of discord. But independently of that, he really
loved a harmless joke. He was a wonderful tamer of animals, squirrels,
bares, fawns, etc. So half in jest a parishioner who had a mule supposed
to be possessed with a devil gave it him and said, "Tame this vagabone,
parson, if ye can." Well, in about six months, Heaven knows how, he
not only tamed Jack, but won his affections to such a degree, that Jack
would come running to his whistle like a dog.

One day, having taken shelter from a shower on the stone settle outside
a certain public-house, he heard a toper inside, a stranger, boasting he
could take more at a draught than any man in Gouda. He instantly marched
in and said, "What, lads, do none of ye take him up for the honour of
Gouda? Shall it be said that there came hither one from another parish a
greater sot than any of us? Nay, then, I your parson do take him up.
Go to, I'll find thee a parishioner shall drink more at a draught than
thou."

A bet was made; Gerard whistled; in clattered Jack--for he was taught
to come into a room with the utmost composure--and put his nose into his
backer's hand.

"A pair of buckets!" shouted Gerard, "and let us see which of these two
sons of asses can drink most at a draught."

On another occasion two farmers had a dispute whose hay was the best.
Failing to convince each other, they said, "We'll ask parson;" for by
this time he was their referee in every mortal thing.

"How lucky you thought of me!" said Gerard, "Why, I have got one staying
with me who is the best judge of hay in Holland. Bring me a double
handful apiece."

So when they came, he had them into the parlour, and put each bundle on
a chair. Then he whistled, and in walked Jack.

"Lord a mercy!" said one of the farmers.

"Jack," said the parson, in the tone of conversation, "just tell us
which is the best hay of these two."

Jack sniffed them both, and made his choice directly, proving his
sincerity by eating every morsel. The farmers slapped their thighs, and
scratched their heads. "To think of we not thinking o' that," And they
each sent Jack a truss.

So Gerard got to be called the merry parson of Gouda. But Margaret, who
like most loving women had no more sense of humour than a turtle-dove,
took this very ill. "What!" said she to herself, "is there nothing sore
at the bottom of his heart that he can go about playing the zany?" She
could understand pious resignation and content, but not mirth, in true
lovers parted. And whilst her woman's nature was perturbed by this
gust (and women seem more subject to gusts than men) came that terrible
animal, a busybody, to work upon her. Catherine saw she was not happy,
and said to her, "Your boy is gone from you. I would not live alone all
my days if I were you."

"He is more alone than I," sighed Margaret.

"Oh, a man is a man, but a woman is a woman. You must not think all of
him and none of yourself. Near is your kirtle, but nearer is your smock.
Besides, he is a priest, and can do no better. But you are not a priest.
He has got his parish, and his heart is in that. Bethink thee! Time
flies; overstay not thy market. Wouldst not like to have three or four
more little darlings about thy knee now they have robbed thee of poor
little Gerard, and sent him to yon nasty school?" And so she worked upon
a mind already irritated.

Margaret had many suitors ready to marry her at a word or even a
look, and among them two merchants of the better class, Van Schelt and
Oostwagen. "Take one of those two," said Catherine.

"Well, I will ask Gerard if I may," said Margaret one day, with a flood
of tears; "for I cannot go on the way I am."

"Why, you would never be so simple as ask him?"

"Think you I would be so wicked as marry without his leave?"

Accordingly she actually went to Gouda, and after hanging her head, and
blushing, and crying, and saying she was miserable, told him his mother
wished her to marry one of those two; and if he approved of her marrying
at all, would he use his wisdom, and tell her which he thought would be
the kindest to the little Gerard of those two; for herself, she did not
care what became of her.

Gerard felt as if she had put a soft hand into his body and torn his
heart out with it. But the priest with a mighty effort mastered the man.
In a voice scarcely audible he declined this responsibility. "I am not a
saint or a prophet," said he; "I might advise thee ill. I shall read the
marriage service for thee," faltered he; "it is my right. No other would
pray for thee as I should. But thou must choose for thyself; and oh! let
me see thee happy. This four months past thou hast not been happy."

"A discontented mind is never happy," said Margaret.

She left him, and he fell on his knees, and prayed for help from above.

Margaret went home pale and agitated. "Mother," said she, "never mention
it to me again, or we shall quarrel."

"He forbade you? Well, more shame for him, that is all."

"He forbid me? He did not condescend so far. He was as noble as I
was paltry. He would not choose for me for fear of choosing me an ill
husband. But he would read the service for my groom and me; that was his
right. Oh, mother, what a heartless creature I was!"

"Well, I thought not he had that much sense."

"Ah, you go by the poor soul's words, but I rate words as air when
the face speaketh to mine eye. I saw the priest and the true lover
a-fighting in his dear face, and his cheek pale with the strife, and oh!
his poor lip trembled as he said the stout-hearted words--Oh! oh! oh!
oh! oh! oh! oh!" And Margaret burst into a violent passion of tears.

Catherine groaned. "There, give it up without more ado," said she. "You
two are chained together for life; and if God is merciful, that won't be
for long; for what are you neither maid, wife, nor widow."

"Give it up?" said Margaret; "that was done long ago. All I think of now
is comforting him; for now I have been and made him unhappy too, wretch
and monster that I am."

So the next day they both went to Gouda. And Gerard, who had been
praying for resignation all this time, received her with peculiar
tenderness as a treasure he was to lose; but she was agitated and eager
to let him see without words that she would never marry, and she fawned
on him like a little dog to be forgiven. And as she was going away she
murmured, "Forgive! and forget! I am but a woman."

He misunderstood her, and said, "All I bargain for is, let me see thee
content; for pity's sake, let me not see thee unhappy as I have this
while."

"My darling, you never shall again," said Margaret, with streaming eyes,
and kissed his hand.

He misunderstood this too at first; but when month after month
passed, and he heard no more of her marriage, and she came to Gouda
comparatively cheerful, and was even civil to Father Ambrose, a mild
benevolent monk from the Dominican convent hard by--then he understood
her; and one day he invited her to walk alone with him in the sacred
paddock; and before I relate what passed between them, I must give its
history.

When Gerard had been four or five days at the manse, looking out of
window he uttered an exclamation of joy. "Mother, Margaret, here is one
of my birds: another, another: four, six, nine. A miracle! a miracle!"

"Why, how can you tell your birds from their fellows?" said Catherine.

"I know every feather in their wings. And see; there is the little
darling whose claw I gilt, bless it!"

And presently his rapture took a serious turn, and he saw Heaven's
approbation in this conduct of the birds as he did in the fall of the
cave. This wonderfully kept alive his friendship for animals; and he
enclosed a paddock, and drove all the sons of Cain from it with threats
of excommunication, "On this little spot of earth we'll have no murder,"
said he. He tamed leverets and partridges, and little birds, and hares,
and roe-deer. He found a squirrel with a broken leg; he set it with
infinite difficulty and patience; and during the cure showed it
repositories of acorns, nuts, chestnuts, etc. And this squirrel got well
and went off, but visited him in hard weather, and brought a mate, and
next year little squirrels were found to have imbibed their parents'
sentiments, and of all these animals each generation was tamer than the
last. This set the good parson thinking, and gave him the true clue to
the great successes of mediaeval hermits in taming wild animals.

He kept the key of this paddock, and never let any man but himself
enter it; nor would he even let little Gerard go there without him or
Margaret. "Children are all little Cains," said he. In this oasis, then,
he spoke to Margaret, and said, "Dear Margaret, I have thought more than
ever of thee of late, and have asked myself why I am content, and thou
unhappy."

"Because thou art better, wiser, holier than I; that is all," said
Margaret promptly.

"Our lives tell another tale," said Gerard thoughtfully. "I know thy
goodness and thy wisdom too well to reason thus perversely. Also I know
that I love thee as dear as thou, I think, lovest me. Yet am I happier
than thou. Why is this so?"

"Dear Gerard, I am as happy as a woman can hope to be this side of the
grave."

"Not so happy as I. Now for the reason. First, then, I am a priest, and
this, the one great trial and disappointment God giveth me along with so
many joys, why, I share it with a multitude. For alas! I am not the only
priest by thousands that must never hope for entire earthly happiness.
Here, then, thy lot is harder than mine."

"But Gerard, I have my child to love. Thou canst not fill thy heart with
him as his mother can, So you may set this against you."

"And I have ta'en him from thee; it was cruel; but he would have broken
thy heart one day if I had not. Well then, sweet one, I come to where
the shoe pincheth, methinks. I have my parish, and it keeps my heart
in a glow from morn till night. There is scarce an emotion that my folk
stir not up in me many times a day. Often their sorrows make me weep,
sometimes their perversity kindles a little wrath, and their absurdity
makes me laugh, and sometimes their flashes of unexpected goodness do
set me all of a glow, and I could hug 'em. Meantime thou, poor soul,
sittest with heart--

"Of lead, Gerard; of very lead."

"See now how unkind thy lot compared with mine, Now how if thou couldst
be persuaded to warm thyself at the fire that warmeth me."

"Ah, if I could?"

"Hast but to will it. Come among my folk. Take in thine hand the alms I
set aside, and give it with kind words; hear their sorrows: they shall
show you life is full of troubles, and as thou sayest truly, no man or
woman without their thorn this side the grave. Indoors I have a map of
Gouda parish. Not to o'erburden thee at first, I will put twenty housen
under thee with their folk. What sayest thou? but for thy wisdom I had
died a dirty maniac,' and ne'er seen Gouda manse, nor pious peace. Wilt
profit in turn by what little wisdom I have to soften her lot to whom I
do owe all?"

Margaret assented warmly, and a happy thing it was for the little
district assigned to her; it was as if an angel had descended on them.
Her fingers were never tired of knitting or cutting for them, her
heart of sympathizing with them. And that heart expanded and waved its
drooping wings; and the glow of good and gentle deed began to spread
over it; and she was rewarded in another way by being brought into more
contact with Gerard, and also with his spirit. All this time malicious
tongues had not been idle. "If there is nought between them more than
meets the eye, why doth she not marry?" etc. And I am sorry to say our
old friend Joan Ketel was one of these coarse sceptics. And now one
winter evening she got on a hot scent. She saw Margaret and Gerard
talking earnestly together on the Boulevard. She whipped behind a tree.
"Now I'll hear something," said she; and so she did. It was winter;
there had been one of those tremendous floods followed by a sharp
frost, and Gerard in despair as to where he should lodge forty or fifty
houseless folk out of the piercing cold. And now it was, "Oh, dear, dear
Margaret, what shall I do? The manse is full of them, and a sharp frost
coming on this night."

Margaret reflected, and Joan listened.

"You must lodge them in the church," said Margaret quietly.

"In the church? Profanation."

"No; charity profanes nothing, not even a church; soils nought, not even
a church. To-day is but Tuesday. Go save their lives, for a bitter night
is coming. Take thy stove into the church, and there house them. We will
dispose of them here and there ere the lord's day."

"And I could not think of that; bless thee, sweet Margaret, thy mind is
stronger than mine, and readier."

"Nay, nay, a woman looks but a little way, therefore she sees clear.
I'll come over myself to-morrow."

And on this they parted with mutual blessings.

Joan glided home remorseful.

And after that she used to check all surmises to their discredit.
"Beware," she would say, "lest some angel should blister thy tongue.
Gerard and Margaret paramours? I tell ye they are two saints which meet
in secret to plot charity to the poor."

In the summer of 1481 Gerard determined to provide against similar
disasters recurring to his poor. Accordingly he made a great hole in his
income, and bled his friends (zealous parsons always do that) to build a
large Xenodochium to receive the victims of flood or fire. Giles and all
his friends were kind, but all was not enough; when lo! the Dominican
monks of Gouda to whom his parlour and heart had been open for years,
came out nobly, and put down a handsome sum to aid the charitable vicar.

"The dear good souls," said Margaret; "who would have thought it?"

"Any one who knows them," said Gerard, "Who more charitable than monks?"

"Go to! They do but give the laity back a pig of their own sow."

"And what more do I? What more doth the duke?"

Then the ambitious vicar must build almshouses for decayed true men in
their old age close to the manse, that he might keep and feed them, as
well as lodge them. And his money being gone, he asked Margaret for a
few thousand bricks and just took off his coat and turned builder; and
as he had a good head, and the strength of a Hercules, with the zeal of
an artist, up rose a couple of almshouses parson built.

And at this work Margaret would sometimes bring him his dinner, and
add a good bottle of Rhenish. And once seeing him run up a plank with a
wheelbarrow full of bricks which really most bricklayers would have
gone staggering under, she said, "Times are changed since I had to carry
little Gerard for thee."

"Ay, dear one, thanks to thee."

When the first home was finished, the question was who they should put
into it; and being fastidious over it like a new toy, there was much
hesitation. But an old friend arrived in time to settle this question.

As Gerard was passing a public-house in Rotterdam one day, he heard a
well-known voice, He looked up, and there was Denys of Burgundy, but
sadly changed; his beard stained with grey, and his clothes worn and
ragged; he had a cuirass still, and gauntlets, but a staff instead of an
arbalest, To the company he appeared to be bragging and boasting, but in
reality he was giving a true relation of Edward the Fourth's invasion of
an armed kingdom with 2000 men, and his march through the country with
armies capable of swallowing him looking on, his battles at Tewkesbury
and Barnet, and reoccupation of his capital and kingdom in three months
after landing at the Humber with a mixed handful of Dutch, English, and
Burgundians.

In this, the greatest feat of arms the century had seen, Denys had
shone; and whilst sneering at the warlike pretensions of Charles the
Bold, a duke with an itch but no talent for fighting, and proclaiming
the English king the first captain of the age, did not forget to exalt
himself.

Gerard listened with eyes glittering affection and fun. "And now," said
Denys, "after all these feats, patted on the back by the gallant young
Prince of Gloucester, and smiled on by the great captain himself, here
I am lamed for life; by what? by the kick of a horse, and this night I
know not where I shall lay my tired bones. I had a comrade once in these
parts that would not have let me lie far from him; but he turned priest
and deserted his sweetheart, so 'tis not likely he would remember his
comrade. And ten years play sad havoc with our hearts, and limbs, and
all." Poor Denys sighed, and Gerard's bowels yearned over him.

"What words are these?" he said, with a great gulp in his throat. "Who
grudges a brave soldier supper and bed? Come home with me!"

"Much obliged, but I am no lover of priests."

"Nor I of soldiers; but what is supper and bed between two true men?"

"Not much to you, but something to me. I will come."

"In one hour," said Gerard, and went in high spirits to Margaret, and
told her the treat in store, and she must come and share it. She must
drive his mother in his little carriage up to the manse with all speed,
and make ready an excellent supper. Then he himself borrowed a cart, and
drove Denys up rather slowly, to give the women time.

On the road Denys found out this priest was a kind soul, so told him his
trouble, and confessed his heart was pretty near broken. "The great use
our stout hearts, and arms, and lives till we are worn out, and then
fling us away like broken tools." He sighed deeply, and it cost Gerard
a great struggle not to hug him then and there, and tell him. But he
wanted to do it all like a story book. Who has not had this fancy once
in his life? Why Joseph had it; all the better for us.

They landed at the little house. It was as clean as a penny, the hearth
blazing, and supper set.

Denys brightened up. "Is this your house, reverend sir?"

"Well, 'tis my work, and with these hands, but 'tis your house."

"Ah, no such luck," said Denys, with a sigh.

"But I say ay," shouted Gerard. "And what is more I--" (gulp) "say--"
(gulp) "COURAGE, CAMARADE, LE DIABLE EST MORT!"

Denys started, and almost staggered. "Why, what?" he stammered,
"w-wh-who art thou, that bringest me back the merry words and merry days
of my youth?" and he was greatly agitated.

"My poor Denys, I am one whose face is changed, but nought else; to my
heart, dear, trusty comrade, to my heart," And he opened his arms, with
the tears in his eyes. But Denys came close to him, and peered in his
face, and devoured every feature; and when he was sure it was really
Gerard, he uttered a cry so vehement it brought the women running from
the house, and fell upon Gerard's neck, and kissed him again and again,
and sank on his knees, and laughed and sobbed with joy so terribly,
that Gerard mourned his folly in doing dramas. But the women with their
gentle soothing ways soon composed the brave fellow, and he sat smiling,
and holding Margaret's hand and Gerard's, And they all supped together,
and went to their beds with hearts warm as a toast; and the broken
soldier was at peace, and in his own house, and under his comrade's
wing.

His natural gaiety returned, and he resumed his consigne after eight
years' disuse, and hobbled about the place enlivening it; but offended
the parish mortally by calling the adored vicar comrade, and nothing but
comrade.

When they made a fuss about this to Gerard, he just looked in their
faces and said, "What does it matter? Break him of swearing, and you
shall have my thanks."

This year Margaret went to a lawyer to make her will, for without this,
she was told, her boy might have trouble some day to get his own, not
being born in lawful wedlock. The lawyer, however, in conversation,
expressed a different opinion.

"This is the babble of churchmen," said he, "Yours is a perfect
marriage, though an irregular one."

He then informed her that throughout Europe, excepting only the southern
part of Britain, there were three irregular marriages, the highest of
which was hers, viz., a betrothal before witnesses, "This," said he, "if
not followed by matrimonial intercourse, is a marriage complete in form,
but incomplete in substance. A person so betrothed can forbid any other
banns to all eternity. It has, however, been set aside where a party
so betrothed contrived to get married regularly, and children were born
thereafter. But such a decision was for the sake of the offspring,
and of doubtful justice. However, in your case the birth of your
child closes that door, and your marriage is complete both in form and
substance. Your course, therefore, is to sue for your conjugal rights;
it will be the prettiest case of the century. The law is all on our
side, the Church all on theirs. If you come to that, the old Batavian
law, which compelled the clergy to marry, hath fallen into disuse, but
was never formally repealed."

Margaret was quite puzzled. "What are you driving at, sir? Who am I to
go to law with?"

"Who is the defendant? Why, the vicar of Gouda."

"Alas, poor soul! And for what shall I law him?"

"Why, to make him take you into his house, and share bed and board with
you, to be sure."

Margaret turned red as fire, "Gramercy for your rede," said she, "What,
is yon a woman's part? Constrain a man to be hers by force? That is
men's way of wooing, not ours. Say I were so ill a woman as ye think me,
I should set myself to beguile him, not to law him;" and she departed,
crimson with shame and indignation.

"There is an impracticable fool for you," said the man of art.

Margaret had her will drawn elsewhere, and made her boy safe from
poverty, marriage or no marriage.

These are the principal incidents that in ten whole years befell two
peaceful lives, which in a much shorter period had been so thronged with
adventures and emotions.

Their general tenor was now peace, piety, the mild content that lasts,
not the fierce bliss ever on tiptoe to depart, and above all, Christian
charity.

On this sacred ground these two true lovers met with an uniformity and
a kindness of sentiment which went far to soothe the wound in their own
hearts, To pity the same bereaved; to hunt in couples all the ills
in Gouda, and contrive and scheme together to remedy all that were
remediable; to use the rare insight into troubled hearts which their
own troubles had given them, and use it to make others happier than
themselves--this was their daily practice. And in this blessed cause
their passions for one another cooled a little, but their affection
increased.

From this time Margaret entered heart and soul into Gerard's pious
charities, that affection purged itself of all mortal dross. And as
it had now long out-lived scandal and misapprehension, one would have
thought that so bright an example of pure self-denying affection was to
remain long before the world, to show men how nearly religious faith,
even when not quite reasonable, and religious charity, which is always
reasonable, could raise two true lovers' hearts to the loving hearts
of the angels of heaven. But the great Disposer of events ordered
otherwise.

Little Gerard rejoiced both his parents' hearts by the extraordinary
progress he made at Alexander Haaghe's famous school at Deventer.

The last time Margaret returned from visiting him, she came to Gerard
flushed with pride. "Oh, Gerard, he will be a great man one day, thanks
to thy wisdom in taking him from us silly women. A great scholar, one
Zinthius, came to see the school and judge the scholars, and didn't our
Gerard stand up, and not a line in Horace or Terence could Zinthius cite
but the boy would follow him with the rest. 'Why, 'tis a prodigy,' says
that great scholar; and there was his poor mother stood by and heard it.
And he took our Gerard in his arms, and kissed him; and what think you
he said?"

"Nay, I know not."

"'Holland will hear of thee one day; and not Holland only, but all the
world,' Why what a sad brow!"

"Sweet one, I am as glad as thou, yet am I uneasy to hear the child is
wise before his time, I love him dear; but he is thine idol, and Heaven
doth often break our idols."

"Make thy mind easy," said Margaret. "Heaven will never rob me of my
child. What I was to suffer in this world I have suffered, For if any
ill happened my child or thee, I should not live a week. The Lord He
knows this, and He will leave me my boy."

A month had elapsed after this; but Margaret's words were yet ringing in
