but half over. "They will never beat us, but by the time they get here
there will be nobody left to beat. I don't think we are more than two
hundred strong now, and every minute the force is diminishing. I don't
wonder the men are impatient. We bargained for fighting, but I never
reckoned on standing for hours to be shot at without even a chance to
reply."

It was just after this that the French cavalry burst upon the squares;
but this cheered rather than depressed the spirits of the men. For a
time they were free from the artillery fire, and now had a chance of
active work. Thus as the fire flashed from the faces of the square the
men laughed and joked, and it was with regret that they saw the
cuirassiers fall back before the charge of Lord Uxbridge's cavalry,
for they knew that the moment this screen was removed the French
artillery would open again.

Ralph's chief sensation was that of wonder that he was alive; so
overwhelming was the din, so incessant the rain of shot, it seemed to
him a marvel how any one could remain alive within its range.

Almost mechanically he repeated the orders, "Close up, close up!" as
the square dwindled and dwindled. He longed as impatiently as the men
for the advance, and would have gladly charged against impossible odds
rather than remain immovable under fire. When the order at length came
he did not hear it. Just after the storm of fire that heralded the
advance of the guards broke out, a round shot struck him high up on
the left arm. He was conscious only of a dull, numbing sensation, and
after that knew no more of what was taking place.

It was pitch dark before he became conscious. Fires were burning at
various points along the ridge; for when the victory was complete the
British retired to the position they had held so long, and the
Prussian cavalry took up the pursuit. Fires had been lighted with
broken gun carriages and shattered artillery wagons, and parties with
torches were collecting the wounded. Ralph found that his head was
being supported, and that a hand was pouring spirits and water down
his throat. The hand was a shaky one, and its owner was crying loudly.
As he opened his eyes the man broke into a torrent of thankful
exclamations.

"The Lord be praised, Mr. Conway. Sure, I thought you were dead and
kilt entirely."

"Is that you, Denis?"

"Sure and it's no one else, your honor."

"Is the battle over?"

"It is that. The French are miles away, and the Proosians at their
heels."

"What has happened to me, Denis?"

"Well, your honor's hurt a bit in the arm, but it will all come right
presently."

It was well for Ralph that he had been struck before the order came
for the advance, for as he fell the one surviving surgeon of the
regiment had at once attended to him, had fixed a tourniquet on the
stump of his arm, tied the arteries, and roughly bandaged it. Had he
not been instantly seen to he would have bled to death in a few
minutes.

Denis now called to one of the parties who were moving about with
stretchers. Ralph was lifted on to it and carried to the village of
Waterloo where he was placed in an ambulance wagon which, as soon as
it was full, started for Brussels.

The fighting was now over, and Denis asked leave to accompany his
master. The rout of the enemy had been so thorough and complete that
it was not thought probable any serious resistance could be offered to
the advance of the allied armies to Paris, and he therefore obtained
leave without difficulty to remain with his master. Ralph suffered
from exhaustion rather than pain on the journey to Brussels, and
several times became almost unconscious. At four o'clock in the
morning the ambulance stopped at a handsome house that its owner had
placed at the disposal of the authorities for the use of wounded
officers. He was carried upstairs and placed in bed in a room on the
second story. Denis at once proceeded to install himself there. He
brought down a mattress from a room above, laid it in the corner,
throwing his greatcoat over it, then as soon as he thought the shops
were open he hurried out and bought a kettle and saucepan, two cups
and tumblers, a small basin, and several other articles.

"There, your honor," he said as he returned. "Now we have got
iverything we need, and I can make soups and drinks for your honor,
and boil myself a tater widout having to go hunting all over the house
for the things to do it with."

A few minutes later two surgeons entered the room and examined Ralph's
arm. They agreed at once that it was necessary to amputate it three
inches higher up, Ralph winced when he heard the news.

"It won't hurt you very much," one of the surgeons said. "The nerves
are all numbed with the shock they have had, but it is absolutely
necessary in order that a neat stump may be made of it. The bone is
all projecting now; and even if the wound healed over, which I don't
think it would, you would have trouble with it all your life."

"Of course if it must be done, it must," Ralph said. "There isn't much
left of it now."

"There is not enough to be of much use," the surgeon agreed; "but even
a shorter stump that you can fit appliances on to will be a great deal
more handy than one with which nothing can be done."

The operation was performed at once, and although Ralph had to press
his lips hard together to prevent himself from crying out, he did find
it less painful than he had expected.

"There, you will do now," the surgeon said. "Here, my man, take that
basin and a tumbler and run downstairs to the kitchen. They will give
you some broth there and some weak spirits and water. Bring them up at
once."

Ralph took a spoonful or two of the broth, and a sip of the spirits,
and then lay back and presently dozed off to sleep. Denis had followed
the surgeons out of the room.

"What instructions is there, your honor?"

"Your master is just to be kept quiet. If he is thirsty give him some
lemonade. You can obtain that or anything else you require below."

"And about myself, sir. I wouldn't speak about it but I have had
nothing to eat since yesterday morning, and I don't like leaving Mr.
Conway alone even to buy myself a mouthful."

"You will not have regular rations, but all officers' servants and
orderlies will obtain food below. Meals will be served out at eight in
the morning, one, and six. You take down your pannikin, and can either
eat your food there or bring it up here as you choose. Breakfast will
not be ready for two hours yet; but there are several others in the
same plight as yourself, and you will find plenty to eat below."

Denis took his place by his master's bedside until he saw that he was
sound asleep, then taking the pannikin from the top of the knapsack he
stole noiselessly out, and in two or three minutes later he returned
with the pannikin full of soup, a small loaf, and a ration of wine.

"By jabers," he said to himself as he sat down to eat them, "these are
good quarters entirely. I should wish for nothing better if it wasn't
for the master lying there. Lashings to eat and drink, and a room fit
for a king. Nothing to do but to wait upon his honor. I suppose after
to-day I shall be able to stale out for a few minutes sometimes for a
draw of me pipe. It would never do to be smoking here. The master
wouldn't mind it; but I expect them doctors would be for sending me
back to my regiment if they were to come in and smell it."

After he had finished his meal, Denis took his seat by Ralph's
bedside; but he was thoroughly exhausted. He had not slept a wink
since the night before the battle, and after the fatigue of the day
had been tramping all night by the side of the ambulance, which was
constantly stopped by the numerous vehicles that had broken down or
been overturned by the way. After waking up suddenly with a jerk once
or twice, he muttered to himself, "I will just take five minutes on
the bed, then I shall be all right again," and threw himself down on
his mattress with his greatcoat for a pillow, and slept for several
hours. So heavy was his slumber that he was not even roused when the
surgeons came round at ten o'clock to see how Ralph was. He had just
woke.

"How do you feel, Mr. Conway?"

"I feel quite comfortable," Ralph said, "but shall be glad of a drink.
Where is my man?"

"He is asleep there in the corner," the surgeon said. "I will give you
a drink of lemonade. The poor fellow is worn out, no doubt."

"Oh, yes; please don't wake him," Ralph said. "I am glad he is asleep;
for he had all that terrible day yesterday, and was on his feet all
night. I shan't want anything but this lemonade; and I have no doubt I
shall go straight off to sleep again as soon as you have gone."

It was not until just one o'clock that Denis woke. He at once got up
and went to Ralph's side. The latter opened his eyes.

"How do you feel now, your honor?"

"Oh, I am getting on very well, Denis. My arm hardly hurts me at all
at present. I expect it will ache worse presently."

"I have been having a few minutes' sleep your honor. And now, if you
don't want me for a minute, I will run down and see about breakfast. I
should think it must be nearly ready."

"See about dinner, you mean, Denis. Why, it's just one o'clock."

"One o'clock! Your honor must be dreaming."

"I don't think so, Denis. There is my watch on the table."

"Why, your honor does not mean to say," Denis said in great
astonishment, "that I have been sleeping for five hours? The watch
must have gone wrong."

"The watch is right enough, Denis. I heard it strike twelve by the
church clocks before I dozed off last time. Why, the surgeons came in
at ten o'clock and gave me some lemonade."

"And me to know nothing about it! Denis Mulligan, you ought to be
ashamed of yourself--slaping like a pig in a stye, with your master
laying wounded there beside you, and no one to look after him. I just
laid down for five minutes' nap, your honor, seeing that you had gone
off into a beautiful sleep, and never dreamed of more than that."

"It was the best thing you could do, Denis. You had been twenty-four
hours on your feet, and you would have been fit for nothing if you
hadn't had a good rest. Now go downstairs and get your dinner, and
when you come back again you can bring me up a basin of broth and a
piece of bread. I begin to feel hungry; and that's a capital sign, I
believe."

When Ralph had finished his broth he said to Denis, "I shan't want
anything now for some time, Denis. You can put a glass of lemonade
within reach of my hand, and then I shall do very well for an hour or
two. I am quite sure you must be dying for a pipe; so go out and take
a turn. It will freshen you up; and you can bring me back what news
you can gather as to the losses yesterday, and whether the army
started in pursuit of the French."

It was some time before Denis would consent to leave the room; but at
last, seeing that Ralph really wished it, he went out for an hour, and
returned full of the rumors he had picked up of the terrible losses of
the British, and the utter rout of the French army. The next morning
Ralph had a great surprise; for just as he had finished his breakfast
there was a tap at the door, and a lady entered. Ralph could hardly
believe his eyes as his mother ran forward to the bed. But the
pressure of her arms and her kisses soon showed him that it was a
reality.

"Why, mother darling!" he exclaimed, "how on earth did you get here?"

"I came across in a smack to Ostend, Ralph, and then came on by carriage.
I got here last night, and learned at the quartermaster-general's
office that you were wounded and were somewhere in Brussels, at least
they believed you were here somewhere, but they could not say where.
They let me have a copy of the list of the houses that had been
allotted for the use of wounded officers. It was too late to begin the
search last night, but I have been three hours going round this
morning. I saw the surgeon downstairs and he told me--" and her lips
quivered and her eyes filled with tears.

"That I had lost my left arm, mother. Well, that is nothing to fret
about when thousands have been killed. One can do very well without a
left arm; and I think, on the whole, that I have been wonderfully
lucky. Denis!" But Denis was not in the room, having, as soon as he
had discovered who Ralph's visitor was, gone out to leave them alone.
"And have you made this journey all by yourself, mother?"

"No, my dear. Mr. Tallboys was good enough to come over to take care
of me by the way."

"Mr. Tallboys, mother! How did he know that you were coming?"

"Well, I told him, Ralph. But that is a long story, and you shall hear
it another day. The doctor said you had better not do much talking
now. Mr. Tallboys will stay here a day or two and then go home. I
intend to take a room somewhere close by and install myself here as
your head nurse."

"I shan't want much nursing, mother; but I shall be delighted to have
you with me. I have a capital servant. The man I told you about in my
letters. He is a most amusing fellow and very much attached to me. Do
you know, he got leave directly the battle was over, and was all night
walking by the side of the ambulance wagon. He is a capital fellow. By
the way, mother, I suppose the will has not turned up yet? You said in
your last letter you had great hopes of its being found."

"It has been found, Ralph; and it is all just as we supposed. But how
it was found, or anything about it, you mustn't ask at present. It is
a long story, and I must insist now that you lie quiet and go to
sleep."

"Well, I will try, mother. Will you just look outside the door and see
if Denis is there? Denis, this is my mother," he said as the soldier
came in. "She has come over to help nurse me; and as she will be
principally with me in the daytime, you will be at liberty to be out
whenever you like."

"Sure, and I am glad the lady has come, Mr. Conway; though I would
have done the best I could for you. Still, a man is but a poor crater
in a sick-room. Can I get you anything ma'am?"

"Well, I have had nothing this morning, Denis; and if you could get me
a cup of tea and some bread and butter, if it is not against the
rules, I should be very glad."

"Sure, I will do that, ma'am, with the greatest pleasure in life,"
Denis said; and presently returned bringing up a tray with tea, bread
and butter, and a plate of cold meat.

"Is there anything else, ma'am?"

"Well, Denis, I should be very much obliged if you will take a note
from me to a gentleman named Tallboys, whom you will find at the Hotel
de L'Europe. Give it to him yourself if you can. He will be glad to
hear from you about my son, how he is going on and so on."

For the next few days Ralph's arm was exceedingly painful, attended by
a certain amount of fever. At the end of that time he began to
improve, and his wound made steady progress toward recovery. After
staying for four days at Brussels, Mr. Tallboys had returned home.
Mrs. Conway and Denis divided the nursing between them, sitting up on
alternate nights.

A fortnight after Mrs. Conway's arrival Ralph said, "Now, mother, I
shall be up to-morrow and can therefore be considered as fairly
convalescent, so there can be no reason now why you should not tell
the story about the finding of the will. You told me in one of your
letters before Christmas that Mr. Tallboys had failed altogether. So
how did it come to be found?"

Mrs. Conway thereupon told the story. When she came to the point where
she had gone as a servant to the Hall, Ralph interrupted her with a
loud protest. "I don't like that, mother; I don't like the idea of
your having gone as a servant, whatever the stake was. If I had been
at home and had known it, I certainly would not have let you go, not
if there had been ten fortunes to be gained by it. The idea of your
having to go and live as a servant, and work for people like that is
horrid!"

"There was nothing very unpleasant about it, Ralph. I had plenty to do
and to think about, and the time passed a great deal more rapidly than
it would have done if I had been staying at home all by myself. It
would have been very lonely and dull then; and I can assure you that I
considered it no hardship at all being at the Hall. But you must not
interrupt me in my story. If you do I shall tell you nothing more
about it until you get home to England."

This threat effectually sealed Ralph's lips, and beyond occasional
exclamations he said nothing until the story was ended.

"Well, it's all very wonderful, mother," he said; "and I should never
have thought for a moment that you were so brave, and could have put
things together like that, and could have carried out such a scheme.
But I am awfully glad you have succeeded; because you had set your
mind on it, and the money will I hope make you quite comfortable. How
much was it after all mother? You never told me that."

"It is half of Mr. Penfold's estates, and of the money he had
invested, which is a very large sum, Ralph; although I do not know how
much."

"Half the estate! Why, it will make me quite a rich man. I never
dreamed it was anything like that. I thought most likely it was enough
to continue the allowance that he said he should make me. Why, mother,
it is tremendous! And what becomes of the other half?"

"That is left to Mabel Withers, Ralph. You two divide everything that
he left."

"Well, that certainly is rather hard upon his sisters," Ralph said;
"and I don't blame them for being against it. Though, of course, it
was not right to keep the will hidden."

"Mr. Penfold did not leave anything to them, because they are both
very well provided for. Their father left them a handsome sum at his
death; and as they have been living at the Hall ever since, and can
have spent nothing, they must be very amply provided for. Their
brother, therefore, naturally considered he was perfectly at liberty
to leave his property as he chose. I do not think the Miss Penfolds
have the slightest reason to grumble, after living as they have done
for the last twenty years at their brother's expense."

"Of course that makes a difference," Ralph agreed; "it certainly
didn't seem nice that Mabel and I, who are no relation by blood to Mr.
Penfold, should come into the property that his sisters expected would
be theirs. But, of course, now you explain it, it is different."

"I do not think in any case, Ralph, Mr. Penfold would have left his
fortune to his sisters. He was a man very averse to exerting his own
will, and I am sure that he submitted to, rather than liked, his
sisters' residence at the Hall. I know that he considered, and justly,
that they had once committed a cruel wrong upon him, and had in a way
spoiled his life. I question whether he really ever forgave them."

"I see, mother," Ralph said. "Well, now, about myself; I should think
there can be no occasion for me to continue in the army unless I
like?"

"I hope you won't like, Ralph. In the first place I want to have you
with me; and in the second, you will be a large landowner, and
property has its duties."

"Well, there is no necessity to decide about that at present. The
doctor said yesterday I should certainly get three months' sick leave
before I rejoined. By all we hear the fighting is at an end, and there
is no fear whatever that Napoleon will have it in his power to cause
trouble in the future. They will take care of that, whatever they do
with him. If there is going to be peace everywhere, I do not know that
I should care very much about staying in the army; but, as I said, we
need not decide at present."

Ten days later, Ralph was so far recovered that he was able to return
home with his mother. As soon as she informed him of her arrival at
Dover, Mr. Tallboys wrote to tell her that he had had an interview in
London with the Miss Penfolds' lawyer, who informed him that he had
instructions from his clients to examine the will, and if satisfied of
its genuineness, to offer no opposition whatever to its being proved.
Mr. Tallboys had thereupon shown him the will, and had no difficulty
in convincing him that it was the document he himself had drawn up,
and Mr. Penfold had signed in his presence.

"The lawyer has placed all the deeds and documents relating to Mr.
Penfold's property in my hands, and, as I was of course before well
aware, my late client died worth a very considerable property in
addition to his large estates in this country. For the last twenty
years his income has exceeded his expenditure by an average of three
thousand a year, and as the surpluses have been judiciously invested,
and as the prices of all funds and stocks now stand vastly higher than
they did during the course of the long war, their total value now
amounts to something over a hundred and thirty thousand pounds.

"The property in this country was valued, at the time Mr. Penfold drew
up his will, at eighty thousand pounds; these estates he left to your
son, and the sum of eighty-thousand pounds, in various investments, to
Miss Withers, and directed that the residue, whatever it might be at
his death, should be equally divided between them. Your son's share,
therefore, will amount to about twenty-five thousand pounds. I may say
that the outlying farms, which were settled by deed as a security for
the four hundred pounds annually paid to you, are not included in the
above valuation, but are ordered to revert to the main estate upon
your decease.

"The formalities will all be completed in the course of a short time.
I may say that from the totals to be divided must be deducted the
