character, another isle arose; while at the same time the skerries known
as the Geirfuglaska disappeared, and with them vanished the great auks,
or gare-fowls--birds now extinct--which up to that time had bred on
them. At all events, though the auks could not well have been drowned,
no traces of them were seen after the date mentioned. In July, 1884, an
island again appeared about ten miles off Reykjanes; but it is already
beginning to diminish in size, and may soon disappear.


OFF THE COAST OF ALASKA


Elsewhere in the region of the northern seas there are other instances
of the influence of the submarine forces in raising up and lowering
land. The coast of Alaska is a region of intense volcanic action. In
1795, during a period of volcanic activity in the craters of Makushina,
on Unalaska, and in others on Umnak Island, a volume of smoke was seen
to rise out of the sea about 42 miles to the north of Unalaska, and
the next year it was followed by a heap of cindery material, from which
arose flame and volcanic matter, the glow being visible over a radius
of ten miles. In four years the island grew into a large cone, 3000 feet
above the sea-level, and two or three miles in circumference. Two years
later it was still so hot that when some hunters landed on it they found
the soil too warm for walking. It was named Ionna Bogoslova (St. John
the Theologian), by the Russians, Agashagok by the Aleuts, and is now
known to the whites of that region as Bogosloff. Mr. Dall believes
that it occupies the site of some rocks that existed there as long as
tradition extends.

There were additions to the cone up to the year 1823, when it became so
quiescent as to be the favorite haunt of seals and sea-fowls, and,
when the weather was favorable, was visited by native egg-hunters
from Unalaska. During the summer of 1883 Bogosloff was again seen
in eruption, as it was thought. However, on closely examining the
neighborhood, it was found that the old island was undisturbed, but that
there had been a fresh eruption, which had resulted in the extension of
Bogosloff by the appearance of a cone and crater (Hague Volcano), 357
feet high, connected with the parent island by a low sand-spit, and
situated in a spot where, the year before, the lead showed 800 fathoms
of water. At the same time Augustin and two other previously quiet
islands on the peninsula of Alaska began simultaneously to emit smoke,
dust and ashes, while a reef running westward and formerly submerged
became elevated to the sea surface. Other islands, of origin exactly
similar to Bogosloff and those mentioned, are to be found in this
region, notably Koniugi and Kasatochi, in the western Aleutians,
and Pinnacle Island, near St. Matthew Island. Indeed, the volcano of
Kliutchevsk, which rises to a height of over 15,000 feet, is really a
volcanic island.

A permanent addition was made to the Aleutian group of Islands by the
action of a submarine volcano in 1806. This new island has the form of
a volcanic peak, with several subsidiary cones. It is four geographical
miles in circumference. In 1814 another arose out of the sea in the same
archipelago, the cone of which attained a height of 3,000 feet; but at
the end of a year it lost a portion of this elevation.

In 1856, in the sea in the same neighborhood, Captain Newell, of the
whaling bark Alice Fraser, witnessed a submarine eruption, which was
also seen by the crews of several other vessels. There was no island
formed on this occasion, but large jets of water were thrown up, and the
sea was greatly agitated all around. Then followed volcanic smoke, and
quantities of stones, ashes, and pumice; the two latter being scattered
over the surface of the sea to a great distance. Loud thundering reports
accompanied this eruption, and all the ships in the neighborhood felt
concussions like those produced by an earthquake. These phenomena seem
to have ended in the formation of some great submarine chasm, into which
the waters rushed with extreme violence and a terrific roar.

Occurrences similar to this last have been several times observed in
a tract of open sea in the Atlantic, about half a degree south of the
equator, and between 20 and 22 degrees of west longitude. Although
quantities of volcanic dross have been from time to time thrown up to
the surface in this region, no island has yet made its appearance above
water.

The events here described repeat on a far smaller scale similar ones
which have occurred in remote ages in many parts of the ocean and left
great island masses as the permanent effects of their work. We may
instance the Hawaiian group, which is wholly of volcanic origin, with
the exception of its minor coral additions, and represents a stupendous
activity of underground agencies beneath the domain of Father Neptune.

In part, as we have said elsewhere in this work, all oceanic islands,
remote from those in the shoal bordering waters of the continents, have
been of volcanic or coral formation, or more often a combination of the
two. No sooner does an island mass appear above or near the surface of
tropical waters than the minute coral animals--effective only by their
myriads--begin their labors, building fringes of coral rock around
the cindery heaps lifted from the ocean floor. The atolls of the
Pacific--circular or oval rings of coral with lagunes of sea-water
within--have long been thought to be built on the rims of submarine
volcanoes, rising to within a few hundred feet of the surface, much
as coral reefs around actual islands. If the volcanic mass should
subsequently subside, as it is likely to do, the minute ocean builders
will continue their work--unless the subsidence be too rapid for their
powers of production--and in this way ring-like islands of coral may
in time rise from great depths of sea, their basis being the volcanic
island which has sunk from near the surface far toward old ocean's
primal floor.



CHAPTER XXXI.

Mud Volcanoes, Geysers, and Hot Springs.


Our usual impression of a volcano is indicated in the title of "burning
mountain," so often employed, a great fire-spouting cone of volcanic
debris, from which steam, lava, rock-masses, cinder-like fragments, and
dust, often of extreme fineness, are flung high into the air or flow
in river-like torrents of molten rock. This, no doubt, applies in the
majority of cases, but the volcanic forces do not confine themselves to
these magnificent displays of energy, nor are their products limited to
those above specified. We have seen that mud is a not uncommon product,
due to the mingling of water with volcanic dust, while water alone is
occasionally emitted, of which we have a marked instance in the Volcan
de Agua, of Guatemala, already mentioned. As regards mud flows, we may
specially instance the first outflow from Mont Pelee, that by which the
Guerin sugar works were overwhelmed.

The imprisoned forces of the earth have still other modes of
manifestation. A very frequent one of these, and the most destructive to
human life of them all, is the earthquake.

Minor manifestations of volcanic action may be seen in the geyser and
the hot spring, the latter the most widely disseminated of all the
resultant effects of the heated condition of the earth's interior. It
is these displays of subterranean energy, differing from those usually
termed volcanic, yet due to the same general causes, that we have next
to consider. And it may be premised that their manifestations, while,
except in the case of the earthquake, less violent, are no less
interesting, especially as the minor displays are free from that peril
to human life which renders the major ones so terrible.

While the largest volcanoes at times pour out rivers of liquid mud,
there are volcanoes from which nothing is ever ejected but mud and
water, the latter being generally salt. From this circumstance they
are sometimes called salses, but they are more generally termed
mud-volcanoes. Some varieties of them throw out little else than gases
of different sorts, and these are called air-volcanoes.


THE GREAT MUD VOLCANO OF SICILY


One of the best known mud-volcanoes is at Macaluba, near Girgenti, in
Sicily. It consists of several conical mounds, varying from time to time
in their form and height, which ranges from eight to thirty feet. From
orifices on the tops of these mounds there are thrown out sometimes jets
of warmish water and mud mixed with bitumen, sometimes bubbles of
gas, chiefly carbonic acid and carburetted hydrogen, occasionally pure
nitrogen. The mud ejected has often a strong sulphurous smell. The jets
in general ascend only to a moderate height; but occasionally they are
thrown up with great violence, attaining a height of about 200 feet.
In 1777 there was ejected an immense column, consisting of mud strongly
impregnated with sulphur and mixed with naphtha and stones, accompanied
also by quantities of sulphurous vapors. This mud-volcano is known to
have been in action for fifteen centuries.

Very recently a small mud-volcano has been formed on the flanks of Mount
Etna. It began with the throwing up of jets of boiling water, mixed with
petroleum and mud, great quantities of gas bubbling up at the same time.
In several of the valleys of Iceland there are similar phenomena, the
boiling water and mud being thrown up in jets to the height of fifteen
feet and upwards, the mud accumulating around the orifices whence the
jets arise.

A mud-volcano named Korabetoff, in the Crimea, presents phenomena more
akin to those of the igneous volcanoes of South America. There was an
eruption from this mountain on the 6th of August, 1853. It began by
throwing up from the summit a column of fire and smoke, which ascended
to a great height. This continued for five or six minutes, and was
followed at short intervals by two similar eruptions. There was then
ejected with a hissing noise a quantity of black fetid mud, which was so
hot as to scorch the grass on the edges of the stream. The mud continued
to pour out for three hours, covering a wide space at the mountain's
base. The mud-volcanoes on the coast of Beloochistan are very numerous,
and extend over an area of nearly a thousand square miles. Their action
resembles that at Macaluba.


THE MUD VOLCANO OF JAVA


There is a mud volcano in Java which is of interest as somewhat
resembling the geyser in its mode of operation and apparently due to
similar agencies. It is thus described by Dr. Horsfield:--

"On approaching it from a distance, it is first discovered by a large
volume of smoke, rising and disappearing at intervals of a few seconds,
resembling the vapors rising from a violent surf. A loud noise is heard,
like that of distant thunder. Having advanced so near that the vision
was no longer impeded by the smoke, a large hemispherical mass was
observed, consisting of black earth mixed with water, about sixteen
feet in diameter, rising to the height of twenty or thirty feet in
a perfectly regular manner, and as if it were pushed up by a force
beneath, which suddenly exploded with a loud noise, and scattered about
a volume of black mud in every direction. After an interval of two or
three, or sometimes four or five seconds, the hemispherical body of mud
rose and exploded again. In the manner stated this volcanic ebullition
goes on without interruption, throwing up a globular body of mud, and
dispersing it with violence through the neighboring plain. The spot
where the ebullition occurs is nearly circular, and perfectly level. It
is covered only with the earthy particles, impregnated with salt water,
which are thrown up from below. The circumference may be estimated at
about half an English mile. In order to conduct the salt water to the
circumference, small passages or gutters are made in the loose muddy
earth, which lead to the borders, where it is collected in holes dug in
the ground for the purpose of evaporation."

The mud has a strong, pungent, sulphurous smell, resembling that of
mineral oil, and is hotter than the surrounding atmosphere. During the
rainy season the explosions increase in violence.

There are submarine mud volcanoes as well as those of igneous kind. In
1814 one of this character broke out in the Sea of Azof, beginning with
flame and black smoke, accompanied by earth and stones, which were flung
to a great height. Ten of these explosions occurred, and, after a period
of rest, others were heard during the night. The next morning there
was visible above the water an island of mud some ten feet high. A very
similar occurrence took place in 1827, near Baku, in the Caspian sea.
This began with a flaming display and the ejection of great fragments of
rock. An eruption of mud succeeded. A set of small volcanoes discovered
by Humboldt in Turbaco, in South America, confined their emissions
almost wholly to gases, chiefly nitrogen.

There is a close connection in character between mud volcanoes and
those intermittent boiling springs named geysers. A good many of the mud
volcanoes throw out jets of boiling water along with the mud; but in
the case of the geysers, the boiling water is ejected alone, without
any visible impregnation, though some mineral in solution, as silica,
carbonate of lime, or sulphur, is usually present.


THE GEYSER IS A WATER VOLCANO


The phenomenon of the geyser serves in a measure to support the theory
that steam is an important agent in volcanic action. A geyser, in fact,
may be designated as a water volcano, since it throws up water only. It
comprises a cone or mound, usually only a few feet high. In the middle
of this is a crater-like opening with a passage leading down into the
earth. As in the case of the volcano, the geyser cone is built up by its
own action. In the boiling water which is ejected there is dissolved a
certain amount of silica. As the water falls and cools this mineral is
deposited, gradually building up a cup-like elevation. The basin of the
geyser is generally full of clear water, with a little steam rising
from its surface; but at intervals an eruption takes place, sometimes at
regular periods, but more often at irregular intervals.

Among the largest and best known geysers in the world are those of
Iceland, chief among them being the Great Geyser. Silica is the
mineral with which the waters of this fountain are impregnated, and
the substance which they deposit, as they slowly evaporate, is named
siliceous sinter. Of this material is composed the mound, six or seven
feet high, on which the spring is situated. On the top of the mound is
a large oval basin, about three feet in depth, measuring in its larger
diameter about fifty-six, and in its shorter about forty-six feet. The
centre of this basin is occupied by a circular well about ten feet in
diameter, and between seventy and eighty feet deep.

Out of the central well springs a jet of boiling water, at intervals of
six or seven hours. When the fountain is at rest, both the basin and the
well appear quite empty, and no steam is seen. But on the approach of
the moment for action, the water rises in the well, till it flows over
into the basin. Then loud subterranean explosions are heard, and the
ground all round is violently shaken.

Instantly, and with immense force, a steaming jet of boiling water, of
the full width of the well, springs up and ascends to a great height
in the air. The top of this large column of water is enveloped in vast
clouds of steam, which diffuse themselves through the air, rendering it
misty. These jets succeed each other with great rapidity to the number
of sixteen or eighteen, the period of action of the fountain being about
five minutes. The last of the jets generally ascends to the greatest
height, usually to about 100, but sometimes to 150 feet; on one occasion
it rose to the great height of 212 feet. Having ejected this great
column of water, the action ceases, and the water that had filled the
basin sinks down into the well. There it remains till the time for the
next eruption, when the same phenomena are repeated. It has been found
that, by throwing large stones into the well, the period of the eruption
may be hastened, while the loudness of the explosions and the violence
of the fountain effect are increased, the stones being at the same time
ejected with great force.


ERUPTION CAN BE INDUCED BY ARTIFICIAL MEANS


Geysers are found all over the island, presenting various peculiarities.
In the case of one of the smaller ones, which is called Strokr, or the
Churn, an eruption can be induced by artificial means. A barrow-load of
sods is thrown into the crater of the geyser, with the effect of causing
an eruption. The sensitiveness of Strokr is due to its peculiar form.
An observer states that, "The bore is eight feet in diameter at the
top, and forty-four feet deep. Below twenty-seven feet it contracts to
nineteen inches, so that the turf thrown in completely chokes it. Steam
collects below; a foaming scum covers the surface of the water, and in
a quarter of an hour it surges up the pipe. The fountain then begins
playing, sending its bundles of jets rather higher than those of
the Great Geyser, flinging up the clods of turf which have been its
obstruction like a number of rockets. This magnificent display continues
for a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes. The erupted water flows
back into the pipe from the curved sides of the bowl. This occasions a
succession of bursts, the last expiring effort, very generally, being
the most magnificent. Strokr gives no warning thumps, like the Great
Geyser, and there is not the same roaring of steam accompanying the
outbreak of the water."

The same author thus describes an eruption of the Great Geyser, which
occurred about two o'clock in the morning: "A violent concussion of the
ground brought me and my companions to our feet. We rushed out of the
tent in every condition of dishabille and were in time to see Geyser put
forth his full strength. Five strokes underground were the signal, then
an overflow, wetting every side of the mound. Presently a dome of
water rose in the centre of the basin and fell again, immediately to
be followed by a fresh bell, which sprang into the air fully forty feet
high, accompanied by a roaring burst of steam. Instantly the fountain
began to play with the utmost violence, a column rushing up to the
height of ninety or one hundred feet against the gray night sky, with
mighty volumes of white steam cloud rolling after it and swept off by
the breeze to fall in torrents of hot rain. Jets and lines of water tore
their way through the clouds, or leaped high above its domed mass. The
earth trembled and throbbed during the explosion, then the column sank,
started up again, dropped once more, and seemed to be sucked back into
the earth. We ran to the basin, which was left dry, and looked down the
bore at the water, which was bubbling at the depth of six feet."

In the case of Strokr, the cause of this eruption is not difficult to
understand. The narrow part of the channel is choked up by the turf and
the steam, and prevented from escaping. Finally it gains such force as
to drive out the obstacle with a violent explosion, just as a bottle
of fermenting liquor may blow out the cork and discharge some of its
contents.

Geysers are somewhat abundant phenomena, existing in many parts of the
earth, while striking examples of them are found in the widely separated
regions of Iceland, New Zealand, Japan and the western United States.
In the volcanic region of New Zealand geysers and their associated hot
springs are abundant. It was to their action that we owed the famous
white and pink terraces and the warm lake of Rotomahana which were
ruined by the destructive eruption of Mount Tarawera, already described.


GEYSERS OF THE UNITED STATES


The United States is abundantly supplied with hot springs, but geysers,
outside of the Yellowstone region, are found only in California and
Nevada. Those of California exist chiefly in Napa Valley, north of San
Francisco, in a canon or defile. Their waters are impregnated not with
silica, but with sulphur, and they thus approach more nearly in their
character to mud-volcanoes, whose ejections are, in like manner, much
impregnated with that substance. They are also, like them, collected in
groups, there being no less than one hundred openings within a space of
flat ground a mile square. Owing to their number and proximity, their
individual energy is nothing like so violent as that of the geysers of
Iceland. Their jets seldom rise higher than 20 or 30 feet; but so great
a number playing within so confined a space produces an imposing effect.
The jets of boiling water issue with a loud noise from little conical
mounds, around which the ground is merely a crust of sulphur. When this
crust is penetrated, the boiling water may be seen underneath. The rocks
in the neighborhood of these fountains are all corroded by the action of
the sulphurous vapors. Nevertheless, within a distance of not more than
50 feet from them, trees grow without injury to their health.

Few of these fountains, however, are regular geysers, most of them
discharging only steam. From the Steamboat Geyser this ascends to a
height of from 50 to 100 feet, with a roar like that of the escape
from a steamboat boiler. Associated with the geysers are numerous hot
springs, some clear, some turbid, and variously impregnated with
iron, sulphur or alum. In Nevada the Steamboat Springs, as they are
designated, exist in Washoe Valley, east of the Virginian range. They
come nearer in character to the Yellowstone geysers, their waters
depositing true geyserite, or silicious concretions. The Volcano
Springs, in Lauder County, are also true geysers, though of small
importance. The ground here is so thickly perforated by holes from which
steam escapes that it looks like a cullender.


THE YELLOWSTONE GEYSERS


The most remarkable geyser country in the world, alike for the size and
the number of its spouting fountains, is the Yellowstone region in the
northwest part of the Territory of Wyoming, in the United States, which,
by a special act of Congress, has been reserved as the Yellowstone
National Park, exempt from settlement, purchase or preemption. Here
nearly every form of geyser and unintermittent hot spring occurs,
with deposits of various kinds, silicious, calcareous, etc. Of the
hot springs, Dr. Peale enumerates 2,195, and considers that within the
limits of the park--which is about 54 miles by 62 miles, and includes
3,312 square miles--as many as 3,000 actually exist. The same geologist
notes the existence of 71 geysers in the area mentioned, though some
of the number are only inferred to be spouting springs from the form of
their basins and the character of the surrounding deposits. Of this
vast collection of still and eruptive springs, between which there seems
every gradation, those which do not send water into the air are, owing
to the magnificent cascades which they form, often quite as remarkable
as those which take the shape of geysers. The more striking of the
latter may, however, be briefly mentioned.

In the Gibbon Basin is a geyser of late origin. In 1878 this consisted
of two steam holes, roaring on the side of a hill, that looked as if
they had recently burst through the surface; and the gully leading
towards the ravine was at that date filled with sand, which appeared to
have been poured out during an eruption. Dead trees stood on the line of
this sand floor, and others, with their bark still remaining, and
even with their foliage not lost, were uprooted hard by, everything
indicating that the "steamboat vent," as it was called, was of recent
formation. In 1875 it had no existence, but in 1879 the spouting
spring--which first opened, it is believed, on the 11th of August in the
preceding year--had "settled down to business as a very powerful flowing
geyser," with a double period; one eruption occurring every half
hour, and projecting water to the height of 30 feet; the main eruption
occurring every six or seven days, with long continued action, and a
column of nearly 100 feet.

The New Geyser in the same basin is also of quite recent origin.
It consists of two fissures in the rock, in which the water boils
vigorously. But there is no mound, and the rocks of the fissure are just
beginning to get a coating of the silicious geyserite deposited from the
water, so that it cannot long have been spouting. Again, in the Grotto
Geyser--in the Upper Geyser Basin of Fire Hole River--the main or
larger crater is hollowed into fantastic arches, beneath which are
the grotto-like cavities from which it is named, which act as lateral
orifices for the escape of water during an eruption. It plays several
times in the course of the twenty-four hours, and sends a column of
water sixty feet high, the eruption lasting an hour. As yet, however,
the force of the water has not been sufficient, or of sufficiently long
duration, to break through the arches covering the basin or crater.
The Excelsior--claimed to be the largest of its order, which sent water
nearly 300 feet into the air at intervals of about five hours, and of
such volume as to wash away bridges over small streams below--was not,
until comparatively recent years, known as a specially powerful geyser.
But if it had for a time waned in importance, its immense crater, 330
feet in length and 200 feet at the widest part, shows that at a still
earlier date it was a gigantic fountain. In this deep pit, when the
breeze wafted aside the clouds of steam constantly arising from its
surface, the water could be seen seething 15 or 20 feet below the
surrounding level. Yet into the cauldron of boiling water a little
stream of cold water, from the melting snow of the uplands, ran
unceasingly. Since 1888 this great geyser has been inactive.

The Castle Geyser is so named on account of the fancied resemblance
which its mound of white and grey deposit presents to the ruins of a
feudal keep, the crater itself being placed on a cone or turret, which
has a somewhat imposing appearance compared with the other geysers in
the neighborhood. It throws a column usually about fifty or sixty feet
