our grandeur, but go on, as if we were nae better nor wiser than your
ain simple sel'."

But, instead of encouraging the dumbfounded deity, this speech
completely upset him. He hastily retreated; and, in trying to screen
himself behind the huntsman, fell back from the stage, and his hound
leapt after him. The incident, whether premeditated or not, amused the
spectators much more than any speech he could have delivered, and the
King joined heartily in the merriment.

Silence being again restored, the first divinity came forward once more,
and spoke thus:--

          'Dread lord! thy Majesty hath stricken dumb
           His weaker god-head; if to himself he come,
           Unto thy service straight he will commend
           These foresters, and charge them to attend
           Thy pleasure in this park, and show such sport;
           To the chief huntsman and thy princely court,
           As the small circle of this round affords,
           And be more ready than he was in words."[5]

"Weel spoken, and to the purpose, gude fallow," cried James. "And we
take this opportunity of assuring our worthy host, in the presence of
his other guests, that we have never had better sport in park or forest
than we have this day enjoyed--have never eaten better cheer, nor
quaffed better wine than at his board--and, altogether, have never been
more hospitably welcomed."

Sir Richard was overwhelmed by his Majesty's commendation.

"I have done nothing, my gracious liege," he said, "to merit such
acknowledgment on your part, and the delight I experience is only
tempered by my utter unworthiness."

"Hoot-toot! man," replied James, jocularly, "ye merit a vast deal mair
than we hae said to you. But gude folk dinna always get their deserts.
Ye ken that, Sir Richard. And now, hae ye not some ither drolleries in
store for us?"

The baronet replied in the affirmative, and soon afterwards the stage
was occupied by a new class of performers, and a drollery commenced
which kept the audience in one continual roar of laughter so long as it
lasted. And yet none of the parts had been studied, the actors entirely
trusting to their own powers of comedy to carry it out. The principal
character was the Cap Justice, enacted by Sir John Finett, who took
occasion in the course of the performance to lampoon and satirise most
of the eminent legal characters of the day, mimicking the voices and
manner of the three justices--Crooke, Hoghton, and Doddridge--so
admirably, that his hearers were wellnigh convulsed; and the three
learned gentlemen, who sat near the King, though fully conscious of the
ridicule applied to them, were obliged to laugh with the rest. But the
unsparing satirist was not content with this, but went on, with most of
the other attendants upon the King, and being intimately versed in court
scandal, he directed his lash with telling effect. As a contrast to the
malicious pleasantry of the Cap Justice, were the gambols and jests of
Robin Goodfellow--a merry imp, who, if he led people into mischief, was
always ready to get them out of it. Then there was a dance by Bill
Huckler, old Crambo, and Tom o' Bedlam, the half-crazed individual
already mentioned as being among the crowd in the base court. This was
applauded to the echo, and consequently repeated. But the most diverting
scene of all was that in which Jem Tospot and the three Doll Wangos
appeared. Though given in the broadest vernacular of the county, and
scarcely intelligible to the whole of the company, the dialogue of this
part of the piece was so lifelike and natural, that every one recognised
its truth; while the situations, arranged with the slightest effort, and
on the spur of the moment, were extremely ludicrous. The scene was
supposed to take place in a small Lancashire alehouse, where a jovial
pedlar was carousing, and where, being visited by his three
sweethearts--each of whom he privately declared to be the favourite--he
had to reconcile their differences, and keep them all in good-humour.
Familiar with the character in all its aspects, Nicholas played it to
the life; and, to do them justice, Dames Baldwyn, Tetlow, and Nance
Redferne, were but little if at all inferior to him. There was a reality
in their jealous quarrelling that gave infinite zest to the performance.

"Saul o' my body!" exclaimed James, admiringly, "those are three braw
women. Ane of them maun be sax feet if she is an inch, and weel made and
weel favourt too. Zounds! Sir Richard, there's nae standing the spells
o' your Lancashire Witches. High-born and low-born, they are a' alike. I
wad their only witchcraft lay in their een. I should then hae the less
fear of 'em. But have you aught mair? for it is growing late, and ye ken
we hae something to do in that pavilion."

"Only a merry dance, my liege, in which a man will appear in a
dendrological foliage of fronds," replied the baronet.

James laughed at the description, and soon afterwards a party of
mummers, male and female, clad in various grotesque garbs, appeared on
the stage. In the midst of them was the "dendrological man," enclosed in
a framework of green boughs, like that borne by a modern
Jack-in-the-green. A ring was formed by the mummers, and the round
commenced to lively music.

While the mazy measure was proceeding, Nance Redferne, who had quitted
the stage with Nicholas, and now stood close to him among the
spectators, said in a low tone, "Look there!"

The squire glanced in the direction indicated, and to his surprise and
terror, distinguished, among the crowd at a little distance, the figure
of a Cistertian monk.

"He is invisible to every eye except our own," whispered Nance, "and is
come to tell me it is time."

"Time for what?" demanded Nicholas.

"Time for you to seize those two accursed Devices, Jem and his mother,"
replied Nance. "They are both on yon boards. Jem is the man in the tree,
and Elizabeth is the owd crone in the red kirtle and high-crowned hat.
Yo win knoa her feaw feace when yo pluck off her mask."

"The monk is gone," cried Nicholas; "I have kept my eyes steadily fixed
on him, and he has melted into air. What has he to do with the Devices?"

"He is their fate," returned Nance, "an ey ha' acted under his orders.
Boh mount, an seize them. Ey win ge wi' ye."

Forcing his way through the crowd, Nicholas ran up the steps, and,
followed by Nance, sprang upon the stage. His appearance occasioned
considerable surprise; but as he was recognised by the spectators as the
jolly Jem Tospot, who had so recently diverted them, and his companion
as one of the three Doll Wangos, in anticipation of some more fun they
received him with a round of applause. But without stopping to
acknowledge it, or being for a moment diverted from his purpose,
Nicholas seized the old crone, and, consigning her to Nance, caught
hold of the leafy frame in which the man was encased, and pulled him
from under it. But he began to think he had unkennelled the wrong fox,
for the man, though a tall fellow, bore no resemblance to Jem Device;
while, when the crone's mask was plucked off, she was found to be a
comely young woman. Meanwhile, all around was in an uproar, and amidst a
hurricane of hisses, yells, and other indications of displeasure from
the spectators, several of the mummers demanded the meaning of such a
strange and unwarrantable proceeding.

"They are a couple of witches," cried Nicholas; "this is Jem Device and
his mother Elizabeth."

"My name is nother Jem nor Device," cried the man.

"Nor mine Elizabeth," screamed the woman.

"We know the Devices," cried two or three voices, "and these are none of
'em."

Nicholas was perplexed. The storm increased; threats accompanied the
hisses; when luckily he espied a ring on the man's finger. He instantly
seized his hand, and held it up to the general gaze.

"A proof!--a proof!" he cried. "This sapphire ring was given by the King
to my cousin, Richard Assheton, this morning, and stolen from him by Jem
Device."

"Examine their features again," said Nance Redferne, waving her hands
over them. "Yo win aw knoa them now."

The woman's face instantly altered. Many years being added to it in a
breath. The man changed equally. The utmost astonishment was evinced by
all at the transformation, and the bystanders who had spoken before, now
cried out loudly--"We know them perfectly now. They are the two
Devices."

By this time an officer, attended by a party of halberdiers, had mounted
the boards, and the two prisoners were delivered to their custody by
Nicholas.

"Howd!" cried the man; "Ey win no longer deny my name. Ey am Jem Device,
an this is my mother, Elizabeth. Boh a warse offender than either on us
stonds afore yo. This woman is Nance Redferne, grandowter of the owd
hag, Mother Chattox. Ey charge her wi' makin' wax images, an' stickin'
pins in 'em, wi' intent to kill folk. Hoo wad ha' kilt me mysel', wi'
her devilry, if ey hadna bin too strong for her--an' that's why hoo
bears me malice, an' has betrayed me to Squoire Nicholas Assheton. Seize
her, an' ca' me as a witness agen her."

And as Nance was secured, he laughed malignantly.

"Ey care not," replied Nance. "Ey am now revenged on you both."

While this impromptu performance took place, as much to the surprise of
James as of any one else, and while he was desiring Sir Richard Hoghton
to ascertain what it all meant--at the very moment that the two Devices
and Nance removed from the stage, an usher approached the monarch, and
said that Master Potts entreated a moment's audience of his majesty.

"Potts!" exclaimed James, somewhat confused. "Wha is he?--ah, yes! I
recollect--a witch-finder. Weel, let him approach."

Accordingly, the next moment the little attorney, whose face was
evidently charged with some tremendous intelligence, was ushered into
the king's presence.

After a profound reverence, he said, "May it please your Majesty, I have
something for your private ear."

"Aweel, then," replied James, "approach us mair closely. What hae ye got
to say, sir? Aught mair anent these witches?"

"A great deal, sire," said Potts, in an impressive tone. "Something
dreadful has happened--something terrible."

"Eh! what?" exclaimed James, looking alarmed. "What is it, man? Speak!"

"Murder? sire,--murder has been done," said Potts, in low thrilling
accents.

"Murder!" exclaimed James, horror-stricken. "Tell us a' about it, and
without more ado."

But Potts was still circumspect. With an air of deepest mystery, he
approached his head as near as he dared to that of the monarch, and
whispered in his ear.

"Can this be true?" cried James. "If sae--it's very shocking--very
sad."

"It is too true, as your Majesty will find on investigation," replied
Potts. "The little girl I told you of, Jennet Device, saw it done."

"Weel, weel, there is nae accounting for human frailty and wickedness,"
said James. "Let a' necessary steps be taken at once. We will consider
what to do. But--d'ye hear, sir?--dinna let the bairn Jennet go. Haud
her fast. D'ye mind that? Now go, and cause the guilty party to be put
under arrest."

And on receiving this command Master Potts departed.

Scarcely was he gone than Nicholas Assheton came up to the railing of
the platform, and, imploring his Majesty's forgiveness for the
disturbance he had occasioned, explained that it had been owing to the
seizure of the two Devices, who, for some wicked but unexplained
purpose, had contrived to introduce themselves, under various disguises,
into the Tower.

"Ye did right to arrest the miscreants, sir," said James. "But hae ye
heard what has happened?"

"No, my liege," replied Nicholas, alarmed by the King's manner; "what is
it?"

"Come nearer, and ye shall learn," replied James; "for we wadna hae it
bruited abroad, though if true, as we canna doubt, it will be known soon
enough."

And as the squire bent forward, he imparted some intelligence to him,
which instantly changed the expression of the latter to one of mingled
horror and rage.

"It is false, sire!" he cried. "I will answer for her innocence with my
life. She could not do it. Your Majesty's patience is abused. It is
Jennet who has done it--not she. But I will unravel the terrible
mystery. You have the other two wretches prisoners, and can enforce the
truth from them."

"We will essay to do so," replied James; "but we have also another
prisoner."

"Christopher Demdike?" said Nicholas.

"Ay, Christopher Demdike," rejoined James. "But another besides
him--Mistress Nutter. You stare, sir; but it is true. She is in yonder
pavilion. We ken fu' weel wha assisted her flight, and wha concealed
her. Maister Potts has told us a'. It is weel for you that your puir
kinsman, Richard Assheton, did us sic gude service at the boar-hunt
to-day. We shall not now be unmindful of it, even though he cannot send
us the ring we gave him."

"It is here, sire," replied Nicholas. "It was stolen from him by the
villain, Jem Device. The poor youth meant to use it for Alizon. I now
deliver it to your Majesty as coming from him in her behalf."

"And we sae receive it," replied the monarch, brushing away the moisture
that gathered thickly in his eyes.

At this moment a tall personage, wrapped in a cloak, who appeared to be
an officer of the guard, approached the railing.

"I am come to inform your Majesty that Christopher Demdike has just died
of his wounds," said this personage.

"And sae he has had a strae death, after a'!" rejoined James. "Weel, we
are sorry for it."

"His portion will be eternal bale," observed the officer.

"How know you that, sir?" demanded the King, sharply. "You are not his
judge."

"I witnessed his end, sire," replied the officer; "and no man who died
as he died can be saved. The Fiend was beside him at the death-throes."

"Save us!" exclaimed James. "Ye dinna say so? God's santie! man, but
this is grewsome, and gars the flesh creep on one's banes. Let his foul
carcase be taen awa', and hangit on a gibbet on the hill where Malkin
Tower aince stood, as a warning to a' sic heinous offenders."

As the King ceased speaking, Master Potts appeared out of breath, and
greatly excited.

"She has escaped, sire!" he cried.

"Wha! Jennet!" exclaimed James. "If sae, we will tang you in her stead."

"No, sire--Alizon," replied Potts. "I can nowhere find her; nor--" and
he hesitated.

"Weel--weel--it is nae great matter," replied James, as if relieved,
and with a glance of satisfaction at Nicholas.

"I know where Alizon is, sire," said the officer.

"Indeed!" exclaimed James. "This fellow is strangely officious," he
muttered to himself. "And where may she be, sir?" he added, aloud.

"I will produce her within a quarter of an hour in yonder pavilion,"
replied the officer, "and all that Master Potts has been unable to
find."

"Your Majesty may trust him," observed Nicholas, who had attentively
regarded the officer. "Depend upon it he will make good his words."

"You think so?" cried the King. "Then we will put him to the test. You
will engage to confront Alizon with her mother?" he added, to the
officer.

"I will, sire," replied the other. "But I shall require the assistance
of a dozen men."

"Tak twenty, if you will," replied the King,--"I am impatient to see
what you can do."

"In a quarter of a minute all shall be ready within the pavilion, sire,"
replied the officer. "You have seen one masque to-night;--but you shall
now behold a different one--the masque of death."

And he disappeared.

Nicholas felt sure he would accomplish his task, for he had recognised
in him the Cistertian monk.

"Where is Sir Richard Assheton of Middleton?" inquired the King.

"He left the Tower with his daughter Dorothy, immediately after the
banquet," replied Nicholas.

"I am glad of it--right glad," replied the monarch; "the terrible
intelligence can be the better broken to them. If it had come upon them
suddenly, it might have been fatal--especially to the puir lassie. Let
Sir Ralph Assheton of Whalley come to me--and Master Roger Nowell of
Read."

"Your Majesty shall be obeyed," replied Sir Richard Hoghton.

The King then gave some instructions respecting the prisoners, and bade
Master Potts have Jennet in readiness.

And now to see what terrible thing had happened.




CHAPTER XI.--FATALITY.


Along the eastern terrace a youth and maiden were pacing slowly. They
had stolen forth unperceived from the revel, and, passing through a door
standing invitingly open, had entered the garden. Though overjoyed in
each other's presence, the solemn beauty of the night, so powerful in
its contrast to the riotous scene they had just quitted, profoundly
impressed them. Above, were the deep serene heavens, lighted up by the
starry host and their radiant queen--below, the immemorial woods,
steeped in silvery mists arising from the stream flowing past them. All
nature was hushed in holy rest. In opposition to the flood of soft light
emanating from the lovely planet overhead, and which turned all it fell
on, whether tree, or tower, or stream, to beauty, was the artificial
glare caused by the torches near the pavilion; while the discordant
sounds occasioned by the minstrels tuning their instruments, disturbed
the repose. As they went on, however, these sounds were lost in the
distance, and the glare of the torches was excluded by intervening
trees. Then the moon looked down lovingly upon them, and the only music
that reached their ears arose from the nightingales. After a pause, they
walked on again, hand-in-hand, gazing at each other, at the glorious
heavens, and drinking in the thrilling melody of the songsters of the
grove.

At the angle of the terrace was a small arbour placed in the midst of a
bosquet, and they sat down within it. Then, and not till then, did their
thoughts find vent in words. Forgetting the sorrows they had endured,
and the perils by which they were environed, they found in their deep
mutual love a shield against the sharpest arrows of fate. In low gentle
accents they breathed their passion, solemnly plighting their faith
before all-seeing Heaven.

Poor souls! they were happy then--intensely happy. Alas! that their
happiness should be so short; for those few moments of bliss, stolen
from a waste of tears, were all that were allowed them. Inexorable fate
still dogged their footsteps.

Amidst the bosquet stood a listener to their converse--a little girl
with high shoulders and sharp features, on which diabolical malice was
stamped. Two yellow eyes glistened through the leaves beside her,
marking the presence of a cat. As the lovers breathed their vows, and
indulged in hopes never to be realised, the wicked child grinned,
clenched her hands, and, grudging them their short-lived happiness,
seemed inclined to interrupt it. Some stronger motive, however, kept her
quiet.

What are the pair talking of now?--She hears her own name mentioned by
the maiden, who speaks of her with pity, almost with affection--pardons
her for the mischief she has done her, and hopes Heaven will pardon her
likewise. But she knows not the full extent of the girl's malignity, or
even her gentle heart must have been roused to resentment.

The little girl, however, feels no compunction. Infernal malice has
taken possession of her heart, and crushed every kindly feeling within
it. She hates all those that compassionate her, and returns evil for
good.

What are the lovers talking of now? Of their first meeting at Whalley
Abbey, when one was May Queen, and by her beauty and simplicity won the
other's heart, losing her own at the same time. A bright unclouded
career seemed to lie before them then. Wofully had it darkened since.
Alas! Alas!

The little girl smiles. She hopes they will go on. She likes to hear
them talk thus. Past happiness is ever remembered with a pang by the
wretched, and they _were_ happy then. Go on--go on!

But they are silent for awhile, for they wish to dwell on that hopeful,
that blissful season. And a nightingale, alighting on a bough above
them, pours forth its sweet plaint, as if in response to their tender
emotions. They praise the bird's song, and it suddenly ceases.

For the little girl, full of malevolence, stretches forth her hand, and
it drops to the ground, as if stricken by a dart.

"Is thy heart broken, poor bird?" exclaimed the young man, taking up the
hapless songster, yet warm and palpitating. "To die in the midst of thy
song--'tis hard."

"Very hard!" replied the maiden, tearfully. "Its fate seems a type of
our own."

The little girl laughed, but in a low tone, and to herself.

The pair then grew sad. This slight incident had touched them deeply,
and their conversation took a melancholy turn. They spoke of the blights
that had nipped their love in the bud--of the canker that had eaten into
its heart--of the destiny that so relentlessly pursued them, threatening
to separate them for ever.

The little girl laughed merrily.

Then they spoke of the grave--and of hope beyond the grave; and they
spoke cheerfully.

The little girl could laugh no longer, for with her all beyond the grave
was despair.

After that they spoke of the terrible power that Satan had lately
obtained in that unhappy district, of the arts he had employed, and of
the votaries he had won. Both prayed fervently that his snares might be
circumvented, and his rule destroyed.

During this part of the discourse the cat swelled to the size of a
tiger, and his eyes glowed like fiery coals. He made a motion as if he
would spring forward, but the voice of prayer arrested him, and he
shrank back to his former size.

"Poor Jennet is ensnared by the Fiend," murmured the maiden, "and will
perish eternally. Would I could save her!"

"It cannot be," replied the young man. "She is beyond redemption."

The little girl gnashed her teeth with rage.

"But my mother--I do not now despair of her," said Alizon. "She has
broken the bondage by which she was enchained, and, if she resists
temptation to the last, I am assured will be saved."

"Heaven aid her!" exclaimed Richard.

Scarcely were the words uttered, than the cat disappeared.

"Why, Tib!--where are yo, Tib? Ey want yo!" cried the little girl in a
low tone.

But the familiar did not respond to the call.

"Where con he ha' gone?" cried Jennet; "Tib! Tib!"

Still the cat came not.

"Then ey mun do the wark without him," pursued the little girl; "an ey
win no longer delay it."

And with this she crept stealthily round the arbour, and, approaching
the side where Richard sat, watched an opportunity of touching him
unperceived.

As her finger came in contact with his frame, a pang like death shot
through his heart, and he fell upon Alizon's shoulder.

"Are you ill?" she exclaimed, gazing at his pallid features, rendered
ghastly white by the moonlight.

Richard could make no reply, and Alizon, becoming dreadfully alarmed,
was about to fly for assistance, but the young man, by a great effort,
detained her.

"Ey mun now run an tell Mester Potts, so that hoo may be found wi' him,"
muttered Jennet, creeping away.

Just then Richard recovered his speech, but his words were faintly
uttered, and with difficulty.

"Alizon," he said, "I will not attempt to disguise my condition from
you. I am dying. And my death will be attributed to you--for evil-minded
persons have persuaded the King that you have bewitched me, and he will
believe the charge now. Oh! if you would ease the pangs of death for
me--if you would console my latest moments--leave me, and quit this
place, before it be too late."

"Oh! Richard," she cried distractedly; "you ask more than I can perform.
If you are indeed in such imminent danger, I will stay with you--will
die with you."

"No! live for me--live--save yourself, Alizon," implored the young man.
"Your danger is greater than mine. A dreadful death awaits you at the
stake! Oh! mercy, mercy, heaven! Spare her--in pity spare her!--Have we
not suffered enough? I can no more. Farewell for ever, Alizon--one
kiss--the last."

And as their lips met, his strength utterly forsook him, and he fell
backwards.

"One grave!" he murmured; "one grave, Alizon!"--And so, without a groan,
he expired.

Alizon neither screamed nor swooned, but remained in a state of
stupefaction, gazing at the body. As the moon fell upon the placid
features, they looked as if locked in slumber.

There he lay--the young, the brave, the beautiful, the loving, the
beloved. Fate had triumphed. Death had done his work; but he had only
performed half his task.

"One grave--one grave--it was his last wish--it shall be so!" she cried,
in frenzied tones, "I shall thus escape my enemies, and avoid the
horrible and shameful death to which they would doom me."

And she snatched the dagger from the ill-fated youth's side.

"Now, fate, I defy thee!" she cried, with a fearful laugh.

One last look at that calm beautiful face--one kiss of the cold lips,
which can no more return the endearment--and the dagger is pointed at
her breast.

But she is withheld by an arm of iron, and the weapon falls from her
grasp. She looks up. A tall figure, clothed in the mouldering
habiliments of a Cistertian monk, stands beside her. She knows the
vestments at once, for she has seen them before, hanging up in the
closet adjoining her mother's chamber at Whalley Abbey--and the features
of the ghostly monk seem familiar to her.

"Raise not thy hand against thyself," said the phantom, in a tone of
awful reproof. "It is the Fiend prompts thee to do it. He would take
advantage of thy misery to destroy thee."

"I took thee for the Fiend," replied Alizon, gazing at him with wonder
rather than with terror. "Who art thou?"

"The enemy of thy enemies, and therefore thy friend," replied the monk.
"I would have saved thy lover if I could, but his destiny was not to be
averted. But, rest content, I will avenge him."

"I do not want vengeance--I want to be with him," she replied,
frantically embracing the body.

"Thou wilt soon be with him," said the phantom, in tones of deep
significance. "Arise, and come with me. Thy mother needs thy
assistance."

"My mother!" exclaimed Alizon, clearing the blinding tresses from her
brow. "Where is she?"

"Follow me, and I will bring thee to her," said the monk.

"And leave him? I cannot!" cried Alizon, gazing wildly at the body.

"You must. A soul is at stake, and will perish if you come not," said
the monk. "He is at rest, and you will speedily rejoin him."

"With that assurance I will go," replied Alizon, with a last look at the
object of her love. "One grave--lay us in one grave!"

"It shall be done according to your wish," said the monk.

And he glided on with noiseless footsteps.

Alizon followed him along the terrace.

Presently they came to a dark yew-tree walk, leading to a labyrinth, and
tracking it swiftly, as well as the overarched and intricate path to
which it conducted, they entered a grotto, whence a flight of steps
descended to a subterranean passage, hewn out of the rock. Along this
passage, which was of some extent, the monk proceeded, and Alizon
followed him.

At last they came to another flight of steps, and here the monk stopped.

"We are now beneath the pavilion, where you will find your mother," he
said. "Mount! the way is clear before you. I have other work to do."

Alizon obeyed; and, as she advanced, was surprised to find the monk
gone. He had neither passed her nor ascended the steps, and must,
therefore, have sunk into the earth.




CHAPTER XII.--THE LAST HOUR.


Within the pavilion sat Alice Nutter. She was clad in deep mourning, but
her dress seemed disordered as if by hasty travel. Her looks were full
of anguish and terror; her blanched tresses, once so dark and beautiful,
hung dishevelled over her shoulders; and her thin hands were clasped in
supplication. Her cheeks were ashy pale, but on her brow was a bright
red mark, as if traced by a finger dipped in blood.

A lamp was burning on the table beside her. Near it was a skull, and
near this emblem of mortality an hourglass, running fast.

The windows and doors of the building were closed, and it would seem the
unhappy lady was a prisoner.

She had been brought there secretly that night, with what intent she
knew not; but she felt sure it was with no friendly design towards
herself. Early in the day three horsemen had arrived at her retreat in
Pendle Forest, and without making any charge against her, or explaining
whither they meant to take her, or indeed answering any inquiry, had
brought her off with them, and, proceeding across the country, had
arrived at a forester's hut on the outskirts of Hoghton Park. Here they
tarried till evening, placing her in a room by herself, and keeping
strict watch over her; and when the shadows of night fell, they conveyed
her through the woods, and by a private entrance to the gardens of the
Tower, and with equal secresy to the pavilion, where, setting a lamp
before her, they left her to her meditations. All refused to answer her
inquiries, but one of them, with a sinister smile, placed the hourglass
and skull beside her.

Left alone, the wretched lady vainly sought some solution of the
enigma--why she had been brought thither. She could not solve it; but
she determined, if her capture had been made by any lawful authorities,
to confess her guilt and submit to condign punishment.

Though the windows and doors were closed as before mentioned, sounds
from without reached her, and she heard confused and tumultuous noises
as if from a large assemblage. For what purpose were they met? Could it
be for her execution? No--there were strains of music, and bursts of
laughter. And yet she had heard that the burning of a witch was a
spectacle in which the populace delighted--that they looked upon it as a
show, like any other; and why should they not laugh, and have music at
it? But could she be executed without trial, without judgment? She knew
not. All she knew was she was guilty, and deserved to die. But when this
idea took possession of her, the laughter sounded in her ears like the
yells of demons, and the strains like the fearful harmonies she had
heard at weird sabbaths.

All at once she recollected with indescribable terror, that on this very
night the compact she had entered into with the Fiend expired. That at
midnight, unless by her penitence and prayers she had worked out her
salvation, he could claim her. She recollected also, and with increased
uneasiness, that the man who had set the hourglass on the table, and who
had regarded her with a sinister smile as he did so, had said it was
eleven o'clock! Her last hour then had arrived--nay, was partly spent,
and the moments were passing swiftly by.

The agony she endured at this thought was intense. She felt as if reason
were forsaking her, and, but for her determined efforts to resist it,
such a crisis might have occurred. But she knew that her eternal welfare
depended upon the preservation of her mental balance, and she strove to
maintain it, and in the end succeeded.

Her gaze was fixed intently on the hourglass. She saw the sand trickling
silently but swiftly down, like a current of life-blood, which, when it
ceased, life would cease with it. She saw the shining grains above
insensibly diminishing in quantity, and, as if she could arrest her
destiny by the act, she seized the glass, and would have turned it, but
the folly of the proceeding arrested her, and she set it down again.

Then horrible thoughts came upon her, crushing her and overwhelming her,
and she felt by anticipation all the torments she would speedily have to
endure. Oceans of fire, in which miserable souls were for ever tossing,
rolled before her. Yells, such as no human anguish can produce, smote
her ears. Monsters of frightful form yawned to devour her. Fiends, armed
with terrible implements of torture, such as the wildest imagination
cannot paint, menaced her. All hell, and its horrors, was there, its
dreadful gulf, its roaring furnaces, its rivers of molten metal, ever
burning, yet never consuming its victims. A hot sulphureous atmosphere
oppressed her, and a film of blood dimmed her sight.

She endeavoured to pray, but her tongue clove to the roof of her mouth.
She looked about for her Bible, but it had been left behind when she was
taken from her retreat. She had no safeguard--none.

Still the sand ran on.

New agonies assailed her. Hell was before her again, but in a new form,
and with new torments. She closed her eyes. She shut her ears. But she
saw it still, and heard its terrific yells.

Again she consults the hourglass. The sand is running on--ever
diminishing.

New torments assail her. She thinks of all she loves most on earth--of
her daughter! Oh! if Alizon were near her, she might pray for her--might
scare away these frightful visions--might save her. She calls to
her--but she answers not. No, she is utterly abandoned of God and man,
and must perish eternally.

Again she consults the hourglass. One quarter of an hour is all that
remains to her. Oh! that she could employ it in prayer! Oh! that she
could kneel--or even weep!

A large mirror hangs against the wall, and she is drawn towards it by an
irresistible impulse. She sees a figure within it--but she does not know
herself. Can that cadaverous object, with the white hair, that seems
newly-arisen from the grave, be she? It must be a phantom. No--she
touches her cheek, and finds it is real. But, ah! what is this red brand
upon her brow? It must be the seal of the demon. She tries to efface
it--but it will not come out. On the contrary, it becomes redder and
deeper.

Again she consults the glass. The sand is still running on. How many
minutes remain to her?

"Ten!" cried a voice, replying to her mental inquiry.--"Ten!"

And, turning, she perceived her familiar standing beside her.

"Thy time is wellnigh out, Alice Nutter," he said. "In ten minutes my
lord will claim thee."

"My compact with thy master is broken," she replied, summoning up all
her resolution. "I have long ceased to use the power bestowed upon me;
but, even if I had wished it, thou hast refused to serve me."

"I have refused to serve you, madam, because you have disobeyed the
express injunctions of my master," replied the familiar; "but your
apostasy does not free you from bondage. You have merely lost advantages
which you might have enjoyed. If you chose to dismiss me I could not
help it. Neither I nor my lord have been to blame. We have performed our
part of the contract."

"Why am I brought hither?" demanded Mistress Nutter.

"I will tell you," replied the familiar. "You were brought here by order
of the King. Your retreat was revealed to him by Master Potts, who
learnt it from Jennet Device. The sapient sovereign intended to confront
you with your daughter Alizon, who, like yourself, is accused of
witchcraft; but he will be disappointed--for when he comes for you, you
will be out of his reach--ha! ha!"

And he rubbed his hands at the jest.

"Alizon accused of witchcraft--say'st thou?" cried Mistress Nutter.

"Ay," replied the familiar. "She is suspected of bewitching Richard
Assheton, who has been done to death by Jennet Device. For one so young,
the little girl has certainly a rare turn for mischief. But no one will
know the real author of the crime, and Alizon will suffer for it."

"Heaven will not suffer such iniquity," said the lady.

"As you have nothing to do with heaven, madam, it is needless to refer
to it," said the familiar. "But it certainly is rather hard that one so
young as Alizon should perish."

"Can you save her?" asked Mistress Nutter.

"Oh! yes, I _could_ save her, but she will not let me," replied the
familiar, with a grin.

"No--no--it is impossible," cried the wretched woman. "And I cannot help
her."

"Perhaps you might," observed the tempter. "My master, whom you accuse
of harshness, is ever willing to oblige you. You have a few minutes
left--do you wish him to aid her? Command me, and I will obey you."

"This is some snare," thought Mistress Nutter; "I will resist it."

"You cannot be worse off than you are," remarked the familiar.

"I know not that," replied the lady. "What would'st thou do?"

"Whatever you command me, madam. I can, do nothing of my own accord.
Shall I bring your daughter here? Say so, and it shall be done."

"No--thou would'st ensnare me," she replied. "I well know thou hast no
power over her. Thou would'st place some phantasm before me. I would see
her, but not through thy agency."

"She is here," cried Alizon, opening the door of a closet, and rushing
towards her mother, who instantly locked her in her arms.

"Pray for me, my child," cried Mistress Nutter, mastering her emotion,
"or I shall be snatched from you for ever. My moments are numbered.
Pray--pray!"

Alizon fell on her knees, and prayed fervently.

"You waste your breath," cried the familiar, in a mocking tone. "Never
till the brand shall disappear from her brow, and the writing, traced in
her blood, shall vanish from this parchment, can she be saved. She is
mine."

"Pray, Alizon, pray!" shrieked Mistress Nutter.

"I will tear her in pieces if she does not cease," cried the familiar,
assuming a terrible shape, and menacing her with claws like those of a
wild beast.

"Pray thou, mother!" cried Alizon.

"I cannot," replied the lady.

"I will kill her if she but makes the attempt," howled the demon.

"But try, mother, try!" cried Alizon.

The poor lady dropped on her knees, and raised her hands in humble
supplication--"Heaven forgive me!" she exclaimed.

The demon seized the hourglass.

"The sand is out--her term has expired--she is mine!" he cried.

"Clasp thy arms tightly round me, my child. He cannot take me from
thee," shrieked the agonised woman.

"Release her, Alizon, or I will slay thee likewise," roared the demon.

"Never," she replied; "thou canst not overcome me. Ha!" she added
joyfully, "the brand has disappeared from her brow."

"And the writing from the parchment," howled the demon; "but I will have
her notwithstanding."

And he plunged his claws into Alice Nutter's flesh. But her daughter
held her fast.

"Oh! hold me, my child--hold me, or I am lost!" shrieked the lady.

"Be warned, and let her go, or thy life shall pay for her's," cried the
demon.

"My life for her's, willingly," replied Alizon.

"Then take thy fate," rejoined the evil spirit.

And placing his hand upon her heart, it instantly ceased to beat.

"Mother, thou art saved--saved!" exclaimed Alizon, throwing out her
arms.

And gazing at her for an instant with a seraphic look, she fell
backwards, and expired.

"Thou art mine," roared the demon, seizing Mistress Nutter by the hair,
and dragging her from her daughter's body, to which she clung
desperately.

"Help!--help!" she cried.

"Thou mayst call, but thy cries will be unheeded," rejoined the familiar
with mocking laughter.

"Thou liest, false fiend!" said Mistress Nutter. "Heaven will help me
now."

