
"She knew I would sweep the kennel for her on hands and knees if she
would have me," said Sir Chris, "and at the first of it she knew not
the ill quarters of the town as I did, and bade me make search for her
and ask questions. But 'twas not long before she found her way herself
and learned that a tall, strong beauty can do more to reach hearts than
a red-faced old man can. Lord, how they love and fear her! And among
the honest folk Jack Oxon wronged--poor tradesmen he ruined by his
trickery, and simple working-folk who lost their all through him--they
would kiss the dust her shoe hath trod. His debts she hath paid, his
victims she hath rescued, the wounds he dealt she hath healed and made
sound flesh, and for ten years she hath done it!"

Her Grace rose to her feet, the rose uplifted in a listening gesture.
From the park below there floated up the lilting music of a dance, a
light, unrustic measure played by their own musicians.

"The dancing begins," she said. "Hark! the dancing begins."

Mistress Anne put out her hand and caught at her sister's dress and
held a fold of its richness in her trembling hand, though her Grace was
not aware of what she did.

"How sweet the music sounds," the poor gentlewoman said, nervously.
"How sweet it sounds."

My Lady Betty Tantillion held up her hand as the Duchess, a moment
since, had held the rose.

"I have heard that tune before," she cried.

"And I," said Lord Charles.

"And I," Sir Harry Granville echoed.

Lady Betty broke into a shiver.

"Why," she cried, "how strange--at just this moment. We danced to it at
the ball at Dunstanwolde House the very night 'twas made known Sir John
Oxon had disappeared."

The Duchess held the rose poised in her hand and slowly bent her head.

"Yes," she said, "'tis the very tune."

She stood among them--my lord Duke remembered it later--the centre
figure of a sort of circle, some sitting, some standing--his Grace of
Marlborough, Mistress Anne, Osmonde himself, the country gentlemen, my
Lady Betty and her swains, and others who drew near. She was the
centre, standing in the starlight, her rose held in her hand.

"Lord, 'twas a strange thing," said Sir Christopher, thoughtfully,
"that a man could disappear like that and leave no trace--no trace."

"Has--all enquiry--ceased?" her Grace asked, quietly.

"There was not much even at first, save from his creditors," said Lord
Charles, with a laugh.

"Ay, but 'twas strange," said old Sir Christopher. "I've thought and
thought what could have come of him. Why, Clo, _thou_ wast the one who
saw him last. What dost _thou_ think?"

In the park below there was a sudden sweet swelling of the music: the
dancers had joined in with their voices.

"Yes," said the Duchess, "'twas I who saw him last." And for a few
seconds all paused to listen to the melody in the air. But Sir
Christopher came back to his theme.

"What sort of humour was the man in?" he asked. "Did he complain of 's
lot?"

Her Grace hesitated a second, as one who thought, and then shook her
head.

"No," she answered, and no other word.

"Did he speak of taking a journey?" said Lady Betty.

And the Duchess shook her head slow again, and answered as before,
"No."

And the music swelled with fresh added voices, and floated up gayer and
more sweet.

"Was he dressed for travel?" asked Lord Charles, he being likely to
think first of the meaning of a man's dress.

"No," said her Grace.

And then my lord Duke drew near behind her, and spoke over her
shoulder.

"Did he bid you any farewell?" he said.

She had not known he was so close, and gave a great start and dropped
her rose upon the terrace. Before she answered, she stooped herself and
picked it up.

"No," she said, very low. "No; none."

"Then," his Grace said, "I will tell you what _I_ think."

"You!" said my Lady Betty. "Has your Grace thought?"

"Often," he answered. "Who has not, at some time? I--knew more of the
man than many. More than once his life touched mine."

"Yours!" they cried.

He waved his hand with the gesture of a man who would sweep away some
memory.

"Yes," he said; "once I saw the end of a poor soul he had maddened, and
'twas a cruel thing." He turned his face towards his wife.

"The morning that he left your Grace," he said, "'tis my thought _he
went not far_."

"Not far?" the party exclaimed, but the Duchess joined not in the
chorus.

"Between Dunstanwolde House and his lodgings," he went on, "lie some of
the worst haunts in London. He was well known there, and not by friends
but by enemies. Perchance some tortured creature who owed him a bitter
debt may have lain in wait and paid it."

The Duchess turned and gazed at him with large eyes.

"What--" she said, almost hoarsely, "what do you mean?"

"There were men," he answered, gravely--"husbands, fathers, and
brothers--there were women he had driven to despair and madness, who
might well have struck him down."

"You mean," said her Grace, almost in a whisper, "you mean that he--was
murdered?"

"Nay," he replied, "not murdered--struck a frenzied blow and killed,
and it might have been by one driven mad with anguish and unknowing
what he did."

Her Grace caught her breath.

"As 'twas with the poor man I told you of," she broke forth as if in
eagerness, "the one who died on Tyburn Tree?"

"Yes," was his answer.

"Perhaps--you are right," she said, and passed her hand across her
brow; "perhaps--you--are right."

"But there was found no trace," Sir Christopher cried out; "no trace."

"Ah!" said my lord Duke, slowly, "that is the mystery. A dead man's
body is not easy hid."

The Duchess broke forth laughing--almost wildly. The whole group
started at the sound.

"Nay, nay!" she cried. "What dark things do we talk of! Sir
Christopher, Sir Christopher, 'twas you who set us on. A dead man's
body is not easy hid!"

"'Tis enough to make a woman shudder," cried Lady Betty, hysterically.

"Yes," said her Grace. "See, I am shuddering--I, who am built of
Wildairs iron and steel." And she held out her hands to them--her white
hands--and indeed they were trembling like leaves.


The evil thing they had spoke of had surely sunk deep into her soul and
troubled it, though she had so laughed and lightly changed the subject
of their talk, for in the night she had an awful dream, and her lord,
wakened from deep slumber--as he had been once before--started up to
behold her standing in the middle of the chamber--a tall white figure
with its arms outflung as if in wild despair, while she cried out in
frenzy to the darkness.

"I have _killed_ thee--I have _killed_ thee," she wailed, "though I
meant it not--even hell itself doth know. Thou art a dead man--and
_this_ is the worst of all!"

"'Tis a dream," he cried aloud to her and clutched her in his warm,
strong arms. "'Tis a dream--a dream! Awake!--Awake!--Awake!"

And she awoke and fell upon her knees, sobbing as those sob who are
roused from such a horror.

"A dream!--a dream!--a dream!" she cried. "And 'tis _you_ awake me!
You--Gerald--Gerald!--And I have been ten years--ten years your wife!"




_CHAPTER XXXII_

_In the Turret Chamber--and in Camylott Wood_


When the great soldier returned to Blenheim Castle, his Grace of
Osmonde bore him company and having spent a few days in his society at
that great house returned to town, from whence he came again to
Camylott.

He reached there on a heavenly day, which seemed to him more peaceful
and more sweet than any day the summer had so far brought, though it
had been a fair one. Many days had been bright and full of flower-scent
and rustling of green leaves, and overarched by tender blueness with
white clouds softly floating therein, but this one, as he rode, he
thought held something in its beauty which seemed to make the earth
seem nearer Heaven and Heaven more fair to lifted mortal eyes. He
thought this as his horse bore him over the white road, he thought it
as he rode across the moor, 'twas in his mind as he passed through the
village and saw the white cottages standing warm and peaceful in the
sunshine, with good wives at the doors or at their windows, and
children playing on the green, who stopped and bobbed courtesies to him
or pulled their forelocks, grinning.

Joan Bush was at her gate and stepped out and dipped a courtesy with
appealing civility.

"Your Grace," she said, "if I might make so bold--poor Mistress Anne--"
And having said so much checked herself in much confusion. "I lose my
wits," she said; "your Grace's pardon. Your Grace has been, to town and
but now comes back, and will not know. But we so love the kind
gentlewoman--" and she mopped her eyes.

"You mean that Mistress Anne is worse?" he said.

"The poor lady fell into a sudden strange swoon but an hour ago," she
answered. "My Matthew, who was at the Tower of an errand said she came
in from the flower-garden and sank lifeless. And the servants who
carried her to her chamber say 'twas like death. And she hath been so
long fading. And we know full well the end must come soon."

My lord Duke rode on. A fulness tightened his throat and he looked up
at the blue sky.

"Poor Anne! Kind Anne!" he said. "Pure heart! I could think 'twas for
the passing of her soul the day was made so fair."

At the park gates the woman from the lodge stood at her door and made
her obeisance tearfully. She was an honest soul to whom her Grace's
sister seemed a saint from Heaven.

"What is the last news?" said my lord Duke, speaking more from kindness
than aught else.

"That the dear lady lies in her bed in the Turret chamber and her Grace
watches with her alone. Oh, my lord Duke, God calls another angel to
Himself this day!"

The very air was still with a strange stillness. The Tower itself rose
white and clear against the blue as though its battlements and fair
turrets might be part of the Eternal City. This strange fancy passed
through his Grace's mind as he rode towards it. The ivy hung thick
about the window of Anne's chamber in the South Tower. 'Twas a room she
loved and had spent long, peaceful days in, and had fitted as a little
shrine. Her lovingness had taught her to feed the doves from it, and
they had grown to be her friends and companions, and now a little cloud
of them flew about and lighted on the turrets and clung to the festoons
of ivy, and flew softly about as if they were drawn to the place by
some strange knowledge and waited for that which was to come to pass.
Two or three sate upon the deep window-ledge and cooed as if they told
those not so near what they could see inside the quiet room.

On the terrace below the elder children stood John and Gerald and
Daphne and Anne. They waited too, as the doves did, and their young
faces were lifted that they might watch the window, and they were very
sweet and gravely tender and unafraid and fair.

When their father drew near them 'twas the child Daphne who spoke,
putting her hand in his and meeting his eyes with a lovely look.

"Father," she said, "we think that Mother Anne lies dying in her room.
We are not afraid; mother has told us that to die is only as if a bird
was let to fly out into the blue sky. And mother is with her, and we
are waiting because we think--perhaps--we are not sure--but perhaps we
might see her soul fly out of the window like a white bird. It seems as
if the doves were waiting too."

My lord Duke kissed her and passed on.

"You may see it," he said, gently. "Who knows--and if you see it, sure
it will be white."

And he went quietly through the house and up the staircase leading to
Anne's tower-chamber, and the pretty apartment her Grace had prepared
for her so lovingly to spend quiet hours in when she would be alone.
This apartment led into the chamber, but now it was quite empty, for
the Duchess was with her sister, who lay on the bed in the room within,
where the ivy hung in festoons about the high window, which seemed to
look up into the blue sky itself and shut out all the earth below and
only look on Heaven.

To enter seemed like entering some sacred shrine where a pure saint
lay, and upon the threshold his Grace lingered, almost fearing to go
in and break upon the awful tenderness of this last hour, and the last
words he heard the loving creature murmuring, while the being she had
so worshipped knelt beside her.

"'Twas love," he heard, "'twas love. What matter if I gave my soul for
you?"

He drew back with a quick sad beat of the heart. Poor, tender
soul--poor woman who had loved and given no sign--and only in her dying
dared to speak.

And then there came a cry--and 'twas the voice of her he loved--and he
stood spellbound. 'Twas a cry of anguish--of fear--of horror and
dismay. 'Twas her voice as he had heard it ring out in the blackness of
her dream--her dear voice harsh with woe and broken into moaning--her
dear voice which he had heard murmuring love to him--crooning over her
children--laughing like music! And the torrent of words which she
poured forth made his blood cold, and yet as they fell upon his ear he
knew--yes, now he _knew_--revealed no new story to him, even though it
had been until that hour untold. No, 'twas not new, for through many an
hour when he had marked the shadow in her eyes he had vaguely guessed
some fatal burden lay upon her soul--and had striven to understand.

"And then I struck him with my whip," he heard, "knowing nothing, not
seeing, only striking like a goaded, dying thing. And he fell--he
fell--and all was done."


None heard or saw my lord Duke when, later, he passed out from the
empty room. He went forth into the fair day again, and through the Park
and into Camylott Wood. The deep amber light was there, and the
gold-green stillness, and he passed onward till he reached the great
wood's depths, and stood beneath an oak-tree's broad-spread branches,
leaning his back against the huge rough trunk, his arms folded.

This was her secret burden--this. And Nature had so moulded him that he
could look upon it with just, unflinching eyes, his soul filled with a
god-like, awful pity.

In a walled-in cellar in the deserted Dunstanwolde House lay, waiting
for the call of Judgment Day, a handful of evil dust which once had
been a man--one whose each day of life from his youth upward had
seemed, as it had passed, to leave black dregs in some poor
fellow-creature's cup. One frantic, unthinking blow struck in terror
and madness had ended him and all his evil doing, but left her standing
frenzied at the awfulness of the thing which had fallen upon her soul
in her first hour of Heaven. And all her being had risen in revolt at
this most monstrous woe of chance, and in her torture she had cried
out that in that hour she would not be struck down.

"Of ending his base life I had never thought," he had heard her wail,
"though I had thought to end my own. But when Fate struck the blow for
me, I swore that carrion should not taint my whole life through."

To atone for this she had lived her life of passionate penance.
Remembering this, she had prayed Heaven strike and blight her, in fear
that she herself should blight the noble and the innocent things she
loved. And while she had thought she bore the burden all alone, the
gentle sister, who had so worshipped her, had known her secret and
borne it with her silently. In dying she had revealed it, with
trembling and piteous love, and this my lord Duke had heard, and her
pure words as she had died.

"Anne! Anne!" the anguished voice had cried. "Must he know--my Gerald?
Must I tell him all? If so I must, I will--upon my knees!"

"Nay, tell him not," was faintly breathed in answer. "Let God tell
him--who understands."

"'Tis in myself," my lord Duke said at last, through his shut teeth,
"'tis in _myself_ to have struck the blow, and had I done it and found
him lie dead before me--in her dear name I swear, and in a new shriven
soul's presence, for sure the pure thing is near--I would have hid it
as she has done; for _naught_ should have torn her from me! And for her
sin, if sin it is counted, I will atone with her; and as she does her
penance, will do mine. And if, at the end of all things, she be called
to Judgment Bar, I will go with her and stand by her side. For her life
is my life, and her soul my soul, her sentence my sentence; and being
her love I will bear it with her, and pray Him who judges to lay the
burden heavier upon me than upon her."

