
The two wretches stood staring at each other--you might have heard their
hearts beat!  Calenus, the less bold by nature, but the more griping,
recovered first.

'We must to our task, and away!' he said, in a low whisper, frightened
at his own voice.  He stepped to the threshold, paused, crossed over the
heated floor and his dead brethren to the sacred chapel, and called to
Burbo to follow.  But the gladiator quaked, and drew back.

'So much the better,' thought Calenus; 'the more will be my booty.'
Hastily he loaded himself with the more portable treasures of the
temple; and thinking no more of his comrade, hurried from the sacred
place.  A sudden flash of lightning from the mount showed to Burbo, who
stood motionless at the threshold, the flying and laden form of the
priest.  He took heart; he stepped forth to join him, when a tremendous
shower of ashes fell right before his feet.  The gladiator shrank back
once more.  Darkness closed him in.  But the shower continued
fast--fast; its heaps rose high and suffocatingly--deathly vapors
steamed from them.  The wretch gasped for breath--he sought in despair
again to fly--the ashes had blocked up the threshold--he shrieked as his
feet shrank from the boiling fluid. How could he escape? he could not
climb to the open space; nay, were he able, he could not brave its
horrors.  It were best to remain in the cells, protected, at least, from
the fatal air. He sat down and clenched his teeth.  By degrees, the
atmosphere from without--stifling and venomous--crept into the chamber.
He could endure it no longer.  His eyes, glaring round, rested on a
sacrificial axe, which some priest had left in the chamber: he seized
it. With the desperate strength of his gigantic arm, he attempted to hew
his way through the walls.

Meanwhile, the streets were already thinned; the crowd had hastened to
disperse itself under shelter; the ashes began to fill up the lower
parts of the town; but, here and there, you heard the steps of fugitives
cranching them warily, or saw their pale and haggard faces by the blue
glare of the lightning, or the more unsteady glare of torches, by which
they endeavored to steer their steps. But ever and anon, the boiling
water, or the straggling ashes, mysterious and gusty winds, rising and
dying in a breath, extinguished these wandering lights, and with them
the last living hope of those who bore them.

In the street that leads to the gate of Herculaneum, Clodius now bent
his perplexed and doubtful way.  'If I can gain the open country,'
thought he, 'doubtless there will be various vehicles beyond the gate,
and Herculaneum is not far distant.  Thank Mercury!  I have little to
lose, and that little is about me!'

'Holla!--help there--help!' cried a querulous and frightened voice.  'I
have fallen down--my torch has gone out--my slaves have deserted me.  I
am Diomed--the rich Diomed--ten thousand sesterces to him who helps me!'

At the same moment, Clodius felt himself caught by the feet. 'Ill
fortune to thee--let me go, fool,' said the gambler.

'Oh, help me up!--give me thy hand!'

'There--rise!'

'Is this Clodius?  I know the voice!  Whither fliest thou?'

'Towards Herculaneum.'

'Blessed be the gods! our way is the same, then, as far as the gate.
Why not take refuge in my villa?  Thou knowest the long range of
subterranean cellars beneath the basement--that shelter, what shower can
penetrate?'

'You speak well,' said Clodius musingly.  'And by storing the cellar
with food, we can remain there even some days, should these wondrous
storms endure so long.'

'Oh, blessed be he who invented gates to a city!' cried Diomed.
'See!--they have placed a light within yon arch: by that let us guide
our steps.'

The air was now still for a few minutes: the lamp from the gate streamed
out far and clear: the fugitives hurried on--they gained the gate--they
passed by the Roman sentry; the lightning flashed over his livid face
and polished helmet, but his stern features were composed even in their
awe!  He remained erect and motionless at his post.  That hour itself
had not animated the machine of the ruthless majesty of Rome into the
reasoning and self-acting man.  There he stood, amidst the crashing
elements: he had not received the permission to desert his station and
escape.

Diomed and his companion hurried on, when suddenly a female form rushed
athwart their way.  It was the girl whose ominous voice had been raised
so often and so gladly in anticipation of 'the merry show'.

'Oh, Diomed!' she cried, 'shelter! shelter!  See'--pointing to an infant
clasped to her breast--'see this little one!--it is mine!--the child of
shame!  I have never owned it till this hour.  But now I remember I am a
mother!  I have plucked it from the cradle of its nurse: she had fled!
Who could think of the babe in such an hour, but she who bore it?  Save
it! save it!'

'Curses on thy shrill voice!  Away, harlot!' muttered Clodius between
his ground teeth.

'Nay, girl,' said the more humane Diomed; 'follow if thou wilt. This
way--this way--to the vaults!'

They hurried on--they arrived at the house of Diomed--they laughed aloud
as they crossed the threshold, for they deemed the danger over.

Diomed ordered his slaves to carry down into the subterranean gallery,
before described, a profusion of food and oil for lights; and there
Julia, Clodius, the mother and her babe, the greater part of the slaves,
and some frightened visitors and clients of the neighborhood, sought
their shelter.



Chapter VII

THE PROGRESS OF THE DESTRUCTION.

THE cloud, which had scattered so deep a murkiness over the day, had now
settled into a solid and impenetrable mass.  It resembled less even the
thickest gloom of a night in the open air than the close and blind
darkness of some narrow room.  But in proportion as the blackness
gathered, did the lightnings around Vesuvius increase in their vivid and
scorching glare.  Nor was their horrible beauty confined to the usual
hues of fire; no rainbow ever rivalled their varying and prodigal dyes.
Now brightly blue as the most azure depth of a southern sky--now of a
livid and snakelike green, darting restlessly to and fro as the folds of
an enormous serpent--now of a lurid and intolerable crimson, gushing
forth through the columns of smoke, far and wide, and lighting up the
whole city from arch to arch--then suddenly dying into a sickly
paleness, like the ghost of their own life!

In the pauses of the showers, you heard the rumbling of the earth
beneath, and the groaning waves of the tortured sea; or, lower still,
and audible but to the watch of intensest fear, the grinding and hissing
murmur of the escaping gases through the chasms of the distant mountain.
Sometimes the cloud appeared to break from its solid mass, and, by the
lightning, to assume quaint and vast mimicries of human or of monster
shapes, striding across the gloom, hurtling one upon the other, and
vanishing swiftly into the turbulent abyss of shade; so that, to the
eyes and fancies of the affrighted wanderers, the unsubstantial vapors
were as the bodily forms of gigantic foes--the agents of terror and of
death.

The ashes in many places were already knee-deep; and the boiling showers
which came from the steaming breath of the volcano forced their way into
the houses, bearing with them a strong and suffocating vapor.  In some
places, immense fragments of rock, hurled upon the house roofs, bore
down along the streets masses of confused ruin, which yet more and more,
with every hour, obstructed the way; and, as the day advanced, the
motion of the earth was more sensibly felt--the footing seemed to slide
and creep--nor could chariot or litter be kept steady, even on the most
level ground.

Sometimes the huger stones striking against each other as they fell,
broke into countless fragments, emitting sparks of fire, which caught
whatever was combustible within their reach; and along the plains beyond
the city the darkness was now terribly relieved; for several houses, and
even vineyards, had been set on flames; and at various intervals the
fires rose suddenly and fiercely against the solid gloom.  To add to
this partial relief of the darkness, the citizens had, here and there,
in the more public places, such as the porticoes of temples and the
entrances to the forum, endeavored to place rows of torches; but these
rarely continued long; the showers and the winds extinguished them, and
the sudden darkness into which their sudden birth was converted had
something in it doubly terrible and doubly impressing on the impotence
of human hopes, the lesson of despair.

Frequently, by the momentary light of these torches, parties of
fugitives encountered each other, some hurrying towards the sea, others
flying from the sea back to the land; for the ocean had retreated
rapidly from the shore--an utter darkness lay over it, and upon its
groaning and tossing waves the storm of cinders and rock fell without
the protection which the streets and roofs afforded to the land.
Wild--haggard--ghastly with supernatural fears, these groups encountered
each other, but without the leisure to speak, to consult, to advise; for
the showers fell now frequently, though not continuously, extinguishing
the lights, which showed to each band the deathlike faces of the other,
and hurrying all to seek refuge beneath the nearest shelter.  The whole
elements of civilization were broken up.  Ever and anon, by the
flickering lights, you saw the thief hastening by the most solemn
authorities of the law, laden with, and fearfully chuckling over, the
produce of his sudden gains.  If, in the darkness, wife was separated
from husband, or parent from child, vain was the hope of reunion.  Each
hurried blindly and confusedly on.  Nothing in all the various and
complicated machinery of social life was left save the primal law of
self-preservation!

Through this awful scene did the Athenian wade his way, accompanied by
Ione and the blind girl.  Suddenly, a rush of hundreds, in their path to
the sea, swept by them.  Nydia was torn from the side of Glaucus, who,
with Ione, was borne rapidly onward; and when the crowd (whose forms
they saw not, so thick was the gloom) were gone, Nydia was still
separated from their side. Glaucus shouted her name.  No answer came.
They retraced their steps--in vain: they could not discover her--it was
evident she had been swept along some opposite direction by the human
current.  Their friend, their preserver, was lost!  And hitherto Nydia
had been their guide.  Her blindness rendered the scene familiar to her
alone.  Accustomed, through a perpetual night, to thread the windings of
the city, she had led them unerringly towards the sea-shore, by which
they had resolved to hazard an escape.  Now, which way could they wend?
all was rayless to them--a maze without a clue.  Wearied, despondent,
bewildered, they, however, passed along, the ashes falling upon their
heads, the fragmentary stones dashing up in sparkles before their feet.

'Alas! alas!' murmured Ione, 'I can go no farther; my steps sink among
the scorching cinders.  Fly, dearest!--beloved, fly! and leave me to my
fate!'

'Hush, my betrothed! my bride!  Death with thee is sweeter than life
without thee!  Yet, whither--oh! whither, can we direct ourselves
through the gloom? Already it seems that we have made but a circle, and
are in the very spot which we quitted an hour ago.'

'O gods! yon rock--see, it hath riven the roof before us!  It is death
to move through the streets!'

'Blessed lightning!  See, Ione--see! the portico of the Temple of
Fortune is before us.  Let us creep beneath it; it will protect us from
the showers.'

He caught his beloved in his arms, and with difficulty and labor gained
the temple.  He bore her to the remoter and more sheltered part of the
portico, and leaned over her, that he might shield her, with his own
form, from the lightning and the showers!  The beauty and the
unselfishness of love could hallow even that dismal time!

'Who is there?' said the trembling and hollow voice of one who had
preceded them in their place of refuge.  'Yet, what matters?--the crush
of the ruined world forbids to us friends or foes.'

Ione turned at the sound of the voice, and, with a faint shriek, cowered
again beneath the arms of Glaucus: and he, looking in the direction of
the voice, beheld the cause of her alarm.  Through the darkness glared
forth two burning eyes--the lightning flashed and lingered athwart the
temple--and Glaucus, with a shudder, perceived the lion to which he had
been doomed couched beneath the pillars--and, close beside it, unwitting
of the vicinity, lay the giant form of him who had accosted them--the
wounded gladiator, Niger.

That lightning had revealed to each other the form of beast and man; yet
the instinct of both was quelled.  Nay, the lion crept nearer and nearer
to the gladiator, as for companionship; and the gladiator did not recede
or tremble.  The revolution of Nature had dissolved her lighter terrors
as well as her wonted ties.

While they were thus terribly protected, a group of men and women,
bearing torches, passed by the temple.  They were of the congregation of
the Nazarenes; and a sublime and unearthly emotion had not, indeed,
quelled their awe, but it had robbed awe of fear.  They had long
believed, according to the error of the early Christians, that the Last
Day was at hand; they imagined now that the Day had come.

'Woe! woe!' cried, in a shrill and piercing voice, the elder at their
head. 'Behold! the Lord descendeth to judgment!  He maketh fire come
down from heaven in the sight of men!  Woe! woe! ye strong and mighty!
Woe to ye of the fasces and the purple!  Woe to the idolater and the
worshipper of the beast!  Woe to ye who pour forth the blood of saints,
and gloat over the death-pangs of the sons of God!  Woe to the harlot of
the sea!--woe! woe!'

And with a loud and deep chorus, the troop chanted forth along the wild
horrors of the air, 'Woe to the harlot of the sea!--woe! woe!'

The Nazarenes paced slowly on, their torches still flickering in the
storm, their voices still raised in menace and solemn warning, till,
lost amid the windings in the streets, the darkness of the atmosphere
and the silence of death again fell over the scene.

There was one of the frequent pauses in the showers, and Glaucus
encouraged Ione once more to proceed.  Just as they stood, hesitating,
on the last step of the portico, an old man, with a bag in his right
hand and leaning upon a youth, tottered by.  The youth bore a torch.
Glaucus recognized the two as father and son--miser and prodigal.

'Father,' said the youth, 'if you cannot move more swiftly, I must leave
you, or we both perish!'

'Fly, boy, then, and leave thy sire!'

'But I cannot fly to starve; give me thy bag of gold!' And the youth
snatched at it.

'Wretch! wouldst thou rob thy father?'

'Ay! who can tell the tale in this hour?  Miser, perish!'

The boy struck the old man to the ground, plucked the bag from his
relaxing hand, and fled onward with a shrill yell.

'Ye gods!' cried Glaucus: 'are ye blind, then, even in the dark? Such
crimes may well confound the guiltless with the guilty in one common
ruin.  Ione, on!--on!'



Chapter VIII

ARBACES ENCOUNTERS GLAUCUS AND IONE.

ADVANCING, as men grope for escape in a dungeon, Ione and her lover
continued their uncertain way.  At the moments when the volcanic
lightnings lingered over the streets, they were enabled, by that awful
light, to steer and guide their progress: yet, little did the view it
presented to them cheer or encourage their path.  In parts, where the
ashes lay dry and uncommixed with the boiling torrents, cast upward from
the mountain at capricious intervals, the surface of the earth presented
a leprous and ghastly white.  In other places, cinder and rock lay
matted in heaps, from beneath which emerged the half-hid limbs of some
crushed and mangled fugitive.  The groans of the dying were broken by
wild shrieks of women's terror--now near, now distant--which, when heard
in the utter darkness, were rendered doubly appalling by the crushing
sense of helplessness and the uncertainty of the perils around; and
clear and distinct through all were the mighty and various noises from
the Fatal Mountain; its rushing winds; its whirling torrents; and, from
time to time, the burst and roar of some more fiery and fierce
explosion.  And ever as the winds swept howling along the street, they
bore sharp streams of burning dust, and such sickening and poisonous
vapors, as took away, for the instant, breath and consciousness,
followed by a rapid revulsion of the arrested blood, and a tingling
sensation of agony trembling through every nerve and fibre of the frame.

'Oh, Glaucus! my beloved! my own!--take me to thy arms!  One embrace!
let me feel thy arms around me--and in that embrace let me die--I can no
more!'

'For my sake, for my life--courage, yet, sweet Ione--my life is linked
with thine: and see--torches--this way!  Lo! how they brave the Wind!
Ha! they live through the storm--doubtless, fugitives to the sea! we
will join them.'

As if to aid and reanimate the lovers, the winds and showers came to a
sudden pause; the atmosphere was profoundly still--the mountain seemed
at rest, gathering, perhaps, fresh fury for its next burst; the
torch-bearers moved quickly on.  'We are nearing the sea,' said, in a
calm voice, the person at their head.  'Liberty and wealth to each slave
who survives this day!  Courage!  I tell you that the gods themselves
have assured me of deliverance.  On!'

Redly and steadily the torches flashed full on the eyes of Glaucus and
Ione, who lay trembling and exhausted on his bosom.  Several slaves were
bearing, by the light, panniers and coffers, heavily laden; in front of
them--a drawn sword in his hand--towered the lofty form of Arbaces.

'By my fathers!' cried the Egyptian, 'Fate smiles upon me even through
these horrors, and, amidst the dreadest aspects of woe and death, bodes
me happiness and love.  Away, Greek!  I claim my ward, Ione!'

'Traitor and murderer!' cried Glaucus, glaring upon his foe, 'Nemesis
hath guided thee to my revenge!--a just sacrifice to the shades of
Hades, that now seem loosed on earth.  Approach--touch but the hand of
Ione, and thy weapon shall be as a reed--I will tear thee limb from
limb!'

Suddenly, as he spoke, the place became lighted with an intense and
lurid glow.  Bright and gigantic through the darkness, which closed
around it like the walls of hell, the mountain shone--a pile of fire!
Its summit seemed riven in two; or rather, above its surface there
seemed to rise two monster shapes, each confronting each, as Demons
contending for a world.  These were of one deep blood-red hue of fire,
which lighted up the whole atmosphere far and wide; but, below, the
nether part of the mountain was still dark and shrouded, save in three
places, adown which flowed, serpentine and irregular, rivers of the
molten lava.  Darkly red through the profound gloom of their banks, they
flowed slowly on, as towards the devoted city. Over the broadest there
seemed to spring a cragged and stupendous arch, from which, as from the
jaws of hell, gushed the sources of the sudden Phlegethon.  And through
the stilled air was heard the rattling of the fragments of rock,
hurtling one upon another as they were borne down the fiery
cataracts--darkening, for one instant, the spot where they fell, and
suffused the next, in the burnished hues of the flood along which they
floated!

The slaves shrieked aloud, and, cowering, hid their faces.  The Egyptian
himself stood transfixed to the spot, the glow lighting up his
commanding features and jewelled robes.  High behind him rose a tall
column that supported the bronze statue of Augustus; and the imperial
image seemed changed to a shape of fire!

With his left hand circled round the form of Ione--with his right arm
raised in menace, and grasping the stilus which was to have been his
weapon in the arena, and which he still fortunately bore about him, with
his brow knit, his lips apart, the wrath and menace of human passions
arrested as by a charm, upon his features, Glaucus fronted the Egyptian!

Arbaces turned his eyes from the mountain--they rested on the form of
Glaucus!  He paused a moment: 'Why,' he muttered, 'should I hesitate?
Did not the stars foretell the only crisis of imminent peril to which I
was subjected?--Is not that peril past?'

'The soul,' cried he aloud, 'can brave the wreck of worlds and the wrath
of imaginary gods!  By that soul will I conquer to the last! Advance,
slaves!--Athenian, resist me, and thy blood be on thine own head!  Thus,
then, I regain Ione!'

He advanced one step--it was his last on earth!  The ground shook
beneath him with a convulsion that cast all around upon its surface.  A
simultaneous crash resounded through the city, as down toppled many a
roof and pillar!--the lightning, as if caught by the metal, lingered an
instant on the Imperial Statue--then shivered bronze and column! Down
fell the ruin, echoing along the street, and riving the solid pavement
where it crashed!--The prophecy of the stars was fulfilled!

The sound--the shock, stunned the Athenian for several moments. When he
recovered, the light still illuminated the scene--the earth still slid
and trembled beneath!  Ione lay senseless on the ground; but he saw her
not yet--his eyes were fixed upon a ghastly face that seemed to emerge,
without limbs or trunk, from the huge fragments of the shattered
column--a face of unutterable pain, agony, and despair!  The eyes shut
and opened rapidly, as if sense were not yet fled; the lips quivered and
grinned--then sudden stillness and darkness fell over the features, yet
retaining that aspect of horror never to be forgotten!

So perished the wise Magician--the great Arbaces--the Hermes of the
Burning Belt--the last of the royalty of Egypt!



Chapter IX

THE DESPAIR OF THE LOVERS.  THE CONDITION OF THE MULTITUDE.

GLAUCUS turned in gratitude but in awe, caught Ione once more in his
arms, and fled along the street, that was yet intensely luminous.  But
suddenly a duller shade fell over the air.  Instinctively he turned to
the mountain, and beheld! one of the two gigantic crests, into which the
summit had been divided, rocked and wavered to and fro; and then, with a
sound, the mightiness of which no language can describe, it fell from
its burning base, and rushed, an avalanche of fire, down the sides of
the mountain!  At the same instant gushed forth a volume of blackest
smoke--rolling on, over air, sea, and earth.

Another--and another--and another shower of ashes, far more profuse than
before, scattered fresh desolation along the streets. Darkness once more
wrapped them as a veil; and Glaucus, his bold heart at last quelled and
despairing, sank beneath the cover of an arch, and, clasping Ione to his
heart--a bride on that couch of ruin--resigned himself to die.

Meanwhile Nydia, when separated by the throng from Glaucus and Ione, had
in vain endeavored to regain them.  In vain she raised that plaintive
cry so peculiar to the blind; it was lost amidst a thousand shrieks of
more selfish terror.  Again and again she returned to the spot where
they had been divided--to find her companions gone, to seize every
fugitive--to inquire of Glaucus--to be dashed aside in the impatience of
distraction.  Who in that hour spared one thought to his neighbor?
Perhaps in scenes of universal horror, nothing is more horrid than the
unnatural selfishness they engender. At length it occurred to Nydia,
that as it had been resolved to seek the sea-shore for escape, her most
probable chance of rejoining her companions would be to persevere in
that direction.  Guiding her steps, then, by the staff which she always
carried, she continued, with incredible dexterity, to avoid the masses
of ruin that encumbered the path--to thread the streets--and unerringly
(so blessed now was that accustomed darkness, so afflicting in ordinary
life!) to take the nearest direction to the sea-side.

Poor girl!--her courage was beautiful to behold!--and Fate seemed to
favor one so helpless!  The boiling torrents touched her not, save by
the general rain which accompanied them; the huge fragments of scoria
shivered the pavement before and beside her, but spared that frail form:
and when the lesser ashes fell over her, she shook them away with a
slight tremor,' and dauntlessly resumed her course.

Weak, exposed, yet fearless, supported but by one wish, she was a very
emblem of Psyche in her wanderings; of Hope, walking through the Valley
of the Shadow; of the Soul itself--lone but undaunted, amidst the
dangers and the snares of life!

Her path was, however, constantly impeded by the crowds that now groped
amidst the gloom, now fled in the temporary glare of the lightnings
across the scene; and, at length, a group of torch-bearers rushing full
against her, she was thrown down with some violence.

'What!' said the voice of one of the party, 'is this the brave blind
girl! By Bacchus, she must not be left here to die!  Up, my Thessalian!
So--so. Are you hurt?  That's well!  Come along with us! we are for the
shore!'

'O Sallust! it is thy voice!  The gods be thanked!  Glaucus! Glaucus!
Glaucus! have ye seen him?'

'Not I.  He is doubtless out of the city by this time.  The gods who
saved him from the lion will save him from the burning mountain.'

As the kindly epicure thus encouraged Nydia, he drew her along with him
towards the sea, heeding not her passionate entreaties that he would
linger yet awhile to search for Glaucus; and still, in the accent of
despair, she continued to shriek out that beloved name, which, amidst
all the roar of the convulsed elements, kept alive a music at her heart.

The sudden illumination, the bursts of the floods of lava, and the
earthquake, which we have already described, chanced when Sallust and
his party had just gained the direct path leading from the city to the
port; and here they were arrested by an immense crowd, more than half
the population of the city.  They spread along the field without the
walls, thousands upon thousands, uncertain whither to fly.  The sea had
retired far from the shore; and they who had fled to it had been so
terrified by the agitation and preternatural shrinking of the element,
the gasping forms of the uncouth sea things which the waves had left
upon the sand, and by the sound of the huge stones cast from the
mountain into the deep, that they had returned again to the land, as
presenting the less frightful aspect of the two.  Thus the two streams
of human beings, the one seaward, the other from the sea, had met
together, feeling a sad comfort in numbers; arrested in despair and
doubt.

'The world is to be destroyed by fire,' said an old man in long loose
robes, a philosopher of the Stoic school: 'Stoic and Epicurean wisdom
have alike agreed in this prediction: and the hour is come!'

'Yea; the hour is come!' cried a loud voice, solemn, but not fearful.

Those around turned in dismay.  The voice came from above them. It was
the voice of Olinthus, who, surrounded by his Christian friends, stood
upon an abrupt eminence on which the old Greek colonists had raised a
temple to Apollo, now timeworn and half in ruin.

As he spoke there came that sudden illumination which had heralded the
death of Arbaces, and glowing over that mighty multitude, awed,
crouching, breathless--never on earth had the faces of men seemed so
haggard!--never had meeting of mortal beings been so stamped with the
horror and sublimity of dread!--never till the last trumpet sounds,
shall such meeting be seen again!  And above those the form of Olinthus,
with outstretched arm and prophet brow, girt with the living fires.  And
the crowd knew the face of him they had doomed to the fangs of the
beast--then their victim--now their warner! and through the stillness
again came his ominous voice:

'The hour is come!'

The Christians repeated the cry.  It was caught up--it was echoed from
side to side--woman and man, childhood and old age, repeated, not aloud,
but in a smothered and dreary murmur:

'THE HOUR IS COME!'

At that moment, a wild yell burst through the air--and, thinking only of
escape, whither it knew not, the terrible tiger of the desert leaped
amongst the throng, and hurried through its parted streams.  And so came
the earthquake--and so darkness once more fell over the earth!

And now new fugitives arrived.  Grasping the treasures no longer
destined for their lord, the slaves of Arbaces joined the throng. One
only of all their torches yet flickered on.  It was borne by Sosia; and
its light falling on the face of Nydia, he recognized the Thessalian.

'What avails thy liberty now, blind girl?' said the slave.

'Who art thou? canst thou tell me of Glaucus?'

'Ay; I saw him but a few minutes since.'

'Blessed be thy head! where?'

'Crouched beneath the arch of the forum--dead or dying!--gone to rejoin
Arbaces, who is no more!'

Nydia uttered not a word, she slid from the side of Sallust; silently
she glided through those behind her, and retraced her steps to the city.
She gained the forum--the arch; she stooped down--she felt around--she
called on the name of Glaucus.

A weak voice answered--'Who calls on me?  Is it the voice of the Shades?
Lo! I am prepared!'

'Arise! follow me!  Take my hand! Glaucus, thou shalt be saved!'

In wonder and sudden hope, Glaucus arose--'Nydia still?  Ah! thou, then,
art safe!'

The tender joy of his voice pierced the heart of the poor Thessalian,
and she blessed him for his thought of her.

Half leading, half carrying Ione, Glaucus followed his guide.  With
admirable discretion, she avoided the path which led to the crowd she
had just quitted, and, by another route, sought the shore.

After many pauses and incredible perseverance, they gained the sea, and
joined a group, who, bolder than the rest, resolved to hazard any peril
rather than continue in such a scene.  In darkness they put forth to
sea; but, as they cleared the land and caught new aspects of the
mountain, its channels of molten fire threw a partial redness over the
waves.

Utterly exhausted and worn out, Ione slept on the breast of Glaucus, and
Nydia lay at his feet.  Meanwhile the showers of dust and ashes, still
borne aloft, fell into the wave, and scattered their snows over the
