
"But I have to judge of my own friendships, sire."

"He who serves his friends does not serve his master."

"I have so well understood that, sire, that I have respectfully offered
your majesty my resignation."

"And I have accepted it, monsieur," said the king. "Before being
separated from you I was willing to prove to you that I know how to keep
my word."

"Your majesty has kept more than your word, for your majesty has had me
arrested," said D'Artagnan, with his cold bantering air; "you did not
promise me that, sire."

The king would not condescend to perceive the pleasantry, and continued
seriously, "You see, monsieur," said he, "to what your disobedience has
forced me."

"My disobedience!" cried D'Artagnan, red with anger.

"That is the mildest name I can find," pursued the king. "My idea was to
take and punish rebels; was I bound to inquire whether these rebels were
your friends or not?"

"But I was," replied D'Artagnan. "It was a cruelty on your majesty's
part to send me to take my friends and lead them to your gibbets."

"It was a trial I had to make, monsieur, of pretended servants, who eat
my bread, and ought to defend my person. The trial has succeeded ill, M.
d'Artagnan."

"For one bad servant your majesty loses," said the musketeer, with
bitterness, "there are ten who have, on that same day, gone through
their ordeal. Listen to me, sire; I am not accustomed to that service.
Mine is a rebel sword when I am required to do ill. It was ill to send
me in pursuit of two men whose lives M. Fouquet, your majesty's
preserver, had implored you to save. Still further, these men were my
friends. They did not attack your majesty, they succumbed to a blind
anger. Besides, why were they not allowed to escape? What crime had they
committed? I admit that you may contest with me the right of judging of
their conduct. But why suspect me before the action? Why surround me
with spies? Why disgrace me before the army? Why me, in whom you have to
this time showed the most entire confidence--me who for thirty years
have been attached to your person, and have given you a thousand proofs
of devotedness--for it must be said, now that I am accused--why reduce
me to see three thousand of the king's soldiers march in battle against
two men?"

"One would say you have forgotten what these men have done to me!" said
the king, in a hollow voice, "and that it was no merit of theirs, that I
was not lost."

"Sire, one would say that you forget I was there."

"Enough, M. d'Artagnan, enough of these dominating interests which arise
to keep the sun from my interests. I am founding a state in which there
shall be but one master, as I promised you formerly; the moment is come
for keeping my promise. You wish to be, according to your tastes or your
friendships, free to destroy my plans and save my enemies? I will thwart
you or will leave you--seek a more compliant master. I know full well
that another king would not conduct himself as I do, and would allow
himself to be dominated over by you, at the risk of sending you some day
to keep company with M. Fouquet and the others; but I have a good
memory, and for me, services are sacred titles to gratitude, to
impunity. You shall only have this lesson, Monsieur d'Artagnan, as the
punishment of your want of discipline, and I will not imitate my
predecessors in their anger, not having imitated them in their favor.
And, then, other reasons make me act mildly toward you; in the first
place, because you are a man of sense, a man of great sense, a man of
heart, and that you will be a good servant for him who shall have
mastered you; secondly, because you will cease to have any motives for
insubordination. Your friends are destroyed or ruined by me. These
supports upon which your capricious mind instinctively relied I have
made to disappear. At this moment, my soldiers have taken or killed the
rebels of Belle-Isle."

D'Artagnan became pale. "Taken or killed!" cried he. "Oh! sire, if you
thought what you tell me, if you were sure you were telling me the
truth, I should forget all that is just, all that is magnanimous in your
words, to call you a barbarous king, and an unnatural man. But I pardon
you these words," said he, smiling with pride; "I pardon them to a young
prince who does not know, who cannot comprehend, what such men as M.
d'Herblay, M. de Valon, and myself are. Taken or killed! Ah! ah! sire!
tell me, if the news is true, how much it has cost you, in men and
money. We will then reckon if the game has been worth the stakes."

As he spoke thus, the king went up to him in great anger, and said,
"Monsieur d'Artagnan, your replies are those of a rebel! Tell me, if you
please, who is king of France? Do you know any other?"

"Sire," replied the captain of the musketeers, coldly, "I very well
remember that one morning at Vaux you addressed that question to many
people who did not answer to it, while I, on my part, did answer to it.
If I recognized my king on that day, when the thing was not easy, I
think it would be useless to ask it of me now, when your majesty is
alone with me."

At these words Louis cast down his eyes. It appeared to him that the
shade of the unfortunate Philippe passed between D'Artagnan and himself,
to evoke the remembrance of that terrible adventure. Almost at the same
moment an officer entered and placed a dispatch in the hands of the
king, who, in his turn, changed color while reading it.

"Monsieur," said he, "what I learn here you would know later; it is
better I should tell you, and that you should learn it from the mouth of
your king. A battle has taken place at Belle-Isle."

"Oh! ah!" said D'Artagnan, with a calm air, though his heart beat enough
to break through his chest. "Well, sire?"

"Well, monsieur--and I have lost a hundred and ten men."

A beam of joy and pride shone in the eyes of D'Artagnan. "And the
rebels?" said he.

"The rebels have fled," said the king.

D'Artagnan could not restrain a cry of triumph. "Only," added the king,
"I have a fleet which closely blockades Belle-Isle, and I am certain no
bark can escape."

"So that," said the musketeer, brought back to his dismal ideas, "if
these two gentlemen are taken--"

"They will be hanged," said the king, quietly.

"And do they know it?" replied D'Artagnan, repressing his trembling.

"They know it, because you must have told them yourself; and all the
country knows it."

"Then, sire, they will never be taken alive, I will answer for that."

"Ah!" said the king, negligently, and taking up his letter again. "Very
well, they will be dead then, Monsieur d'Artagnan, and that will come to
the same thing, since I should only take them to have them hanged."

D'Artagnan wiped the sweat which flowed from his brow.

"I have told you," pursued Louis XIV., "that I would one day be an
affectionate, generous and constant master. You are now the only man of
former times worthy of my anger or my friendship. I will not be sparing
of either to you, according to your conduct. Could you serve a king,
Monsieur d'Artagnan, who should have a hundred kings his equals in the
kingdom? Could I, tell me, do, with such weakness, the great things I
meditate? Have you ever seen an artist effect solid works with a
rebellious instrument? Far from us, monsieur, those old leavens of
feudal abuses! The Fronde, which threatened to ruin the monarchy, has
emancipated it. I am master at home, Captain d'Artagnan, and I shall
have servants who, wanting, perhaps, your genius, will carry devotedness
and obedience up to heroism. Of what consequence, I ask you, of what
consequence is it that God has given no genius to arms and legs? It is
to the head he has given it, and the head, you know, all the rest obey.
I am the head."

D'Artagnan started. Louis XIV. continued as if he had seen nothing,
although this emotion had not at all escaped him. "Now, let us conclude
between us two that bargain which I promised to make with you one day
when you found me very little at Blois. Do me justice, monsieur, when
you think that I do not make any one pay for the tears of shame I then
shed. Look around you; lofty heads have bowed; bow yours, or choose the
exile that will best suit you. Perhaps, when reflecting upon it, you
will find that this king is a generous heart, who reckons sufficiently
upon your loyalty to allow you to leave him dissatisfied, when you
possess a great state secret. You are a brave man; I knew you to be so.
Why have you judged me before term? Judge me from this day forward,
D'Artagnan, and be as severe as you please."

D'Artagnan remained bewildered, mute, undecided for the first time in
his life. He had just found an adversary worthy of him. This was no
longer trick, it was calculation; it was no longer violence, it was
strength; it was no longer passion, it was will; it was no longer
boasting, it was council. This young man who had brought down Fouquet,
and could do without D'Artagnan, deranged all the somewhat headstrong
calculations of the musketeer.

"Come, let us see what stops you?" said the king, kindly. "You have
given in your resignation; shall I refuse to accept it? I admit that it
may be hard for an old captain to recover his good humor."

"Oh!" replied D'Artagnan, in a melancholy tone, "that is not my most
serious care. I hesitate to take back my resignation because I am old in
comparison with you, and that I have habits difficult to abandon.
Henceforward, you must have courtiers who know how to amuse you--madmen
who will get themselves killed to carry out what you call your great
works. Great they will be, I feel--but, if by chance I should not think
them so? I have seen war, sire, I have seen peace; I have served
Richelieu and Mazarin; I have been scorched, with your father, at the
fire of Rochelle; riddled with thrusts like a sieve, having made a new
skin ten times, as serpents do. After affronts and injustices, I have a
command which was formerly something, because it gave the bearer the
right of speaking as he liked to his king. But your captain of the
musketeers will henceforward be an officer guarding the lower doors.
Truly, sire, if that is to be the employment from this time, seize the
opportunity of our being on good terms, to take it from me. Do not
imagine that I bear malice; no, you have tamed me, as you say; but it
must be confessed that in taming me you have lessened me; by bowing me
you have convicted me of weakness. If you knew how well it suits me to
carry my head high, and what a pitiful mien I shall have while
scenting the dust of your carpets! Oh! sire, I regret sincerely,
and you will regret as I do, those times when the king of France
saw in his vestibules all those insolent gentlemen, lean, always
swearing--cross-grained mastiffs, who could bite mortally in days of
battle. Those men were the best of courtiers for the hand which fed
them--they would lick it; but for the hand that struck them, oh! the
bite that followed! A little gold on the lace of their cloaks, a slender
stomach in their _hauts-de-chausses_, a little sprinkling of gray in
their dry hair, and you will behold the handsome dukes and peers, the
haughty _marechaux_ of France. But why should I tell you all this? The
king is my master; he wills that I should make verses, he wills that I
should polish the mosaics of his antechambers with satin shoes.
Mordioux! that is difficult, but I have got over greater difficulties
than that. I will do it. Why should I do it? Because I love money?--I
have enough. Because I am ambitious?--my career is bounded. Because I
love the court? No. I will remain because I have been accustomed for
thirty years to go and take the orderly word of the king, and to have
said to me, 'Good-evening, D'Artagnan,' with a smile I did not beg for!
That smile I will beg for! Are you content, sire?" And D'Artagnan bowed
his silvered head, upon which the smiling king placed his white hand
with pride.

"Thanks, my old servant, my faithful friend," said he. "As, reckoning
from this day, I have no longer any enemies in France, it remains with
me to send you to a foreign field to gather your _marechal's_ baton.
Depend upon me for finding you an opportunity. In the meanwhile, eat of
my best bread and sleep tranquilly."

"That is all kind and well!" said D'Artagnan, much agitated. "But those
poor men at Belle-Isle? One of them, in particular--so good! so brave!
so true!"

"Do you ask their pardon of me?"

"Upon my knees, sire!"

"Well! then, go and take it to them, if it be still time. But do you
answer for them?"

"With my life, sire!"

"Go, then. To-morrow I set out for Paris. Return by that time, for I do
not wish you to leave me in future."

"Be assured of that, sire," said D'Artagnan, kissing the royal hand.

And, with a heart swelling with joy, he rushed out of the castle on his
way to Belle-Isle.




CHAPTER CXXVIII.

THE FRIENDS OF M. FOUQUET.


The king had returned to Paris, and with him D'Artagnan, who, in
twenty-four hours, having made with the greatest care all possible
inquiries at Belle-Isle, had learned nothing of the secret so well kept
by the heavy rock of Locmaria, which had fallen on the heroic Porthos.
The captain of the musketeers only knew what those two valiant men--what
these two friends, whose defense he had so nobly taken up, whose lives
he had so earnestly endeavored to save--aided by three faithful
Bretons--had accomplished against a whole army. He had been able to see,
launched on to the neighboring heath, the human remains which had
stained with blood the stones scattered among the flowering broom. He
learned also that a bark had been seen far out at sea, and that, like a
bird of prey, a royal vessel had pursued, overtaken and devoured this
poor little bird which was flying with rapid wings. But there
D'Artagnan's certainties ended. The field of conjectures was thrown open
at this boundary. Now, what could he conjecture? The vessel had not
returned. It is true that a brisk wind had prevailed for three days; but
the corvette was known to be a good sailer and solid in its timbers; it
could not fear gales of wind, and it ought, according to the calculation
of D'Artagnan, to have either returned to Brest, or come back to the
mouth of the Loire. Such were the news, ambiguous, it is true, but in
some degree reassuring to him personally, which D'Artagnan brought to
Louis XIV., when the king, followed by all the court, returned to Paris.

Louis, satisfied with his success, Louis--more mild and more affable
since he felt himself more powerful--had not ceased for an instant to
ride close to the carriage door of Mademoiselle de la Valliere.
Everybody had been anxious to amuse the two queens, so as to make them
forget this abandonment of the son and the husband. Everything breathed
of the future; the past was nothing to anybody. Only that past came like
a painful and bleeding wound to the hearts of some tender and devoted
spirits. Scarcely was the king re-installed in Paris, when he received a
touching proof of this. Louis XIV. had just risen and taken his first
repast, when his captain of the musketeers presented himself before him.
D'Artagnan was pale and looked unhappy. The king, at the first glance,
perceived the change in a countenance generally so unconcerned.

"What is the matter, D'Artagnan?" said he.

"Sire, a great misfortune has happened to me."

"Good heavens! what is that?"

"Sire, I have lost one of my friends, M. de Valon, in the affair of
Belle-Isle."

And, while speaking these words. D'Artagnan fixed his falcon eye upon
Louis XIV., to catch the first feeling that would show itself.

"I knew it," replied the king, quietly.

"You knew it, and did not tell me!" cried the musketeer.

"To what good? Your grief, my friend, is so respectable! It was my duty
to treat it kindly. To have informed you of this misfortune, which I
knew would pain you so greatly, D'Artagnan, would have been, in your
eyes, to have triumphed over you. Yes, I knew that M. de Valon had
buried himself beneath the rocks of Locmaria; I knew that M. d'Herblay
had taken one of my vessels with its crew, and had compelled it to
convey him to Bayonne. But, I was willing you should learn these matters
in a direct manner, in order that you might be convinced my friends are
with me respected and sacred; that always in me the man will immolate
himself to men, while the king is so often found to sacrifice men to his
majesty and power."

"But, sire, how could you know?"

"How do you yourself know, D'Artagnan?"

"By this letter, sire, which M. d'Herblay, free and out of danger,
writes me from Bayonne."

"Look here," said the king, drawing from a casket placed upon the table
close to the seat upon which D'Artagnan was leaning, "here is a letter
copied exactly from that of M. d'Herblay. Here is the very letter, which
Colbert placed in my hands a week before you received yours. I am well
served, you may perceive."

"Yes, sire," murmured the musketeer, "you were the only man whose
fortune was capable of dominating the fortunes and strength of my two
friends. You have used it, sire, but you will not abuse it, will you?"

"D'Artagnan," said the king, with a smile beaming with kindness. "I
could have M. d'Herblay carried off from the territories of the king of
Spain, and brought here alive to inflict justice upon him. But,
D'Artagnan, be assured I will not yield to this first and natural
impulse. He is free, let him continue free."

"Oh, sire! you will not always remain so clement, so noble, so generous
as you have shown yourself with respect to me and M. d'Herblay; you will
have about you counselors who will cure you of that weakness."

"No, D'Artagnan, you are mistaken when you accuse my council of urging
me to pursue rigorous measures. The advice to spare M. d'Herblay comes
from Colbert himself."

"Oh, sire!" said D'Artagnan, extremely surprised.

"As for you," continued the king, with a kindness very uncommon with
him, "I have several pieces of good news to announce to you; but you
shall know them, my dear captain, the moment I have made my accounts all
straight. I have said that I wish to make, and would make, your fortune:
that promise will soon be a reality."

"A thousand times thanks, sire! I can wait. But I implore you, while I
go and practice patience, that your majesty will deign to notice those
poor people who have for so long a time besieged your antechamber, and
come humbly to lay a petition at your feet."

"Who are they?"

"Enemies of your majesty."

The king raised his head.

"Friends of M. Fouquet," added D'Artagnan.

"Their names?"

"M. Gourville, M. Pellisson, and a poet, M. Jean de la Fontaine."

The king took a moment to reflect. "What do they want?"

"I do not know."

"How do they appear?"

"In great affliction."

"What do they say?"

"Nothing."

"What do they do?"

"They weep."

"Let them come in," said the king, with a serious brow.

D'Artagnan turned rapidly on his heel, raised the tapestry which closed
the entrance to the royal chamber, and directing his voice to the
adjoining room, cried, "Introduce!"

The three men D'Artagnan had named soon appeared at the door of the
cabinet in which were the king and his captain. A profound silence
prevailed in their passage. The courtiers, at the approach of the
friends of the unfortunate surintendant of the finances, the courtiers,
we say, drew back, as if fearful of being infected by contagion with
disgrace and misfortune. D'Artagnan, with a quick step, came forward to
take by the hand the unhappy men who stood trembling at the door of the
cabinet; he led them to the front of the fauteuil of the king who,
having placed himself in the embrasure of a window, awaited the moment
of presentation, and was preparing himself to give the supplicants a
rigorously diplomatic reception.

The first of the friends of Fouquet that advanced was Pellisson. He did
not weep, but his tears were only restrained that the king might the
better hear his voice and his prayer. Gourville bit his lips to check
his tears, out of respect for the king. La Fontaine buried his face in
his handkerchief, and the only signs of life he gave were the convulsive
motions of his shoulders, raised by his sobs.

The king had preserved all his dignity. His countenance was impassible.
He had even maintained the frown which had appeared when D'Artagnan had
announced his enemies to him. He made a gesture which signified,
"Speak:" and he remained standing, with his eyes searchingly fixed upon
these desponding men. Pellisson bowed down to the ground, and La
Fontaine knelt as people do in churches. This obstinate silence,
disturbed only by such dismal sighs and groans, began to excite in the
king, not compassion, but impatience.

"Monsieur Pellisson," said he, in a sharp dry tone, "Monsieur Gourville,
and you, Monsieur--" and he did not name La Fontaine, "I cannot, without
sensible displeasure, see you come to plead for one of the greatest
criminals that it is the duty of my justice to punish. A king does not
allow himself to be softened but by tears and remorse; the tears of the
innocent, the remorse of guilty. I have no faith either in the remorse
of M. Fouquet or the tears of his friends, because the one is tainted to
the very heart, and the others ought to dread coming to offend me in my
own palace. For these reasons, I beg you, Monsieur Pellisson, Monsieur
Gourville, and you, Monsieur--to say nothing that will not plainly
proclaim the respect you have for my will."

"Sire," replied Pellisson, trembling at these terrible words, "we are
come to say nothing to your majesty that is not the most profound
expression of the most sincere respect and love which are due to a king
from all his subjects. Your majesty's justice is redoubtable, every one
must yield to the sentences it pronounces. We respectfully bow before
it. Far from us be the idea of coming to defend him who has had the
misfortune to offend your majesty. He who has incurred your displeasure
may be a friend of ours, but he is an enemy to the state. We abandon
him, but with tears, to the severity of the king."

"Besides," interrupted the king, calmed by that supplicating voice, and
those persuasive words, "my parliament will decide. I do not strike
without having weighed a crime; my justice does not wield the sword
without having employed the scales."

"Therefore have we every confidence in that impartiality of the king,
and hope to make our feeble voices heard, with the consent of your
majesty, when the hour for defending an accused friend shall strike for
us."

"In that case, messieurs, what do you ask of me?" said the king, with
his most imposing air.

"Sire," continued Pellisson, "the accused leaves a wife and a family.
The little property he had was scarcely sufficient to pay his debts, and
Madame Fouquet, since the captivity of her husband, is abandoned by
everybody. The hand of your majesty strikes like the hand of God. When
the Lord sends the curse of leprosy or pestilence into a family, every
one flies and shuns the abode of the leprous or the plague-stricken.
Sometimes, but very rarely, a generous physician alone ventures to
approach the accursed threshold, passes it with courage, and exposes his
life to combat death. He is the last resource of the dying, he is the
instrument of heavenly mercy. Sire, we supplicate you, with clasped
hands and bended knees, as a divinity is supplicated! Madame Fouquet
has no longer any friends, no longer any support; she weeps in her poor
deserted house, abandoned by all those who besieged its doors in the
hour of prosperity; she has neither credit nor hope left. At least, the
unhappy wretch upon whom your anger falls, receives from you, however
culpable he may be, the daily bread which is moistened by his tears. As
much afflicted, more destitute than her husband, Madame Fouquet--she who
had the honor to receive your majesty at her table--Madame Fouquet, the
wife of the ancient surintendant of your majesty's finances, Madame
Fouquet has no longer bread."

Here the mortal silence which enchained the breath of Pellisson's two
friends was broken by an outburst of sobs: and D'Artagnan, whose chest
heaved at hearing this humble prayer, turned round toward the angle of
the cabinet to bite his mustache and conceal his sighs.

The king had preserved his eye dry and his countenance severe; but the
color had mounted to his cheeks, and the firmness of his look was
visibly diminished.

"What do you wish?" said he, in an agitated voice.

"We come humbly to ask your majesty," replied Pellisson, upon whom
emotion was fast gaining, "to permit us, without incurring the
displeasure of your majesty, to lend to Madame Fouquet two thousand
pistoles collected among the old friends of her husband, in order that
the widow may not stand in need of the necessaries of life."

At the word _widow_, pronounced by Pellisson while Fouquet was still
alive, the king turned very pale--his pride fell; pity rose from his
heart to his lips; he cast a softened look upon the men who knelt
sobbing at his feet.

"God forbid!" said he, "that I should confound the innocent with the
guilty. They know me but ill who doubt my mercy toward the weak. I
strike none but the arrogant. Do, messieurs, do all that your hearts
counsel you to assuage the grief of Madame Fouquet. Go, messieurs--go!"

The three men arose in silence with dried eyes. The tears had been
dried up by contact with their burning cheeks and eyelids. They had not
the strength to address their thanks to the king, who himself cut short
their solemn reverences by entrenching himself suddenly behind the
fauteuil.

D'Artagnan remained alone with the king. "Well!" said he, approaching
the young prince, who interrogated him with his look. "Well, my master!
If you had not the device which belongs to your sun, I would recommend
you one which M. Conrart should translate into Latin, 'Mild with the
lowly; rough with the strong.'"

The king smiled, and passed into the next apartment after having said to
D'Artagnan, "I give you the leave of absence you must want to put the
affairs of your friend the late M. de Valon in order."




CHAPTER CXXIX.

PORTHOS' WILL.


At Pierrefonds everything was in mourning. The courts were deserted--the
stables closed--the parterres neglected. In the basins, the fountains,
formerly so spreading, noisy, and sparkling, had stopped of themselves.
Along the roads around the chateau came a few grave personages mounted
upon mules or farm nags. These were country neighbors, cures, and
bailiffs of adjacent estates. All these people entered the chateau
silently, gave their nags to a melancholy-looking groom, and directed
their steps, conducted by a huntsman in black, to the great dining-room,
where Mousqueton received them at the door. Mousqueton had become so
thin in two days that his clothes moved upon him like sheaths which are
too large, and in which the blades of swords dance about at each motion.
His face, composed of red and white, like that of the Madonna of
Vandyke, was furrowed by two silver rivulets which had dug their beds in
his cheeks, as full formerly as they had become flabby since his grief
began. At each fresh arrival, Mousqueton found fresh tears, and it was
pitiful to see him press his throat with his fat hand to keep from
bursting into sobs and lamentations. All these visits were for the
purpose of hearing the reading of Porthos' will, announced for that day,
and at which all the covetousness and all the friendships connected with
the defunct were anxious to be present, as he had left no relation
behind him.

The visitors took their places as they arrived; and the great room had
just been closed when the clock struck twelve, the hour fixed for the
reading of the important document. Porthos' procureur--and that was
naturally the successor of Master Coquenard--commenced by slowly
unfolding the vast parchment upon which the powerful hand of Porthos had
traced his sovereign will. The seal broken--the spectacles put on--the
preliminary cough having sounded--every one opened his ears. Mousqueton
had squatted himself in a corner, the better to weep and the better to
hear. All at once the folding-doors of the great room, which had been
shut, were thrown open as if by a prodigy, and a manly figure appeared
upon the threshold, resplendent in the full light of the sun. This was
D'Artagnan, who had come alone to the gate, and finding nobody to hold
his stirrup, he had tied his horse to a knocker and announced himself.
The splendor of the daylight invading the room, the murmur of all
present, and, more than all that, the instinct of the faithful dog, drew
Mousqueton from his reverie; he raised his head, recognized the old
friend of his master, and, howling with grief, he embraced his knees,
watering the floor with his tears. D'Artagnan raised up the poor
intendant, embraced him as if he had been a brother, and, having nobly
saluted the assembly, who all bowed as they whispered to each other his
name, he went and took his seat at the extremity of the great carved oak
hall, still holding by the hand poor Mousqueton, who was suffocating,
and sunk down upon the steps. Then the procureur, who, like the rest,
was considerably agitated, commenced the reading.

Porthos, after a profession of faith of the most Christian character,
asked pardon of his enemies for all the injuries he might have done
them. At this paragraph, a ray of inexpressible pride beamed from the
eyes of D'Artagnan. He recalled to his mind the old soldier; all those
enemies of Porthos brought to the earth by his valiant hand, he reckoned
up the numbers of them, and said to himself that Porthos had acted
wisely not to detail his enemies or the injuries done to them, or the
task would have been too much for the reader. Then came the following
enumeration:--

"I possess at this present time, by the grace of God:

"1. The domain of Pierrefonds, lands, woods, meadows, waters, and
forests, surrounded by good walls.

"2. The domain of Bracieux, chateau, forests, plowed lands, forming
three farms.

"3. The little estate, De Valon, so named because it is in the valley."
(Brave Porthos!)

"4. Fifty farms in Touraine, amounting to five hundred acres.

"5. Three mills upon the Cher, bringing in six hundred livres each.

"6. Three fish-pools in Bern, producing two hundred livres a year.

"As to my personal or movable property, so called because it can be
moved, as is so well explained by my learned friend the bishop of
Vannes--" (D'Artagnan shuddered at the dismal remembrance attached to
that name)--the procureur continued imperturbably--"they consist--

"1. In goods which I cannot detail here for want of room, and which
furnish all my chateaux or houses, but of which the list is drawn up by
my intendant."

Every one turned his eyes toward Mousqueton, who was absorbed in his
grief.

"2. In twenty horses for saddle and draught, which I have particularly
at my chateau of Pierrefonds, and which are called--Bayard, Roland,
Charlemagne, Pepin, Dunois, La Hire, Ogier, Samson, Milo, Nimrod,
Urganda, Armida, Falstrade, Dalilah, Rebecca, Yolande, Finette,
Grisette, Lisette, and Musette.

"3. In sixty dogs, forming six packs, divided as follows: the first, for
the stag: the second, for the wolf; the third, for the wild boar; the
fourth, for the hare; and the two others, for setters and protection.

"4. In arms for war and the chase contained in my gallery of arms.

"5. My wines of Anjou, selected for Athos, who liked them formerly; my
wines of Burgundy, Champagne, Bordeaux, and Spain, stocking eight
cellars and twelve vaults, in my various houses.

"6. My pictures and statues, which are said to be of great value, and
which are sufficiently numerous to fatigue the sight.

"7. My library, consisting of six thousand volumes, quite new, and have
never been opened.

"8. My silver plate, which is perhaps a little worn, but which ought to
weigh from a thousand to twelve hundred pounds, for I had great trouble
in lifting the coffer that contained it, and could not carry it more
than six times round my chamber.

"9. All these objects, in addition to the table and house linen, are
divided in the residences I liked the best."

Here the reader stopped to take breath. Every one sighed, coughed, and
redoubled his attention. The procureur resumed:

"I have lived without having any children, and it is probable I never
shall have any, which to me is a cutting grief. And yet I am mistaken,
for I have a son, in common with my other friends: that is M. Raoul
Auguste Jules de Bragelonne, the true son of M. le Comte de la Fere.

"This young nobleman has appeared to me worthy to succeed to the three
valiant gentlemen, of whom I am the friend and the very humble servant."

Here a sharp sound interrupted the reader. It was D'Artagnan's sword,
which, slipping from his baldrick, had fallen on the sonorous flooring.
Every one turned his eyes that way, and saw that a large tear had rolled
from the thick lid of D'Artagnan on to his aquiline nose, the luminous
edge of which shone like a crescent enlightened by the sun.

"This is why," continued the procureur, "I have left all my property,
movable or immovable, comprised in the above enumerations, to M. le
Vicomte Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne, son of M. le Comte de la
Fere, to console him for the grief he seems to suffer, and enable him to
support his name gloriously." A long murmur ran through the auditory.
The procureur continued, seconded by the flashing eye of D'Artagnan,
which, glancing over the assembly, quickly restored the interrupted
silence:

"On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do give to M. le
Chevalier d'Artagnan, captain of the king's musketeers, whatever the
said Chevalier d'Artagnan may demand of my property. On condition that
M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do pay a good pension to M. le Chevalier
d'Herblay, my friend, if he should need it in exile. I leave to my
intendant Mousqueton all my clothes, of city, war, or chase, to the
number of forty-seven suits, with the assurance that he will wear them
till they are worn out, for the love of, and in remembrance of, his
master. Moreover, I bequeath to M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne my old
servant and faithful friend Mousqueton, already named, providing that
the said vicomte shall so act that Mousqueton shall declare when dying
he has never ceased to be happy."

On hearing these words, Mousqueton bowed, pale and trembling; his large
shoulders shook convulsively; his countenance, impressed by a frightful
grief, appeared from between his icy hands, and the spectators saw him
stagger, and hesitate, as if, though wishing to leave the hall, he did
not know the way.

"Mousqueton, my good friend," said D'Artagnan, "go and make your
preparations. I will take you with me to Athos' house, whither I shall
go on leaving Pierrefonds."

Mousqueton made no reply. He scarcely breathed, as if everything in that
hall would from that time be foreign. He opened the door, and
disappeared slowly. The procureur finished his reading, after which the
greater part of those who had come to hear the last will of Porthos
dispersed by degrees, many disappointed, but all penetrated with
respect. As to D'Artagnan, left alone, after having received the formal
compliments of the procureur, he was lost in admiration of the wisdom of
the testator, who had so judiciously bestowed his wealth upon the most
necessitous and the most worthy, with a delicacy that none among the
most refined courtiers and the most noble hearts could have displayed
more becomingly. When Porthos enjoined Raoul de Bragelonne to give to
D'Artagnan all he would ask, he knew well, did that worthy Porthos, that
D'Artagnan would ask or take nothing; and in case he did demand
anything, none but himself could say what. Porthos left a pension to
Aramis, who, if he should be inclined to ask too much, was checked by
the example of D'Artagnan; and that word _exile_, thrown out by the
testator, without apparent intention, was it not the most mild, the most
exquisite criticism upon that conduct of Aramis which had brought about
the death of Porthos. But there was no mention of Athos in the testament
of the dead. Could the latter for a moment suppose that the son would
not offer the best part to the father? The rough mind of Porthos had
judged all these causes, seized all these shades, better than the law,
better than custom, better than taste.

"Porthos was a heart," said D'Artagnan to himself, with a sigh. As he
made this reflection, he fancied he heard a groan in the room above him;
and he thought immediately of poor Mousqueton, whom he felt it was a
pleasing duty to divert from his grief. For this purpose he left the
hall hastily to seek the worthy intendant, as he had not returned. He
ascended the staircase leading to the first story, and perceived, in
Porthos' own chamber, a heap of clothes of all colors and all materials,
upon which Mousqueton had laid himself down after heaping them together.
It was the legacy of the faithful friend. These clothes were truly his
own; they had been given to him; the hand of Mousqueton was stretched
over these relics, which he kissed with all his lips, with all his face,
which he covered with his whole body. D'Artagnan approached to console
the poor fellow.

"My God!" said he, "he does not stir--he has fainted!"

But D'Artagnan was mistaken--Mousqueton was dead! Dead, like the dog
who, having lost his master, comes back to die upon his cloak.




CHAPTER CXXX.

THE OLD AGE OF ATHOS.


While all these affairs were separating forever the four musketeers,
formerly bound together in a manner that seemed indissoluble, Athos,
left alone after the departure of Raoul, began to pay his tribute to
that anticipated death which is called the absence of those we love.
Returned to his house at Blois, no longer having even Grimaud to receive
a poor smile when he passed through the parterre, Athos daily felt the
decline of the vigor of a nature which for so long a time had appeared
infallible. Age, which had been kept back by the presence of the beloved
object, arrived with that cortege of pains and inconveniences, which
increases in proportion as it makes itself looked for. Athos had no
longer his son to induce him to walk firmly, with his head erect, as a
good example; he had no longer, in those brilliant eyes of the young
man, an ever-ardent focus at which to regenerate the fire of his looks.
And then, must it be said, that nature, exquisite in its tenderness and
its reserve, no longer finding anything that comprehended its feelings,
gave itself up to grief with all the warmth of vulgar natures when they
give themselves up to joy. The Comte de la Fere, who had remained a
young man up to his sixty-second year; the warrior, who had preserved
his strength in spite of fatigues, his freshness of mind in spite of
misfortunes, his mild serenity of soul and body in spite of Milady, in
spite of Mazarin, in spite of La Valliere; Athos had become an old man
in a week, from the moment at which he had lost the support of his
latter youth. Still handsome, though bent; noble, but sad; gently, and
tottering under his gray hairs, he sought, since his solitude, the
glades where the rays of the sun penetrated through the foliage of the
walks. He discontinued all the strong exercises he had enjoyed through
life, when Raoul was no longer with him. The servants, accustomed to see
him stirring with the dawn at all seasons, were astonished to hear seven
o'clock strike before their master had quitted his bed. Athos remained
in bed with a book under his pillow, but he did not sleep, neither did
he read. Remaining in bed that he might no longer have to carry his
body, he allowed his soul and spirit to wander from their envelope, and
return to his son, or to God.

His people were sometimes terrified to see him, for hours together,
absorbed in a silent reverie, mute and insensible; he no longer heard
the timid step of the servant who came to the door of his chamber to
watch the sleeping or waking of his master. It often occurred that he
forgot that the day had half passed away, that the hours for the two
first meals were gone by. Then he was awakened. He rose, descended to
his shady walk, then came out a little into the sun, as if to partake
its warmth for a minute with his absent child. And then the dismal,
monotonous walk recommenced, until, quite exhausted, he regained the
chamber and the bed, his domicile by choice. For several days the comte
did not speak a single word. He refused to receive the visits that were
paid him, and, during the night, he was seen to relight his lamp and
pass long hours in writing, or examining parchments.

Athos wrote one of these letters to Vannes, another to Fontainebleau;
they remained without answers. We know why: Aramis had quitted France,
and D'Artagnan was traveling from Nantes to Paris, from Paris to
Pierrefonds. His valet-de-chambre observed that he shortened his walk
every day by several turns. The great alley of limes soon became too
long for feet that used to traverse it formerly a hundred times in a
day. The comte walked feebly as far as the middle trees, seated himself
upon a mossy bank which sloped toward a lateral walk, and there waited
the return of his strength, or rather the return of night. Very shortly,
a hundred steps exhausted him. At length Athos refused to rise at all;
he declined all nourishment, and his terrified people, although he did
not complain, although he had a smile on his lips, although he continued
to speak with his sweet voice--his people went to Blois in search of the
ancient physician of the late Monsieur, and brought him to the Comte de
la Fere in such a fashion that he could see the comte without being
himself seen. For this purpose, they placed him in a closet adjoining
the chamber of the patient, and implored him not to show himself, in the
fear of displeasing their master, who had not asked for a physician. The
doctor obeyed; Athos was a sort of model for the gentlemen of the
country; the Blaisois boasted of possessing this sacred relic of the old
French glories. Athos was a great seigneur compared with such nobles as
the king improvised by touching with his yellow fecundating scepter the
dry trunks of the heraldic trees of the province.

People respected, we say, if they did not love Athos. The physician
could not bear to see his people weep, and to see flock round him the
poor of the canton, to whom Athos gave life and consolation by his kind
words and his charities. He examined, therefore, from the depths of his
hiding-place, the nature of that mysterious malady which bent down and
devoured more mortally every day a man but lately so full of life, and
of a desire to live. He remarked upon the cheeks of Athos the purple of
fever, which fires itself and feeds itself; slow fever, pitiless, born
in a fold of the heart, sheltering itself behind that rampart, growing
from the suffering it engenders, at once cause and effect of a perilous
situation. The comte spoke to nobody, we say; he did not even talk to
himself. His thought feared noise; it approached to that degree of
over-excitement which borders upon ecstasy. Man thus absorbed, though he
does not yet belong to God, already belongs no longer to earth. The
doctor remained for several hours studying this painful struggle of the
will against a superior power; he was terrified at seeing those eyes
always fixed, always directed toward an invisible object; he was
terrified at seeing beat with the same movement that heart from which
never a sigh arose to vary the melancholy state; sometimes the acuteness
of pain creates the hope of the physician. Half a day passed away thus.
The doctor formed his resolution like a brave man, like a man of firm
mind; he issued suddenly from his place of retreat, and went straight up
to Athos, who saw him without evincing more surprise than if he had
understood nothing of the apparition.

"Monsieur le Comte, I crave your pardon," said the doctor, coming up to
the patient with open arms; "but I have a reproach to make you--you
shall hear me." And he seated himself by the pillow of Athos, who had
great trouble in rousing himself from his preoccupation.

"What is the matter, doctor?" asked the comte, after a silence.

"Why, the matter is, you are ill, monsieur, and have had no advice."

"I! ill!" said Athos, smiling.

"Fever, consumption, weakness, decay, Monsieur le Comte."

"Weakness!" replied Athos; "is that possible? I do not get up."

"Come, come, M. le Comte, no subterfuges; you are a good Christian?"

"I hope so," said Athos.

"Would you kill yourself?"

"Never, doctor."

"Well, monsieur, you are in a fair way of doing so; to remain thus is
suicide; get well! M. le Comte, get well!"

"Of what? Find the disease first. For my part, I never knew myself
better; never did the sky appear more blue to me; never did I take more
care of my flowers."

"You have a concealed grief."

"Concealed!--not at all; I have the absence of my son, doctor; that is
my malady, and I do not conceal it."

"M. le Comte, your son lives, he is strong, he has all the future before
him of men of his merit, and of his race; live for him--"

"But I do live, doctor; oh! be satisfied of that," added he, with a
melancholy smile; "as long as Raoul lives, it will be plainly known, for
as long as he lives, I shall live."

"What do you say?"

"A very simple thing. At this moment, doctor, I leave life suspended in
me. A forgetful, dissipated, indifferent life would be above my strength
now I have no longer Raoul with me. You do not ask the lamp to burn when
the spark has not enlightened the flame; do not ask me to live amid
noise and light. I vegetate, I prepare myself, I wait. Look, doctor;
remember those soldiers we have so often seen together at the ports,
where they were waiting to embark; lying down, indifferent, half upon
one element, half upon the other; they were neither at the place where
the sea was going to carry them, nor at the place where the earth was
going to lose them; baggages prepared, minds upon the stretch, looks
fixed--they waited. I repeat it, that word is the one which paints my
present life. Lying down, like the soldiers, my ear on the stretch for
the reports that may reach me, I wish to be ready to set out at the
first summons. Who will make me that summons? life or death? God or
Raoul? My baggage is packed, my soul is prepared, I await the signal--I
wait, doctor, I wait!"

The doctor knew the temper of that mind; he appreciated the strength of
that body; he reflected for a moment, told himself that words were
useless, remedies absurd, and he left the chateau, exhorting Athos'
servants not to leave him for a moment.

The doctor being gone, Athos evinced neither anger nor vexation at
having been disturbed. He did not even desire that all letters that came
should be brought to him directly. He knew very well that every
distraction which should arrive would be a joy, a hope, which his
servants would have paid with their blood to procure him. Sleep had
become rare. By intense thinking, Athos forgot himself, for a few hours
at most, in a reverie more profound, more obscure than other people
would have called a dream. This momentary repose which this
forgetfulness afforded the body, fatigued the soul, for Athos lived a
double life during these wanderings of his understanding. One night, he
dreamed that Raoul was dressing himself in a tent, to go upon an
expedition commanded by M. de Beaufort in person. The young man was sad;
he clasped his cuirass slowly, and slowly he girded on his sword.

"What is the matter?" asked his father, tenderly.

"What afflicts me is the death of Porthos, ever so dear a friend,"
replied Raoul. "I suffer here of the grief you will feel at home."

And the vision disappeared with the slumber of Athos. At daybreak one of
his servants entered his master's apartments, and gave him a letter
which came from Spain.

"The writing of Aramis," thought the comte; and he read.

"Porthos is dead!" cried he, after the first lines. "Oh! Raoul, Raoul!
thanks! thou keepest thy promise, thou warnest me!"

And Athos, seized with a mortal sweat, fainted in his bed, without any
other cause than his weakness.




CHAPTER CXXXI.

THE VISION OF ATHOS.


When this fainting of Athos had ceased, the comte, almost ashamed of
having given way before this supernatural event, dressed himself and
ordered his horse, determined to ride to Blois, to open more certain
correspondence with either Africa, D'Artagnan, or Aramis. In fact, this
letter from Aramis informed the Comte de la Fere of the bad success of
the expedition of Belle-Isle. It gave him sufficient details of the
death of Porthos, to move the tender and devoted heart of Athos to its
last fibers. Athos wished to go and pay his friend Porthos a last visit.
To render this honor to his companion in arms, he meant to send to
D'Artagnan, to prevail upon him to recommence the painful voyage to
Belle-Isle, to accomplish in his company that sad pilgrimage to the tomb
of the giant he had so much loved, then to return to his dwelling to
obey that secret influence which was conducting him to eternity by a
mysterious road. But scarcely had his joyous servants dressed their
master, whom they saw with pleasure preparing himself for a journey
which might dissipate his melancholy; scarcely had the comte's gentlest
horse been saddled and brought to the door, than the father of Raoul
felt his head become confused, his legs give way, and he clearly
perceived the impossibility of going one step farther. He ordered
himself to be carried into the sun; they laid him upon his bed of moss,
where he passed a full hour before he could recover his spirits. Nothing
could be more natural than this weakness after the inert repose of the
latter days. Athos took a bouillon, to give him strength, and bathed his
dried lips in a glassful of the wine he loved the best--that old Anjou
wine mentioned by Porthos in his admirable will. Then, refreshed, free
in mind, he had his horse brought again; but it required the aid of his
servants to mount painfully into the saddle. He did not go a hundred
paces; a shivering seized him again at the turning of the road. "This is
very strange!" said he to his valet-de-chambre, who accompanied him.

"Let us stop, monsieur--I conjure you!" replied the faithful servant;
"how pale you are getting!"

"That will not prevent my pursuing my route, now I have once started,"
replied the comte. And he gave his horse his head again. But suddenly,
the animal, instead of obeying the thought of his master, stopped. A
movement, of which Athos was unconscious, had checked the bit.

"Something," said Athos, "wills that I should go no further. Support
me," added he, stretching out his arms; "quick! come closer! I feel all
my muscles relax, and I shall fall from my horse."

The valet had seen the movement made by his master at the moment he
received the order. He went up to him quickly, received the comte in his
arms, and as they were not yet sufficiently distant from the house for
the servants, who had remained at the door to watch their master's
departure, not to perceive the disorder in the usually regular
proceeding of the comte, the valet called his comrades by gestures and
voice, and all hastened to his assistance. Athos had gone but a few
steps on his return, when he felt himself better again. His strength
seemed to revive, and with it the desire to go to Blois. He made his
horse turn round, but, at the animal's first steps, he sunk again into a
state of torpor and anguish.

"Well! decidedly," said he, "it is WILLED that I should stay at
home." His people flocked around him; they lifted him from his horse and
carried him as quickly as possible into the house. Everything was soon
prepared in his chamber, and they put him to bed.

"You will be sure to remember," said he, disposing himself to sleep,
"that I expect letters from Africa this very day."

"Monsieur will no doubt hear with pleasure that Blaisois' son is gone on
horseback, to gain an hour over the courier of Blois," replied his
valet-de-chambre.

"Thank you," replied Athos, with his bland smile.

The comte fell asleep, but his disturbed slumber resembled suffering
more than repose. The servant who watched him saw several times the
expression of interior torture thrown out upon his features. Perhaps
Athos was dreaming. The day passed away. Blaisois' son returned: the
courier had brought no news. The comte reckoned the minutes with
despair; he shuddered when those minutes had formed an hour. The idea
that he was forgotten seized him once, and brought on a fearful pang of
the heart. Everybody in the house had given up all hopes of the
courier--his hour had long passed. Four times the express sent to Blois
had reiterated his journey, and there was nothing to the address of the
comte. Athos knew that the courier only arrived once a week. Here, then,
was a delay of eight mortal days to be endured. He recommenced the night
in this painful persuasion. All that a sick man, irritated by suffering,
can add of melancholy suppositions to probabilities always sad, Athos
heaped up during the early hours of this dismal night. The fever rose;
it invaded the chest, where the fire soon caught, according to the
expression of the physician, who had been brought back from Blois by
Blaisois at his last journey. It soon gained the head. The physician
made two successive bleedings, which unlodged it, but left the patient
very weak, and without power of action in anything but his brain. And
yet this redoubtable fever had ceased. It besieged with its last
palpitations the stiffened extremities; it ended by yielding as midnight
struck.

The physician, seeing the incontestable improvement, returned to Blois,
after having ordered some prescriptions, and declared that the comte was
saved. Then commenced for Athos a strange, indefinable state. Free to
think, his mind turned toward Raoul, that beloved son. His imagination
painted the fields of Africa in the environs of Gigelli, where M. de
Beaufort must have landed his army. There were gray rocks, rendered
green in certain parts by the waters of the sea, when it lashed the
shore in storms and tempests. Beyond the shore, strewed over with these
rocks like tombs, ascended, in form of an amphitheater, among
mastick-trees and cactus, a sort of small town, full of smoke, confused
noises and terrified movements. All on a sudden, from the bosom of this
smoke arose a flame, which succeeded, by creeping along the houses, in
covering the whole surface of this town, and which increased by degrees,
uniting in its red vortices tears, cries, arms extended toward heaven.

There was for a moment, a frightful _pele-mele_ of _madriers_ falling to
pieces, of swords broken, of stones calcined, of trees burned and
disappearing. It was a strange thing that in this chaos, in which Athos
distinguished raised arms, in which he heard cries, sobs and groans, he
did not see one human figure. The cannon thundered at a distance,
musketry cracked, the sea moaned, flocks made their escape, bounding
over the verdant slope. But not a soldier to apply the match to the
batteries of cannon, not a sailor to assist in maneuvering the fleet,
not a shepherd for the flocks. After the ruin of the village, and the
destruction of the forts which dominated it, a ruin and a destruction
operated magically without the co-operation of a single human being, the
flame was extinguished, the smoke began to descend, then diminished in
intensity, paled, and disappeared entirely. Night then came over the
scene; a night dark upon the earth, brilliant in the firmament. The
large blazing stars which sparkled in the African sky shone without
lighting anything even around them.

A long silence ensued, which gave, for a moment, repose to the troubled
imagination of Athos; and, as he felt that that which he saw was not
terminated, he applied more attentively the looks of his understanding
upon the strange spectacle which his imagination had presented. This
spectacle was soon continued for him. A mild and pale moon arose behind
the declivities of the coast, and streaking at first the undulating
ripples of the sea, which appeared to have calmed after the roarings it
had sent forth during the vision of Athos--the moon, say we, shed its
diamonds and opals upon the briars and bushes of the hills. The gray
rocks, like so many silent and attentive phantoms, appeared to raise
their verdant heads to examine likewise the field of battle by the light
of the moon, and Athos perceived that that field, entirely void during
the combat, was now strewed over with fallen bodies.

An inexpressible shudder of fear and horror seized his soul when he
recognized the white and blue uniform of the soldiers of Picardy, with
their long pikes and blue handles, and their muskets marked with the
fleur-de-lis on the butts. When he saw all the gaping, cold wounds,
looking up to the azure heavens as if to demand back of them the souls
to which they had opened a passage--when he saw the slaughtered horses,
stiff, with their tongues hanging out at one side of their mouths,
sleeping in the icy blood pooled around them, staining their furniture
and their manes--when he saw the white horse of M. de Beaufort, with his
head beaten to pieces, in the first ranks of the dead, Athos passed a
cold hand over his brow, which he was astonished not to find burning. He
was convinced by this touch that he was present, as a spectator, without
fever, at the day after a battle fought upon the shores of Gigelli by
the army of the expedition, which he had seen leave the coasts of France
and disappear in the horizon, and of which he had saluted with thought
and gesture the last cannon-shot fired by the duke as a signal of
farewell to his country.

Who can paint the mortal agony with which his soul followed, like a
vigilant eye, the trace of those dead bodies, and examined them, one
after the other, to see if Raoul slept among them? Who can express the
intoxication of joy with which Athos bowed before God, and thanked him
for not having seen him he sought with so much fear among the dead? In
fact, fallen dead in their ranks, stiff, icy, all these dead, easy to be
recognized, seemed to turn with complacency toward the Comte de la Fere,
to be the better seen by him during his funereal inspection. But yet, he
was astonished, while viewing all these bodies, not to perceive the
survivors. To such a point did the illusion extend, that this vision was
for him a real voyage made by the father into Africa, to obtain more
exact information respecting his son.

Fatigued, therefore, with having traversed seas and continents, he
sought repose under one of the tents sheltered behind a rock, on the top
of which floated the white fleur-de-lised pennon. He looked for a
soldier to conduct him to the tent of M. de Beaufort. Then, while his
eye was wandering over the plain, turning on all sides, he saw a white
form appear behind the resinous myrtles. This figure was clothed in the
costume of an officer: it held in its hand a broken sword: it advanced
slowly toward Athos, who, stopping short and fixing his eyes upon it,
neither spoke nor moved, but wished to open his arms, because, in this
silent and pale officer, he had just recognized Raoul. The comte
attempted to utter a cry, but it remained stifled in his throat. Raoul,
with a gesture, directed him to be silent, placing his finger on his
lips and drawing back by degrees, without Athos being able to see his
legs move. The comte, more pale than Raoul, more trembling, followed his
son, traversing painfully briars and bushes, stones and ditches, Raoul
not appearing to touch the earth, and no obstacle impeding the lightness
of his march. The comte, whom the inequalities of the path fatigued,
soon stopped exhausted. Raoul still continued to beckon him to follow
him. The tender father, to whom love restored strength, made a last
effort, and climbed the mountain after the young man, who attracted him
by his gesture and his smile.

At length he gained the crest of the hill, and saw, thrown out in black,
upon the horizon whitened by the moon, the elongated aerial form of
Raoul. Athos stretched out his hand to get closer to his beloved son
upon the plateau, and the latter also stretched out his; but suddenly,
as if the young man had been drawn away in spite of himself, still
retreating, he left the earth, and Athos saw the clear blue sky shine
between the feet of his child and the ground of the hill. Raoul rose
insensibly into the void, still smiling, still calling with a
gesture:--he departed toward heaven. Athos uttered a cry of terrified
tenderness. He looked below again. He saw a camp destroyed, and all
those white bodies of the royal army, like so many motionless atoms.
And, then, when raising his head, he saw still, still, his son beckoning
him to ascend with him.




CHAPTER CXXXII.

THE ANGEL OF DEATH.


Athos was at this part of his marvelous vision, when the charm was
suddenly broken by a great noise rising from the outward gates of the
house. A horse was heard galloping over the hard gravel of the great
alley, and the sound of most noisy and animated conversations ascended
to the chamber in which the comte was dreaming. Athos did not stir from
the place he occupied; he scarcely turned his head toward the door to
ascertain the sooner what these noises could be. A heavy step ascended
the stairs; the horse which had recently galloped, departed slowly
toward the stables. Great hesitation appeared in the steps which by
degrees approached the chamber of Athos. A door then was opened, and
Athos, turning a little toward the part of the room the noise came from,
cried in a weak voice:

"It is a courier from Africa, is it not?"

"No, Monsieur le Comte," replied a voice which made the father of Raoul
start upright in his bed.

"Grimaud!" murmured he. And the sweat began to pour down his cheeks.
Grimaud appeared in the doorway. It was no longer the Grimaud we have
seen, still young with courage and devotion, when he jumped the first
into the boat destined to convey Raoul de Bragelonne to the vessels of
the royal fleet. He was a stern and pale old man, his clothes covered
with dust, with a few scattered hairs whitened by old age. He trembled
while leaning against the door-frame, and was near falling on seeing, by
the light of the lamps, the countenance of his master. These two men,
who had lived so long together in a community of intelligence, and whose
eyes, accustomed to economize expressions, knew how to say so many
things silently--these two old friends, one as noble as the other in
heart, if they were unequal in fortune and birth, remained interdicted
while looking at each other. By the exchange of a single glance they had
just read to the bottom of each other's heart. Grimaud bore upon his
countenance the impression of a grief already old, of a dismal
familiarity with it. He appeared to have no longer in use but one single
version of his thoughts. As formerly he was accustomed not to speak
much, he was now accustomed not to smile at all. Athos read at a glance
all these shades upon the visage of his faithful servant, and in the
same tone he would have employed to speak to Raoul in his dream--

"Grimaud," said he, "Raoul is dead, is he not?"

Behind Grimaud, the other servants listened breathlessly, with their
eyes fixed upon the bed of their sick master. They heard the terrible
question, and an awful silence ensued.

"Yes," replied the old man, heaving up the monosyllable from his chest
with a hoarse, broken sigh.

Then arose voices of lamentation, which groaned without measure, and
filled with regrets and prayers the chamber where the agonized father
sought with his eyes for the portrait of his son. This was for Athos
like the transition which led to his dream. Without uttering a cry,
without shedding a tear, patient, mild, resigned as a martyr, he raised
his eyes toward heaven, in order to there see again, rising above the
mountain of Gigelli, the beloved shade which was leaving him at the
moment of Grimaud's arrival. Without doubt, while looking toward the
heavens, when resuming his marvelous dream, he repassed by the same road
by which the vision, at once so terrible and so sweet, had led him
before, for, after having gently closed his eyes, he reopened them and
began to smile. He had just seen Raoul, who had smiled upon him. With
his hands joined upon his breast, his face turned toward the window,
bathed by the fresh air of night, which brought to his pillow the aroma
of the flowers and the woods, Athos entered, never again to come out of
it, into the contemplation of that paradise which the living never see.
God willed, no doubt, to open to this elect the treasures of eternal
beatitude, at the hour when other men tremble with the idea of being
severely received by the Lord, and cling to this life they know, in the
dread of the other life of which they get a glimpse by the dismal, murky
torches of death. Athos was guided by the pure and serene soul of his
son, which aspired to be like the paternal soul. Everything for this
just man was melody and perfume in the rough road which souls take to
return to the celestial country. After an hour of this ecstasy, Athos
softly raised his hands, as white as wax; the smile did not quit his
lips, and he murmured low, so low as scarcely to be audible, these three
words addressed to God or to Raoul:

"HERE I AM!"

And his hands fell down slowly, as if he himself had laid them on the
bed.

Death had been kind and mild to this noble creature. It had spared him
the tortures of the agony, the convulsions of the last departure; it had
opened with an indulgent finger the gates of eternity to that noble soul
worthy of every respect. God had no doubt ordered it thus that the pious
remembrance of this death should remain in the hearts of those present,
and in the memory of other men--a death which caused to be loved the
passage from this life to the other by those whose existence upon this
earth leads them not to dread the last judgment. Athos, preserved, even
in the eternal sleep, that placid and sincere smile--an ornament which
was to accompany him to the tomb. The quietude of his features, the calm
of his nothingness, made his servants for a long time doubt whether he
had really quitted life. The comte's people wished to remove Grimaud,
who from a distance devoured the face growing so pale, and did not
approach, from the pious fear of bringing to him the breath of death.
But Grimaud, fatigued as he was, refused to leave the room. He sat
himself down upon the threshold, watching his master with the vigilance
of a sentinel, and jealous to receive either his first waking look or
his last dying sigh. The noises were all quieted in the house, and every
one respected the slumber of their lord. But Grimaud, by anxiously
listening, perceived that the comte no longer breathed. He raised
himself, with his hands leaning on the ground, looked to see if there
did not appear some motion in the body of his master. Nothing! Fear
seized him; he rose completely up, and, at the very moment, heard some
one coming up the stairs. A noise of spurs knocking against a sword--a
warlike sound, familiar to his ears--stopped him as he was going toward
the bed of Athos. A voice still more sonorous than brass or steel
resounded within three paces of him.

"Athos! Athos! my friend!" cried this voice, agitated even to tears.

"Monsieur le Chevalier d'Artagnan!" faltered out Grimaud.

"Where is he? Where is he?" continued the musketeer.

Grimaud seized his arm in his bony fingers, and pointed to the bed, upon
the sheets of which the livid tints of the dead already showed.

A choked respiration, the opposite to a sharp cry, swelled the throat of
D'Artagnan. He advanced on tiptoe, trembling, frightened at the noise
his feet made upon the floor, and his heart rent by a nameless agony. He
placed his ear to the breast of Athos, his face to the comte's mouth.
Neither noise nor breath! D'Artagnan drew back. Grimaud, who had
followed him with his eyes, and for whom each of his movements had been
a revelation, came timidly, and seated himself at the foot of the bed,
and glued his lips to the sheet which was raised by the stiffened feet
of his master. Then large drops began to flow from his red eyes. This
old man in despair, who wept, bent double without uttering a word,
presented the most moving spectacle that D'Artagnan, in a life so filled
with emotion, had ever met with.

The captain remained standing in contemplation before that smiling dead
man, who seemed to have kept his last thought, to make to his best
friend, to the man he had loved next to Raoul, a gracious welcome even
beyond life; and as if to reply to that exalted flattery of hospitality,
D'Artagnan went and kissed Athos fervently on the brow, and with his
trembling fingers closed his eyes. Then he seated himself by the pillow
without dread of that dead man, who had been so kind and affectionate to
him for thirty-five years; he fed himself greedily with the remembrances
which the noble visage of the comte brought to his mind in crowds--some
blooming and charming as that smile--some dark, dismal, and icy, as that
face with its eyes closed for eternity.

All at once, the bitter flood which mounted from minute to minute
invaded his heart, and swelled his breast almost to bursting. Incapable
of mastering his emotion, he arose, and tearing himself violently from
the chamber where he had just found dead him to whom he came to report
the news of the death of Porthos, he uttered sobs so heart-rending, that
the servants, who seemed only to wait for an explosion of grief,
answered to it by their lugubrious clamors, and the dogs of the late
comte by their lamentable howlings. Grimaud was the only one who did not
lift up his voice. Even in the paroxysm of his grief he would not have
dared to profane the dead, or for the first time disturb the slumber of
his master. Athos had accustomed him never to speak.

At daybreak, D'Artagnan, who had wandered about the lower hall biting
his fingers to stifle his sighs--D'Artagnan went up once more; and
watching the moment when Grimaud turned his head toward him, he made him
a sign to come to him, which the faithful servant obeyed without making
more noise than a shadow. D'Artagnan went down again followed by
Grimaud; and when he had gained the vestibule, taking the old man's
hands, "Grimaud," said he, "I have seen how the father died; now let me
know how the son died."

Grimaud drew from his breast a large letter, upon the envelope of which
was traced the address of Athos. He recognized the writing of M. de
Beaufort, broke the seal, and began to read, walking about in the first
blue rays of day, in the dark alley of old limes, marked by the still
visible footsteps of the comte who had just died.




CHAPTER CXXXIII.

THE BULLETIN.


The Duc de Beaufort wrote to Athos. The letter destined for the living
only reached the dead. God had changed the address.

     "MY DEAR COMTE," wrote the prince in his large, bad
     school-boy's hand--"a great misfortune has struck us amid a great
     triumph. The king loses one of the bravest of soldiers. I lose a
     friend. You lose M. de Bragelonne. He has died gloriously, and so
     gloriously that I have not the strength to weep as I could wish.
     Receive my sad compliments, my dear comte. Heaven distributes
     trials according to the greatness of our hearts. This is an immense
     one, but not above your courage. Your good friend,

                                                   "LE DUC DE BEAUFORT."

The letter contained a relation written by one of the prince's
secretaries. It was the most touching recital, and the most true, of
that dismal episode which unraveled two existences. D'Artagnan,
accustomed to battle emotions, and with a heart armed against
tenderness, could not help starting on reading the name of Raoul, the
name of that beloved boy who had become, as his father had, a shade.

"In the morning," said the prince's secretary, "monseigneur commanded
the attack. Normandy and Picardy had taken position in the gray rocks
dominated by the heights of the mountain, upon the declivity of which
were raised the bastions of Gigelli.

"The cannon beginning to fire, opened the action; the regiments marched
full of resolution; the pikemen had their pikes elevated, the bearers of
muskets had their weapons ready. The prince followed attentively the
march and movements of the troops, so as to be able to sustain them
with a strong reserve. With monseigneur were the oldest captains and his
aides-de-camp. M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne had received orders not to
leave his highness. In the meantime the enemy's cannon, which at first
had thundered with little success against the masses, had regulated its
fire, and the balls, better directed, had killed several men near the
prince. The regiments formed in column and which were advancing against
the ramparts were rather roughly handled. There was a sort of hesitation
in our troops, who found themselves ill-seconded by the artillery. In
fact, the batteries which had been established the evening before had
but a weak and uncertain aim, on account of their position. The
direction from low to high lessened the justness of the shots as well as
their range.

"Monseigneur, comprehending the bad effect of this position of the siege
artillery, commanded the frigates moored in the little road to commence
a regular fire against the place. M. de Bragelonne offered himself at
once to carry this order. But monseigneur refused to acquiesce in the
vicomte's request. Monseigneur was right, for he loved and wished to
spare the young nobleman. He was quite right, and the event took upon
itself to justify his foresight and refusal; for scarcely had the
sergeant charged with the message solicited by M. de Bragelonne gained
the sea-shore, when two shots from long carbines issued from the enemy's
ranks and laid him low. The sergeant fell, dyeing the sand with his
blood; observing which, M. de Bragelonne smiled at monseigneur, who said
to him, 'You see, vicomte, I have saved your life. Report that, some
day, to M. le Comte de la Fere, in order that, learning it from you, he
may thank me.' The young nobleman smiled sadly, and replied to the duc,
'It is true, monseigneur, that but for your kindness I should have been
killed, where the poor sergeant has fallen, and should be at rest.' M.
de Bragelonne made this reply in such a tone that monseigneur answered
him warmly. 'Vrai Dieu! young man, one would say that your mouth waters
for death; but, by the soul of Henry IV., I have promised your father to
bring you back alive; and, please the Lord, I will keep my word."

"Monsieur de Bragelonne colored, and replied in a lower voice,
'Monseigneur, pardon me, I beseech you; I have always had the desire to
go to meet good opportunities; and it is so delightful to distinguish
ourselves before our general, particularly when that general is M. le
Duc de Beaufort."

"Monseigneur was a little softened by this; and, turning to the officers
who surrounded him, gave his different orders. The grenadiers of the two
regiments got near enough to the ditches and the intrenchments to launch
their grenades, which had but little effect. In the meanwhile, M.
d'Estrees, who commanded the fleet, having seen the attempt of the
sergeant to approach the vessels, understood that he must act without
orders, and open his fire. Then the Arabs, finding themselves seriously
injured by the balls from the fleet, and beholding the destruction and
the ruins of their bad walls, uttered the most fearful cries. Their
horsemen descended the mountain at the gallop, bent over their saddles,
and rushed full tilt upon the columns of infantry, which, crossing their
pikes, stopped this mad assault. Repulsed by the firm attitude of the
battalion, the Arabs threw themselves with great fury toward the
_etat-major_, which was not on its guard at that moment.

"The danger was great; monseigneur drew his sword; his secretaries and
people imitated him; the officers of the suite engaged in combat with
the furious Arabs. It was then M. de Bragelonne was able to satisfy the
inclination he had manifested from the commencement of the action. He
fought near the prince with the valor of a Roman, and killed three Arabs
with his small sword. But it was evident that his bravery did not arise
from one of those sentiments of pride natural to all who fight. It was
impetuous, affected, forced even; he sought to intoxicate himself with
noise and carnage. He heated himself to such a degree that monseigneur
called out to him to stop. He must have heard the voice of monseigneur,
because we who were close to him heard it. He did not, however, stop,
but continued his course toward the entrenchments. As M. de Bragelonne
was a well-disciplined officer, this disobedience to the orders of
monseigneur very much surprised everybody, and M. de Beaufort redoubled
his earnestness, crying, 'Stop, Bragelonne! Where are you going? Stop,'
repeated monsiegneur, 'I command you!'

"We all, imitating the gesture of M. le Duc, we all raised our hands. We
expected that the cavalier would turn bridle; but M. de Bragelonne
continued to ride toward the palisades.

"'Stop, Bragelonne!' repeated the prince, in a very loud voice; 'stop!
in the name of your father!'

"At these words M. de Bragelonne turned round, his countenance expressed
a lively grief, but he did not stop; we then concluded that his horse
must have run away with him. When M. le Duc had imagined that the
vicomte was not master of his horse, and had seen him precede the first
grenadiers, his highness cried, 'Musketeers, kill his horse! A hundred
pistoles for him who shall kill his horse!' But who could expect to hit
the beast without at least wounding his rider? No one durst venture. At
length one presented himself; he was a sharpshooter of the regiment of
Picardy, named Luzerne, who took aim at the animal, fired, and hit him
in the quarters, for we saw the blood redden the hair of the horse.
Instead of falling, the cursed jennet was irritated, and carried him on
more furiously than ever. Every Picard who saw this unfortunate young
man rushing on to meet death, shouted in the loudest manner, 'Throw
yourself off, Monsieur le Vicomte!--off!--off!--throw yourself off!' M.
de Bragelonne was an officer much beloved in the army. Already had the
vicomte arrived within pistol-shot of the ramparts, a discharge was
poured upon him, and enveloped him in its fire and smoke. We lost sight
of him; the smoke dispersed; he was on foot, standing; his horse was
killed.

"The vicomte was summoned to surrender by the Arabs, but he made them a
negative sign with his head, and continued to march toward the
palisades. This was a mortal imprudence. Nevertheless the whole army was
pleased that he would not retreat, since ill chance had led him so near.
He marched a few paces further, and the two regiments clapped their
hands. It was at this moment the second discharge shook the walls, and
the Vicomte de Bragelonne again disappeared in the smoke; but this time
the smoke was dispersed in vain, we no longer saw him standing. He was
down, with his head lower than his legs, among the bushes, and the Arabs
began to think of leaving their intrenchments to come and cut off his
head or take his body, as is the custom with the infidels. But
Monseigneur le Duc de Beaufort had followed all this with his eyes, and
the sad spectacle drew from him many and painful sighs. He then cried
aloud, seeing the Arabs running like white phantoms among the
mastic-trees, 'Grenadiers! piqueurs! will you let them take that noble
body?'

"Saying these words and waving his sword, he himself rode toward the
enemy. The regiments, rushing in his steps, ran in their turns, uttering
cries as terrible as those of the Arabs were wild.

"The combat commenced over the body of M. de Bragelonne, and with such
inveteracy was it fought, that a hundred and sixty Arabs were left upon
the field, by the side of at least fifty of our troops. It was a
lieutenant from Normandy who took the body of the vicomte on his
shoulders and carried it back to the lines. The advantage was, however,
pursued, the regiments took the reserve with them, and the enemy's
palisades were destroyed. At three o'clock the fire of the Arabs ceased;
the hand to hand fight lasted two hours; that was a massacre. At five
o'clock we were victorious on all the points; the enemy had abandoned
his positions, and M. le Duc had ordered the white flag to be planted
upon the culminating point of the little mountain. It was then we had
time to think of M. de Bragelonne, who had eight large wounds through
his body, by which almost all his blood had escaped. Still, however, he
breathed, which afforded inexpressible joy to monseigneur, who insisted
upon being present at the first dressing of the wounds and at the
consultation of the surgeons. There were two among them who declared M.
de Bragelonne would live. Monseigneur threw his arms round their necks,
and promised them a thousand louis each if they could save him.

"The vicomte heard these transports of joy, and whether he was in
despair, or whether he suffered much from his wounds, he expressed by
his countenance a contradiction, which gave rise to reflection,
particularly in one of the secretaries when he had heard what follows.
The third surgeon was the brother of Sylvain de Saint-Cosme, the most
learned of ours. He probed the wounds in his turn, and said nothing. M.
de Bragelonne fixed his eyes steadily upon the skillful surgeon, and
seemed to interrogate his every movement. The latter, upon being
questioned by monseigneur, replied that he saw plainly three mortal
wounds out of eight, but so strong was the constitution of the wounded,
so rich was he in youth, and so merciful was the goodness of God, that
perhaps M. de Bragelonne might recover, particularly if he did not move
in the slightest manner. Frere Sylvain added, turning toward his
assistants, 'Above everything, do not allow him to move even a finger,
or you will kill him;' and we all left the tent in very low spirits.
That secretary I have mentioned, on leaving the tent, thought he
perceived a faint and sad smile glide over the lips of M. de Bragelonne
when the duc said to him, in a cheerful, kind voice, 'We shall save you,
vicomte, we shall save you!'

"In the evening, when it was believed the wounded young man had taken
some repose, one of the assistants entered his tent, but rushed
immediately out again, uttering loud cries. We all ran up in disorder,
M. le Duc with us, and the assistant pointed to the body of M. de
Bragelonne upon the ground, at the foot of his bed, bathed in the
remainder of his blood. It appeared that he had had some convulsion,
some febrile movement, and that he had fallen; that the fall had
accelerated his end, according to the prognostic of Frere Sylvain. We
raised the vicomte; he was cold and dead. He held a lock of fair hair in
his right hand, and that hand was pressed tightly upon his heart."

Then followed the details of the expedition, and of the victory obtained
over the Arabs. D'Artagnan stopped at the account of the death of poor
Raoul. "Oh!" murmured he, "unhappy boy! a suicide!"

And turning his eyes toward the chamber of the chateau, in which Athos
slept in eternal sleep, "They kept their words with each other," said
he, in a low voice; "now I believe them to be happy; they must be
reunited." And he returned through the parterre with slow and melancholy
steps. All the village--all the neighborhood--were filled with grieving
neighbors relating to each other the double catastrophe, and making
preparations for the funeral.




CHAPTER CXXXIV.

THE LAST CANTO OF THE POEM.


On the morrow, all the noblesse of the provinces, of the environs, and
wherever messengers had carried the news, were seen to arrive.
D'Artagnan had shut himself up, without being willing to speak to
anybody. Two such heavy deaths falling upon the captain, so closely
after the death of Porthos, for a long time oppressed that spirit which
had hitherto been so indefatigable and invulnerable. Except Grimaud, who
entered his chamber once, the musketeer saw neither servants nor guests.
He supposed, from the noises in the house, and the continual coming and
going, that preparations were being made for the funeral of the comte.
He wrote to the king to ask for an extension of his leave of absence.
Grimaud, as we have said, had entered D'Artagnan's apartment, had seated
himself upon a joint-stool near the door, like a man who meditates
profoundly; then, rising, he made a sign to D'Artagnan to follow him.
The latter obeyed in silence. Grimaud descended to the comte's
bed-chamber, showed the captain with his finger the place of the empty
bed, and raised his eyes eloquently toward heaven.

"Yes," replied D'Artagnan, "yes, good Grimaud--now with the son he loved
so much!"

Grimaud left the chamber, and led the way to the hall, where, according
to the custom of the province, the body was laid out, previously to its
being buried forever. D'Artagnan was struck at seeing two open coffins
in the hall. In reply to the mute invitation of Grimaud, he approached,
and saw in one of them Athos, still handsome in death, and, in the
other, Raoul, with his eyes closed, his cheeks pearly as those of the
Pallas of Virgil, with a smile on his violet lips. He shuddered at
seeing the father and son, those two departed souls, represented on
earth by two silent, melancholy bodies, incapable of touching each
other, however close they might be.

"Raoul here!" murmured he. "Oh! Grimaud, why did you not tell me this?"

Grimaud shook his head, and made no reply; but taking D'Artagnan by the
hand, he led him to the coffin, and showed him, under the thin
winding-sheet, the black wounds by which life had escaped. The captain
turned away his eyes, and, judging it useless to question Grimaud, who
would not answer, he recollected that M. de Beaufort's secretary had
written more than he, D'Artagnan, had had the courage to read. Taking up
the recital of the affair which had cost Raoul his life, he found these
words, which terminated the last paragraph of the letter:

"Monsieur le Duc has ordered that the body of Monsieur le Vicomte should
be embalmed, after the manner practiced by the Arabs when they wish
their bodies to be carried to their native land; and Monsieur le Duc has
appointed relays, so that a confidential servant who brought up the
young man might take back his remains to M. le Comte de la Fere."

"And so," thought D'Artagnan, "I shall follow thy funeral, my dear
boy--I, already old--I, who am of no value on earth--and I shall
scatter the dust upon that brow which I kissed but two months since. God
has willed it to be so. Thou hast willed it to be so, thyself. I have no
