on the occasion, as well as the overmastering excitement which seized
all, are so well remembered, however, that I forbear to dwell upon them,
though they served to distract my mind from my own position. Suffice it
that at one moment we heard that His Majesty was dead, at another that
the wound was skin deep, and again that we might expect him at Meudon
before sunset. The rumour that the Duchess de Montpensier had taken
poison was no sooner believed than we were asked to listen to the guns
of Paris firing FEUX DE JOIE in honour of the King's death.

The streets were so closely packed with persons telling and hearing
these tales that I seemed from my window to be looking on a fair. Nor
was all my amusement withoutdoors; for a number of the gentlemen of the
Court, hearing that I had been at St. Cloud in the morning, and in the
very chamber, a thing which made me for the moment the most desirable
companion in the world, remembered on a sudden that they had a slight
acquaintance with me, and honoured me by calling upon me and sitting
a great part of the day with me. From which circumstance I confess I
derived as much hope as they diversion; knowing that courtiers are the
best weather-prophets in the world, who hate nothing so much as to be
discovered in the company of those on whom the sun does not shine.

The return of the King of Navarre, which happened about the middle of
the afternoon, while it dissipated the fears of some and dashed the
hopes of others, put an end to this state of uncertainty by confirming,
to the surprise of many, that His Majesty was in no danger. We learned
with varying emotions that the first appearances, which had deceived,
not myself only, but experienced leeches, had been themselves belied by
subsequent conditions; and that, in a word, Paris had as much to fear,
and loyal men as much to hope, as before this wicked and audacious
attempt.

I had no more than stomached this surprising information, which was less
welcome to me, I confess, than it should have been, when the arrival of
M. d'Agen, who greeted me with the affection which he never failed to
show me, distracted my thoughts for a time. Immediately on learning
where I was and, the strange adventures which had befallen me he had
ridden off; stopping only once, when he had nearly reached me, for the
purpose of waiting on Madame de Bruhl. I asked him how she had received
him.

'Like herself,' he replied with an ingenuous blush. 'More kindly than I
had a right to expect, if not as warmly as I had the courage to hope.'

'That will come with time,' I said, laughing. 'And Mademoiselle de la
Vire?'

'I did not see her,' he answered, 'but I heard she was well. And a
hundred fathoms deeper in love,' he added, eyeing me roguishly, 'than
when I saw her last.'

It was my turn to colour now, and I did so, feeling all the pleasure
and delight such, a statement was calculated to afford me. Picturing
mademoiselle as I had seen her last, leaning from her horse with love
written so plainly on her weeping face that all who ran might read, I
sank into so delicious a reverie that M. la Varenne, entering suddenly,
surprised us both before another word passed on either side.

His look and tone were as abrupt as it was in his nature, which was soft
and compliant, to make them. 'M. de Marsac,' he said, 'I am sorry to
put any constraint upon you, but I am directed to forbid you to your
friends. And I must request this gentleman to withdraw.'

'But all day my friends have come in and out,' I said with surprise. 'Is
this a new order?'

'A written order, which reached me no farther back than two minutes ago,
'he answered plainly. 'I am also directed to remove you to a room at the
back of the house, that you may not overlook the street.'

'But my parole was taken,' I cried, with a natural feeling of
indignation.

He shrugged his shoulders. 'I am sorry to say that I have nothing to
do with that,' he answered. 'I can only obey orders. I must ask this
gentleman, therefore, to withdraw.'

Of course M. d'Agen had no option but to leave me; which he did, I could
see, notwithstanding his easy and confident expressions, with a good
deal of mistrust and apprehension. When he was gone, La Varenne lost
no time in carrying out the remainder of his orders. As a consequence I
found myself confined to a small and gloomy apartment which looked, at
a distance of three paces, upon the smooth face of the rock on which the
Castle stood. This change, from a window which commanded all the life
of the town, and intercepted every breath of popular fancy, to a closet
whither no sounds penetrated, and where the very transition from noon to
evening scarcely made itself known, could not fail to depress my spirits
sensibly; the more as I took it to be significant of a change in my
fortunes fully as grave. Reflecting that I must now appear to the King
of Navarre in the light of a bearer of false tidings, I associated the
order to confine me more closely with his return from St. Cloud; and
comprehending that M. de Turenne was once more at liberty to attend to
my affairs, I began to look about me with forebodings which were none
the less painful because the parole I had given debarred me from any
attempt to escape.

Sleep and habit enabled me, nevertheless, to pass the night in comfort.
Very early in the morning a great firing of guns, which made itself
heard even in my quarters, led me to suppose that Paris had surrendered;
but the servant who brought me my breakfast; declined in a surly fashion
to give me any information. In the end, I spent the whole day alone, my
thoughts divided between my mistress and my own prospects, which seemed
to grow more and more gloomy as the hours succeeded one another. No one
came near me, no step broke the silence of the house; and for a while
I thought my guardians had forgotten even that I needed food. This
omission, it is true, was made good about sunset, but still M. la
Varenne did not appear, the servant seemed to be dumb, and I heard no
sounds in the house.

I had finished my meal an hour or more, and the room was growing dark,
when the silence was at last broken by quick steps passing along the
entrance. They paused, and seemed to hesitate at the foot of the stairs,
but the next moment they came on again, and stopped at my door. I rose
from my seat on hearing the key turned in the lock, and my astonishment
may be conceived when I saw no other than M. de Turenne enter, and close
the door behind him.

He saluted me in a haughty manner as he advanced to the table, raising
his cap for an instant and then replacing it. This done he stood looking
at me, and I at him, in a silence which on my side was the result of
pure astonishment; on his, of contempt and a kind of wonder. The evening
light, which was fast failing, lent a sombre whiteness to his face,
causing it to stand out from the shadows behind him in a way which was
not without its influence on me.

'Well!' he said at, last, speaking slowly and with unimaginable
insolence, 'I am here to look at you!'

I felt my anger rise, and gave him back look for look. 'At your will,' I
said, shrugging my shoulders.

'And to solve a question,' he continued in the same tone. 'To learn
whether the man who was mad enough to insult and defy me was the old
penniless dullard some called him, or the dare-devil others painted
him.'

'You are satisfied now?' I said.

He eyed me for a moment closely; then with sudden heat he cried, 'Curse
me if I am! Nor whether I have to do with a man very deep or very
shallow, a fool or a knave!'

'You may say what you please to a prisoner,' I retorted coldly.

'Turenne commonly does--to whom he pleases!' he answered. The next
moment he made me start by saying, as he drew out a comfit-box and
opened it, 'I am just from the little fool you have bewitched. If she
were in my power I would have her whipped and put on bread and water
till she came to her senses. As she is not, I must take another way.
Have you any idea, may I ask,' he continued in his cynical tone, 'what
is going to become of you, M. de Marsac?'

I replied, my heart inexpressibly lightened by what he had said of
mademoiselle, that I placed the fullest confidence in the justice of the
King of Navarre.

He repeated the name in a tone, I did not understand.

'Yes, sir, the King of Navarre,' I answered firmly.

'Well, I daresay you have good reason to do so,' he rejoined with a
sneer. 'Unless I am mistaken he knew a little more of this affair than
he acknowledges.'

'Indeed? The King of Navarre?' I said, staring stolidly at him.

'Yes, indeed, indeed, the King of Navarre!' he retorted, mimicking me,
with a nearer approach to anger than I had yet witnessed in him. 'But
let him be a moment, sirrah!' he continued, 'and do you listen to me. Or
first look at that. Seeing is believing.'

He drew out as he spoke a paper, or, to speak more correctly, a
parchment, which he thrust with a kind of savage scorn into my hand.
Repressing for the moment the surprise I felt, I took it to the window,
and reading it with difficulty, found it to be a royal patent drawn,
as far as I could judge, in due form, and appointing some person
unknown--for the name was left blank--to the post of Lieutenant-Governor
of the Armagnac, with a salary of twelve thousand livres a year!

'Well, sir?' he said impatiently.

'Well?' I answered mechanically. For my brain reeled; the exhibition of
such a paper in such a way raised extraordinary thoughts in my mind.

'Can you read it?' he asked.

'Certainly,' I answered, telling myself that he would fain play a trick
on me.

'Very well,' he replied, 'then listen. I am going to condescend; to make
you an offer, M. de Marsac. I will procure you your freedom, and fill up
the blank, which you see there, with your name--upon one condition.'

I stared at him with all the astonishment it was natural for me to feel
in the face, of such a proposition. 'You will confer this office on me?'
I muttered incredulously.

'The king having placed it at my disposal,' he answered, 'I will. But
first let me remind you,' he went on proudly, 'that the affair has
another side. On the one hand I offer you such employment, M. de Marsac,
as should satisfy your highest ambition. On the other, I warn you that
my power to avenge myself is no less to-day than it was yesterday; and
that if I condescend to buy you, it is because that course commends
itself to me for reasons, not because it is the only one open.'

I bowed. 'The condition, M. le Vicomte?' I said huskily, beginning to
understand him.

'That you give up all claim and suit to the hand of my kinswoman,' he
answered lightly. 'That is all. It is a simple and easy condition.'

I looked at him in renewed astonishment, in wonder, in stupefaction;
asking myself a hundred questions. Why did he stoop to bargain, who
could command? Why did he condescend to treat, who held me at his mercy?
Why did he gravely discuss my aspirations, to whom they must seem the
rankest presumption? Why?--but I could not follow it. I stood looking at
him in silence; in perplexity as great as if he had offered me the Crown
of France; in amazement and doubt and suspicion that knew no bounds.

'Well!' he said at last, misreading the emotion which appeared in my
face. 'You consent, sir?'

'Never!' I answered firmly.

He started. 'I think I cannot have heard you aright,' he said, speaking
slowly and almost courteously. 'I offer you a great place and my
patronage, M. de Marsac. Do I understand that you prefer a prison and my
enmity?'

'On those conditions,' I answered.

'Think, think!' he said harshly.

'I have thought,' I answered.

'Ay, but have you thought where you are?' he retorted. 'Have you thought
how many obstacles lie between you and this little fool? How many
persons you must win over, how many friends you must gain? Have you
thought what it will be to have me against you in this, or which of us
is more likely to win in the end?'

'I have thought,' I rejoined.

But my voice shook, my lips were dry. The room had grown dark. The rock
outside, intercepting the light, gave it already the air of a dungeon.
Though I did not dream of yielding to him, though I even felt that in
this interview he had descended to my level, and I had had the better of
him, I felt my heart sink. For I remembered how men immured in prisons
drag out their lives always petitioning, always forgotten; how wearily
the days go, that to free men are bright with hope and ambition. And I
saw in a flash what it would be to remain here, or in some such place;
never to cross horse again, or breathe the free air of Heaven, never
to hear the clink of sword against stirrup, or the rich tones of M.
d'Agen's voice calling for his friend!

I expected M. de Turenne to go when I had made my answer, or else to
fall into such a rage as opposition is apt to cause in those who seldom
encounter it. To my surprise, however, he restrained himself. 'Come,' he
said, with patience which fairly astonished me, and so much the more
as chagrin was clearly marked in his voice, 'I know where you put your
trust. You think the King of Navarre will protect you. Well, I pledge
you the honour of Turenne that he will not; that the King of Navarre
will do nothing to save you. Now, what do you say?'

'As I said before,' I answered doggedly.

He took up the parchment from the table with a grim laugh. 'So much
the worse for you then!' he said, shrugging his shoulders. 'So much the
worse for you! I took you for a rogue! It seems you are a fool!'



CHAPTER XXXVI. 'VIVE LE ROI!'

He took his leave with those words. But his departure, which I
should have hailed a few minutes before with joy, as a relief from
embarrassment and humiliation, found me indifferent. The statement to
which he had solemnly pledged himself in regard to the King of Navarre,
that I could expect no further help from him, had prostrated me; dashing
my hopes and spirits so completely that I remained rooted to the spot
long after his step had ceased to sound on the stairs. If what he said
was true, in the gloom which darkened alike my room and my prospects
I could descry no glimmer of light. I knew His Majesty's weakness and
vacillation too well to repose any confidence in him; if the King
of Navarre also abandoned me, I was indeed without hope, as without
resource.

I had stood some time with my mind painfully employed upon this problem,
which my knowledge of M. de Turenne's strict honour in private matters
did not allow me to dismiss lightly, when I heard another step on the
stairs, and in a moment M. la Varenne opened the door. Finding me in the
dark he muttered an apology for the remissness of the servants; which I
accepted, seeing nothing else for it, in good part.

'We have been at sixes-and-sevens all day, and you have been forgotten,'
he continued. 'But you will have no reason to complain now. I am ordered
to conduct you to His Majesty without delay.'

'To St. Cloud?' I exclaimed, greatly astonished.

'No, the king of France is here,' he answered.

'At Meudon?'

'To be sure. Why not?'

I expressed my wonder at his Majesty's rapid recovery.

'Pooh!' he answered roughly. 'He is as well as he ever was. I will leave
you my light. Be good enough to descend as soon as you are ready, for it
is ill work keeping kings waiting. Oh! and I had forgotten one thing,'
he continued, returning when he had already reached the door. 'My orders
are to see that you do not hold converse with anyone until you have seen
the king, M. de Marsac. You will kindly remember this if we are kept
waiting in the antechamber.'

'Am I to be transported to--other custody?' I asked, my mind full of
apprehension.

He shrugged his shoulders. 'Possibly,' he replied. 'I do not know.'

Of course there was nothing for it but to murmur that I was at the
king's disposition; after which La Varenne retired, leaving me to put
the best face on the matter I could. Naturally I augured anything
but well of an interview weighted with such a condition; and this
contributed still further to depress my spirits, already lowered by the
long solitude in which I had passed the day. Fearing nothing, however,
so much as suspense, I hastened to do what I could to repair my costume,
and then descended to the foot of the stairs, where I found my custodian
awaiting me with a couple of servants, of whom one bore a link.

We went out side by side, and having barely a hundred yards to go,
seemed in a moment to be passing through the gate of the Castle. I
noticed that the entrance was very strongly guarded, but an instant's
reflection served to remind me that this was not surprising after what
had happened at St. Cloud. I remarked to M. la Varenne as we crossed the
courtyard that I supposed Paris had surrendered; but he replied in the
negative so curtly, and with so little consideration, that I forebore to
ask any other questions; and the Chateau being small, we found ourselves
almost at once in a long, narrow corridor, which appeared to serve as
the antechamber.

It was brilliantly lighted and crowded from end to end, and almost from
wall to wall, with a mob of courtiers; whose silence, no less than
their keen and anxious looks, took me by surprise. Here and there two or
three, who had seized upon the embrasure of a window, talked together in
a low tone; or a couple, who thought themselves sufficiently important
to pace the narrow passage between the waiting lines, conversed in
whispers as they walked. But even these were swift to take alarm, and
continually looked askance; while the general company stood at gaze,
starting and looking up eagerly whenever the door swung open or a
newcomer was announced. The strange silence which prevailed reminded me
of nothing so much as of the Court at Blois on the night of the Duke
of Mercoeur's desertion; but that stillness had brooded over empty
chambers, this gave a peculiar air of strangeness to a room thronged in
every part.

M. la Varenne, who was received by those about the door with silent
politeness, drew me into the recess of a window; whence I was able
to remark, among other things, that the Huguenots present almost
outnumbered the king's immediate following. Still, among those who were
walking up and down, I noticed M. de Rambouillet, to whom at another
time I should have hastened to pay my respects; with Marshal d'Aumont,
Sancy, and Humieres. Nor had I more than noted the presence of these
before the door of the chamber opened and added to their number Marshal
Biron, who came out leaning on the arm of Crillon. The sight of these
old enemies in combination was sufficient of itself to apprise me that
some serious crisis was at hand; particularly as their progress through
the crowd was watched, I observed, by a hundred curious and attentive
eyes.

They disappeared at last through the outer door, and the assemblage
turned as with one accord to see who came next. But nearly half an hour
elapsed before the Chamber door, which all watched so studiously, again
opened. This time it was to give passage to my late visitor, Turenne,
who came out smiling, and leaning, to my great surprise, on the arm of
M. de Rosny.

As the two walked down the room, greeting here and there an obsequious
friend, and followed in their progress by all eyes, I felt my heart sink
indeed; both at sight of Turenne's good-humour, and of the company in
which I found him. Aware that in proportion as he was pleased I was like
to meet with displeasure, I still might have had hope left had I had
Rosny left. Losing him, however--and I could not doubt, seeing him as I
saw him, that I had lost him--and counting the King of Navarre as gone
already, I felt such a failure of courage as I had never known before.
I told myself with shame that I was not made for Courts, or for such
scenes as these; and recalling with new and keen mortification the poor
figure I had cut in the King of Navarre's antechamber at St. Jean, I
experienced so strange a gush of pity for my mistress that nothing could
exceed the tenderness I felt for her. I had won her under false colours,
I was not worthy of her. I felt that my mere presence in her company in
such a place as this, and among these people, must cover her with shame
and humiliation.

To my great relief, since I knew my face was on fire, neither of the
two, as they walked down the passage, looked my way or seemed conscious
of my neighbourhood. At the door they stood a moment talking earnestly,
and it seemed as if M. de Rosny would have accompanied the Vicomte
farther. The latter would not suffer it, however, but took his leave
there; and this with so many polite gestures that my last hope based on
M. de Rosny vanished.

Nevertheless, that gentleman was not so wholly changed that on his
turning to re-traverse the room I did not see a smile flicker for an
instant on his features as the two lines of bowing courtiers opened
before him. The next moment his look fell on me, and though his face
scarcely altered, he stopped opposite me.

'M. de Marsac is waiting to see His Majesty?' he asked aloud, speaking
to M. la Varenne.

My companion remaining silent, I bowed.

'In five minutes,' M. de Rosny replied quietly, yet with a distant air,
which made me doubt whether I had not dreamed all I remembered of this
man. 'Ah! M. de Paul, what can I do for you?' he continued. And he bent
his head to listen to the application which a gentleman who stood next
me poured into his ear. 'I will see,' I heard him answer. 'In any case
you shall know to-morrow.'

'But you will be my friend?' M. Paul urged, detaining him by the sleeve.

'I will put only one before you,' he answered.

My neighbour seemed to shrink into himself with disappointment. 'Who is
it?' he murmured piteously.

'The king and his service, my friend,' M. de Rosny replied drily. And
with that he walked away. But half a dozen times at least; before he
reached the upper end of the room I saw the scene repeated.

I looked on at all this in the utmost astonishment, unable to guess or
conceive what had happened to give M. de Rosny so much importance. For
it did not; escape me that the few words he had stopped to speak to me
had invested me with interest in the eyes of all who stood near.
They gave me more room and a wider breathing-space, and looking at me
askance, muttered my name in whispers. In my uncertainty, however, what
this portended I drew no comfort from it; and before I had found time to
weigh it thoroughly the door through which Turenne and Rosny had entered
opened again. The pages and gentlemen who stood about it hastened to
range themselves on either side. An usher carrying a white wand came
rapidly down the room, here and there requesting the courtiers to stand
back where the passage was narrow. Then a loud voice without cried, 'The
King, gentlemen! the King!' and one in every two of us stood a-tiptoe to
see him enter.

But there came in only Henry of Navarre, wearing a violet cloak and cap.

I turned to La Varenne and with my head full of confusion, muttered
impatiently, 'But the king, man! Where is the king?'

He grinned at me, with his hand before his mouth. 'Hush!' he whispered.
''Twas a jest we played on you! His late Majesty died at daybreak this
morning. This is the king.'

'This! the King of Navarre?' I cried; so loudly that some round us
called 'Silence!'

'No, the King of France, fool!' he replied. 'Your sword must be sharper
than your wits, or I have been told some lies!'

I let the gibe pass and the jest, for my heart was beating so fast and
painfully that I could scarcely preserve my outward composure. There was
a mist before my eyes, and a darkness which set the lights at defiance.
It was in vain I tried to think what this might mean--to me. I could not
put two thoughts together, and while I still questioned what reception
I might expect, and who in this new state of things were my friends, the
king stopped before me.

'Ha, M. de Marsac!' he cried cheerfully, signing to those who stood
before me to give place. 'You are the gentleman who rode so fast to warn
me the other morning. I have spoken to M. de Turenne about you, and he
is willing to overlook the complaint he had against you. For the rest,
go to my closet, my friend. Go! Rosny knows my will respecting you.'

I had sense enough left to kneel and kiss his hand; but it was in
silence, which he knew how to interpret. He had moved on and was
speaking to another before I recovered the use of my tongue, or the wits
which his gracious words had scattered. When I did so, and got on my
feet again I found myself the centre of so much observation and the
object of so many congratulations that I was glad to act upon the hint
which La Varenne gave me, and hurry away to the closet.

Here, though I had now an inkling of what I had to expect, I found
myself received with a kindness which bade fair to overwhelm me. Only M.
de Rosny was in the room, and he took me by both hands in a manner which
told me without a word that the Rosny of old days was back, and that;
for the embarrassment I had caused him of late I was more than forgiven.
When I tried to thank him for the good offices which I knew he had done
me with the king he would have none of it; reminding me with a smile
that he had eaten of my cheese when the choice lay between that and
Lisieux.

'And besides, my friend,' he continued, his eyes twinkling, 'You have
made me richer by five hundred crowns.'

'How so?' I asked, wondering more and more.

'I wagered that sum with Turenne that he could not bribe you,' he
answered, smiling. 'And see,' he continued, selecting from some on the
table the same parchment I had seen before, 'here is the bribe. Take
it; it is yours. I have given a score to-day, but none with the same
pleasure. Let me be the first to congratulate the Lieutenant-Governor of
the Armagnac.'

For a while I could not believe that he was in earnest; which pleased
him mightily, I remember. When I was brought at last to see that the
king had meant this for me from the first, and had merely lent the
patent to Turenne that the latter might make trial of me, my pleasure
and gratification were such that I could no more express them then than
