Olympus, and tell King Priam in Ilius, that he is to go to the ships of
the Achaeans and free the body of his dear son. He is to take such
gifts with him as shall give satisfaction to Achilles, and he is to go
alone, with no other Trojan, save only some honoured servant who may
drive his mules and waggon, and bring back the body of him whom noble
Achilles has slain. Let him have no thought nor fear of death in his
heart, for we will send the slayer of Argus to escort him, and bring
him within the tent of Achilles. Achilles will not kill him nor let
another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he
will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

On this Iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her message. She
went to Priam's house, and found weeping and lamentation therein. His
sons were seated round their father in the outer courtyard, and their
raiment was wet with tears: the old man sat in the midst of them with
his mantle wrapped close about his body, and his head and neck all
covered with the filth which he had clutched as he lay grovelling in
the mire. His daughters and his sons' wives went wailing about the
house, as they thought of the many and brave men who lay dead, slain by
the Argives. The messenger of Jove stood by Priam and spoke softly to
him, but fear fell upon him as she did so. "Take heart," she said,
"Priam offspring of Dardanus, take heart and fear not. I bring no evil
tidings, but am minded well towards you. I come as a messenger from
Jove, who though he be not near, takes thought for you and pities you.
The lord of Olympus bids you go and ransom noble Hector, and take with
you such gifts as shall give satisfaction to Achilles. You are to go
alone, with no Trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive
your mules and waggon, and bring back to the city the body of him whom
noble Achilles has slain. You are to have no thought, nor fear of
death, for Jove will send the slayer of Argus to escort you. When he
has brought you within Achilles' tent, Achilles will not kill you nor
let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and
he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy."

Iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and Priam told his sons to
get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast upon
the top of its bed. Then he went down into his fragrant store-room,
high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were
kept, and he called Hecuba his wife. "Wife," said he, "a messenger has
come to me from Olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of the
Achaeans to ransom my dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall give
satisfaction to Achilles. What think you of this matter? for my own
part I am greatly moved to pass through the camps of the Achaeans and
go to their ships."

His wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, "Alas, what has become
of that judgement for which you have been ever famous both among
strangers and your own people? How can you venture alone to the ships
of the Achaeans, and look into the face of him who has slain so many of
your brave sons? You must have iron courage, for if the cruel savage
sees you and lays hold on you, he will know neither respect nor pity.
Let us then weep Hector from afar here in our own house, for when I
gave him birth the threads of overruling fate were spun for him that
dogs should eat his flesh far from his parents, in the house of that
terrible man on whose liver I would fain fasten and devour it. Thus
would I avenge my son, who showed no cowardice when Achilles slew him,
and thought neither of flight nor of avoiding battle as he stood in
defence of Trojan men and Trojan women."

Then Priam said, "I would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as a bird
of ill omen in my house, for you will not move me. Had it been some
mortal man who had sent me some prophet or priest who divines from
sacrifice--I should have deemed him false and have given him no heed;
but now I have heard the goddess and seen her face to face, therefore I
will go and her saying shall not be in vain. If it be my fate to die at
the ships of the Achaeans even so would I have it; let Achilles slay
me, if I may but first have taken my son in my arms and mourned him to
my heart's comforting."

So saying he lifted the lids of his chests, and took out twelve goodly
vestments. He took also twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs,
twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. He weighed out ten
talents of gold, and brought moreover two burnished tripods, four
cauldrons, and a very beautiful cup which the Thracians had given him
when he had gone to them on an embassy; it was very precious, but he
grudged not even this, so eager was he to ransom the body of his son.
Then he chased all the Trojans from the court and rebuked them with
words of anger. "Out," he cried, "shame and disgrace to me that you
are. Have you no grief in your own homes that you are come to plague me
here? Is it a small thing, think you, that the son of Saturn has sent
this sorrow upon me, to lose the bravest of my sons? Nay, you shall
prove it in person, for now he is gone the Achaeans will have easier
work in killing you. As for me, let me go down within the house of
Hades, ere mine eyes behold the sacking and wasting of the city."

He drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the old
man sped them. Then he called to his sons, upbraiding Helenus, Paris,
noble Agathon, Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites of the loud battle-cry,
Deiphobus, Hippothous, and Dius. These nine did the old man call near
him. "Come to me at once," he cried, "worthless sons who do me shame;
would that you had all been killed at the ships rather than Hector.
Miserable man that I am, I have had the bravest sons in all Troy--noble
Nestor, Troilus the dauntless charioteer, and Hector who was a god
among men, so that one would have thought he was son to an
immortal--yet there is not one of them left. Mars has slain them and
those of whom I am ashamed are alone left me. Liars, and light of foot,
heroes of the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own people,
why do you not get a waggon ready for me at once, and put all these
things upon it that I may set out on my way?"

Thus did he speak, and they feared the rebuke of their father. They
brought out a strong mule-waggon, newly made, and set the body of the
waggon fast on its bed. They took the mule-yoke from the peg on which
it hung, a yoke of boxwood with a knob on the top of it and rings for
the reins to go through. Then they brought a yoke-band eleven cubits
long, to bind the yoke to the pole; they bound it on at the far end of
the pole, and put the ring over the upright pin making it fast with
three turns of the band on either side the knob, and bending the thong
of the yoke beneath it. This done, they brought from the store-chamber
the rich ransom that was to purchase the body of Hector, and they set
it all orderly on the waggon; then they yoked the strong harness-mules
which the Mysians had on a time given as a goodly present to Priam; but
for Priam himself they yoked horses which the old king had bred, and
kept for his own use.

Thus heedfully did Priam and his servant see to the yolking of their
cars at the palace. Then Hecuba came to them all sorrowful, with a
golden goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might make a
drink-offering before they set out. She stood in front of the horses
and said, "Take this, make a drink-offering to father Jove, and since
you are minded to go to the ships in spite of me, pray that you may
come safely back from the hands of your enemies. Pray to the son of
Saturn lord of the whirlwind, who sits on Ida and looks down over all
Troy, pray him to send his swift messenger on your right hand, the bird
of omen which is strongest and most dear to him of all birds, that you
may see it with your own eyes and trust it as you go forth to the ships
of the Danaans. If all-seeing Jove will not send you this messenger,
however set upon it you may be, I would not have you go to the ships of
the Argives."

And Priam answered, "Wife, I will do as you desire me; it is well to
lift hands in prayer to Jove, if so be he may have mercy upon me."

With this the old man bade the serving-woman pour pure water over his
hands, and the woman came, bearing the water in a bowl. He washed his
hands and took the cup from his wife; then he made the drink-offering
and prayed, standing in the middle of the courtyard and turning his
eyes to heaven. "Father Jove," he said, "that rulest from Ida, most
glorious and most great, grant that I may be received kindly and
compassionately in the tents of Achilles; and send your swift messenger
upon my right hand, the bird of omen which is strongest and most dear
to you of all birds, that I may see it with my own eyes and trust it as
I go forth to the ships of the Danaans."

So did he pray, and Jove the lord of counsel heard his prayer.
Forthwith he sent an eagle, the most unerring portent of all birds that
fly, the dusky hunter that men also call the Black Eagle. His wings
were spread abroad on either side as wide as the well-made and
well-bolted door of a rich man's chamber. He came to them flying over
the city upon their right hands, and when they saw him they were glad
and their hearts took comfort within them. The old man made haste to
mount his chariot, and drove out through the inner gateway and under
the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Before him went the mules
drawing the four-wheeled waggon, and driven by wise Idaeus; behind
these were the horses, which the old man lashed with his whip and drove
swiftly through the city, while his friends followed after, wailing and
lamenting for him as though he were on his road to death. As soon as
they had come down from the city and had reached the plain, his sons
and sons-in-law who had followed him went back to Ilius.

But Priam and Idaeus as they showed out upon the plain did not escape
the ken of all-seeing Jove, who looked down upon the old man and pitied
him; then he spoke to his son Mercury and said, "Mercury, for it is you
who are the most disposed to escort men on their way, and to hear those
whom you will hear, go, and so conduct Priam to the ships of the
Achaeans that no other of the Danaans shall see him nor take note of
him until he reach the son of Peleus."

Thus he spoke and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as
he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with
which he could fly like the wind over land and sea; he took the wand
with which he seals men's eyes in sleep, or wakes them just as he
pleases, and flew holding it in his hand till he came to Troy and to
the Hellespont. To look at, he was like a young man of noble birth in
the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
face.

Now when Priam and Idaeus had driven past the great tomb of Ilius, they
stayed their mules and horses that they might drink in the river, for
the shades of night were falling, when, therefore, Idaeus saw Mercury
standing near them he said to Priam, "Take heed, descendant of
Dardanus; here is matter which demands consideration. I see a man who I
think will presently fall upon us; let us fly with our horses, or at
least embrace his knees and implore him to take compassion upon us?"

When he heard this the old man's heart failed him, and he was in great
fear; he stayed where he was as one dazed, and the hair stood on end
over his whole body; but the bringer of good luck came up to him and
took him by the hand, saying, "Whither, father, are you thus driving
your mules and horses in the dead of night when other men are asleep?
Are you not afraid of the fierce Achaeans who are hard by you, so cruel
and relentless? Should some one of them see you bearing so much
treasure through the darkness of the flying night, what would not your
state then be? You are no longer young, and he who is with you is too
old to protect you from those who would attack you. For myself, I will
do you no harm, and I will defend you from any one else, for you remind
me of my own father."

And Priam answered, "It is indeed as you say, my dear son; nevertheless
some god has held his hand over me, in that he has sent such a wayfarer
as yourself to meet me so opportunely; you are so comely in mien and
figure, and your judgement is so excellent that you must come of
blessed parents."

Then said the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "Sir, all that you
have said is right; but tell me and tell me true, are you taking this
rich treasure to send it to a foreign people where it may be safe, or
are you all leaving strong Ilius in dismay now that your son has fallen
who was the bravest man among you and was never lacking in battle with
the Achaeans?"

And Priam said, "Who are you, my friend, and who are your parents, that
you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy son?"

The slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, answered him, "Sir, you would
prove me, that you question me about noble Hector. Many a time have I
set eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the Argives to their
ships and putting them to the sword. We stood still and marvelled, for
Achilles in his anger with the son of Atreus suffered us not to fight.
I am his squire, and came with him in the same ship. I am a Myrmidon,
and my father's name is Polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as
you are; he has six sons besides myself, and I am the seventh. We cast
lots, and it fell upon me to sail hither with Achilles. I am now come
from the ships on to the plain, for with daybreak the Achaeans will set
battle in array about the city. They chafe at doing nothing, and are so
eager that their princes cannot hold them back."

Then answered Priam, "If you are indeed the squire of Achilles son of
Peleus, tell me now the whole truth. Is my son still at the ships, or
has Achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him to his hounds?"

"Sir," replied the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "neither hounds
nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying at the tents
by the ship of Achilles, and though it is now twelve days that he has
lain there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the worms eaten him
although they feed on warriors. At daybreak Achilles drags him cruelly
round the sepulchre of his dear comrade, but it does him no hurt. You
should come yourself and see how he lies fresh as dew, with the blood
all washed away, and his wounds every one of them closed though many
pierced him with their spears. Such care have the blessed gods taken of
your brave son, for he was dear to them beyond all measure."

The old man was comforted as he heard him and said, "My son, see what a
good thing it is to have made due offerings to the immortals; for as
sure as that he was born my son never forgot the gods that hold
Olympus, and now they requite it to him even in death. Accept therefore
at my hands this goodly chalice; guard me and with heaven's help guide
me till I come to the tent of the son of Peleus."

Then answered the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "Sir, you are
tempting me and playing upon my youth, but you shall not move me, for
you are offering me presents without the knowledge of Achilles whom I
fear and hold it great guilt to defraud, lest some evil presently
befall me; but as your guide I would go with you even to Argos itself,
and would guard you so carefully whether by sea or land, that no one
should attack you through making light of him who was with you."

The bringer of good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing the
whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses. When
they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships, those
who were on guard had just been getting their suppers, and the slayer
of Argus threw them all into a deep sleep. Then he drew back the bolts
to open the gates, and took Priam inside with the treasure he had upon
his waggon. Ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of
Peleus for which the Myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built
for their king; when they had built it they thatched it with coarse
tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and all round it
they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes set close
together. The gate was barred with a single bolt of pine which it took
three men to force into its place, and three to draw back so as to open
the gate, but Achilles could draw it by himself. Mercury opened the
gate for the old man, and brought in the treasure that he was taking
with him for the son of Peleus. Then he sprang from the chariot on to
the ground and said, "Sir, it is I, immortal Mercury, that am come with
you, for my father sent me to escort you. I will now leave you, and
will not enter into the presence of Achilles, for it might anger him
that a god should befriend mortal men thus openly. Go you within, and
embrace the knees of the son of Peleus: beseech him by his father, his
lovely mother, and his son; thus you may move him."

With these words Mercury went back to high Olympus. Priam sprang from
his chariot to the ground, leaving Idaeus where he was, in charge of
the mules and horses. The old man went straight into the house where
Achilles, loved of the gods, was sitting. There he found him with his
men seated at a distance from him: only two, the hero Automedon, and
Alcimus of the race of Mars, were busy in attendance about his person,
for he had but just done eating and drinking, and the table was still
there. King Priam entered without their seeing him, and going right up
to Achilles he clasped his knees and kissed the dread murderous hands
that had slain so many of his sons.

As when some cruel spite has befallen a man that he should have killed
some one in his own country, and must fly to a great man's protection
in a land of strangers, and all marvel who see him, even so did
Achilles marvel as he beheld Priam. The others looked one to another
and marvelled also, but Priam besought Achilles saying, "Think of your
father, O Achilles like unto the gods, who is such even as I am, on the
sad threshold of old age. It may be that those who dwell near him
harass him, and there is none to keep war and ruin from him. Yet when
he hears of you being still alive, he is glad, and his days are full of
hope that he shall see his dear son come home to him from Troy; but I,
wretched man that I am, had the bravest in all Troy for my sons, and
there is not one of them left. I had fifty sons when the Achaeans came
here; nineteen of them were from a single womb, and the others were
borne to me by the women of my household. The greater part of them has
fierce Mars laid low, and Hector, him who was alone left, him who was
the guardian of the city and ourselves, him have you lately slain;
therefore I am now come to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom his body
from you with a great ransom. Fear, O Achilles, the wrath of heaven;
think on your own father and have compassion upon me, who am the more
pitiable, for I have steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled
himself before me, and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew
my son."

Thus spoke Priam, and the heart of Achilles yearned as he bethought him
of his father. He took the old man's hand and moved him gently away.
The two wept bitterly--Priam, as he lay at Achilles' feet, weeping for
Hector, and Achilles now for his father and now for Patroclus, till the
house was filled with their lamentation. But when Achilles was now
sated with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he
left his seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white
hair and beard; then he said, "Unhappy man, you have indeed been
greatly daring; how could you venture to come alone to the ships of the
Achaeans, and enter the presence of him who has slain so many of your
brave sons? You must have iron courage: sit now upon this seat, and for
all our grief we will hide our sorrows in our hearts, for weeping will
not avail us. The immortals know no care, yet the lot they spin for man
is full of sorrow; on the floor of Jove's palace there stand two urns,
the one filled with evil gifts, and the other with good ones. He for
whom Jove the lord of thunder mixes the gifts he sends, will meet now
with good and now with evil fortune; but he to whom Jove sends none but
evil gifts will be pointed at by the finger of scorn, the hand of
famine will pursue him to the ends of the world, and he will go up and
down the face of the earth, respected neither by gods nor men. Even so
did it befall Peleus; the gods endowed him with all good things from
his birth upwards, for he reigned over the Myrmidons excelling all men
in prosperity and wealth, and mortal though he was they gave him a
goddess for his bride. But even on him too did heaven send misfortune,
for there is no race of royal children born to him in his house, save
one son who is doomed to die all untimely; nor may I take care of him
now that he is growing old, for I must stay here at Troy to be the bane
of you and your children. And you too, O Priam, I have heard that you
were aforetime happy. They say that in wealth and plenitude of
offspring you surpassed all that is in Lesbos, the realm of Makar to
the northward, Phrygia that is more inland, and those that dwell upon
the great Hellespont; but from the day when the dwellers in heaven sent
this evil upon you, war and slaughter have been about your city
continually. Bear up against it, and let there be some intervals in
your sorrow. Mourn as you may for your brave son, you will take nothing
by it. You cannot raise him from the dead, ere you do so yet another
sorrow shall befall you."

And Priam answered, "O king, bid me not be seated, while Hector is
still lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great ransom
which I have brought you, and give him to me at once that I may look
upon him. May you prosper with the ransom and reach your own land in
safety, seeing that you have suffered me to live and to look upon the
light of the sun."

Achilles looked at him sternly and said, "Vex me, sir, no longer; I am
of myself minded to give up the body of Hector. My mother, daughter of
the old man of the sea, came to me from Jove to bid me deliver it to
you. Moreover I know well, O Priam, and you cannot hide it, that some
god has brought you to the ships of the Achaeans, for else, no man
however strong and in his prime would dare to come to our host; he
could neither pass our guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus
easily; therefore, provoke me no further, lest I sin against the word
of Jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within my tents."

The old man feared him and obeyed. Then the son of Peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his
two squires Automedon and Alcimus who were closer to him than any
others of his comrades now that Patroclus was no more. These unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade Priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. They lifted the ransom for Hector's body from the
waggon, but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that Achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. Then he
called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint it,
but he first took it to a place where Priam should not see it, lest if
he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of his grief, and
enrage Achilles, who might then kill him and sin against the word of
Jove. When the servants had washed the body and anointed it, and had
wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle, Achilles himself lifted it on to
a bier, and he and his men then laid it on the waggon. He cried aloud
as he did so and called on the name of his dear comrade, "Be not angry
with me, Patroclus," he said, "if you hear even in the house of Hades
that I have given Hector to his father for a ransom. It has been no
unworthy one, and I will share it equitably with you."

Achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right
angles to the one against which Priam was sitting. "Sir," he said,
"your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to
desire; you shall look upon him when you take him away at daybreak; for
the present let us prepare our supper. Even lovely Niobe had to think
about eating, though her twelve children--six daughters and six lusty
sons--had been all slain in her house. Apollo killed the sons with
arrows from his silver bow, to punish Niobe, and Diana slew the
daughters, because Niobe had vaunted herself against Leto; she said
Leto had borne two children only, whereas she had herself borne
many--whereon the two killed the many. Nine days did they lie
weltering, and there was none to bury them, for the son of Saturn
turned the people into stone; but on the tenth day the gods in heaven
themselves buried them, and Niobe then took food, being worn out with
weeping. They say that somewhere among the rocks on the mountain
pastures of Sipylus, where the nymphs live that haunt the river
Achelous, there, they say, she lives in stone and still nurses the
sorrows sent upon her by the hand of heaven. Therefore, noble sir, let
us two now take food; you can weep for your dear son hereafter as you
are bearing him back to Ilius--and many a tear will he cost you."

With this Achilles sprang from his seat and killed a sheep of silvery
whiteness, which his followers skinned and made ready all in due order.
They cut the meat carefully up into smaller pieces, spitted them, and
drew them off again when they were well roasted. Automedon brought
bread in fair baskets and served it round the table, while Achilles
dealt out the meat, and they laid their hands on the good things that
were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
Priam, descendant of Dardanus, marvelled at the strength and beauty of
Achilles for he was as a god to see, and Achilles marvelled at Priam as
he listened to him and looked upon his noble presence. When they had
gazed their fill Priam spoke first. "And now, O king," he said, "take
me to my couch that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of
sleep. Never once have my eyes been closed from the day your hands took
the life of my son; I have grovelled without ceasing in the mire of my
stable-yard, making moan and brooding over my countless sorrows. Now,
moreover, I have eaten bread and drunk wine; hitherto I have tasted
nothing."

As he spoke Achilles told his men and the women-servants to set beds in
the room that was in the gatehouse, and make them with good red rugs,
and spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Priam
and Idaeus to wear. So the maids went out carrying a torch and got the
two beds ready in all haste. Then Achilles said laughingly to Priam,
"Dear sir, you shall lie outside, lest some counsellor of those who in
due course keep coming to advise with me should see you here in the
darkness of the flying night, and tell it to Agamemnon. This might
cause delay in the delivery of the body. And now tell me and tell me
true, for how many days would you celebrate the funeral rites of noble
Hector? Tell me, that I may hold aloof from war and restrain the host."

And Priam answered, "Since, then, you suffer me to bury my noble son
with all due rites, do thus, Achilles, and I shall be grateful. You
know how we are pent up within our city; it is far for us to fetch wood
from the mountain, and the people live in fear. Nine days, therefore,
will we mourn Hector in my house; on the tenth day we will bury him and
there shall be a public feast in his honour; on the eleventh we will
build a mound over his ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be need, we
will fight."

And Achilles answered, "All, King Priam, shall be as you have said. I
will stay our fighting for as long a time as you have named."

As he spoke he laid his hand on the old man's right wrist, in token
that he should have no fear; thus then did Priam and his attendant
sleep there in the forecourt, full of thought, while Achilles lay in an
inner room of the house, with fair Briseis by his side.

And now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the livelong
