whole desires on one point,--God knows, with no selfish purpose; and
I am justly punished by this final termination of my views, for having
been too little scrupulous in the means by which I pursued them.--Niece,
farewell, and may God bless you also!'

'No, sir,' said Lilias, seizing his hand eagerly. 'You have been
hitherto my protector,--you are now in sorrow, let me be your attendant
and your comforter in exile.'

'I thank you, my girl, for your unmerited affection; but it cannot and
must not be. The curtain here falls between us. I go to the house of
another. If I leave it before I quit the earth, it shall be only for the
House of God. Once more, farewell both! The fatal doom,' he said, with
a melancholy smile, 'will, I trust, now depart from the House of
Redgauntlet, since its present representative has adhered to the winning
side. I am convinced he will not change it, should it in turn become the
losing one.'

The unfortunate Charles Edward had now given his last adieus to his
downcast adherents. He made a sign with his hand to Redgauntlet, who
came to assist him into the skiff. General Campbell also offered his
assistance, the rest appearing too much affected by the scene which had
taken place to prevent him.

'You are not sorry, general, to do me this last act of courtesy,' said
the Chevalier; 'and, on my part, I thank you for it. You have taught me
the principle on which men on the scaffold feel forgiveness and kindness
even for their executioner. Farewell!'

They were seated in the boat, which presently pulled off from the land.
The Oxford divine broke out into a loud benediction, in terms which
General Campbell was too generous to criticize at the time, or to
remember afterwards;--nay, it is said, that, Whig and Campbell as he
was, he could not help joining in the universal Amen! which resounded
from the shore.




CONCLUSION, BY DR. DRYASDUST

IN A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY

I am truly sorry, my worthy and much-respected sir, that my anxious
researches have neither, in the form of letters, nor of diaries or other
memoranda, been able to discover more than I have hitherto transmitted,
of the history of the Redgauntlet family. But I observe in an old
newspaper called the WHITEHALL GAZETTE, of which I fortunately possess a
file for several years, that Sir Arthur Darsie Redgauntlet was
presented to his late Majesty at the drawing-room, by Lieut.-General
Campbell--upon which the editor observes, in the way of comment, that
we were going, REMIS ATQUE VELIS, into the interests of the Pretender,
since a Scot had presented a Jacobite at Court. I am sorry I have not
room (the frank being only uncial) for his further observations, tending
to show the apprehensions entertained by many well-instructed persons of
the period, that the young king might himself be induced to become one
of the Stuarts' faction,--a catastrophe from which it has pleased Heaven
to preserve these kingdoms.

I perceive also, by a marriage-contract in the family repositories, that
Miss Lilias Redgauntlet of Redgauntlet, about eighteen months after the
transactions you have commemorated, intermarried with Alan Fairford,
Esq., Advocate, of Clinkdollar, who, I think, we may not unreasonably
conclude to be the same person whose name occurs so frequently in
the pages of your narration. In my last excursion to Edinburgh, I was
fortunate enough to discover an old caddie, from whom, at the expense
of a bottle of whisky and half a pound of tobacco, I extracted the
important information, that he knew Peter Peebles very well, and had
drunk many a mutchkin with him in Caddie Fraser's time. He said 'that
he lived ten years after King George's accession, in the momentary
expectation of winning his cause every day in the session time, and
every hour in the day, and at last fell down dead, in what my informer
called a 'perplexity fit,' upon a proposal for a composition being made
to him in the Outer House. I have chosen to retain my informer's phrase,
not being able justly to determine whether it is a corruption of the
word apoplexy, as my friend Mr. Oldbuck supposes, or the name of some
peculiar disorder incidental to those who have concern in the courts of
law, as many callings and conditions of men have diseases appropriate to
themselves. The same caddie also remembered Blind Willie Stevenson, who
was called Wandering Willie, and who ended his days 'unco beinly, in Sir
Arthur Redgauntlet's ha' neuk.' 'He had done the family some good turn,'
he said, 'specially when ane of the Argyle gentlemen was coming down on
a wheen of them that had the "auld leaven" about them, and wad hae taen
every man of them, and nae less nor headed and hanged them. But Willie,
and a friend they had, called Robin the Rambler, gae them warning, by
playing tunes such as "The Campbells are coming" and the like, whereby
they got timeous warning to take the wing.' I need not point out to your
acuteness, my worthy sir, that this seems to refer to some inaccurate
account of the transactions in which you seem so much interested.

Respecting Redgauntlet, about whose subsequent history you are more
particularly inquisitive, I have learned from an excellent person
who was a priest in the Scottish Monastery of Ratisbon, before its
suppression, that he remained for two or three years in the family of
the Chevalier, and only left it at last in consequence of some discords
in that melancholy household. As he had hinted to General Campbell, he
exchanged his residence for the cloister, and displayed in the latter
part of his life, a strong sense of the duties of religion, which in
his earlier days he had too much neglected, being altogether engaged in
political speculations and intrigues. He rose to the situation of prior,
in the house which he belonged to, and which was of a very strict order
of religion. He sometimes received his countrymen, whom accident brought
to Ratisbon, and curiosity induced to visit the Monastery of ------. But
it was remarked, that though he listened with interest and attention,
when Britain, or particularly Scotland, became the subject of
conversation, yet he never either introduced or prolonged the subject,
never used the English language, never inquired about English affairs,
and, above all, never mentioned his own family. His strict observation
of the rules of his order gave him, at the time of his death, some
pretensions to be chosen a saint, and the brethren of the Monastery
of ------ made great efforts for that effect, and brought forward some
plausible proofs of miracles. But there was a circumstance which threw
a doubt over the subject, and prevented the consistory from acceding
to the wishes of the worthy brethren. Under his habit, and secured in
a small silver box, he had worn perpetually around his neck a lock
of-hair, which the fathers avouched to be a relic. But the Avvocato del
Diabolo, in combating (as was his official duty) the pretensions of
the candidate for sanctity, made it at least equally probable that the
supposed relic was taken from the head of a brother of the deceased
prior, who had been executed for adherence to the Stuart family in
1745-6; and the motto, HAUD OBLIVISCENDUM, seemed to intimate a tone
of mundane feeling and recollection of injuries, which made it at least
doubtful whether, even in the quiet and gloom of the cloister,
Father Hugo had forgotten the sufferings and injuries of the House of
Redgauntlet.

June 10, 1824,




NOTES

NOTE 1.--THE SOCIETY OF FRIENDS

In explanation of this circumstance, I cannot help adding a note not
very necessary for the reader, which yet I record with pleasure, from
recollection of the kindness which it evinces. In early youth I resided
for a considerable time in the vicinity of the beautiful village
of Kelso, where my life passed in a very solitary manner. I had few
acquaintances, scarce any companions, and books, which were at the time
almost essential to my happiness, were difficult to come by. It was then
that I was particularly indebted to the liberality and friendship of
an old lady of the Society of Friends, eminent for her benevolence and
charity. Her deceased husband had been a medical man of eminence,
and left her, with other valuable property, a small and well-selected
library. This the kind old lady permitted me to rummage at pleasure, and
carry home what volumes I chose, on condition that I should take, at the
same time, some of the tracts printed for encouraging and extending the
doctrines of her own sect. She did not even exact any promise that I
would read these performances, being too justly afraid of involving me
in a breach of promise, but was merely desirous that I should have
the chance of instruction within my reach, in case whim, curiosity, or
accident, might induce me to have recourse to it.


NOTE 2.--THE PERSECUTORS

The personages here mentioned are most of them characters of historical
fame; but those less known and remembered may be found in the tract
entitled, 'The Judgment and Justice of God Exemplified, or, a Brief
Historical Account of some of the Wicked Lives and Miserable Deaths of
some of the most remarkable Apostates and Bloody Persecutors, from
the Reformation till after the Revolution.' This constitutes a sort of
postscript or appendix to John Howie of Lochgoin's 'Account of the Lives
of the most eminent Scots Worthies.' The author has, with considerable
ingenuity, reversed his reasoning upon the inference to be drawn from
the prosperity or misfortunes which befall individuals in this world,
either in the course of their lives or in the hour of death. In the
account of the martyrs' sufferings, such inflictions are mentioned only
as trials permitted by providence, for the better and brighter display
of their faith, and constancy of principle. But when similar afflictions
befell the opposite party, they are imputed to the direct vengeance of
Heaven upon their impiety. If, indeed, the life of any person obnoxious
to the historian's censures happened to have passed in unusual
prosperity, the mere fact of its being finally concluded by death,
is assumed as an undeniable token of the judgement of Heaven, and, to
render the conclusion inevitable, his last scene is generally garnished
with some singular circumstances. Thus the Duke of Lauderdale is said,
through old age but immense corpulence, to have become so sunk in
spirits, 'that his heart was not the bigness of a walnut.'


NOTE 3.--LAMENTATION FOR THE DEAD

I have heard in my youth some such wild tale as that placed in the
mouth of the blind fiddler, of which, I think, the hero was Sir Robert
Grierson of Lagg, the famous persecutor. But the belief was general
throughout Scotland that the excessive lamentation over the loss of
friends disturbed the repose of the dead, and broke even the rest of the
grave. There are several instances of this in tradition, but one struck
me particularly, as I heard it from the lips of one who professed
receiving it from those of a ghost-seer. This was a Highland lady, named
Mrs. C---- of B------, who probably believed firmly in the truth of an
apparition which seems to have originated in the weakness of her nerves
and strength of her imagination. She had been lately left a widow by her
husband, with the office of guardian to their only child. The young man
added to the difficulties of his charge by an extreme propensity for a
military life, which his mother was unwilling to give way to, while
she found it impossible to repress it. About this time the Independent
Companies, formed for the preservation of the peace of the Highlands,
were in the course of being levied; and as a gentleman named Cameron,
nearly connected with Mrs. C--, commanded one of those companies,
she was at length persuaded to compromise the matter with her son, by
permitting him to enter this company in the capacity of a cadet, thus
gratifying his love of a military life without the dangers of foreign
service, to which no one then thought these troops were at all liable to
be exposed, while even their active service at home was not likely to
be attended with much danger. She readily obtained a promise from her
relative that he would be particular in his attention to her son and
therefore concluded she had accommodated matters between her son's
wishes and his safety in a way sufficiently attentive to both. She set
off to Edinburgh to get what was awanting for his outfit, and shortly
afterwards received melancholy news from the Highlands. The Independent
Company into which her son was to enter had a skirmish with a party of
caterans engaged in some act of spoil, and her friend the captain
being wounded, and out of the reach of medical assistance, died in
consequence. This news was a thunderbolt to the poor mother, who was at
once deprived of her kinsman's advice and assistance, and instructed by
his fate of the unexpected danger to which her son's new calling exposed
him. She remained also in great sorrow for her relative, whom she loved
with sisterly affection. These conflicting causes of anxiety,
together with her uncertainty, whether to continue or change her son's
destination, were terminated in the following manner:--

The house in which Mrs. C---- resided in the old town of Edinburgh, was
a flat or story of a land accessible, as was then universal, by a common
stair. The family who occupied the story beneath were her acquaintances,
and she was in the habit of drinking tea with them every evening. It was
accordingly about six o'clock, when, recovering herself from a deep fit
of anxious reflection, she was about to leave the parlour in which she
sat in order to attend this engagement. The door through which she was
to pass opened, as was very common in Edinburgh, into a dark passage. In
this passage, and within a yard of her when she opened the door,
stood the apparition of her kinsman, the deceased officer, in his full
tartans, and wearing his bonnet. Terrified at what she saw, or thought
she saw, she closed the door hastily, and, sinking on her knees by
a chair, prayed to be delivered from the horrors of the vision. She
remained in that posture till her friends below tapped on the door,
to intimate that tea was ready. Recalled to herself by the signal, she
arose, and, on opening the apartment door, again was confronted by
the visionary Highlander, whose bloody brow bore token, on this second
appearance, to the death he had died. Unable to endure this repetition
of her terrors, Mrs. C---- sank on the door in a swoon. Her friends
below, startled with the noise, came upstairs, and, alarmed at the
situation in which they found her, insisted on her going to bed and
taking some medicine, in order to compose what they took for a nervous
attack. They had no sooner left her in quiet, than the apparition of
the soldier was once more visible in the apartment. This time she took
courage and said, 'In the name of God, Donald, why do you haunt one who
respected and loved you when living?' To which he answered readily, in
Gaelic, 'Cousin, why did you not speak sooner? My rest is disturbed by
your unnecessary lamentation--your tears scald me in my shroud. I come
to tell you that my untimely death ought to make no difference in your
views for your son; God will raise patrons to supply my place and he
will live to the fullness of years, and die honoured and at peace.' The
lady of course followed her kinsman's advice and as she was accounted
a person of strict veracity, we may conclude the first apparition an
illusion of the fancy, the final one a lively dream suggested by the
other two.


NOTE 4.--PETER PEEBLES

This unfortunate litigant (for a person named Peter Peebles actually
flourished) frequented the courts of justice in Scotland about the year
1792, and the sketch of his appearance is given from recollection. The
author is of opinion that he himself had at one time the honour to be
counsel for Peter Peebles, whose voluminous course of litigation served
as a sort of assay-pieces to most young men who were called to the bar.
The scene of the consultation is entirely imaginary.


NOTE 5.--JOHN'S COFFEE-HOUSE

This small dark coffee-house, now burnt down, was the resort of such
writers and clerks belonging to the Parliament House above thirty years
ago as retained the ancient Scottish custom of a meridian, as it was
called, or noontide dram of spirits. If their proceedings were watched,
they might be seen to turn fidgety about the hour of noon, and exchange
looks with each other from their separate desks, till at length some one
of formal and dignified presence assumed the honour of leading the band,
when away they went, threading the crowd like a string of wild
fowl, crossed the square or close, and following each other into
the coffee-house, received in turn from the hand of the waiter, the
meridian, which was placed ready at the bar. This they did, day by day:
and though they did not speak to each other, they seemed to attach a
certain degree of sociability to performing the ceremony in company.


NOTE 6.--FISHING RIGHTS

It may be here mentioned, that a violent and popular attack upon what
the country people of this district considered as an invasion of their
fishing right is by no means an improbable fiction. Shortly after the
close of the American war, Sir James Graham of Netherby constructed a
dam-dyke, or cauld, across the Esk, at a place where it flowed through
his estate, though it has its origin, and the principal part of its
course, in Scotland. The new barrier at Netherby was considered as
an encroachment calculated to prevent the salmon from ascending into
Scotland, and the right of erecting it being an international question
of law betwixt the sister kingdoms, there was no court in either
competent to its decision. In this dilemma, the Scots people assembled
in numbers by signal of rocket lights, and, rudely armed with
fowling-pieces, fish-spears, and such rustic weapons, marched to the
banks of the river for the purpose of pulling down the dam-dyke objected
to. Sir James Graham armed many of his own people to protect his
property, and had some military from Carlisle for the same purpose.
A renewal of the Border wars had nearly taken place in the eighteenth
century, when prudence and moderation on both sides saved much tumult,
and perhaps some bloodshed. The English proprietor consented that a
breach should be made in his dam-dyke sufficient for the passage of the
fish, and thus removed the Scottish grievance. I believe the river has
since that time taken the matter into its own disposal, and entirely
swept away the dam-dyke in question.


NOTE 7.--STATE OF SCOTLAND

Scotland, in its half-civilized state, exhibited too many examples
of the exertion of arbitrary force and violence, rendered easy by the
dominion which lairds exerted over their tenants and chiefs over their
clans. The captivity of Lady Grange, in the desolate cliffs of Saint
Kilda, is in the recollection of every one. At the supposed date of the
novel also a man of the name of Merrilees, a tanner in Leith, absconded
from his country to escape his creditors; and after having slain his own
mastiff dog, and put a bit of red cloth in its mouth, as if it had died
in a contest with soldiers, and involved his own existence in as
much mystery as possible, made his escape into Yorkshire. Here he was
detected by persons sent in search of him, to whom he gave a portentous
account of his having been carried off and concealed in various places.
Mr. Merrilees was, in short, a kind of male Elizabeth Canning, but did
not trespass on the public credulity quite so long.


NOTE 8.--CONCEALMENTS FOR THEFT AND SMUGGLING

I am sorry to say that the modes of concealment described in the
imaginary premises of Mr. Trumbull, are of a kind which have been common
on the frontiers of late years. The neighbourhood of two nations having
different laws, though united in government, still leads to a multitude
of transgressions on the Border, and extreme difficulty in apprehending
delinquents. About twenty years since, as far as my recollection serves,
there was along the frontier an organized gang of coiners, forgers,
smugglers, and other malefactors, whose operations were conducted on a
scale not inferior to what is here described. The chief of the party was
one Richard Mendham a carpenter, who rose to opulence, although ignorant
even of the arts of reading and writing. But he had found a short
road to wealth, and had taken singular measures for conducting his
operations. Amongst these, he found means to build, in a suburb
of Berwick called Spittal, a street of small houses, as if for the
investment of property. He himself inhabited one of these; another, a
species of public-house, was open to his confederates, who held secret
and unsuspected communication with him by crossing the roofs of the
intervening houses, and descending by a trap-stair, which admitted them
into the alcove of the dining-room of Dick Mendham's private mansion.
A vault, too, beneath Mendham's stable, was accessible in the manner
mentioned in the novel. The post of one of the stalls turned round on
a bolt being withdrawn, and gave admittance to a subterranean place of
concealment for contraband and stolen goods, to a great extent. Richard
Mendham, the head of this very formidable conspiracy, which involved
malefactors of every kind, was tried and executed at Jedburgh, where the
author was present as Sheriff of Selkirkshire. Mendham had previously
been tried, but escaped by want of proof and the ingenuity of his
counsel.


NOTE 9--CORONATION OF GEORGE III

In excuse of what may be considered as a violent infraction of
probability in this chapter, the author is under the necessity of
quoting a tradition which many persons may recollect having heard. It
was always said, though with very little appearance of truth, that upon
the Coronation of the late George III, when the champion of England,
Dymock, or his representative, appeared in Westminster Hall, and in
the language of chivalry solemnly wagered his body to defend in single
combat the right of the young King to the crown of these realms, at the
moment when he flung down his gauntlet as the gage of battle, an unknown
female stepped from the crowd and lifted the pledge, leaving another
gage in room of it, with a paper expressing, that if a fair field of
combat should be allowed, a champion of rank and birth would appear with
equal arms to dispute the claim of King George to the British kingdoms.
The story is probably one of the numerous fictions which were circulated
to keep up the spirits of a sinking faction, The incident was, however,
possible, if it could be supposed to be attended by any motive adequate
to the risk, and might be imagined to occur to a person of Redgauntlet's
enthusiastic character. George III, it is said, had a police of his own,
whose agency was so efficient, that the sovereign was able to tell
his prime minister upon one occasion, to his great surprise, that the
Pretender was in London. The prime minister began immediately to talk of
measures to be taken, warrants to be procured, messengers and guards
to be got in readiness. 'Pooh, pooh,' said the good-natured sovereign,
since I have found him out, leave me alone to deal with him.'--'And
what,' said the minister, 'is your Majesty's purpose, in so important a
case?'--'To leave the young man to himself,' said George III; 'and when
he tires he will go back again.' The truth of this story does not depend
on that of the lifting of the gauntlet; and while the latter could be
but an idle bravado, the former expresses George Ill's goodness of heart
and soundness of policy.


NOTE 10.--COLLIER AND SALTER

The persons engaged in these occupations were at this time bondsmen; and
in case they left the ground of the farm to which they belonged, and as
pertaining to which their services were bought or sold, they were liable
to be brought back by a summary process. The existence of this species
of slavery being thought irreconcilable with the spirit of liberty,
colliers and salters were declared free, and put upon the same footing
with other servants, by the Act 15 Geo. III chapter 28th. They were so
far from desiring or prizing the blessing conferred on them, that they
esteemed the interest taken in their freedom to be a mere decree on the
part of the proprietors to get rid of what they called head and harigald
money, payable to them when a female of their number, by bearing a
child, made an addition to the live stock of their master's property.




GLOSSARY

   ABOON, above.
   AD LITEM, in law.
   AD VINDICTAM PUBLICAM, for the public defence.
   ADUST, looking as if burned or scorched.
   AE, one.
   AFFLATUS, breath, inspiration.
   AIRT, direct.
   ALCANDER, a Greek soothsayer.
   ALDEBORONTIPHOSCOPHORNIO, a courtier in H. Carey's burlesque,
       CHRONONHOTONTHOLOGOS.
   ALIMENTARY, nourishing.
   ALQUIFE, an enchanter in the mediaeval romances of knight-errantry.
   AMADIS, a hero of the romances, especially in Amadis of Gaul.
   ANENT, about.
   ANES, once.
   ANNO DOMINI, in the year of the Lord.
   ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM, AD FEMINAM, lit. 'the argument to a man,
       to a woman,' refutation of a man's argument by an example
       drawn from his own conduct.
   ARIES, earnest-money, a gift.
   ARS LONGA, VITA BREVIS, art is long, life short.
   ARS MEDENDI, art of medicine.
   APPROBATE, approve.
   ATLANTES, a character in ORLANDO FURIOSO.
   AULD REEKIE, Edinburgh.
   ADVOCATO DEL DIABOLO, lit. 'the devil's advocate', one whose duty
       it is to oppose the canonization of a person on whose behalf
       claims to sanctity are made.
   AWSOME, awful, fearful.

   BACK-GANGING, behind hand in paying.
   BACKSPAUL, the back of the shoulder.
   BALLANT, a ballad, a fable.
   BANNOCK, a flat, round cake.
   BARLEY-BROO, barley-broth.
   BARON-OFFICER, the magistrate's officer in a burgh of barony.
   BARTIZAN, a small overhanging turret, the battlements.
   BEAUFET, cupboard.
   BEAVER, the lower part of the helmet.
   BEIN, comfortable.
   BELISARIUS, a general of the Eastern Empire ungratefully treated
       by the Emperor Justinian.
   BENEDICTE, bless you.
   BETIMES THE MORN, early in the morning.
   BICKER, a wooden vessel for holding drink; a quarrel.
   BILLIE, a term of familiarity, comrade.
   BIRKIE, a smart fellow.
   BIRLING, merry-making.
   BIT, small.
   BLATE, shy, bashful.
   BLAWING, flattering.
   BLEEZING, bragging.
   BLUE-CAP, a Scotsman.
   BOGLE, a ghost, a scarecrow.
   BON VIVANTS, lovers of good living.
   BONA ROBA, a showy wanton.
   BONUS SOCIUS, good comrade.
   BORREL, common, rude.
   BRAID, broad.
   BRASH, a sudden storm, an attack.
   BRATTLE, a clattering noise, as of a horse going at full speed.
   BRAW, brave, fine.
   BRENT BROO, high brow.
   BROCARD, maxim.
   BROSE, oatmeal which has had boiling water poured upon it.
   BROWN, a famous landscape gardener.
   BROWST, a brewing.
   BUCEPHALUS, the favourite horse of Alexander the Great.
   BUCKIE, an imp, a fellow with an evil twist in his character.
   BUFF NOR STYE, neither one thing nor another.
   BUFFERS, pistols.
   BUSK, deck up.
   BY ORDINAR, extraordinary, uncommon.
   BYE AND ATTOUR, over and above.

   CADGER, a travelling dealer.
   CADDIE, a porter, an errand-boy.
   CAETERA PRORSUS IGNORO, in short, I know nothing of the rest.
   CALLANT, a young lad.
   CALLER, cool, fresh.
   CANNY, shrewd, prudent, quiet.
   CANTLE, fragment.
   CAPERNOITED, crabbed, foolish.
   CAPRICCIOS, a fanciful composition.
   CAPRIOLE, a leap made by a horse without advancing.
   CARDINAL, a woman's cloak.
   CARLINES, old women.
   CATILINA OMNIUM, ETC. Catilina had surrounded himself with the
       most vile and criminal company.
   CAUSEWAY, path, roadway.
   CAVALIERE SERVENTE, gentleman in attendance.
   CAVE NE LITERAS, ETC. take care that you are not carrying
       Bellerophon's letters (letters unfavourable to the bearer).
   CHACK, a slight repast.
   CHANCY, safe, auspicious.
   CHANGE-HOUSE, a small inn or ale-house.
   CHANTER, the tenor or treble pipe in a bag-pipe.
   CHAPE, a thin metal blade at the end of a scabbard.
   CHAPEAU BRAS, a low, three-cornered hat.
   CHOUGH, a bird of the crow family.
   CHUCKY, fowl.
   CHUCKY-STONES, small stones, a child's game.
   CLAP AND HOPPER, signs of the mill.
   CLAVERS, gossip, idle talk.
   CLEEK, lay hold on.
   CLEIK IN, to join company.
   CLOSE, an alley, a narrow way.
   CLOSE-HEADS, the entry to an alley, a meeting-place for gossips.
   CLOUR, to strike, to bump.
   COBLE, a little boat.
   COCKERNONY, top-knot.
   COGIE, small wooden bowl.
   COMMUNE FORUM, ETC. the common court is the common dwelling-place.
   CORDWAIN, Spanish leather.
   CORIOLANUS, a Roman patrician, who, being driven from the city,
       took refuge with Aufidius, the leader of the Volsci.
   COUP, fall, upset.
   COURIER DE L'EUROPE, a newspaper.
   COVYNE, artifice.
   CRACK, gossip.
   CRAIG, throat, neck.
   CRAWSTEP, the steplike edges of a gable seen in some old houses.
   CREEL, basket carried on the back.
   CREMONY, Cremona [where the best fiddles were made].
   CROWDER, fiddler.
   CUR ME EXAMINAS QUERELIS TUIS?, why do you wear me out with your
       complaints.
   CURN, a very little.

   DAFT, crazy.
   DAIS, a canopy, a table placed above the others, a room of state.
   DARGLE, dell.
   DAURG, day's work.
   DE APICIBUS JURIS, from the high places of the law.
   DE PERICULO ET COMMODO REI VENDITAE, concerning the risk and
       profit of sales.
   DEAD-THRAW, death-thraw.
   DEBOSHED, debauched.
   DEFORCEMENT--SPULZIE--SOUTHRIEF, legal terms for resisting an
       officer of law.
   DEIL, devil.
   DELATE, accuse.
   DELICT, misdemeanour, QUASI DELICT, apparent offence.
   DEPONE, to testify.
   DERNIER RESORT, last resort.
   DIABLERIE, sorcery, witchcraft.
   DILIGENCE, writ of execution, coach.
   DING, to knock, beat down.
   DIRDUM, uproar, disturbance.
   DITTAY, an indictment.
   DIVOT, thin turf used for thatching cottages.
   DOCH AN DORROCH, the stirrup cup.
   DOMINUS LITIS, one of the principals in a law suit.
   DOOL, sorrow, sad consequences.
   DOOR-CHEEK, door-post.
   DOUCE, respectable.
   DRAMATIS PERSONAE, persons of the drama.
   DRAPPIT, fried.
   DRIBBLE, a drop.
   DRIFT, drift-snow.
   DULCINEA, Don Quixote's imaginary mistress.
   DUNSTABLE, something simple and matter-of-fact.
   DYVOUR, bankrupt.

   EKE, addition.
   EMBONPOINT, plumpness.
   EN CROUPE, riding behind one another.
   ET PER CONTRA, and on the other side.
   EVITE, avoid.
   EX COMITATE, out of courtesy.
   EX MISERICORDIA, out of pity.
   EXCEPTIO FIRMAT REGULAM, the exception proves the rule.
   EXOTIC, of foreign origin.

   FACTOR LOCO TUTORIS, an agent acting in place of a guardian.
   FARDEL, burden.
   FASH, FASHERIE, trouble.
   FECK, space.
   FEMME DE CHAMBRE, chamber-maid.
   FIERI, to be made.
   FLACON, a smelling bottle.
   FLAP, gust.
   FLIP, a drink consisting of beer and spirit sweetened.
   FLORY, frothy.
   FORBY, besides.
   FORENSIC, legal.
   FORFOUGHEN, out of breath, distressed.
   FORPIT, fourth part of a peck.
   FORTALICE, a small outwork.
   FRIST, to postpone, give credit,
   FUGIE, fugitive.
   FUNCTUS OFFICIO, having finished my duties, 'out of office'.

   GABERLUNZIE, a beggar.
   GAEN, gone.
   GALLOWAY, a strong Scotch cob.
   GANGREL, wandering, a vagrant.
   GAR, to force, make.
   GATE, way, road.
   GAUGER, an exciseman.
   GENTRICE, gentle blood.
   GIFF-GAFF, give and take.
   GIRDED, hooped like a barrel.
   GIRN, to grin, cry.
   GLAIKET, giddy, rash.
   GLIFF, glimpse, moment,
   GOWFF BA', golf ball.
   GRAINED, groaned.
   GRANA INVECTA ET ILLATA, grain brought and imported.
   GRAT, wept.
   GRILLADE, a broiled dish.
   GRIT, great.
   GROSSART, gooseberry.
   GRUE, to creep, shiver,
   GUDESIRE, grandfather.
   GUIDE, to deal with, to employ.
   GUMPLE-FOISTED, sulky, sullen.
   GWAY, very.
   GYTES, contemptuous name for a young child, a brat.

   HAFFLINS, half-grown.
   HAILL, all, the whole.
   HAIRST, harvest.
   HAMESUCKEN, assaulting a person in his own house.
   HAMSHACKLE, to fasten.
   HANK, a hold.
   HAP, to hop, turn from.
   HARPOCRATES, an Egyptian god, supposed by the Greeks to be the
       god of silence.
   HAUGH, holm, low-lying flat ground.
   HAULD, place of abode.
   HAVINGS, behaviour.
   HEFTED, closed, as a knife in its haft.
   HELLICAT, extravagant, light-headed.
   HEMPEY, rogue.
   HET, hot.
   HEUCK, sickle.
   HINC ILLAE LACRYMAE, hence these tears.
