his generosity, I was transported on this occasion, and throwing myself
at his feet, told him, he had now completed my happiness, for, without
the possession of Narcissa I should be miserable among all the pleasures
of life. He raised me with a smile of paternal fondness; said he knew
what it was to be in love; and observed that, if he had been as tenderly
beloved by his father as I was by mine, he should not now perhaps have
cause--here he was interrupted by a sigh, the tear rushed into his eye,
suppressed the dictates of his grief, and the time being opportune,
desired me to relate the passages of my life, which my uncle had
told him were manifold and surprising. I recounted the most material
circumstances of my fortune, to which he listened with wonder and
attention, manifesting from time to time the different emotions which
my different situations may be supposed to have raised in a parent's
breast; and, when my detail was ended, blessed God for the adversity I
had undergone, which, he said, enlarged the understanding, improved the
heart, steeled the constitution, and qualified a young man for all
the duties and enjoyments of life much better than any education which
affluence could bestow.

When I had thus satisfied his curiosity, I discovered an inclination to
hear the particulars of his story, which he gratified by beginning with
his marriage, and proceeded to the day of his disappearing, as I have
related in the first part of my memoirs. "Careless of life," continued
he, "and unable to live in a place where every object recalled the
memory of my dear Charlotte, whom I had lost through the barbarity of an
unnatural parent, I took my leave of you, my child, then an infant, with
a heart full of unutterable woe, but little suspecting that my father's
unkindness would have descended to my innocent orphan; and setting out
alone at midnight for the nearest seaport, early next morning got on
board a ship, bound, as I had heard, for France; and, bargaining with
the master for my passage, bade a long adieu to my native country, and
put to sea with the first fair wind. The place of our destination was
Granville, but we had the misfortune to run upon a ridge of rocks near
the Island of Alderney, called the Caskets, where the sea running high,
the ship went to pieces, the boat sunk alongside, and every soul on
board perished, except myself, who, by the assistance of a grating got
ashore on the coast of Normandy. I went directly to Caen, where I was so
lucky as to meet with a count, whom I had formerly known in my travels;
with this gentleman I set out for Paris, where I was recommended by him
and other friends, as tutor to a young nobleman, whom I accompanied to
the court of Spain. There we remained a whole year, at the end of which
my pupil being recalled by his father, I quitted my office, and stayed
behind, by the advice of a certain Spanish grandee, who took me into his
protection, and introduced me to another nobleman, who was afterwards
created viceroy of Peru. He insisted on my attending, him to his
government of the Indies, where, however, by reason of my religion,
it was not in his power to make my fortune any other way than by
encouraging me to trade, which I had not long prosecuted when my patron
died, and I found myself in the midst of strangers, without one friend
to support or protect me. Urged by this consideration, I sold my
effects, and removed to this country, the governor of which, having been
appointed by the viceroy, was my intimate acquaintance. Here has heaven
prospered my endeavours, during a residence of sixteen years, in which
my tranquillity was never invaded but by the remembrance of your mother,
whose death I have in secret mourned without ceasing, and the reflection
of you, whose fate I could never learn notwithstanding all my
inquiries by means of my friends in France, who, after the most strict
examination, could give me no other account than that you went abroad
six years ago, and was never after heard of. I could not rest satisfied
with this imperfect information, and, though my hope of finding you
was but languid, resolved to go in quest of you in person; for which
purpose, I have remitted to Holland the value of twenty thousand pounds,
and am in possession of fifteen thousand more, with which I intended
to embark myself on board of Captain Bowling, before I discovered this
amazing stroke of Providence, which, you may be sure, has not altered my
intention."

My father, having entertained us with this agreeable sketch of his life,
withdrew, in order to relieve Don Antonio, who, in his absence, had done
the honours of his house; and I was just dressed for my appearance among
the guests, when Strap arrived from the ship.

He no sooner entered the grand apartment in which I was, and saw the
magnificence of my apparel, than his speech was lost in amazement, and
he gaped in silence at the objects that surrounded him. I took him by
the hand, observed that I had sent for him to be a witness and sharer
of my happiness, and told him I had found a father. At these words he
started, and, after having continued some minutes with his mouth
and eyes wide open, cried, "Ah!--odd, I know what! go thy ways, poor
Narcissa, and go thy ways somebody else--well--Lord, what a thing is
love! God help us! are all our mad pranks and protestations come to
this? And have you fixed your habitation in this distant land? God
prosper you--I find we must part at last--for I would not leave my poor
carcase so far from my native home, for all the wealth of the universe!"
With these ejaculations, he began to sob and make wry faces; upon which
I assured him of his mistake, both in regard to my staying in Paraguay,
and informed him, as briefly as I could, of the great event that had
happened. Never was rapture more ludicrously expressed than in the
behaviour of this worthy creature, who cried, laughed, whistled, sung,
and danced, all in a breath. His transport was scarce over, when my
father entered, who no sooner understood that this was Strap, than he
took him by the hand, saying, "Is this the honest man who befriended you
so much in your distress? You are welcome to my house, and I will soon
put it in the power of my son to reward you for your good offices in
his behalf; in the meantime go with us and partake of the repast that is
provided." Strap, wild as he was with joy, would by no means accept
of the proffered honour, crying, "God forbid! I know my distance--your
worship shall excuse me." And Don Rodrigo, finding his modesty
invincible, recommended him to his major-domo, to be treated with the
utmost respect; while he carried me in a large saloon, where I was
presented to a numerous company, who loaded me with compliments and
caresses, and congratulated my father in terms not proper for me to
repeat.

Without specifying the particulars of our entertainment, let it
suffice to say, it was at the same time elegant and sumptuous, and
the rejoicings lasted two days; after which, Don Rodrigo settled his
affairs, converted his effects into silver and gold, visited and
took leave of all his friends, who were grieved at his departure, and
honoured me with considerable presents; and, coming on board of my
uncle's ship, with the first fair wind we sailed from the Rio de la
Plata, and in two months came safe to an anchor in the harbour of
Kingston, in the Island of Jamaica.






CHAPTER LXVII

I visit my old Friend Thompson--we set sail for Europe--meet with an odd
Adventure--arrive in England--I ride across the Country from Portsmouth
to Sussex--converse with Mrs. Sagely, who informs me of Narcissa's
being in London--in consequence of this Intelligence, I proceed to
Canterbury--meet with my old friend Morgan--arrive in London--visit
Narcissa--introduce my Father to be--he is charmed with her good sense
and beauty--we come to a Determination of demanding her Brother's
Consent to our Marriage

I inquired, as soon as I got ashore, about my generous companion, Mr.
Thompson, and hearing that he lived in a flourishing condition upon the
estate left him by his wife's father, who had been dead some years, I
took horse immediately, with the consent of Don Rodrigo, who had heard
me mention him with great regard, and in a few hours reached the place
of his habitation.

I should much wrong the delicacy of Mr. Thompson's sentiments to say
barely he was glad to see me: he felt all that the most sensible and
disinterested friendship could feel on this occasion, introduced me to
his wife, a very amiable young lady, who had already blessed him with
two fine children, and being as yet ignorant of my circumstances,
frankly offered me the assistance of his purse and interest. I thanked
him for his generous intention, and made him acquainted with my
situation, on which he congratulated me with great joy, and, after I had
stayed with him a whole day and night, accompanied me back to Kingston,
to wait upon my father, whom he invited to his house. Don Rodrigo
complied with his request, and, having been handsomely entertained
during the space of a week, returned extremely well satisfied with the
behaviour of my friend and his lady, to whom, at parting, he presented a
very valuable diamond ring, as a token of his esteem. During the course
of my conversation with Mr. Thompson, he gave me to understand, that his
old commander Captain Oakum was dead some months, and that, immediately
after his death, a discovery had been made of some valuable effects
that he had feloniously secreted out of a prize by the assistance of Dr.
Mackshane, who was now actually in prison on that account, and, being
destitute of friends, subsisted solely on the charity of my friend,
whose bounty he had implored in the most abject manner, after having
been the barbarous occasion of driving him to that terrible extremity
on board of The Thunder, which we have formerly related. Whatsoever this
wretch had been guilty of, I applauded Mr. Thompson's generosity towards
him in his distress, which wrought so much upon me also, that I sent
him ten pistoles, in such a private manner that he could never know his
benefactor.

While my father and I were caressed among the gentlemen on shore,
Captain Bowling had written to his owners, by the packet, which sailed
a few days after our arrival, signifying his prosperous voyage hitherto,
and desiring them to insure his ship and cargo homeward bound: after
which precaution he applied himself so heartily to the task of loading
his ship that, with the assistance of Mr. Thompson, she was full in less
than six weeks. This kind gentleman likewise procured for Don Rodrigo
bills upon London for the greatest part of his gold and silver, by which
means it was secured against the risk of the seas and the enemy; and,
before we sailed, supplied us with such large quantities of all kinds
of stock, that not only we, but the ship's company, fared sumptuously
during the voyage.

Everything being ready, we took our leave of our kind entertainers, and,
going on board at Port Royal, set sail for England on the first day
of June. We beat up to windward, with fine easy weather, and one night
believing ourselves near Cape Tiberon, lay to, with an intention to wood
and water next morning in the bay. While we remained in this situation,
a sailor, having drunk more new rum than he could carry, staggered over
board, and, notwithstanding all the means that could be used to preserve
him, went to the bottom, and disappeared. About two hours after
this melancholy accident happened, as I enjoyed the cool air on the
quarter-deck, I heard a voice rising, as it were, out of the sea
and calling, "Ho, the ship ahoy!" Upon which one of the men upon the
forecastle cried, "I'll be d--n'd if that an't Jack Marlinspike, who
went overboard!" Not a little surprised at this event, I jumped into the
boat that lay alongside, with the second mate and four men, and rowing
towards the place from whence the voice (which repeated the hail) seemed
to proceed, we perceived something floating upon the water. When we
had rowed a little further, we discerned it to be a man riding upon a
hencoop, who, seeing us approach, pronounced with a hoarse voice, "D--n
your bloods! why did you not answer when I hailed?" Our mate, who was
a veritable seaman, hearing his salute, said, "By G--, my lads, this is
none of our man. This is the devil--pull away for the ship." The fellows
obeyed his command without question, and were already some fathoms on
our return, when I insisted on their taking up the poor creature, and
prevailed upon them to go back to the wreck, which when we came near
the second time, and signified our intention, we received an answer of
"Avast, avast--what ship, brother?" Being satisfied in this particular,
he cried, "D--n the ship, I was in hopes it had been my own--where are
you bound?" We satisfied his curiosity in this particular too; upon
which he suffered himself to be taken on board, and, after having been
comforted with a dram, told us, he belonged to the Vesuvio man-of-war,
upon a cruise off the island of Hispaniola; that he had fallen overboard
four-and-twenty hours ago, and the ship being under sail, they did not
choose to bring to, but tossed a hencoop overboard for his convenience,
upon which he was in good hopes of reaching the Cape next morning:
howsomever, he was as well content to be aboard of us because he did
not doubt that we should meet his ship, and if he had gone ashore in
the bay, he might have been taken prisoner by the French. My uncle
and father were very much diverted with the account of this fellow's
unconcerned behaviour; and in two days, meeting with the Vesuvio, as he
expected, sent him on board of her, according to his desire.

Having beat up successfully the windward passage, we stretched to the
northward, and falling in with a westerly wind, in eight weeks arrived
in the soundings, and in two days after made for the Lizard. It is
impossible to express the joy I felt at the sight of English ground! Don
Rodrigo was not unmoved, and Strap shed tears of gladness. The sailors
profited by our satisfaction, the shoe that was nailed to the mast being
quite filled with our liberality. My uncle resolved to run up into the
Downs at once, but the wind shifting when we were abreast of the Isle of
Wight, he was obliged to turn into St. Helen's, and come to Spithead,
to the great mortification of the crew, thirty of whom were immediately
pressed on board a man-of-war.

My father and I went ashore immediately at Portsmouth, leaving Strap
with the captain to go round with the ship and take care of our effects;
and I discovered so much impatience to see my charming Narcissa, that my
father permitted me to ride across the country to her brother's house;
while he should hire a post-chaise for London, where he would wait for
me at a place to which I directed him.

Fired with all the eagerness of passion, I took post that very night,
and in the morning reached an inn about three miles from the squire's
habitation; here I remained till next morning, allaying the torture of
my impatience with the rapturous hope of seeing that divine creature
after an absence of eighteen months, which, far from impairing, had
raised my love to the most exalted pitch! Neither were my reflections
free from apprehensions: that something intervened in spite of all my
hope, and represented her as having yielded to the importunity of her
brother and blessed the arms of a happy rival. My thoughts were even
maddened with the fear of her death; and, when I arrived in the dark
at the house of Mrs. Sagely, I had not for some time courage to desire
admittance, lest my soul should be shocked with dismal tidings. At
length, however, I knocked, and no sooner certified the good gentlewoman
of my voice than she opened the door, and received me with the most
affectionate embrace, that brought tears into her aged eyes: "For
heaven's sake, dear mother," cried I, "tell me how is Narcissa? is she
the same that I left her?" She blessed my ears with saying, "She is as
beautiful, in as good health, and as much yours as ever." Transported at
this assurance, I begged to know if I could not see her that very night,
when this sage matron gave me to understand that my mistress was in
London, and that things were strangely altered in the squire's house
since my departure; that he had been married a whole year to Melinda,
who at first found means to wean his attention so much from Narcissa,
that he became quite careless of that lovely sister, comforting himself
with the clause in his father's will, by which she should forfeit her
fortune, by marrying without his consent: that my mistress, being but
indifferently treated by her sister-in-law, had made use of her freedom
some months ago, and gone to town, where she was lodged with Miss
Williams, in expectation of my arrival; and had been pestered with the
addresses of Lord Quiverwit, who, finding her heart engaged, had fallen
upon a great many shifts to persuade her that I was dead; but, finding
all his artifices unsuccessful, and despairing of gaining her affection,
he had consoled himself for her indifference, by marrying another lady
some weeks ago, who had already left him on account of some family
uneasiness. Besides this interesting information, she told me there was
not a great deal of harmony between Melinda and the squire, who was so
much disgusted at the number of gallants who continued to hover about
her even after her marriage, that he had hurried her down into
the country, much against her own inclination, where their mutual
animosities had risen to such a height, that they preserved no decency
before company or servants, but abused one another in the grossest
terms.

This good old gentlewoman, to give me a convincing proof of my dear
Narcissa's unalterable love, gratified me with a sight of the last
letter she had favoured her with, in which I was mentioned with so much
honour, tenderness, and concern, that my soul was fired with impatience,
and I determined to ride all night, that I might have it the sooner in
my power to make her happy. Mrs. Sagely, perceiving my eagerness, and
her maternal affection being equally divided between Narcissa and me,
begged leave to remind me of the sentiments with which I went abroad,
that would not permit me for any selfish gratification to prejudice the
fortune of that amiable young lady, who must entirely depend upon me,
after having bestowed herself in marriage. I thanked her for her kind
concern, and as briefly as possible described my flourishing situation,
which afforded this humane person infinite wonder and satisfaction. I
told her, that now I had an opportunity to manifest my gratitude for
the many obligations I owed, I would endeavour to make her old age
comfortable and easy; as a step to which I proposed she should come
and live with Narcissa and me. This venerable gentlewoman was so much
affected with my words, that the tears ran down her ancient cheeks; she
thanked heaven that I had not belied the presages she had made, on her
first acquaintance with me; acknowledging my generosity, as she called
it, in the most elegant and pathetic expressions; but declined my
proposal, on account of her attachment to the dear melancholy cottage
where she had so peacefully consumed her solitary widowhood. Finding
her immovable on this subject, I insisted on her accepting a present of
thirty guineas, and took my leave, resolving to accommodate her with the
same sum annually, for the more comfortable support of the infirmities
of old age.

Having rode all night, I found myself at Canterbury in the morning,
where I alighted to procure fresh horses; and, as I walked into the inn,
perceived an apothecary's on the other side of the street, with the name
of Morgan over the door; alarmed at this discovery, I could not help
thinking that my old messmate had settled in this place, and upon
inquiry found my conjecture true, and that he was married lately to a
widow in that city, by whom he had got three thousand pounds. Rejoiced
at this intelligence, I went to his shop as soon as it was open, and
found my friend behind the counter, busy in preparing a clyster. I
saluted him at entrance, with, "Your servant, Mr. Morgan." Upon which he
looked at me, and replying, "Your most humble servant, good sir," rubbed
his ingredients in the mortar without any emotion. "What," said I,
"Morgan, have you forgot your old messmate?" At these words he looked
up again, and starting, cried, "As Cot is my--sure it cannot--yes, by my
salfation, I pelieve it is my dear friend Mr. Rantom." He was no sooner
convinced of my identity, than he threw down the pestle, overset the
mortar, and jumping over the board, swept up the contents with his
clothes, flew about my neck, hugged me affectionately, and daubed me all
over with turpentine and the yolks of eggs which he had been mixing when
I came in. Our mutual congratulations being over, he told me, that he
found himself a widower upon his return from the West Indies; that
he had got interest to be appointed surgeon of a man-of-war, in which
capacity he had served some years, until he married an apothecary's
widow, with whom he now enjoyed a pretty good sum of money, peace, and
quiet, and an indifferent good trade. He was very desirous of hearing my
adventures, which I assured him I had not time to relate, but told him
in general, my circumstances were very good, and that I hoped to see
him when I should not be in such a hurry as at present. He insisted,
however, on my staying breakfast, and introduced me to his wife, who
seemed to be a decent sensible woman, pretty well stricken in years.
In the course of our conversation, he showed the sleeve-buttons I had
exchanged with him at our parting in the West Indies, and was not a
little proud to see that I had preserved his with the same care. When I
informed him of Mackshane's condition, he seemed at first to exult over
his distress; but, after a little recollection, said, "Well, he has paid
for his malice; I forgife him, and may Cot forgife him likewise." He
expressed great concern for the soul of Captain Oakum, which he believed
was now gnashing its teeth; but it was some time before I could convince
him of Thompson's being alive, at whose good fortune, nevertheless, he
was extremely glad.

Having renewed our protestations of friendship, I bade the honest
Welshman and his spouse farewell, and, taking post-horses, arrived at
London that same night, where I found my father in good health, to
whom I imparted what I had learned of Narcissa. This indulgent parent
approved of my intention of marrying her, even without fortune, provided
her brother's consent could not be obtained; promised to make over to me
in a few days a sufficiency to maintain her in a fashionable manner and
expressed a desire of seeing this amiable creature, who had captivated
me so much. As I had not slept the night before, and was besides
fatigued with my journey, I found myself under a necessity of taking
some repose, and went to bed accordingly: next morning, about ten
o'clock, took a chair, and according to Mrs. Sagely's directions, went
to my charmer's lodgings, and inquired for Miss Williams. I had not
waited in the parlour longer than a minute, when this young woman
entered, and no sooner perceived me, than she shrieked and ran backward:
but I got between her and the door, and clasping her in my arms, brought
her to herself with an embrace. "Good heaven," cried she, "Mr. Random,
is it you indeed? My mistress will run distracted with joy." I told her,
it was from an apprehension that my sudden appearance might have had
some bad effect on my dear Narcissa, that I had desired to see her
first, in order to concert some method of acquainting her mistress
gradually with my arrival. She approved of my conduct, and, after having
yielded to the suggestions of her own friendship, in asking if my voyage
had been successful, charged herself with that office, and left me
glowing with desire of seeing and embracing the object of my love. In a
very little time I heard some body coming down the stairs in haste, and
the voice of my angel pronounce, with an eager tone, "O heaven! is it
possible! where is he?" How were my faculties aroused at this well known
sound! and how was my soul transported when she broke in upon my view in
all the bloom of ripened beauty! Grace was in all her steps, heaven
in her eye, in every gesture dignity and love! You, whose souls are
susceptible of the most delicate impressions, whose tender bosoms have
felt the affecting vicissitudes of love, who have suffered an absence
of eighteen long months from the dear object of your hope, and found
at your return the melting fair as kind and constant as your heart can
wish, do me justice on this occasion, and conceive what unutterable
rapture possessed us both, while we flew into each other's arms! This
was no time for speech: locked in a mutual embrace, we continued some
minutes in a silent trance of joy! When I thus encircled all my soul
held dear--while I hung over her beauties--beheld her eyes sparkle, and
every feature flush with virtuous fondness--when I saw her enchanting
bosom heave with undissembled rapture, and knew myself the happy
cause--heavens! what was my situation! I am tempted to commit my paper
to the flames, and to renounce my pen for ever, because its most ardent
and lucky expression so poorly describes the emotions of my soul. "O
adorable Narcissa!" cried I, "O miracle of beauty, love and truth! I
at last fold thee in my arms! I at last can call thee mine! No jealous
brother shall thwart our happiness again; fortune hath at length
recompensed me for all my sufferings, and enabled me to do justice to my
love." The dear creature smiled ineffably charmingly, and, with a
look of bewitching tenderness, said, "and shall we never part again?"
"Never," I replied, "thou wondrous pattern of all earthly perfection!
never, until death shall divide us! By this ambrosial kiss, a thousand
times more fragrant than the breeze that sweeps the orange grove, I
never more will leave thee!"

As my first transport abated, my passion grew turbulent and unruly. I
was giddy with standing on the brink of bliss, and all my virtue and
philosophy were scarce sufficient to restrain the inordinate sallies of
desire. Narcissa perceived the conflict within me, and with her usual
dignity of prudence, called off my imagination from the object in view,
and with eager expressions of interested curiosity, desired to know the
particulars of my voyage. In this I gratified her inclination, bringing
my story down to the present hour. She was infinitely surprised at the
circumstance of finding my father, which brought tears into her
lovely eyes. She was transported at hearing that approved of my flame,
discovered a longing desire of being introduced to him, congratulated
herself and me upon my good fortune, and observed, that this great
and unexpected stroke of fate seemed to have been brought about by the
immediate direction of Providence. Having entertained ourselves some
hours with the genuine effusions of our souls, I obtained her consent to
complete my happiness as soon as my father should judge it proper; and,
applying with my own hands a valuable necklace, composed of diamonds
and amethysts set alternately, which an old Spanish lady at Paraguay had
presented me with, I took my leave, promising to return in the afternoon
with Don Rodrigo. When I went home, this generous parent inquired very
affectionately about the health of my dear Narcissa, to whom, that I
might be the more agreeable, he put into my hand a deed, by which I
found myself in possession of fifteen thousand pounds, exclusive of the
profits of my own merchandise, which amounted to three thousand more.
After dinner I accompanied him to the lodgings of my mistress, who,
being dressed for the occasion, made a most dazzling appearance. I could
perceive him struck with her figure, which I really think was the most
beautiful that ever was created under the sun. He embraced her tenderly,
and told her he was proud of having a son who had spirit to attempt, and
qualifications to engage the affections of such a fine lady. She blushed
at this compliment, and, with eyes full of the softest languishment
turned upon me, said, she should have been unworthy of Mr. Random's
attention, had she been blind to his extraordinary merit. I made no
other answer than a low bow. My father, sighing, pronounced, "Such was
once my Charlotte;" while the tear rushed into his eye, and the tender
heart of Narcissa manifested itself in two precious drops of sympathy,
which, but for his presence, I would have kissed away. Without repeating
the particulars of our conversation, I shall only observe, that Don
Rodrigo was as much charmed with her good sense as with her appearance,
and she was no less pleased with his understanding and polite address.
It was determined that he should write to the squire, signifying his
approbation of my passion for his sister, and offering a settlement,
which he should have no reason to reject; and that, if he should refuse
the proposal, we would crown our mutual wishes without any further
regard to his will.






CHAPTER LXVIII

My Father makes a present to Narcissa--the Letter is dispatched to her
Brother--I appear among my Acquaintance--Banter's Behaviour--the Squire
refuses his Consent--my Uncle comes to Town--approves of my Choice--I am
married--we meet the Squire and his Lady at the Play--our Acquaintance
is courted

After having spent the evening to the satisfaction of all present, my
father addressed himself thus to Narcissa. "Madam, give me leave to
consider you hereafter as my daughter, in which capacity I insist upon
your accepting this first instance of my paternal duty and affection."
With these words he put into her hand a bank note of five hundred
pounds, which she no sooner examined, than with a low courtesy she
replied. "Dear sir, though I have not the least occasion for this
supply, I have too great a veneration for you to refuse this proof of
your generosity and esteem, which I the more freely receive, because I
already look upon Mr. Random's interest as inseparably connected with
mine." He was extremely well pleased with her frank and ingenuous reply,
upon which we saluted, and wished her good night. The letter, at my
request, was dispatched to Sussex by an express, and in the meantime,
Don Rodrigo, to grace my nuptials, hired a ready furnished house, and
set up a very handsome equipage.

Though I passed the greatest part of the day with the darling of my
soul, I found leisure sometimes to be among my former acquaintance,
who were astonished at the magnificence of my appearance. Banter in
particular was confounded at the vicissitudes of my fortune, the causes
of which he endeavoured in vain to discover, until I thought fit to
disclose the whole secret of my last voyage, partly in consideration
of our former intimacy, and partly to prevent unfavourable conjectures,
which he and others, in all probability, would have made in regard to
my circumstances. He professed great satisfaction at this piece of news;
and I had no cause to believe him insincere, when I considered that he
would now look upon himself as acquitted of the debt he owed me, and
at the same time flatter himself with the hopes of borrowing more. I
carried him home to dinner with me, and my father liked his conversation
so much, that, upon hearing his difficulties, he desired me to
accommodate him for the present, and inquire, if he would accept of
a commission in the army, towards the purchase of which he should
willingly lend him money. Accordingly, I gave my friend an opportunity
of being alone with me, when, as I expected, he told me that he was just
on the point of being reconciled to an old rich uncle, whose heir he
was, but wanted a few pieces for immediate expense, which he desired I
would lend him and take my bond for the whole. His demand was limited to
ten guineas; and when I put twenty in his hand, he stared at me for some
moments; then, putting it into his purse, "Ay,--'tis all one--you shall
have the whole in a very short time." When I had taken his note, to save
the expense of a bond, I expressed some surprise that a fellow of his
spirit should loiter away his time in idleness, and, asked why he did
not choose to make his fortune in the army. "What," said he, "throw
away money upon a subaltern's commission, and be under the command of
a parcel of scoundrels, who have raised themselves above me by the most
infamous practices. No, I love independency too well to sacrifice my
life, health, and pleasure, for such a pitiful consideration." Finding
him adverse to this way of life, I changed the subject, and returned
to Don Rodrigo, who had just received the following epistle from the
squire:


"Sir,--Concerning a letter which I received, subscribed R. Random, this
is the answer. As for you, I know nothing of you. Your son, or pretended
son, I have seen; if he marries my sister, at his peril be it; I do
declare that he shall not have one farthing of her fortune, which
becomes my property, if she takes a husband without my consent. Your
settlement, I do believe, is all a sham, and yourself no better than you
should be; but if you had all the wealth of the Indies, your son shall
never match in our family with the consent of

"Orson Topehall"

My father was not much surprised at this polite letter, after having
heard the character of the author; and as for me, I was even pleased
at his refusal, because I had now an opportunity of showing my
disinterested love. By his permission I waited on my charmer: and
having imparted the contents of her brother's letter, at which she wept
bitterly, in spite of all my consolation and caresses, the time of our
marriage was fixed two days. During this interval, in which my soul
was wound up to the last stretch of rapturous expectation, Narcissa
endeavoured to reconcile some of her relations in town to her marriage
with me; but, finding them all deaf to her remonstrances, either out of
envy or prejudice, she told me with the most enchanting sweetness, while
the tears bedewed her lovely cheeks, "Sure the world will no longer
question your generosity when you take a poor forlorn beggar to your
arms?" Affected with her sorrow, I pressed the fair mourner to my
breast, and swore that she was more dear and welcome on that account,
because she had sacrificed her friends and fortune to her love for me.
My uncle, for whose character she had a great veneration, being by this
time come to town, I introduced him to my bride; and, although he was
not very much subject to refined sensations, he was struck dumb with
admiration at her beauty. After having kissed and gazed at her for some
time, he turned to me, saying. "Odds bobs, Rory! a notable prize indeed,
finely built and gloriously rigged, i'faith! If she an't well manned
when you take the command of her, sirrah, you deserve to go to sea in a
cockle shell. No offence, I hope, niece! you must not mind what I say,
being (as the saying is) a plain seafaring man, thof mayhap I have as
much regard for you as another." She received him with great civility,
told him she had longed a great while to see a person to whom she was so
much indebted for his generosity to Mr. Random; that she looked upon him
as her uncle, by which name she begged leave to call him for the future;
and that she was very sure he could say nothing that would give her
the least offence. The honest captain was transported at her courteous
behaviour, and insisted upon giving her away at the ceremony, swearing
that he loved her as well as if she was his own child, and that he would
give two thousand guineas to the first fruit of our love, as soon as
it would squeak. Everything being settled for the solemnisation of our
nuptials, which were to be performed privately at my father's house, the
auspicious hour arrived, when Don Rodrigo and my uncle went in the coach
to fetch the bride and Miss Williams: leaving me with a parson, Banter,
and Strap, neither of whom had as yet seen my charming mistress. My
faithful valet, who was on the rack of impatience to behold a lady
of whom he had heard so much, no sooner understood that the coach was
returned, than he placed himself at a window, to have a peep at her as
she alighted; and, when he saw her, clapped his hands together, turned
up the white of his eyes, and, with his mouth wide open, remained in a
sort of ecstacy, which broke out into "O Dea certe! qualis in Eurotae
ripis, aut per iuga Cynthi exercet Diana choros?" The doctor and Banter
were surprised to hear my man speak Latin; but when my father led
Narcissa into the room, the object of their admiration was soon changed,
as appeared in the countenances of both. Indeed, they must have been the
most insensible of all beings, could they have beheld without emotion
the divine creature that approached! She was dressed in a sack of white
satin, embroidered on the breast with gold, the crown of her head was
