large sum to pay for postage. However, sacrifices must now and then be
made for friendship, and for sleep. When she had paid half the money,
her mind was relieved, and she had the slumber which preserves beauty.
Luigi was to be paid the other half on his return. "He may never
return," she thought, while graciously dismissing him. The deduction by
mental arithmetic of the two hundred and twenty, or the one hundred and
ten florins, from the large amount Countess Anna was bound to pay her
in turn, annoyed her, though she knew it was a trifle. For this lady,
Milan, Turin, and Paris sighed deeply.

When he had left Violetta at her house in the Corso, Merthyr walked
briskly for exercise, knowing that he would have need of his health and
strength. He wanted a sight of Alps to wash out the image of the woman
from his mind, and passed the old Marshal's habitation fronting the
Gardens, wishing that he stood in the field against the fine old
warrior, for whom he had a liking. Near the walls he discovered Beppo
sitting pensively with his head between his two fists. Beppo had not
seen Count Ammiani, but he had seen Barto Rizzo, and pointing to the
walls, said that Barto had dropped down there. He had met him hurrying
in the Corso Francesco. Barto took him to the house of Sarpo, the
bookseller, who possessed a small printing-press. Beppo described
vividly, with his usual vivacity of illustration, the stupefaction of
the man at the apparition of his tormentor, whom he thought fast in
prison; and how Barto had compelled him to print a proclamation to the
Piedmontese, Lombards, and Venetians, setting forth that a battle had
been fought South of the Ticino, and that Carlo Alberto was advancing
on Milan, signed with the name of the Piedmontese Pole in command of the
king's army. A second, framed as an order of the day, spoke of victory
and the planting of the green, white and red banner on the Adige, and
forward to the Isonzo.

"I can hear nothing of Carlo Alberto's victory," Beppo said; "no one has
heard of it. Barto told us how the battle was fought, and the name of
the young lieutenant who discovered the enemy's flank march, and got the
artillery down on him, and pounded him so that--signore, it's amazing!
I'm ready to cry, and laugh, and howl!--fifteen thousand men capitulated
in a heap!"

"Don't you know you've been listening to a madman?" said Merthyr,
irritated, and thoroughly angered to see Beppo's opposition to that
view.

"Signore, Barto described the whole battle. It began at five o'clock in
the morning."

"When it was dark!"

"Yes; when it was dark. He said so. And we sent up rockets, and caught
the enemy coming on, and the cavalry of Alessandria fell upon two
batteries of field guns and carried them off, and Colonel Romboni was
shot in his back, and cries he, 'Best give up the ghost if you're hit in
the rear. Evviva l'Italia!'"

"A Piedmontese colonel, you fool! he would have shouted 'Viva Carlo
Alberto!'" said Merthyr, now critically disgusted with the tale, and
refusing to hear more. Two hours later, he despatched Beppo to Carlo
in Brescia, warning him that for some insane purpose these two
proclamations had been printed by Barto Rizzo, and that they were false.

It was early on the morning of a second day, before sunrise, when
Vittoria sent for Merthyr to conduct her to the cathedral. "There has
been a battle," she said. Her lips hardly joined to frame the syllables
in speech. Merthyr refrained from asking where she had heard of the
battle. As soon as the Duomo doors were open, he led her in and left her
standing shrinking under the great vault with her neck fearfully drawn
on her shoulders, as one sees birds under thunder. He thought that she
was losing courage. Choosing to go out on the steps rather than look
on her, he was struck by the sight of two horsemen, who proved to be
Austrian officers, rattling at racing speed past the Duomo up the Corso.
The sight of them made it seem possible that a battle had been fought.
As soon as he was free, Merthyr went to the Duchess of Graatli, from
whom he had the news of Novara. The officers he had seen were Prince
Radocky and Lieutenant Wilfrid Pierson, the old Marshal's emissaries of
victory. They had made a bet on the bloody field about reaching Milan
first, and the duchess affected to be full of the humour of this bet
in order to conceal her exultation. The Lenkensteins called on her; the
Countess of Lenkenstein, Anna, and Lena; and they were less considerate,
and drew their joy openly from the source of his misery--a dreadful
house for Merthyr to remain in; but he hoped to see Wilfrid, having
heard the duchess rally Lena concerning the deeds of the white umbrella,
which, Lena said, was pierced with balls, and had been preserved for
her. "The dear foolish fellow insisted on marching right into the midst
of the enemy with his absurd white umbrella; and wherever there was
danger the men were seen following it. Prince Radocky told me the
whole army was laughing. How he escaped death was a miracle!" She spoke
unaffectedly of her admiration for the owner, and as Wilfrid came in she
gave him brilliant eyes. He shook Merthyr's hand without looking at
him. The ladies would talk of nothing but the battle, so he went up to
Merthyr, and under pretext of an eager desire for English news, drew him
away.

"Her husband was not there? not at Novara, I mean?" he said.

"He's at Brescia," said Merthyr.

"Well, thank goodness he didn't stand in those ranks!"

Wilfrid murmured, puffing thoughtfully over the picture they presented
to his memory.

Merthyr then tried to hint to him that he had a sort of dull suspicion
of Carlo's being in personal danger, but of what kind he could not say.
He mentioned Weisspriess by name; and Nagen; and Countess Anna. Wilfrid
said, "I'll find out if there's anything, only don't be fancying it. The
man's in a bad hole at Brescia. Weisspriess, I believe, is at Verona.
He's an honourable fellow. The utmost he would do would be to demand
a duel; and I'm sure he's heartily sick of that work. Besides, he and
Countess Anna have quarrelled. Meet me;--by the way, you and I mustn't
be seen meeting, I suppose. The duchess is neutral ground. Come here
to-night. And don't talk of me, but say that a friend asks how she is,
and hopes--the best things you can say for me. I must go up to their
confounded chatter again. Tell her there's no fear, none whatever.
You all hate us, naturally; but you know that Austrian officers are
gentlemen. Don't speak my name to her just yet. Unless, of course, she
should happen to allude to me, which is unlikely. I had a dismal idea
that her husband was at Novara."

The tender-hearted duchess sent a message to Vittoria, bidding her not
to forget that she had promised her at Meran to 'love her always.'

"And tell her," she said to Merthyr, "that I do not think I shall
have my rooms open for the concert to-morrow night. I prefer to let
Antonio-Pericles go mad. She will not surely consider that she is bound
by her promise to him? He drags poor Irma from place to place to make
sure the miserable child is not plotting to destroy his concert, as that
man Sarpo did. Irma is half dead, and hasn't the courage to offend him.
She declares she depends upon him for her English reputation. She has
already caught a violent cold, and her sneezing is frightful. I have
never seen so abject a creature. I have no compassion at the sight of
her."

That night Merthyr heard from Wilfrid that a plot against Carlo Ammiani
did exist. He repeated things he had heard pass between Countess
d'Isorella and Irma in the chamber of Pericles before the late battle.
Modestly confessing that he was 'for some reasons' in high favour with
Countess Lena, he added that after a long struggle he had brought her
to confess that her sister had sworn to have Countess Alessandra Ammiani
begging at her feet.

By mutual consent they went to consult the duchess. She repelled the
notion of Austrian women conspiring. "An Austrian noble lady--do you
think it possible that she would act secretly to serve a private hatred?
Surely I may ask you, for my sake, to think better of us?"

Merthyr showed her an opening to his ground by suggesting that Anna's
antipathy to Victoria might spring more from a patriotic than a private
source.

"Oh! I will certainly make inquiries, if only to save Anna's reputation
with her enemies," the duchess answered rather proudly.

It would have been a Novara to Pericles if Vittoria had refused to sing.
He held the pecuniarily-embarrassed duchess sufficiently in his power to
command a concert at her house; his argument to those who pressed him
to spare Vittoria in a season of grief running seriously, with visible
contempt of their intellects, thus: "A great voice is an ocean. You
cannot drain it with forty dozen opera-hats. It is something found--an
addition to the wealth of this life. Shall we not enjoy what we find?
You do not wear out a picture by looking at it; likewise you do not wear
out a voice by listening to it. A bird has wings;--here is a voice.
Why were they given? I should say, to go into the air. Ah; but not if
grandmother is ill. What is a grandmother to the wings and the voice? If
to sing would kill,--yes, then let the puny thing be silent! But Sandra
Belloni has a soul that has not a husband--except her Art. Her body is
husbanded; but her soul is above her body. You would treat it as below.
Art is her soul's husband! Besides, I have her promise. She is a girl
who will go up to a loaded gun's muzzle if she gives her word. And
besides, her husband may be shot to-morrow. So, all she sings now is
clear gain."

Vittoria sent word to him that she would sing.

In the meantime a change had come upon Countess Anna. Weisspriess, her
hero, appeared at her brother's house, fresh from the field of Novara,
whither he had hurried from Verona on a bare pretext, that was a
breach of military discipline requiring friendly interposition in
high quarters. Unable to obtain an audience with Count Lenkenstein,
he remained in the hall, hoping for things which he affected to care
nothing for; and so it chanced that he saw Lena, who was mindful that
her sister had suffered much from passive jealousy when Wilfrid returned
from the glorious field, and led him to Anna, that she also might
rejoice in a hero. Weisspriess did not refrain from declaring on the way
that he would rather charge against a battery. Some time after, Anna lay
in Lena's arms, sobbing out one of the wildest confessions ever made by
woman:--she adored Weisspriess; she hated Nagen; but was miserably bound
to the man she hated. "Oh! now I know what love is." She repeated this
with transparent enjoyment of the opposing sensations by whose shock the
knowledge was revealed to her.

"How can you be bound to Major Nagan?" asked Lena.

"Oh! why? except that I have been possessed by devils."

Anna moaned. "Living among these Italians has distempered my blood." She
exclaimed that she was lost.

"In what way can you be lost?" said Lena.

"I have squandered more than half that I possess. I am almost a beggar.
I am no longer the wealthy Countess Anna. I am much poorer than anyone
of us."

"But Major Weisspriess is a man of honour, and if he loves you--"

"Yes; he loves me! he loves me! or would he come to me after I have
sent him against a dozen swords? But he is poor; he must, must marry a
wealthy woman. I used to hate him because I thought he had his eye on
money. I love him for it now. He deserves wealth; he is a matchless
hero. He is more than the first swordsman of our army; he is a knightly
man. Oh my soul Johann!" She very soon fell to raving. Lena was implored
by her to give her hand to Weisspriess in reward for his heroism--"For
you are rich," Anna said; "you will not have to go to him feeling that
you have made him face death a dozen times for your sake, and that you
thank him and reward him by being a whimpering beggar in his arms.
Do, dearest! Will you? Will you, to please me, marry Johann? He is not
unworthy of you." And more of this hysterical hypocrisy, which brought
on fits of weeping. "I have lived among these savages till I have ceased
to be human--forgotten everything but my religion," she said. "I wanted
Weisspriess to show them that they dared not stand up against a man of
us, and to tame the snarling curs. He did. He is brave. He did as much
as a man could do, but I was unappeasable. They seem to have bitten me
till I had a devouring hunger to humiliate them. Lena, will you believe
that I have no hate for Carlo Ammiani or the woman he has married? None!
and yet, what have I done!" Anna smote her forehead. "They are nothing
but little dots on a field for me. I don't care whether they live or
die. It's like a thing done in sleep."

"I want to know what you have done," said Lena caressingly.

"You at least will try to reward our truest hero, and make up to him for
your sister's unkindness, will you not?" Anna replied with a cajolery
wonderfully like a sincere expression of her wishes. "He will be a good
husband.. He has proved it by having been so faithful a--a lover. So you
may be sure of him. And when he is yours, do not let him fight again,
Lena, for I have a sickening presentiment that his next duel is his
last."

"Tell me," Lena entreated her, "pray tell me what horrible thing you
have done to prevent your marrying him."

"With their pride and their laughter," Anna made answer; "the fools!
were they to sting us perpetually and not suffer for it? That woman, the
Countess Alessandra, as she's now called--have you forgotten that she
helped our Paul's assassin to escape? was she not eternally plotting
against Austria? And I say that I love Austria. I love my country; I
plot for my country. She and her husband plot, and I plot to thwart
them. I have ruined myself in doing it. Oh, my heart! why has it
commenced beating again? Why did Weisspriess come here? He offended me.
He refused to do my orders, and left me empty-handed, and if he suffers
too," Anna relieved a hard look with a smile of melancholy, "I hope he
will not; I cannot say more."

"And I'm to console him if he does?" said Lena.

"At least, I shall be out of the way," said Anna. "I have still money
enough to make me welcome in a convent."

"I am to marry him?" Lena persisted, and half induced Anna to act a
feeble part, composed of sobs and kisses and full confession of her
plight. Anna broke from her in time to leave what she had stated of
herself vague and self-justificatory, so that she kept her pride, and
could forgive, as she was ready to do even so far as to ask forgiveness
in turn, when with her awakened enamoured heart she heard Vittoria sing
at the concert of Pericles. Countess Alessandra's divine gift, which she
would not withhold, though in a misery of apprehension; her grave eyes,
which none could accuse of coldness, though they showed no emotion;
her simple noble manner that seemed to lift her up among the forces
threatening her; these expressions of a superior soul moved Anna under
the influence of the incomparable voice to pass over envious contrasts,
and feel the voice and the nature were one in that bosom. Could it be
the same as the accursed woman who had stood before her at Meran? She
could hardly frame the question, but she had the thought sufficiently
firmly to save her dignity; she was affected by very strong emotion
when Vittoria's singing ended, and nothing but the revival of the
recollection of her old contempt preserved her from an impetuous desire
to take the singer by the hand and have all clear between them; for they
were now of equal rank to tolerating eyes. "But she has no religious
warmth!" Anna reflected with a glow of satisfaction. The concert was
broken up by Laura Piaveni. She said out loud that the presence of Major
Weisspriess was intolerable to the Countess Alessandra. It happened
that Weisspriess entered the room while Laura sat studying the effect
produced by her countrywoman's voice on the thick eyelids of Austrian
Anna; and Laura, seeing their enemy ready to weep in acknowledgment of
their power, scorned the power which could never win freedom, and broke
up the sitting, citing the offence of the presence of Weisspriess for
a pretext. The incident threw Anna back upon her old vindictiveness.
It caused an unpleasant commotion in the duchess's saloon. Count
Serabiglione was present, and ran round to Weisspriess, apologizing for
his daughter's behaviour. "Do you think I can't deal with your women as
well as your men, you ass?" said Weisspriess, enraged by the scandal of
the scene. He was overheard by Count Karl Lenkenstein, who took him to
task sharply for his rough speech; but Anna supported her lover, and
they joined hands publicly. Anna went home prostrated with despair.
"What conscience is in me that I should wish one of my Kaiser's officers
killed?" she cried enigmatically to Lena. "But I must have freedom. Oh!
to be free. I am chained to my enemy, and God blesses that woman. He
makes her weep, but he blesses her, for her body is free, and mine,--the
thought of mine sets flames creeping up my limbs as if I were tied to
the stake. Losing a husband you love--what is that to taking a husband
you hate?" Still Lena could get no plain confession from her, for Anna
clung to self-justification, and felt it abandoning her, and her soul
fluttering in a black gulf when she opened her month to disburden
herself.

There came tidings of the bombardment of Brescia one of the historic
deeds of infamy. Many officers of the Imperial army perceived the shame
which it cast upon their colours, even in those intemperate hours,
and Karl Lenkenstein assumed the liberty of private friendship to go
complaining to the old Marshal, who was too true a soldier to condemn
a soldier in action, however strong his disapproval of proceedings.
The liberty assumed by Karl was excessive; he spoke out in the midst of
General officers as if his views were shared by them and the Marshal;
and his error was soon corrected; one after another reproached
him, until the Marshal, pitying his condition, sent him into his
writing-closet, where he lectured the youth on military discipline.
It chanced that there followed between them a question upon what the
General in command at Brescia would do with his prisoners; and hearing
that they were subject to the rigours of a court-martial, and if
adjudged guilty, would forthwith summarily be shot, Karl ventured to ask
grace for Vittoria's husband. He succeeded finally in obtaining his kind
old Chief's promise that Count Ammiani should be tried in Milan, and as
the bearer of a paper to that effect, he called on his sisters to get
them or Wilfrid to convey word to Vittoria of her husband's probable
safety. He found Anna in a swoon, and Lena and the duchess bending
over her. The duchess's chasseur Jacob Baumwalder Feckelwitz had been
returning from Moran, when on the Brescian high-road he met the spy
Luigi, and acting promptly under the idea that Luigi was always a
pestilential conductor of detestable correspondence, he attacked him,
overthrew him, and ransacked him, and bore the fruit of his sagacious
exertions to his mistress in Milan; it was Violetta d'Isorella's letter
to Carlo Ammiani. "I have read it," the duchess said; "contrary to any
habits when letters are not addressed to me. I bring it open to your
sister Anna. She catches sight of one or two names and falls down in the
state in which you see her."

"Leave her to me," said Karl.

He succeeded in extracting from Anna hints of the fact that she had
paid a large sum of her own money to Countess d'Isorella for secrets
connected with the Bergamasc and Brescian rising. "We were under a
mutual oath to be silent, but if one has broken it the other cannot; so
I confess it to you, dearest good brother. I did this for my country at
my personal sacrifice."

Karl believed that he had a sister magnificent in soul. She was glad to
have deluded him, but she could not endure his praises, which painted to
her imagination all that she might have been if she had not dashed her
patriotism with the low cravings of vengeance, making herself like some
abhorrent mediaeval grotesque, composed of eagle and reptile. She was
most eager in entreating him to save Count Ammiani's life. Carlo, she
said, was their enemy, but he had been their friend, and she declared
with singular earnestness that she should never again sleep or hold up
her head, if he were slain or captured.

"My Anna is justified by me in everything she has done," Karl said to
the duchess.

"In that case," the duchess replied, "I have only to differ with her to
feel your sword's point at my breast."

"I should certainly challenge the man who doubted her," said Karl.

The duchess laughed with a scornful melancholy.

On the steps of the door where his horse stood saddled, he met Wilfrid,
and from this promised brother-in-law received matter for the challenge.
Wilfrid excitedly accused Anna of the guilt of a conspiracy to cause
the destruction of Count Ammiani. In the heat of his admiration for his
sister, Karl struck him on the cheek with his glove, and called him a
name by which he had passed during the days of his disgrace, signifying
one who plays with two parties. Lena's maid heard them arrange to meet
within an hour, and she having been a witness of the altercation, ran to
her mistress in advance of Wilfrid, and so worked on Lena's terrors on
behalf of her betrothed and her brother, that Lena, dropped at Anna's
feet telling her all that she had gathered and guessed in verification
of Wilfrid's charge, and imploring her to confess the truth. Anna,
though she saw her concealment pierced, could not voluntarily forego
her brother's expressed admiration of her, and clung to the tatters of
secresy. After a brief horrid hesitation, she chose to face Wilfrid.
This interview began with lively recriminations, and was resulting
in nothing--for Anna refused to be shaken by his statement that the
Countess d'Isorella had betrayed her, and perceived that she was
listening to suspicions only--when, to give his accusation force,
Wilfrid said that Brescia had surrendered and that Count Ammiani had
escaped.

"And I thank God for it!" Anna exclaimed, and with straight frowning
eyes demanded the refutation of her sincerity.

"Count Ammiani and his men have five hours' grace ahead of Major Nagen
and half a regiment," said Wilfrid.

At this she gasped; she had risen her breath to deny or defy, and hung
on the top of it without a voice.

"Tell us--say, but do say--confess that you know Nagen to be a name of
mischief," Lena prayed her.

"I will say anything to prevent my brother from running into danger,"
Anna rejoined.

"She is most foully accused by one whom we permitted to aspire to be of
our own family," said Karl.

"Yet you, Karl, have always been the first to declare her revengeful,"
Lena turned to him.

"Help, Karl, help me," said Anna.

"Yes!" cried her sister; "there you stand, and ask for help, meanest of
women! Do you think these men are not in earnest? Karl is to help you,
and you will not speak a word to save him from a grave before night, or
me from a lover all of blood."

"Am I to be the sacrifice?" said Anna.

"Whatever you call it, Wilfrid has spoken truth of you, and to none but
members of our family; and he had a right to say it, and you are bound
now to acknowledge it."

"I acknowledge that I love and serve my country, Lena."

"Not with a pure heart: you can't forgive. Insult or a wrong makes a
madwoman of you. Confess, Anna! You know well that you can't kneel to
a priest's ear, for you've stopped your conscience. You have pledged
yourself to misery to satisfy a spite, and you have not the courage to
ask for--" Lena broke her speech like one whose wits have been kindled.
"Yes, Karl," she resumed; "Anna begged you to help her. You will. Take
her aside and save her from being miserable forever. You do mean to
fight my Wilfrid?"

"I am certainly determined to bring him to repentance leaving him the
option of the way," said Karl.

Lena took her sullen sister by the arm.

"Anna, will you let these two men go--to slaughter? Look at them; they
are both our brothers. One is dearer than a brother to me, and, oh God!
I have known what it is to half-lose him. You to lose a lover and
have to go bound by a wretched oath to be the wife of a detestable
short-sighted husband! Oh, what an abominable folly!"

This epithet, 'short-sighted,' curiously forced in by Lena, was like a
shock of the very image of Nagen's needle features thrust against Anna's
eyes; the spasm of revulsion in her frame was too quick for her habitual
self-control.

At that juncture Weisspriess opened the door, and Anna's eyes met his.

"You don't spare me," she murmured to Lena.

Her voice trembled, and Wilfrid bent his head near her, pressing her
hand, and said, "Not only I, but Countess Alessandra Ammiani exonerates
you from blame. As she loves her country, you love yours. My words
to Karl were an exaggeration of what I know and think. Only tell me
this;--if Nagen captures Count Ammiani, how is he likely to deal with
him?"

"How can I inform you?" Anna replied coldly; but she reflected in a
fire of terror. She had given Nagen the prompting of a hundred angry
exclamations in the days of her fever of hatred; she had nevertheless
forgotten their parting words; that is, she had forgotten her mood when
he started for Brescia, and the nature of the last instructions she had
given him. Revolting from the thought of execution being done upon Count
Ammiani, as one quickly springing out of fever dreams, all her white
face went into hard little lines, like the withered snow which
wears away in frost. "Yes," she said; and again, "Yes," to something
Weisspriess whispered in her ear, she knew not clearly what. Weisspriess
told Wilfrid that he would wait below. As he quitted the room, the
duchess entered, and went up to Anna. "My good soul," she said, "you
have, I trust, listened to Major Weisspriess. Oh, Anna! you wanted
revenge. Now take it, as becomes a high-born woman; and let your enemy
come to your feet, and don't spurn her when she is there. Must I inform
you that I have been to Countess d'Isorella myself with a man who can
compel her to speak? But Anna von Lenkenstein is not base like that
Italian. Let them think of you as they will, I believe you to have a
great heart. I am sure you will not allow personal sentiment to sully
your devotion to our country. Show them that our Austrian faces can be
bright; and meet her whom you call your enemy; you cannot fly. You
must see her, or you betray yourself. The poor creature's husband is in
danger of capture or death."

While the duchess's stern under-breath ran on hurriedly, convincing Anna
that she had, with no further warning, to fall back upon her uttermost
strength--the name of Countess Alessandra Ammiani was called at the
door. Instinctively the others left a path between Vittoria and Anna. It
was one of the moments when the adoption of a decisive course says more
in vindication of conduct than long speeches. Anna felt that she was
on her trial. For the first time since she had looked on this woman she
noticed the soft splendour of Vittoria's eyes, and the harmony of her
whole figure; nor was the black dress of protesting Italian mourning
any longer offensive in her sight, but on a sudden pitiful, for Anna
thought: "It may at this very hour be for her husband, and she not
knowing it." And with that she had a vision under her eyelids of Nagen
like a shadowy devil in pursuit of men flying, and striking herself and
Vittoria worse than dead in one blow levelled at Carlo Ammiani. A sense
of supernatural horror chilled her blood when she considered again,
facing her enemy, that their mutual happiness was by her own act
involved in the fate of one life. She stepped farther than the half-way
to greet her visitor, whose hands she took. Before a word was uttered
between them, she turned to her brother, and with a clear voice said:

"Karl, the Countess Alessandra's husband, our old, friend Carlo Ammiani,
may need succour in his flight. Try to cross it; or better, get among
those who are pursuing him; and don't delay one minute. You understand
me."

Count Karl bowed his head, bitterly humbled.

Anna's eyes seemed to interrogate Vittoria, "Can I do, more?" but her
own heart answered her.

Inveterate when following up her passion for vengeance, she was
fanatical in responding to the suggestions of remorse.

"Stay; I will despatch Major Weisspriess in my own name," she said.
"He is a trusty messenger, and he knows those mountains. Whoever is the
officer broken for aiding Count Ammiani's escape, he shall be rewarded
by me to the best of my ability. Countess Alessandra, I have anticipated
your petition; I hope you may not have to reproach me. Remember that my
country was in pieces when you and I declared war. You will not suffer
without my suffering tenfold. Perhaps some day you will do me the favour
to sing to me, when there is no chance of interruption. At present it is
cruel to detain you."

Vittoria said simply: "I thank you, Countess Anna."

She was led out by Count Karl to where Merthyr awaited her. All wondered
at the briefness of a scene that had unexpectedly brought the crisis
to many emotions and passions, as the broken waters of the sea beat
together and make here or there the wave which is topmost. Anna's grand
initiative hung in their memories like the throbbing of a pulse, so
hotly their sensations swarmed about it, and so intensely it embraced
and led what all were desiring. The duchess kissed Anna, saying:

"That is a noble heart to which you have become reconciled. Though you
should never be friends, as I am with one of them, you will esteem her.
Do not suppose her to be cold. She is the mother of an unborn little
one, and for that little one's sake she follows out every duty; she
checks every passion in her bosom. She will spare no sacrifice to save
her husband, but she has brought her mind to look at the worst, for fear
that a shock should destroy her motherly guard."

"Really, duchess," Anna replied, "these are things for married women to
hear;" and she provoked some contempt of her conventional delicacy, at
the same time that in her imagination the image of Vittoria struggling
to preserve this burden of motherhood against a tragic mischance,
completely humiliated and overwhelmed her, as if nature had also come to
add to her mortifications.

"I am ready to confess everything I have done, and to be known for what
I am," she said.

"Confess no more than is necessary, but do everything you can; that's
wisest," returned the duchess.

"Ah; you mean that you have nothing to learn." Anna shuddered.

"I mean that you are likely to run into the other extreme of
disfavouring yourself just now, my child. And," continued the duchess,
"you have behaved so splendidly that I won't think ill of you."

Before the day darkened, Wilfrid obtained, through Prince Radocky's
influence, an order addressed to Major Nagen for the surrender of
prisoners into his hands. He and Count Karl started for the Val Camonica
on the chance of intercepting the pursuit. These were not much wiser
than their guesses and their apprehensions made them; but Weisspriess
started on the like errand after an interview with Anna, and he had
drawn sufficient intelligence out of sobs, and broken sentences, and
torture of her spirit, to understand that if Count Ammiani fell alive or
dead into Nagen's hands, Nagen by Anna's scrupulous oath, had a claim on
her person and her fortune: and he knew Nagen to be a gambler. As he
was now by promotion of service Nagen's superior officer, and a near
relative of the Brescian commandant, who would be induced to justify his
steps, his object was to reach and arbitrarily place himself over Nagen,
as if upon a special mission, and to get the lead of the expedition. For
that purpose he struck somewhat higher above the Swiss borders than
Karl and Wilfrid, and gained a district in the mountains above the
vale, perfectly familiar to him. Obeying directions forwarded to her
by Wilfrid, Vittoria left Milan for the Val Camonica no later than the
evening; Laura was with her in the carriage; Merthyr took horse after
them as soon as he had succeeded in persuading Countess Ammiani to
pardon her daughter's last act of wilfulness, and believe that, during
the agitation of unnumbered doubts, she ran less peril in the wilds
where her husband fled, than in her home.

"I will trust to her idolatrously, as you do," Countess Ammiani said;
"and perhaps she has already proved to me that I may."

Merthyr saw Agostino while riding out of Milan, and was seen by him;
but the old man walked onward, looking moodily on the stones, and merely
waved his hand behind.




CHAPTER XLVI

THE LAST

There is hard winter overhead in the mountains when Italian Spring
walks the mountain-sides with flowers, and hangs deep valley-walls with
flowers half fruit; the sources of the rivers above are set about with
fangs of ice, while the full flat stream runs to a rose of sunlight.
High among the mists and snows were the fugitives of Brescia, and
those who for love or pity struggled to save them wandered through the
blooming vales, sometimes hearing that they had crossed the frontier
into freedom, and as often that they were scattered low in death and
captivity. Austria here, Switzerland yonder, and but one depth between
to bound across and win calm breathing. But mountain might call to
mountain, peak shine to peak; a girdle of steel drove the hunted men
back to frosty heights and clouds, the shifting bosom of snows and
lightnings. They saw nothing of hands stretched out to succour. They saw
a sun that did not warm them, a home of exile inaccessible, crags like
an earth gone to skeleton in hungry air; and below, the land of
their birth, beautiful, and sown everywhere for them with torture and
captivity, or death, the sweetest. Fifteen men numbered the escape from
Brescia. They fought their way twice through passes of the mountains,
and might easily, in their first dash Northward from the South-facing
hills, have crossed to the Valtelline and Engadine, but that in their
insanity of anguish they meditated another blow, and were readier to
march into the plains with the tricolour than to follow any course of
flight. When the sun was no longer in their blood they thought of reason
and of rest; they voted the expedition to Switzerland, that so they
should get round to Rome, and descended from the crags of the Tonale,
under which they were drawn to an ambush, suffering three of their party
killed, and each man bloody with wounds. The mountain befriended them,
and gave them safety, as truth is given by a bitter friend. Among icy
crags and mists, where the touch of life grows dull as the nail of a
fore-finger, the features of the mountain were stamped on them, and with
hunger they lost pride, and with solitude laughter; with endless fleeing
they lost the aim of flight; some became desperate, a few craven.
Companionship was broken before they parted in three bodies, commanded
severally by Colonel Corte, Carlo Ammiani, and Barto Rizzo. Corte
reached the plains, masked by the devotion of Carlo's band, who lured
the soldiery to a point and drew a chase, while Corte passed the
line and pushed on for Switzerland. Carlo told off his cousin Angelo
Guidascarpi in the list of those following Corte; but when he fled up
to the snows again, he beheld Angelo spectral as the vapour on a jut
of rock awaiting him. Barto Rizzo had chosen his own way, none knew
whither. Carlo, Angelo, Marco Sana, and a sharply-wounded Brescian lad,
conceived the scheme of traversing the South Tyrol mountain-range toward
Friuli, whence Venice, the still-breathing republic, might possibly be
gained. They carried the boy in turn till his arms drooped long down,
and when they knew the soul was out of him they buried him in snow, and
thought him happy. It was then that Marco Sana took his death for an
omen, and decided them to turn their heads once more for Switzerland;
telling them that the boy, whom he last had carried, uttered "Rome" with
the flying breath. Angelo said that Sana would get to Rome; and Carlo,
smiling on Angelo, said they were to die twins though they had been born
only cousins. The language they had fallen upon was mystical, scarce
intelligible to other than themselves. On a clear morning, with the
Swiss peaks in sight, they were condemned by want of food to quit their
fastness for the valley.

Vittoria read the faces of the mornings as human creatures base tried
to gather the sum of their destinies off changing surfaces, fair not
meaning fair, nor black black, but either the mask upon the secret
of God's terrible will; and to learn it and submit, was the spiritual
burden of her motherhood, that the child leaping with her heart
might live. Not to hope blindly, in the exceeding anxiousness of her
passionate love, nor blindly to fear; not to bet her soul fly out among
the twisting chances; not to sap her great maternal duty by affecting
false stoical serenity:--to nurse her soul's strength, and suckle her
womanly weakness with the tsars which are poison--when repressed; to
be at peace with a disastrous world for the sake of the dependent life
unborn; lay such pure efforts she clung to God. Soft dreams of sacred
nuptial tenderness, tragic images, wild pity, were like phantoms
encircling her, plucking at her as she went, lest they were beneath her
feet, and she kept them from lodging between her breasts. The thought
that her husband, though he should have perished, was not a life lost
if their child lived, sustained her powerfully. It seemed to whisper at
times almost as it were Carlo's ghost breathing in her ears: "On thee!"
On her the further duty devolved; and she trod down hope, lest it should
build her up and bring a shock to surprise her fortitude; she put back
alarm.

The mountains and the valleys scarce had names for her understanding;
they were but a scene where the will of her Maker was at work. Rarely
has a soul been so subjected to its own force. She certainly had the
image of God in her mind.

Yet when her ayes lingered on any mountain gorge, the fate of her
husband sang within it a strange chant, ending in a key that rang
sounding through all her being, and seemed to question heaven. This
music framed itself; it was still when she looked at the shrouded
mountain-tops. A shadow meting sunlight on the long green slopes aroused
it, and it hummed above the tumbling hasty foam, and penetrated hanging
depths of foliage, sad-hued rock-clefts, dark green ravines; it became
convulsed where the mountain threw forward in a rushing upward line
against the sky, there to be severed at the head by cloud. It was silent
among the vines.

Most painfully did human voices affect her when she had this music;
speech was a scourge to her sense of hearing, and touch distressed her:
an edge of purple flame would then unfold the vision of things to
her eyes. She had lost memory; and if by hazard unawares one idea was
projected by some sudden tumult of her enslaved emotions beyond known
and visible circumstances, her intelligence darkened with am oppressive
dread like that of zealots of the guilt of impiety.

Thus destitute, her eye took innumerable pictures sharp as on a
brass-plate: torrents, goat-tracks winding up red earth, rocks veiled
with water, cottage and children, strings of villagers mounting to the
church, one woman kneeling before a wayside cross, her basket at
her back, and her child gazing idly by; perched hamlets, rolling
pasture-fields, the vast mountain lines. She asked all that she saw,
"Does he live?" but the life was out of everything, and these shows
told of no life, neither of joy nor of grief. She could only distantly
connect the appearance of the white-coated soldiery with the source of
her trouble. They were no more than figures on a screen that hid the
flashing of the sword which renders dumb. She had charity for one who
was footsore and sat cherishing his ankle by a village spring, and she
fed him, and not until he was far behind, thought that he might have
