you, ride for 't; ye will do naught by standing.  And keep ever forward,
Master Shelton; turn me not back again, an ye love your life; there is no
help in Tunstall, mind ye that.  And now, since ye go to the great wars
about the king, and I continue to dwell here in extreme jeopardy of my
life, and the saints alone can certify if we shall meet again below, I
give you my last counsels now at your riding.  Keep an eye on Sir Daniel;
he is unsure.  Put not your trust in the jack-priest; he intendeth not
amiss, but doth the will of others; it is a hand-gun for Sir Daniel!  Get
your good lordship where ye go; make you strong friends; look to it.  And
think ever a pater-noster-while on Bennet Hatch.  There are worse rogues
afoot than Bennet.  So, God-speed!"

"And Heaven be with you, Bennet!" returned Dick.  "Ye were a good friend
to me-ward, and so I shall say ever."

"And, look ye, master," added Hatch, with a certain embarrassment, "if
this Amend-All should get a shaft into me, ye might, mayhap, lay out a
gold mark or mayhap a pound for my poor soul; for it is like to go stiff
with me in purgatory."

"Ye shall have your will of it, Bennet," answered Dick.  "But, what
cheer, man! we shall meet again, where ye shall have more need of ale
than masses."

"The saints so grant it, Master Dick!" returned the other.  "But here
comes Sir Oliver.  An he were as quick with the long-bow as with the pen,
he would be a brave man-at-arms."

Sir Oliver gave Dick a sealed packet, with this superscription: "To my
ryght worchypful master, Sir Daniel Brackley, knyght, be thys delyvered
in haste."

And Dick, putting it in the bosom of his jacket, gave the word and set
forth westward up the village.




BOOK I--THE TWO LADS


CHAPTER I--AT THE SIGN OF THE SUN IN KETTLEY


Sir Daniel and his men lay in and about Kettley that night, warmly
quartered and well patrolled.  But the Knight of Tunstall was one who
never rested from money-getting; and even now, when he was on the brink
of an adventure which should make or mar him, he was up an hour after
midnight to squeeze poor neighbours.  He was one who trafficked greatly
in disputed inheritances; it was his way to buy out the most unlikely
claimant, and then, by the favour he curried with great lords about the
king, procure unjust decisions in his favour; or, if that was too
roundabout, to seize the disputed manor by force of arms, and rely on his
influence and Sir Oliver's cunning in the law to hold what he had
snatched.  Kettley was one such place; it had come very lately into his
clutches; he still met with opposition from the tenants; and it was to
overawe discontent that he had led his troops that way.

By two in the morning, Sir Daniel sat in the inn room, close by the
fireside, for it was cold at that hour among the fens of Kettley.  By his
elbow stood a pottle of spiced ale.  He had taken off his visored
headpiece, and sat with his bald head and thin, dark visage resting on
one hand, wrapped warmly in a sanguine-coloured cloak.  At the lower end
of the room about a dozen of his men stood sentry over the door or lay
asleep on benches; and somewhat nearer hand, a young lad, apparently of
twelve or thirteen, was stretched in a mantle on the floor.  The host of
the Sun stood before the great man.

"Now, mark me, mine host," Sir Daniel said, "follow but mine orders, and
I shall be your good lord ever.  I must have good men for head boroughs,
and I will have Adam-a-More high constable; see to it narrowly.  If other
men be chosen, it shall avail you nothing; rather it shall be found to
your sore cost.  For those that have paid rent to Walsingham I shall take
good measure--you among the rest, mine host."

"Good knight," said the host, "I will swear upon the cross of Holywood I
did but pay to Walsingham upon compulsion.  Nay, bully knight, I love not
the rogue Walsinghams; they were as poor as thieves, bully knight.  Give
me a great lord like you.  Nay; ask me among the neighbours, I am stout
for Brackley."

"It may be," said Sir Daniel, dryly.  "Ye shall then pay twice."

The innkeeper made a horrid grimace; but this was a piece of bad luck
that might readily befall a tenant in these unruly times, and he was
perhaps glad to make his peace so easily.

"Bring up yon fellow, Selden!" cried the knight.

And one of his retainers led up a poor, cringing old man, as pale as a
candle, and all shaking with the fen fever.

"Sirrah," said Sir Daniel, "your name?"

"An't please your worship," replied the man, "my name is Condall--Condall
of Shoreby, at your good worship's pleasure."

"I have heard you ill reported on," returned the knight.  "Ye deal in
treason, rogue; ye trudge the country leasing; y' are heavily suspicioned
of the death of severals.  How, fellow, are ye so bold?  But I will bring
you down."

"Right honourable and my reverend lord," the man cried, "here is some
hodge-podge, saving your good presence.  I am but a poor private man, and
have hurt none."

"The under-sheriff did report of you most vilely," said the knight.
"'Seize me,' saith he, 'that Tyndal of Shoreby.'"

"Condall, my good lord; Condall is my poor name," said the unfortunate.

"Condall or Tyndal, it is all one," replied Sir Daniel, coolly.  "For, by
my sooth, y' are here and I do mightily suspect your honesty.  If ye
would save your neck, write me swiftly an obligation for twenty pound."

"For twenty pound, my good lord!" cried Condall.  "Here is midsummer
madness!  My whole estate amounteth not to seventy shillings."

"Condall or Tyndal," returned Sir Daniel, grinning, "I will run my peril
of that loss.  Write me down twenty, and when I have recovered all I may,
I will be good lord to you, and pardon you the rest."

"Alas! my good lord, it may not be; I have no skill to write," said
Condall.

"Well-a-day!" returned the knight.  "Here, then, is no remedy.  Yet I
would fain have spared you, Tyndal, had my conscience suffered.  Selden,
take me this old shrew softly to the nearest elm, and hang me him
tenderly by the neck, where I may see him at my riding.  Fare ye well,
good Master Condall, dear Master Tyndal; y' are post-haste for Paradise;
fare ye then well!"

"Nay, my right pleasant lord," replied Condall, forcing an obsequious
smile, "an ye be so masterful, as doth right well become you, I will
even, with all my poor skill, do your good bidding."

"Friend," quoth Sir Daniel, "ye will now write two score.  Go to! y' are
too cunning for a livelihood of seventy shillings.  Selden, see him write
me this in good form, and have it duly witnessed."

And Sir Daniel, who was a very merry knight, none merrier in England,
took a drink of his mulled ale, and lay back, smiling.

Meanwhile, the boy upon the floor began to stir, and presently sat up and
looked about him with a scare.

"Hither," said Sir Daniel; and as the other rose at his command and came
slowly towards him, he leaned back and laughed outright.  "By the rood!"
he cried, "a sturdy boy!"

The lad flushed crimson with anger, and darted a look of hate out of his
dark eyes.  Now that he was on his legs, it was more difficult to make
certain of his age.  His face looked somewhat older in expression, but it
was as smooth as a young child's; and in bone and body he was unusually
slender, and somewhat awkward of gait.

"Ye have called me, Sir Daniel," he said.  "Was it to laugh at my poor
plight?"

"Nay, now, let laugh," said the knight.  "Good shrew, let laugh, I pray
you.  An ye could see yourself, I warrant ye would laugh the first."

"Well," cried the lad, flushing, "ye shall answer this when ye answer for
the other.  Laugh while yet ye may!"

"Nay, now, good cousin," replied Sir Daniel, with some earnestness,
"think not that I mock at you, except in mirth, as between kinsfolk and
singular friends.  I will make you a marriage of a thousand pounds, go
to! and cherish you exceedingly.  I took you, indeed, roughly, as the
time demanded; but from henceforth I shall ungrudgingly maintain and
cheerfully serve you.  Ye shall be Mrs. Shelton--Lady Shelton, by my
troth! for the lad promiseth bravely.  Tut! ye will not shy for honest
laughter; it purgeth melancholy.  They are no rogues who laugh, good
cousin.  Good mine host, lay me a meal now for my cousin, Master John.
Sit ye down, sweetheart, and eat."

"Nay," said Master John, "I will break no bread.  Since ye force me to
this sin, I will fast for my soul's interest.  But, good mine host, I
pray you of courtesy give me a cup of fair water; I shall be much
beholden to your courtesy indeed."

"Ye shall have a dispensation, go to!" cried the knight.  "Shalt be well
shriven, by my faith!  Content you, then, and eat."

But the lad was obstinate, drank a cup of water, and, once more wrapping
himself closely in his mantle, sat in a far corner, brooding.

In an hour or two, there rose a stir in the village of sentries
challenging and the clatter of arms and horses; and then a troop drew up
by the inn door, and Richard Shelton, splashed with mud, presented
himself upon the threshold.

"Save you, Sir Daniel," he said.

"How!  Dickie Shelton!" cried the knight; and at the mention of Dick's
name the other lad looked curiously across.  "What maketh Bennet Hatch?"

"Please you, sir knight, to take cognisance of this packet from Sir
Oliver, wherein are all things fully stated," answered Richard,
presenting the priest's letter.  "And please you farther, ye were best
make all speed to Risingham; for on the way hither we encountered one
riding furiously with letters, and by his report, my Lord of Risingham
was sore bested, and lacked exceedingly your presence."

"How say you?  Sore bested?" returned the knight.  "Nay, then, we will
make speed sitting down, good Richard.  As the world goes in this poor
realm of England, he that rides softliest rides surest.  Delay, they say,
begetteth peril; but it is rather this itch of doing that undoes men;
mark it, Dick.  But let me see, first, what cattle ye have brought.
Selden, a link here at the door!"

And Sir Daniel strode forth into the village street, and, by the red glow
of a torch, inspected his new troops.  He was an unpopular neighbour and
an unpopular master; but as a leader in war he was well-beloved by those
who rode behind his pennant.  His dash, his proved courage, his
forethought for the soldiers' comfort, even his rough gibes, were all to
the taste of the bold blades in jack and salet.

"Nay, by the rood!" he cried, "what poor dogs are these?  Here be some as
crooked as a bow, and some as lean as a spear.  Friends, ye shall ride in
the front of the battle; I can spare you, friends.  Mark me this old
villain on the piebald!  A two-year mutton riding on a hog would look
more soldierly!  Ha!  Clipsby, are ye there, old rat?  Y' are a man I
could lose with a good heart; ye shall go in front of all, with a bull's
eye painted on your jack, to be the better butt for archery; sirrah, ye
shall show me the way."

"I will show you any way, Sir Daniel, but the way to change sides,"
returned Clipsby, sturdily.

Sir Daniel laughed a guffaw.

"Why, well said!" he cried.  "Hast a shrewd tongue in thy mouth, go to!
I will forgive you for that merry word.  Selden, see them fed, both man
and brute."

The knight re-entered the inn.

"Now, friend Dick," he said, "fall to.  Here is good ale and bacon.  Eat,
while that I read."

Sir Daniel opened the packet, and as he read his brow darkened.  When he
had done he sat a little, musing.  Then he looked sharply at his ward.

"Dick," said he, "Y' have seen this penny rhyme?"

The lad replied in the affirmative.

"It bears your father's name," continued the knight; "and our poor shrew
of a parson is, by some mad soul, accused of slaying him."

"He did most eagerly deny it," answered Dick.

"He did?" cried the knight, very sharply.  "Heed him not.  He has a loose
tongue; he babbles like a jack-sparrow.  Some day, when I may find the
leisure, Dick, I will myself more fully inform you of these matters.
There was one Duckworth shrewdly blamed for it; but the times were
troubled, and there was no justice to be got."

"It befell at the Moat House?" Dick ventured, with a beating at his
heart.

"It befell between the Moat House and Holywood," replied Sir Daniel,
calmly; but he shot a covert glance, black with suspicion, at Dick's
face.  "And now," added the knight, "speed you with your meal; ye shall
return to Tunstall with a line from me."

Dick's face fell sorely.

"Prithee, Sir Daniel," he cried, "send one of the villains!  I beseech
you let me to the battle.  I can strike a stroke, I promise you."

"I misdoubt it not," replied Sir Daniel, sitting down to write.  "But
here, Dick, is no honour to be won.  I lie in Kettley till I have sure
tidings of the war, and then ride to join me with the conqueror.  Cry not
on cowardice; it is but wisdom, Dick; for this poor realm so tosseth with
rebellion, and the king's name and custody so changeth hands, that no man
may be certain of the morrow.  Toss-pot and Shuttle-wit run in, but my
Lord Good-Counsel sits o' one side, waiting."

With that, Sir Daniel, turning his back to Dick, and quite at the farther
end of the long table, began to write his letter, with his mouth on one
side, for this business of the Black Arrow stuck sorely in his throat.

Meanwhile, young Shelton was going on heartily enough with his breakfast,
when he felt a touch upon his arm, and a very soft voice whispering in
his ear.

"Make not a sign, I do beseech you," said the voice, "but of your charity
tell me the straight way to Holywood.  Beseech you, now, good boy,
comfort a poor soul in peril and extreme distress, and set me so far
forth upon the way to my repose."

"Take the path by the windmill," answered Dick, in the same tone; "it
will bring you to Till Ferry; there inquire again."

And without turning his head, he fell again to eating.  But with the tail
of his eye he caught a glimpse of the young lad called Master John
stealthily creeping from the room.

"Why," thought Dick, "he is a young as I.  'Good boy' doth he call me?
An I had known, I should have seen the varlet hanged ere I had told him.
Well, if he goes through the fen, I may come up with him and pull his
ears."

Half an hour later, Sir Daniel gave Dick the letter, and bade him speed
to the Moat House.  And, again, some half an hour after Dick's departure,
a messenger came, in hot haste, from my Lord of Risingham.

"Sir Daniel," the messenger said, "ye lose great honour, by my sooth!
The fight began again this morning ere the dawn, and we have beaten their
van and scattered their right wing.  Only the main battle standeth fast.
An we had your fresh men, we should tilt you them all into the river.
What, sir knight!  Will ye be the last?  It stands not with your good
credit."

