inspired them: Love or Hate."

"Hate!" said Constantine gloomily; and Eusebius added sorrowfully

"In these dark days our Faith is seen under an aspect that by no means
fairly represents its true nature, noble lady; trust my words! Have you
not yourself seen, even in your short life, that what is highest and
greatest can in its excess, be all that is most hideous? A noble pride,
if not kept within bounds, becomes overweening ambition; the lovely
grace of humility degenerates into an indolent sacrifice of opinion and
will; high-hearted enterprise into a mad chase after fortune, in which
we ride down everything that comes in the way of success. What is nobler
than a mother's love, but when she fights for her child she becomes a
raving Megaera. In the same way the Faith--the consoler of hearts--turns
to a raging wild-beast when it stoops to become religious partisanship.
If you would really understand Christianity you must look neither down
to the deluded masses, and those ambitious worldlings who only use it
as a means to an end by inflaming their baser passions, nor up to the
throne, where power translates the impulse of a disastrous moment into
sinister deeds. If you want to know what true and pure Christianity is,
look into our homes, look at the family life of our fellow believers.
I know them well, for my humble functions lead me into daily and hourly
intercourse with them. Look to them if you purpose to give your hand to
a Christian and make your home with him. There, my child, you will
see all the blessings of the Saviour's teaching, love and soberness,
pitifulness to the poor and a real heart-felt eagerness to forgive
injuries. I have seen a Christian bestow his last crust on his hapless
foe, on the enemy of his house, on the Heathen or the Jew, because they,
too, are men, because our neighbor's woes should be as our own--I
have seen them taken in and cherished as though they were
fellow-Christians.--There you will find a striving after all that is
good, a never-fading hope in better days to come, even under the worst
afflictions; and when death requires the sacrifice of all that is
dearest, or swoops down on life itself, a firm assurance of the
forgiveness of sins through Christ. Believe me, mistress, there is no
home so happy as that of the Christian; for he who really apprehends the
Saviour and understands his teaching need not mar his own joys in this
life to the end that he may be a partaker of the bliss of the next.
On the contrary: He who called the erring to himself, who drew little
children to his heart, who esteemed the poor above the rich, who was
a cheerful guest at wedding-feasts, who bid us gain interest on the
spiritual talents in our care, who commanded us to remember Him at a
social meal, who opened hearts to love--He longed to release the life
of the humblest creature from want and suffering. Where love and peace
reign must there not be happiness? And as He preached love and peace
above all else, He cannot have desired that we should intentionally
darken our lives on earth and load them with sorrow and miseries in
order to will our share of Heaven. The soul that is full of the happy
confidence of being one with Him and his love, is released from the
bondage of sin and sorrow, even here below; for Jesus has taken all the
sins and pains of the world on himself; and if Fate visits the Christian
with the heaviest blows he bears them in silence and patience. Our Lord
is Love itself; neither hatred nor envy are known to Him as they are to
the gods of the Heathen; and when he afflicts us, it is as the wise and
tender pastor of our souls, and for our good. The omniscient Lord knows
his own counsel, and the Christian submits as a child does to a wise
father whose loving kindness he can always trust; nay, he can even thank
him for sorrow and pain as though they were pleasurable benefits."

Gorgo shook her head.

"That all sounds very beautiful and good; it is required of the
Christian, and sometimes, no doubt, fulfilled; but the Stoa demands the
same virtues of its disciples. You, Constantine, knew Damon the Stoic,
and you will remember how strictly he enjoined on all that they should
rise superior to pain and grief. And then, when his only daughter
lost her sight--she was a great friend of mine--he behaved like one
possessed. My father, too, has often spoken to you of philosophy as a
help to contemning the discomforts of life, and bearing the sports of
Fate with a lofty mind; and now? You should see the poor man, reverend
Father. What good have all the teachings of the great master done him?"

"But he has lost so much--so much!" sighed Constantine thinking of his
own loss; and Eusebius shook his head.

"In sorrow such as his, no philosophy, no mental effort can avail. The
blows that wound the affections can only be healed by the affections,
and not by the intellect and considerations of reason. Faith, child!
Faith is the true Herb of Grace. The intellect is its foe; the feelings
are its native soil where it finds constant nourishment; and however
deep the bleeding wound of the mourner may be, Faith can heal it and
reconcile the sufferer to his loss. You have been taught to value a fine
understanding, to measure everything by it, to build everything on its
decisions. To you the knowledge you have attained to by argument and
inference is supreme; but the Creator has given us a heart as well as
a brain; our affections, too, stir and grow in their own way, and the
knowledge they can attain to, my child, is Faith. You love--and Love
is part of your affections; and now take my advice; do not let that
reasoning intelligence, which has nothing to do with love, have anything
to say in the matter; cherish your love and nurture it from the
rich stores of your heart; thus only can it thrive to beauty and
harmony.--And this must suffice for to-day, for I have already kept the
wounded waiting too long in the Serapeum. If you desire it, another time
I will show you Christianity in all its depth and beauty, and your
love for this good man will prepare the way and open your heart to my
teaching. A day will come when you will be able to listen to the voice
of your heart as gladly as you have hitherto obeyed the dictates of your
intellect; something new will be born in you which you will esteem as
a treasure above all you ever acquired by reason and thought. That day
will assuredly dawn on you; for he whom you love has opened the path for
you that leads to the gates of Truth; and as you seek you will not fail
to find.--And so farewell. When you crave a teacher you have only to
come to him--and I know he will not have long to wait."

Gorgo looked thoughtfully at the old man as he went away and then went
with Constantine to see his parents. It was in total silence that they
made their way along the short piece of road to the house of Clemens.
Lights were visible in the viridarium and the curtains of the doorway
were drawn back; as they reached the threshold Constantine pointed to
a bier which had been placed in the little court among the flower-beds;
his parents were on their knees by the side of it.

Neither he nor Gorgo ventured to disturb their wordless devotions, but
presently the ship-master rose, drawing his fine, stalwart figure to its
full height; then turning his kind, manly, grave face to his wife, who
had also risen to her feet, he laid one hand on her still abundant white
hair and held out the other which she took in hers. Mariamne dried her
eyes and looked up, in her husband's face as he said firmly and calmly:

"The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away!' She hid her face on his
shoulder and responded sadly but fervently:

"Blessed be the name of the Lord!"

"Yea--Blessed!" repeated Clemens emphatically but he passed his arm
across his eyes. "For thirty-two years hath He lent him to us; and in
our hearts...." and he struck his broad breast, "in here, he will never
die for you or for me. As for the rest--and there was a deal of property
of our own and of other folks in these wood-piles--well, in time we
shall get over that. We may bless the Almighty for what we have left!"

Gorgo felt her lover's hand grasp hers more tightly and she understood
what he meant; she clung closer to him and whispered softly: "Yes, that
is grand--that is the Truth."




CHAPTER XXVIII.

In the great house in the Canopic street it was late ere all was quiet
for the night. Even Demetrius, in spite of his fatigue, broke through
his rule of "early to bed"; he felt he must see the reaping of the
harvest he had sown for his brother.

It had been no easy task to persuade Mary to accede to his
importunities, but to his great joy he at last succeeded.

He would have met with a rough dismissal if he had begun by praising
Dada and expressing his wish to see her married to Marcus; he had gained
his point inch by inch, very quietly; but when he had explained to her
that it was in his hands to secure the martyr's crown for her husband
she had turned suspicious and ironical, had made him swear that it was
true, threatening him with punishments in this world and in the next;
but he had let it all pass over his head, had solemnly sworn as she
desired him, pledging not merely the salvation of his soul but his
possessions in this world; till, at length, convinced that it really was
in his power to gratify the dearest wish of her heart, she had yielded
somewhat and altered her demeanor. Still, he had not spoken a word to
help her through her deliberations and bewilderment, but had left her
to fight out the hard struggle with her own soul; not without some
malicious enjoyment but also not without anxiety, till the first
decisive question was put to him by his stepmother.

She had heard that Dada was quite resolved to be baptized, and having
once more made sure of the fact that the girl was anxious to become a
Christian, she next asked:

"And it was Marcus who won her to the faith?"

"He alone."

"And you can swear that she is a pure-minded and well-conducted girl?"

"Certainly, with the firmest conviction."

"I saw her in the arena--she is pretty, uncommonly charming indeed--and
Marcus...?"

"He has set his heart on the girl, and I am sure that his passion is
sincere and unselfish. On the other hand I need hardly remind you that
in this city there are many women, even among those of the first rank,
whose birth and origin are far more doubtful than those of your
son's little friend, for she, at any rate, is descended from free and
respectable parents. Her uncle's connections are among the best families
in Sicily; not that we need trouble ourselves about that, for the wife
of Philip's grandson would command respect even if she were only a
freed-woman."

"I know, I know," murmured Mary, as though all this were of minor
importance in her eyes; and then for some little time she remained
silent. At last she looked up and exclaimed in a voice that betrayed the
struggle still going on in her soul:

"What have I to care for but my child's happiness? In the sight of God
we are all equal--great and small alike; and I myself am but a weak
woman, full of defects and sins--but for all that I could have wished
that the only son of a noble house might have chosen differently. All
I can say is that I must look upon this marriage as a humiliation laid
upon me by the Almighty--still, I give it my sanction and blessing, and
I will do freely and with my whole heart if my son's bride brings as her
marriage-portion the one thing which is the first and last aim of all my
desires: The everlasting glory of Apelles. The martyr's crown will open
the gates of Heaven to him--who was your father, too, Demetrius. Gain
that and I myself will lead the singer to my son's arms."

"That is a bargain!" cried Demetrius--and soon after midnight he had
retired to rest, after seeing Mary fulfil her promise to give a parental
blessing to the betrothed pair.

A few weeks later Dada and Gorgo were both baptized, and both by the
name of Cecilia; and then, at Mary's special entreaty, Marcus' marriage
was solemnized with much pomp by the Bishop himself.

Still, and in spite of the lavish demonstrations of more than motherly
affection which the widow showered her daughter-in-law, Dada felt a
stranger, and ill at ease in the great house in the Canopic way. When
Demetrius, a few weeks after their marriage, proposed Marcus that he
should undertake the management of family estates in Cyrenaica, she
jumped at the suggestion; and Marcus at once decided to act upon it
when his brother promised to remain with him for the first year or two,
helping him with his advice and instructions.

Their fears lest Mary should oppose the project, proved unfounded; for,
though the widow declared that life would be a burden to her without her
children, she soon acceded to her son's wishes and admitted that they
were kind and wise. She need not fear isolation, for, as the widow of
the martyred Apelles, she was the recognized leader of the Christian
sisterhood in the town, and preferred working in a larger circle than
that of the family. She always spoke with enthusiasm to her visitors
of her daughter-in-law Cecilia, of her beauty, her piety and her
gentleness; in fact, she did all she could to make it appear that she
herself had chosen her son's wife. But she did not care to keep this
"beloved daughter" with her in Alexandria, for the foremost position in
every department of social life was far more certain to be conceded to
the noble widow of a "martyred witness" in the absence of the pretty
little converted singer.

So the young couple moved to Cyrenaica, and Dada was happy in learning
to govern her husband's large estates with prudence and good sense. The
gay singing-girl became a capable housewife, and the idle horse-loving
Marcus a diligent farmer. For three years Demetrius staid with them as
adviser and superintendent; even afterwards he frequently visited them,
and for months at a time, and he was wont to say:

"In Alexandria I am heart and soul, a Heathen, but in the house with
your Cecilia I am happy to be a Christian."

Before they quitted the city a terrible blow fell on Eusebius. The
sermon he had delivered just before the overthrow of Serapes, to soothe
the excited multitude and guide them in the right way, had been regarded
by the Bishop of the zealot priests, who happened to be present, as
blasphemous and as pandering to the infidels; Theophilus, therefore, had
charged his nephew Cyril--his successor in the see--to verify the facts
and enquire into the deacon's orthodoxy. It thus came to light that
Agne, an Arian, was not only living under his roof, but had been trusted
by him to nurse certain sick persons among the orthodox; the old man
was condemned by Cyril to severe acts of penance, but Theophilus decided
that he must be deprived of his office in the city, where men of sterner
stuff were needed, and only allowed the charge of souls in a country
congregation.

It was a cruel blow to the venerable couple to be forced to quit the
house and the little garden where they had been happy together for half
a lifetime; however, the change proved to be to their advantage, for
Marcus invited his worthy teacher to be the spiritual pastor of his
estates. The churches he built for his peasants were consecrated by
Eusebius, whose mild doctrine and kindly influence persuaded many
laborers and slaves to be baptized and to join his flock of disciples.
But the example and amiability of their young mistress was even more
effectual than his preaching. Men and women, slaves and free, all adored
and respected her; to imitate her in all she did could only lead to
honor and happiness, could only be right and good and wise. Thus by
degrees, and without the exertion of any compulsion, the temples and
shrines on the Martyr's inheritance were voluntarily abandoned, and fell
into ruin and decay.

It was the same on the property of Constantine, which lay at no more
than a day's journey from that of Marcus; the two young couples were
faithful friends and good neighbors. The estate which had come into
Constantine's possession had belonged to Barkas, the Libyan, who, with
his troops, had been so anxiously and vainly expected to succor the
Serapeum. The State had confiscated his extensive and valuable lands,
and the young officer, after retiring from the service, had purchased
them with the splendid fortune left to Gorgo by her grandmother.

The two sons of Porphyrius had, as it proved, been so happy as to escape
in the massacre at Thessalonica; and as they were Christians and piously
orthodox, the old man transferred to them, during his lifetime,
the chief share of his wealth; so that henceforth he could live
honestly--alienated from the Church and a worshipper of the old gods,
without anxiety as to his will. The treasures of art which Constantine
and Gorgo found in the house of Barkas they carefully preserved, though,
ere long, few heathen were to be found even in this neighborhood which
had formerly been the headquarters of rebellion on behalf of the old
religion.

Papias was brought up with the children of Marcus and Dada Cecilia,
while his sister Agne, finding herself relieved of all care on his
account, sought and found her own way through life.

Orpheus, after seeing his parents killed in the fight at the Serapeum,
was carried, sorely wounded, to the sick-house of which Eusebius was
spiritual director. Agne had volunteered to nurse him and had watched
by his couch day and night. Eusebius had also brought Dada and Papias
to visit them, and Dada had promised, on behalf of Marcus, that Agne and
her brother should always be provided for, even in the event of the good
Deacon's death. The little boy was for the moment placed in Eusebius'
care, and it was a cause of daily rejoicing to Agne to hear from the
kind old man of all the charming qualities he discovered in the child
who was perfectly happy with the old folks, and who, though he was
always delighted to see his sister, was quite content to part from her
and return home with Eusebius, or with Dada, to whom he was devoted.

Orpheus recognized no one, neither Agne nor the child--and when
visitors had been to see him, in his fevered ravings he would talk more
vehemently than ever of great Apollo and other heathen divinities. Then
he would fancy that he was still fighting in the Serapeum and butchering
thousands of Christian foes with his own hand. Agne, whom he rarely
recognized for a moment, would talk soothingly to him, and even try to
say a few words about the Saviour and the life to come; but he always
interrupted her with blasphemous exclamations, and cursed and abused
her. Never had she gone through such anguish of soul as by his bed of
suffering, and yet she could not help gazing at his face; and when she
told herself that he must soon be no more, that the light of his eyes
would cease to shine on hers, she felt as though the sun were about
to be extinguished and the earth darkened for all time. However, his
healthy vigor kept him lingering for many days and nights.

On the last evening of his life he took Agne for a Muse, and calling to
her to come to him seized her hand and sank back unconscious, never to
move again. She stood there as the minutes slowly passed, waiting in
agonized suspense till his hand should be cold in hers; and as she
waited she overheard a dialogue between two deaconesses who were
watching by a sleeping patient. One of them was telling the other that
her sister's husband, a mason, had died an obdurate heathen and a bitter
enemy of the Christian Church. Then Dorothea, his widow, had devoted
herself to saving his soul; she left her children, abandoning them to
the charity of the congregation, and had withdrawn to a cloister to
pray in silence and unceasingly for the soul of her deceased husband.
At first he used to appear to her in her dreams, with furious gestures,
accompanied by centaurs and goat-footed creatures, and had desired her
to go home to her children and leave his soul in peace, for that he was
in very good quarters with the jolly devils; but soon after she had
seen him again with scorched limbs, and he lead implored her to pray
fervently for mercy on him, for that they were torturing him cruelly in
hell.

Dorothea had then retired into the desert of Kolzoum where she was still
living in a cave, feeding on herbs, roots, and shell-fish thrown up on
the sea-shore. She had schooled herself to do without sleep, and prayed
day and night for her husband's soul; and she lead obtained strength
never to think of anything but her own and her husband's salvation, and
to forget her children completely. Her fervid devotion had at length met
with full reward; for some little time her husband had appeared to her
in a robe of shining light and often attended by lovely angels.

Agne had not lost a word of this narrative, and when, next morning,
she felt the cold hand of the dead youth and looked at his drawn and
pain-stricken features, she shuddered with vague terrors: he, she
thought, like Dorothea's husband, must have hell-torments to endure.
When she presently found herself alone with the corpse she bent over it
and kissed the pale lips, and swore to herself that she would save his
soul.

That same evening she went back to Eusebius and told him of her wish
to withdraw to the desert of Koizoum and become a recluse. The old man
besought her to remain with him, to take charge of her little brother,
and not to abandon him and his old wife; for that it was a no less
lovely Christian duty to be compassionate and helpful, and cherish the
feeble in their old age. His wife added her entreaties and tears; but a
sudden chill had gripped Agne's heart; dry-eyed and rigid she resisted
their prayers, and took leave of her benefactors and of Papias.
Bare-foot and begging her way, she started for the south-east and
reached the shores of the Red Sea. There she found the stonemason's
widow, emaciated and haggard, with matted hair, evidently dying. Agne
remained with her, closed her eyes, and then lived on as Dorothea had
lived, in the same cave, till the fame of her sanctity spread far beyond
the boundaries of Egypt.

When Papias had grown to man's estate and was installed as steward to
Demetrius, he sought his sister many times and tried to persuade her to
live with him in his new home; but she never would consent to quit her
solitary cell. She would not have exchanged it for a king's palace; for
