hard to endure, when he lectured us each apart, with all the authority
of a senior--told me that Eustace was dying, and that every mile he
traveled was hastening his end, laughing to scorn that one hope which
buoyed me up, the Dirkius could do more for him than any one else,
and almost commanding me to take him home again to Paris while it was
possible.

And he equally harassed Eustace the next morning with representations
of the folly of taking me away to Holland, and breaking off the
advantageous Poligny match, to gratify my headstrong opposition and
desire for a mesalliance, which would now happily be impossible, the
fellow having ruined himself.

The fellow entered at that moment with M. le Baron's coat and boots,
and Eustace could hardly repress a smile. We could not but rejoice when
Solivet took leave of us at the carriage door, very affectionate, but
shrugging his shoulders at our madness, and leaving a corporal and
his party to guard us to the frontier. They prolonged the sense of
constraint, and forced us to be very guarded with poor Clement, but
otherwise they were very useful. The inhabitants fancied us by turns
great princes or great criminals, or both, being escorted out of the
country. Once we were taken for the Queen escaping with the Cardinal,
another time for the Prince of Conde eloping with Mademoiselle; but any
way of soldiers secured for us plenty of civility, and the best food and
lodgings to be had. They pricked on our mules with a good-will, and when
one of them fell lame they scoured the neighbourhood to find another,
for which Eustace endeavoured to pay the just price, but I am afraid it
went into the corporal's pocket, and Clement never so nearly betrayed
himself as when he refused to share with the escort the reckoning of
which they stripped the landlord. Integrity in a Parisian valet was all
too suspicious! However, to us they behaved very well; and, if all we
heard were true, their presence may have saved us from being robbed, if
not murdered, long before we reached the frontier.




CHAPTER XXXIII. -- BRIDAL PEARLS



When once over the border, and our passports duly examined, we breathed
freely, and at our first resting-place Clement took out a suit of my
brother's clothes and appeared once more as a gentleman, except for
his short hair. He was able, whenever French would serve, to take the
management of our journey.

We finished it as before in a canal boat, and the rest of mind and body,
and the sense of approaching Millicent, certainly did Eustace good; the
hectic fever lessened, and though he slept little at night, he had much
good slumber by day, lying on cloaks on deck as we quietly glided along
the water, between the fields full of corn, with harvest beginning,
and the tall cocks of hay in the large fields, all plenty and high
cultivation, and peaceful industry, in contrast with the places we had
left devastated by civil war, and the famished population.

The comparison made Clement groan; and yet that canal journey had
a pensive joy about it, as we sat beside our sleeping brother and
conversed freely and fearlessly, as we had never been able to do for ten
minutes together in all the long years that we had loved one another.
There was something very sweet in the knowing that, exile as he was, he
and I must be all the world to one another. And so indeed it has been.
After our stormy beginning, our life has been well-nigh like our voyage
on that smooth Dutch stream.

However, the sorrows were not yet over, although at that time we trusted
that there would be healing for my dear brother in the very air of the
Hague. We landed on a fine August evening, and were at once recognized
by some of the English gentlemen who had little to do but to loiter
about the quays and see the barges come in. It rejoiced my heart to hear
my brother called Lord Walwyn again, instead of by his French title. Yet
therewith, it was a shock to see how changed they thought him since he
had left them a year before; but they vied with one another in helping
us, and we were soon housed in good lodgings. I knew what Eustace most
wished to learn, and asked, with as good an air of indifference as
I could assume, whether Vrow van Hunker were in the town. 'Vrow van
Hunker, the Providence of the Cavaliers?' asked one. 'No; she is at
her country-house, where she hath taken in there or four poor starving
ladies and parsons with their families.'

When I heard how she was using old Van Hunker's wealth--in providing
for our poor loyal folk, and especially for the clergy, pensioning some,
hospitably receiving others in her own house, and seeking employment
for others--I had to repent of all the scorn with which I had looked on
Millicent Wardour as a poor fickle creature, and now I had to own that
my brother's love had been as nearly worthy of him as any creature could
be.

Eustace would not, however, go to visit her until he had seen Dr.
Dirkius, to whom he repaired early the next day, having caused a hackney
coach to be ordered against his return, and bestowed Clement on an
English friend who could speak French well. For Eustace held that it
would be more fitting, in the sight of the world, for me to go with him
to visit Madame van Hunker.

The carriage was at the door when he came back from the physician's.
There never was anything to find fault with in his looks, and on this
day, with his light brown hair and beard freshly-trimmed and shinning,
his clear skin with the red colour in his cheek, and his bright eyes, in
their hollow caves, there was something so transparent and sublimated
in his aspect, that I thought that he looked more like a spirit than a
bridegroom. He was gave and silent by the way, and there was something
about him that withheld me from asking what Dirkius had said to him.

Thus we reached the entrance of the great double avenue, along which,
as we presently saw, two English clergymen were walking together in
conversation, and we saw a little farther on some children at play.

'This is well,' said Eustace, as he looked out. 'I thank God for this!
It will be all the better for her that such a good work is begun.'

'Nay,' said I, 'but what will the poor things do when she loses old
Hunkers's gold?'

'Sister,' said Eustace, 'I have left this too long, but I thought you
understood that I am never like to wed my poor Millicent.'

'Dirkius?' I said.

'Dirkius does but confirm what I have known ever since the spring, and
so have you too, Nan, that it would be a miracle should I be here after
this winter.'

I had known it by my inner conviction, and heard him say the like often
before; it was only a fancied outward hope that had been sustaining
me, and I could obey when he bade me look cheerfully on Millicent,
and remember the joy it was to him to see her at all, and, above all,
employed in such tasks as would bring comfort to her.

The great Dutch house seemed full of English. Gentlewomen were sitting
in the tapestried hall, spinning or working with their needle. We had
been known to one or two of them in former times, and while they greeted
us word was taken to Madame van Hunker that we were there, and a servant
brought us word to ask us to come to her in her own parlour. There, up
a few shallow steps, in a quiet, cool, wainscoted room, adorned with
Eastern porcelain on shelves, we found her with her little daughter at
her knee.

She met us at the door with a few faltering words, excusing herself for
having given us the trouble to come to her.

'Best so, Millicent,' said Eustace, and as he spoke she lifted her eyes
to his face and I saw a look of consternation pass over her features at
sight of his wasted looks; but I only saw it for a moment, for he put an
arm round her, and kissed her brow, as she hid her face against him.

The child, not contented with my embrace, ran and pulled his coat,
crying, 'My lord, my lord, I can speak English now;' and he stooped
to kiss her, while her mother turned to me with swimming eyes of mute
inquiry, as of one who saw her long-cherished hope fulfilled only for
her sorrow. She was less altered than had been feared. That smooth
delicacy of her skin was indeed lost which had made her a distinguished
beauty; but she still had a pair of eyes that made her far from
insignificant, and there was an innocence, candour, and pleading
sweetness in her countenance that--together, perhaps, with my pity--made
even me, who had hitherto never liked her, lover her heartily.

I heard little or nothing of what they said to one another, being
employed in keeping the child from them. She prattled freely in English,
and was pleased to show me her baby-house, a marvel of Dutch neatness
of handiwork, like that one which Madame van Hunker brought you, my
daughter Peggy, when you were a little one. The doll we had given her
had, however, the place of honour. Her sister, little Emilia told me,
was married a month ago, and she was proceeding to make the little Dutch
puppets in her baby-house enact the wedding, one being dressed in a
black gown and stiff ruff, like a Genevan minister, when she caught a
tone that made her cry out that mother was weeping, and stump across the
floor in her stout little shoes to comfort her, before I could hinder
her.

My brother and her mother set her down between them, and I had nought to
do but to put in order the baby-house, till a great bell clanged through
the house, which was the signal for dinner. Madame van Hunker was calmer
by that time, and let Eustace hand her down, and place her at the head
of the table, where she had around her no less than four families and
two widows of our poor exiled Cavaliers and clergy. We had not found
ourselves in so English a world for years past.

The hostess sat as one in a dream, doing her part like one moved by
wires, and eating scarce anything, while Eustace showed all his usual
courtliness of manner and grace. After dinner, he rested on a couch, as
was his wont, before going back, and Millicent drew me into her chamber
and wept on my neck, as she made me tell her all she had not been able
to learn from him.

He had been very tender with her, and tried to persuade her that it was
all for the best, and that there was happiness for them in the having no
one between them now. She, poor woman, would fain, as I saw, have thrown
aside all her houses and wealth to be his, and to tend him, were it
merely for a few weeks, and she felt as if her love was strong enough to
be his cure; but he had spoken of the cruel selfishness of giving away
her power of aiding all these our fellow-countrymen in order that they
two might come together for what he knew would be so brief a time.
Yet he had not taken all hope from her, for he had talked of their
reconsidering the matter if he were in better health after the winter,
and, meantime, they could see each other often.

Poor thing! I believe she expected the miracle that might make him yet
recover, and so she bore up, while Eustace was verily happy--having
lived, as it were, nearly into spiritual love, and left behind that
which had been earthly and corporeal, and thus he was content to rest.
He had strained himself very hard to accomplish the journey, bring
Clement and me into safety, and see Millicent again, and when the effort
ceased, we fully saw, for the first time, how great it had been, and
how far he was gone on that other journey. I do not think he crossed
the threshold of our lodging half a dozen times after our arrival; but
Millicent came into her town-house, and was with him every day. She had
fitted the great dining chamber of that town-house as a chapel for our
English service, and my brother went thither on two Sundays, on the
second of which he saw M. Darpent received into our English Protestant
Church. Clement had long inclined that way, having never forgotten the
Huguenot training of his childhood, and the studies he had made, when
his mother impelled him towards Port Royal, having resulted in farther
doubts and yearning towards what Eustace had told him of our doctrine.
Conversation with the learned Dr. Elson, one of our exiled divines, had
completed the work, though he made his profession with pain and grief,
feeling it a full severance from his country and his mother.

And the last time my dear brother left the house was to give me to his
friend. He was anxious that I should be Clement's wife before he
left me, and there was no fear that we should starve, for, through
trustworthy merchants, a small amount of the Darpent money had been
transmitted to him before the State laid hands on his property as that
of a fugitive. He might have bought himself a share in one of the
great trading houses, or have--which tempted him most--gone out to the
plantations in the new countries of Java or America; but Eustace
prayed him to pledge himself to nothing until he should hear from Harry
Merrycourt, to whom my brother had sent a letter before quitting Paris.

We would have had a quiet wedding, but Eustace was resolved, as he said,
that all the world should know that it was not done in a corner, and
Madame van Hunker WOULD give the wedding feast, and came to dress me for
my bridal. You know the dress: the white brocade with hyacinth flowers
interwoven in the tissue--and when she had curled my hair after her
fancy, she kissed me and clasped round my neck the pearls of Ribaumont.
I told her I would wear them then to please her and Eustace, and, in
truth, I knew in my heart that I was the last true Ribaumont bride
that ever would wear them. We were wedded in the chapel in Madame van
Hunker's house; and the Princess-Royal was there, and the Duke of York,
and my Lord and Lady of Newcastle, and I know not who besides--only
remembering that they all knew how to treat Clement as a man of
distinction, who had, like them, given up all for conscience sake, and
he, in his plain lawyer's suit, with his fine, clear-cut face and grave
eyes, looked, even in spite of his close-cropped head, as veritable a
gentleman as any of them. The festivities ended the dinner, that being
as much as my brother was able for. We went quietly back to our lodgings
in Millicent's coach, and Eustace went to rest on his bed, till she
should have bidden farewell to her guests and could come and sup with
us; but he and Clement forbade me to take off my finery, for it tickled
their eyes.

And thus, when tidings came to the door that a gentlemen from England
desired to see my Lord Walwyn, Harry Merrycourt, after all these years
of seeing nothing but sad-coloured Puritan dames, came in upon this
magnificent being in silvered brocade.

He said he thought he had stumbled on the Princess-Royal at least, and
it was a descent to hear it was only plain Mistress Darpent! Harry had
a good wife of his own by that time, who suited him far better than I
should have done. Indeed, I believe he had only thought of wedding me to
relieve my family from me. And when he saw how unlike M. Darpent was to
all he had ever thought or believed of Frenchmen, and heard how well he
spoke English, and how he had borne himself at Paris, he quite forgave
me, and only thought how he could serve Eustace, the man whom he had
always loved beyond all others.

He was practicing law in London still, but he had had time to repent of
having been on the wrong side when he saw what it had come to, and
had the Protector at the head of affairs. He said, however, that
negotiations for peace with France were like to begin, and that Mr.
Secretary Milton was casting about for one learned in French law to
assist in drawing the papers, so that he had little doubt that Mr.
Darpent would be readily taken into one of the public officers in
London.

Moreover, he said that the Walwyn property had been sequestered, but no
one had yet purchased it, and he thought that for a fair sum, it might
be redeemed for the family.

When Eustace and Millicent found that I would not hear of keeping
the pearls, declaring that such things were not fit for a poor exiled
lawyer's wife, Millicent said they had always felt like hot lead on her
neck. To compound the matter, Eustace persuaded her to have the chaplet
valued by a Dutch jeweller, and to ask Margaret and Solivet, the
guardians of the young Marquis de Nidemerle, to purchase them for him.

To Margaret was left whatever of the property M. Poligny would spare,
and if Gaspard should have sons, one would bear the title of Ribaumont,
though the name would be extinct. So it was fitting that the pearls
should return to that family, and the fair value, as we hoped, sufficed,
in Harry Merrycourt's hands, to redeem, in my husband's name, the
inheritance my brother had always destined for me.

This was the last worldly care that occupied our believed brother.
He said his work was done, and he was very peaceful and at rest. His
strength failed very fast after Harry Merrycourt came. Indeed, I
think he had for months lived almost more by force of strong will than
anything else, and now he said he had come to his rest. He passed
away one month after my wedding, on the 16th of October 1652, very
peacefully, and the last look he gave any one here was for Millicent.
There was a last eager, brighter look, but that was for nothing here.

The physicians said he died of the old wound in the lungs received at
Naseby, so that he gave his life as much for the cause as my father and
Berenger had done, though he had had far, far more to suffer in his nine
years of banishment.

We left him in a green churchyard by the waterside, and Millicent saying
through her tears that he had taught her to find comfort in her married
life, and that he had calmed her and left her peace and blessing now in
the work before her. And then we sailed with sore hearts for England,
which was England still to me, though sadly changed from what I had once
known it. We had come to think that there was no hope of the right cause
ever prevailing, and that all that could be done was to save our own
conscience, and do our best to serve God and man. 'The foundations are
cast down, and what hath the righteous done?'

We were met by Harry Merrycourt, who had obtained the employment
for Clement that he had hoped for. It was well, for, when Walwyn was
repurchased, all our money had been sunk in it, and enough borrowed to
consume the rents for some years to come, and thus we had to live very
frugally in a little house in Westminster; but as for that, I was far
happier marketing in the morning with my basket on my arm, cooking my
husband's supper, making his shirts, and by and by nursing my babe, than
ever I had been in all the stiff state and splendour of poor Margaret's
fine salons. Camlet suits me better than brocade, and a basket of fresh
eggs better than a gold-enamelled snuff-box. While, though I did long to
see the old home again, I knew it would be bare of those who had made it
dear, and, besides, it would be as well that M. Darpent should rub off
as much as might be of his French breeding before showing him among
the Thistlewoods and Merrycourts, and all the rest of our country-folk.
Moreover, after the stir of Paris he might have found himself dull, and
he had the opportunity of studying English law; ay, and I saw him yearly
winning more and more trust and confidence among those who had to do
with him, and forming friendships with Mr. John Evelyn and other good
men.

So, when better times came round, and we had our King and Court back, on
the very day of my Harry's birth, M. Darpent was recommended to my Lord
Clarendon as too useful a secretary to be parted with, and therewith
the great folk remembered that I came of an old Cavalier family. Indeed
Queen Henrietta had promised my mother and sister to seek me out, though
may be she would never have recollected it. After all it was the Duke
of Gloucester who actually came and found me, riding up to our door with
only one gentleman, and he no other than good old Sir Francis Ommaney.

Prince Henry was a fine youth, far handsomer and more like his blessed
father than his brothers, and with as bright a wit and as winning and
gracious as the King. He reproached me for not having come to see his
mother, and asked merrily if I had turned Roundhead as well Frondeuse.
I told him I had a good excuse, and showed him my three children, the
youngest not yet a month old, and the other two staring open-mouthed to
see a Prince so like other gentlemen.

Whereupon he asked if the little one was yet christened, and did him the
honour to offer to be his godfather; and he noted that little Eustace
promised to be like his uncle, and spake, with tears in his eyes, of the
blessing my brother had been to him in his earlier stay at Paris, and
how the remembrance of that example had helped him through the days when
he had to undergo the same persuasions to forsake his father's Church.

So whereas the two first christenings had been done privately, as
among those under persecution, Master Harry was baptized in state and
splendour in St. Margaret's Church in full and open day, with all the
neighbours gaping to see the Duke come forth, leading Mistress Darpent
by the hand.

Thus I had to turn out my fine gowns (grown all too tight for me) and
betake me to the Queen, who had become a little old woman, but was as
gay and kind as ever, and told me much about my mother and sister. The
King himself came and spoke to me, and said he supposed I wished to have
the old title revived; but I told him, with all thanks, that I liked
my husband better by his own name than by that which I had rather leave
sacred to my brother; whereat he laughed, and said he must make a low
bow to me, as being the first person he had met who had nothing to ask
from him.

That was all I saw of the Court. Before many weeks had passed the cruel
smallpox had carried off the young Duke of Gloucester in his twentieth
year, taking him, mayhap, from the evil to come, in his bright youth
and innocence, for had he lived, and kept himself unsoiled even to these
days, he might have been sorely tempted to break that last promise made
when he sat on his father's knee.

Soon after Madame van Hunker came to England. There was Wardour
property, which had descended to her, and she was glad to have a good
cause for bringing her daughter Emilia to England. My children all knew
and loved the fair and saint-like lady full of alms-deeds, and with
the calm face that always was ready with comfort and soothing. The very
sight of it would rest the fretful, hasty spirit; and I was thankful
indeed that when Emilia married, her mother still abode near to us--I
felt her like my guardian spirit.

My husband kept his post till my Lord Clarendon went out and the Cabal
came in, and then, not liking those he had to work with, he gave up his
office, and we retired into the country, while our children were still
young enough to grow up in the love to Walwyn that I had always felt.




CHAPTER XXXIV. -- ANNORA'S HOME



It seemed as if I had scarcely time to understand what was the meaning
of my party with my beloved brother and sister. My poor Cecile was still
so ill that I could hardly attend to anything else, and when I returned
in the morning I found that, missing me, she had fallen into another
crisis, and that all the danger was renewed.

However, the poor frail creature lived, little as she cared to do so,
except to pray for the soul of the husband to whom her whole being had
been given, ever since they had wedded her to him as a mere child. It
was well that I had her to attend to, or my home would have seemed very
desolate to me, empty as it now was of my brother and sister, and with
my mother spending her time between her Queen and her favourite convent.
Happily for me there was no longer required to be in waiting, but was
free to finish his education. Indeed, I believe the Queen had found out
that Gaspard had put into King Louis's head certain strange ideas about
sovereigns and subjects, so that she was glad to keep him at a distance.
Queen Henrietta bade me take care what I was doing. Thus Cardinal
Mazarin being absent, and the events of former years not brought to
mind, it was possible to obtain permission to retire for a time to our
estates. Indeed I fancy it was meant to disgrace two such Frondeuses as
we were supposed to have been.

Cecile recovered something like health in the country, but she would
not hear of doing anything save entering a convent. She longed to
be constantly praying for her husband, and she felt herself utterly
incapable of coping with the world, or educating her son. She took
her little girl with her to be a pensionnaire at the Visitation, and
entrusted her boy to me, to be brought up with mine. They have indeed
always been like brothers, and to me the tenderest and most dutiful of
sons. Maurice d'Aubepine never ceased to love his own mother, but as a
sort of saint in a shrine, and he used to say that when he went to see
her he always felt more as if he had been worshipping than making a
visit.

