suffered and might yet have to suffer, and above all things dreading
the consciousness that men were talking of him and staring at him. In
this mood he was preparing to leave the coach when he found himself
approaching near to that Buttevant stage; but he had more to go
through at present than he expected.

"There's his honour--Hurrah! God bless his sweet face that's come
among us agin this day! Hurrah for Sir Herbert, boys! hurrah! The
rail ould Fitzgerald 'll be back agin among us, glory be to God and
the Blessed Virgin! Hurrah for Sir Herbert!" and then there was a
shout that seemed to be repeated all down the street of Buttevant.

But that was nothing to what was coming. Herbert, when he first heard
this, retreated for a moment back into the coach. But there was
little use in that. It was necessary that he should descend, and had
he not done so he would have been dragged out. He put his foot on the
steps, and then found himself seized in the arms of a man outside,
and pressed and embraced as though he had been a baby.

"Ugh, ugh, ugh!" exclaimed a voice, the owner of which intended to
send forth notes of joy; but so overcome was he by the intensity of
his own feelings that he was in nowise able to moderate his voice
either for joy or sorrow. "Ugh, ugh, ugh! Eh! Sir Herbert! but it's I
that am proud to see yer honour this day,--wid yer ouwn name, wid yer
ouwn name. Glory be to God; oh dear! oh dear! And I knew the Lord'd
niver forgit us that way, and let the warld go intirely wrong like
that. For av you weren't the masther, Sir Herbert, as you are, the
Lord presarve you to us, divil a masther'd iver be able to hould a
foot in Castle Richmond, and that's God's ouwn thruth."

"And that's thrue for you, Richard," said another, whom Herbert in
the confusion could not recognize, though his voice was familiar to
him. "'Deed and the boys had it all made out. But what matthers now
Sir Herbert's back?"

"And God bless the day and the hour that he came to us!" And then
leaving his master's arm and coat to which he had still stuck, he
began to busy himself loudly about the travelling gear. "Coachman,
where's Sir Herbert's portmantel? Yes; that's Sir Herbert's hat-box.
'Deed, an' I ought to know it well. And the black bag; yes, that'll
be Sir Herbert's, to be sure," and so on.

Nor was this all. The name seemed to run like wildfire through all
the Buttevantians there assembled; and no sound seemed to reach our
hero's name but that of Sir Herbert, Sir Herbert. Everybody took hold
of him, and kissed his hand, and pulled his skirts, and stroked his
face. His hat was knocked off, and put on again amid thousands of
blessings. It was nearly dark, and his eyes were dazed by the coach
lanterns which were carried about, so that he could hardly see his
friends; but the one sound which was dinned into his ears was that of
Sir Herbert, Sir Herbert.

Had he thought about it when starting from Dublin early that morning
he would have said that it would have killed him to have heard
himself so greeted in the public street, but as it was he found
that he got over it very easily. Before he was well seated on his
car it may be questioned whether he was not so used to his name,
that he would have been startled to hear himself designated as Mr.
Fitzgerald. For half a minute he had been wretched, and had felt
a disgust at poor Richard which he thought at the moment would be
insuperable; but when he was on the car, and the poor fellow came
round to tuck the apron in under his feet, he could not help giving
him his hand, and fraternizing with him.

"And how is my mother, Richard?"

"'Deed then, Sir Herbert, me lady is surprising--very quiet-like; but
her leddyship was always that, and as sweet to them as comes nigh her
as flowers in May; but sure that's nathural to her leddyship."

"And, Richard--"

"Yes, Sir Herbert."

"Was Mr. Owen over at Castle Richmond since I left?"

"Sorrow a foot, Sir Herbert. Nor no one ain't heard on him, nor seen
him. And I will say this on him--"

"Don't say anything against him, Richard."

"No, surely not, seeing he is yer honour's far-away cousin, Sir
Herbert. But what I war going to say warn't agin Mr. Owen at all,
at all. For they do say that cart-ropes wouldn't have dragged him
to Castle Richmond; and that only yer honour has come back to yer
own,--and why not?--there wouldn't have been any masther in Castle
Richmond at all, at all. That's what they do say."

"There's no knowing how it will go yet, Richard."

"'Deed, an' I know how it 'll go very well, Sir Herbert, and so does
Mr. Somers, God bless him! 'Twas only this morning he tould me. An',
faix, it's he has the right to be glad."

"He is a very old friend."

"So is we all ould frinds, an' we're all glad--out of our skins wid
gladness, Sir Herbert. 'Deed an' I thought the eend of the warld had
come when I heerd it, for my head went round and round and round as I
stood in the stable, and only for the fork I had a hould of, I'd have
been down among the crathur's legs."

And then it struck Herbert that as they were going on he heard the
footsteps of some one running after the car, always at an equal
distance behind them. "Who's that running, Richard?"

"Sure an' that's just Larry Carson, yer honour's own boy, that minds
yer honour's own nag, Sir Herbert. But, faix, I suppose ye'll be
having a dozen of 'em now."

"Stop and take him up; you've room there."

"Room enough, Sir Herbert, an' yer honour's so good. Here, Larry, yer
born fool, Sir Herbert says ye're to get up. He would come over, Sir
Herbert, just to say he'd been the first to see yer honour."

"God--bless--yer honour--Sir Herbert," exclaimed the poor fellow, out
of breath, as he took his seat. It was his voice that Sir Herbert
had recognized among the crowd, angry enough at that moment. But in
future days it was remembered in Larry Carson's favour, that he had
come over to Castle Richmond to see his master, contented to run the
whole road back to Castle Richmond behind the car. A better fate,
however, was his, for he made one in the triumphal entry up the
avenue.

When they got to the lodge it was quite dark--so dark that even
Richard, who was experienced in night-driving, declared that a cat
could not see. However, they turned in at the great gates without any
accident, the accustomed woman coming out to open them.

"An' is his honour there thin?" said the woman; "and may God bless
you, Sir Herbert, and ye're welcome back to yer own; so ye are!"

And then a warm large hand was laid upon his leg, and a warm voice
sounded greeting in his ear. "Herbert, my boy, how are you? This is
well, is it not?" It was Mr. Somers who had been waiting there for
him at the lodge gate.

Upon the whole he could not but acknowledge to himself that it was
well. Mr. Somers got up beside him on the car, so that by this time
it was well laden. "And how does my mother take it?" Herbert asked.

"Very quietly. Your Aunt Letty told me that she had spent most of her
time in prayer since she heard it. But Miss Letty seems to think that
on your account she is very full of joy."

"And the girls?"

"Oh! the girls--what girls? Well, they must answer for themselves; I
left them about half an hour ago, and now you hear their voices in
the porch."

He did hear the voices in the porch plainly, though he could not
distinguish them, as the horse's feet and the car wheels rattled over
the gravel. But as the car stopped at the door with somewhat of a
crash, he heard Emmeline say, "There's Herbert," and then as he got
down they all retreated in among the lights in the hall.

"God bless your honour, Sir Herbert. An' it's you that are welcome
back this blessed night to Castle Richmond." Such and such like
were the greetings which met him from twenty different voices as
he essayed to enter the house. Every servant and groom about the
place was there, and some few of the nearest tenants,--of those who
had lived near enough to hear the glad tidings since the morning.
A dozen, at any rate, took his hands as he strove to make his
way through them, and though he was never quite sure about it, he
believed that one or two had kissed him in the dark. At last he found
himself in the hall, and even then the first person who got hold of
him was Mrs. Jones.

"And so you've come back to us after all, Mr. Herbert--Sir Herbert
I should say, begging your pardon, sir; and it's all right about my
lady. I never thought to be so happy again, never--never--never." And
then she retreated with her apron up to her eyes, leaving him in the
arms of Aunt Letty.

"The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away. Blessed be the name of
the Lord. Oh! Herbert, my darling boy. I hope this may be a lesson
and a warning to you, so that you may flee from the wrath to come."
Aunt Letty, had time been allowed to her, would certainly have
shown that the evil had all come from tampering with papistical
abominations; and that the returning prosperity of the house of
Castle Richmond was due to Protestant energy and truth. But much
time was not allowed to Aunt Letty, as Herbert hurried on after his
sisters.

As he had advanced they had retreated, and now he heard them in
the drawing-room. He began to be conscious that they were not
alone,--that they had some visitor with them, and began to be
conscious also who that visitor was. And when he got himself at last
into the room, sure enough there were three girls there, two running
forward to meet him from the fireplace to which they had retreated,
and the other lingering a little in their rear.

"Oh, Herbert!" and "oh, Herbert!" and then their arms were thrown
about his neck, and their warm kisses were on his cheeks--kisses not
unmixed with tears; for of course they began to cry immediately that
he was with them, though their eyes had been dry enough for the two
or three hours before. Their arms were about his neck, and their
kisses on his cheeks, I have said,--meaning thereby the arms and
kisses of his sisters, for the third young lady still lingered a
little in the rear.

"Was it not lucky Clara was here when the news came to us this
morning?" said Mary.

"Such difficulty as we have had to get her," said Emmeline. "It was
to have been her farewell visit to us; but we will have no more
farewells now; will we, Clara?"

And now at last he had his arm round her waist, or as near to that
position as he was destined to get it on the present occasion. She
gave him her hand, and let him hold that fast, and smiled on him
through her soft tears, and was gracious to him with her sweet words
and pleasant looks; but she would not come forward and kiss him
boldly as she had done when last they had met at Desmond Court.
He attempted it now; but he could get his lips no nearer to hers
than her forehead; and when he tried to hold her she slipped away
from him, and he continually found himself in the embraces of his
sisters,--which was not the same thing at all. "Never mind," he said
to himself; "his day would soon come round."

"You did not expect to find Clara here, did you?" asked Emmeline.

"I hardly know what I have expected, or not expected, for the last
two days. No, certainly, I had no hope of seeing her to-night."

"I trust I am not in the way," said Clara.

Whereupon he made another attempt with his arm, but when he thought
he had caught his prize, Emmeline was again within his grasp.

"And my mother?" he then said. It must be remembered that he had only
yet been in the room for three minutes, though his little efforts
have taken longer than that in the telling.

"She is up stairs, and you are to go to her. But I told her that we
should keep you for a quarter of an hour, and you have not been here
half that time yet."

"And how has she borne all this?"

"Why, well on the whole. When first she heard it this morning, which
she did before any of us, you know--"

"Oh, yes, I wrote to her."

"But your letter told her nothing. Mr. Somers came down almost
as soon as your letter was here. He had heard also--from Mr.
Prendergast, I think it was, and Mr. Prendergast said a great deal
more than you did."

"Well?"

"We thought she was going to be ill at first, for she became so very
pale,--flushing up sometimes for half a minute or so; but after an
hour or two she became quite calm. She has seen nobody since but us
and Aunt Letty."

"She saw me," said Clara.

"Oh, yes, you; you are one of us now,--just the same as ourselves,
isn't she, Herbert?"

Not exactly the same, Herbert thought. And then he went up stairs to
his mother.

This interview I will not attempt to describe. Lady Fitzgerald had
become a stricken woman from the first moment that she had heard that
that man had returned to life, who in her early girlhood had come to
her as a suitor. Nay, this had been so from the first moment that she
had expected his return. And these misfortunes had come upon her so
quickly that, though they had not shattered her in body and mind as
they had shattered her husband, nevertheless they had told terribly
on her heart. The coming of those men, the agony of Sir Thomas, the
telling of the story as it had been told to her by Mr. Prendergast,
the resolve to abandon everything--even a name by which she might
be called, as far as she herself was concerned, the death of her
husband, and then the departure of her ruined son, had, one may say,
been enough to destroy the spirit of any woman. Her spirit they had
not utterly destroyed. Her powers of endurance were great,--and she
had endured, still hoping. But as the uttermost malice of adversity
had not been able altogether to depress her, so neither did returning
prosperity exalt her,--as far as she herself was concerned. She
rejoiced for her children greatly, thanking God that she had not
entailed on them an existence without a name. But for herself, as
she now told Herbert, outside life was all over. Her children and
the poor she might still have with her, but beyond, nothing in this
world;--to them would be confined all her wishes on this side the
grave.

But nevertheless she could be warm in her greetings to her son. She
could understand that though she were dead to the world he need not
be so,--nor indeed ought to be so. Things that were now all ending
with her were but beginning with him. She had no feeling that taught
her to think that it was bad for him to be a man of rank and fortune,
the head of his family, and the privileged one of his race. It had
been perhaps her greatest misery that she, by her doing, had placed
him in the terrible position which he had lately been called upon to
fill.

"Dearest mother, it did not make me unhappy," he said, caressing her.

"You bore it like a man, Herbert, as I shall ever remember. But it
did make me unhappy,--more unhappy than it should have done, when we
remember how very short is our time here below."

He remained with his mother for more than an hour, and then returned
to the drawing-room, where the girls were waiting for him with the
tea-things arranged before them.

"I was very nearly coming up to fetch you," said Mary, "only that we
knew how much mamma must have to say to you."

"We dined early because we are all so upset," said Emmeline; "and
Clara must be dying for her tea."

"And why should Clara die for tea any more than any one else?" asked
Lady Clara herself.

I will not venture to say what hour it was before they separated for
bed. They sat there with their feet over the fender, talking about
things gone and things coming,--and there were so many of such things
for them to discuss! Even yet, as one of the girls remarked, Lady
Desmond had not heard of the last change, or if she had so heard, had
had no time to communicate with her daughter upon the subject.

And then Owen was spoken of with the warmest praise by them all, and
Clara explained openly what had been the full tenor of his intended
conduct.

"That would have been impossible," said Herbert.

"But it was not the less noble in him, was it?" said Clara, eagerly.
But she did not tell how Owen Fitzgerald had prayed that her love
might be given back to him, as his reward for what he wished to do on
behalf of his cousin. Now, at least, at this moment it was not told;
yet the day did come when all that was described,--a day when Owen
in his absence was regarded by them both among the dearest of their
friends.

But even on that night Clara resolved that he should have some meed
of praise. "Has he not been noble?" she said, appealing to him who
was to be her husband; "has he not been very noble?"

Herbert, too happy to be jealous, acknowledged that it was so.




CHAPTER XLIII.

PLAYING ROUNDERS.


My story is nearly at its close, and all readers will now know how
it is to end. Those difficulties raised by Mr. Die were all made to
vanish; and though he implored Mr. Prendergast over and over again
to go about this business with a moderated eagerness, that gentleman
would not consent to let any grass grow under his heels till he had
made assurance doubly sure, and had seen Herbert Fitzgerald firmly
seated on his throne. All that the women in Spinny Lane had told him
was quite true. The register was found in the archives of the parish
of Putney, and Mr. Prendergast was able to prove that Mr. Matthew
Mollett, now of Spinny Lane, and the Mr. Matthew Mollett then
designated as of Newmarket in Cambridgeshire, were one and the same
person; therefore Mr. Mollett's marriage with Miss Wainwright was
no marriage, and therefore, also, the marriage between Sir Thomas
Fitzgerald and that lady was a true marriage; all which things will
now be plain to any novel-reading capacity, mean as such capacity may
be in respect to legal law.

And I have only further to tell in respect to this part of my story,
that the Molletts, both father and son, escaped all punishment
for the frauds and villanies related in these pages--except such
punishment as these frauds and villanies, acting by their own innate
destructive forces and poisons, brought down upon their unfortunate
heads. For so allowing them to escape I shall be held by many to
have been deficient in sound teaching. "What!" men will say, "not
punish your evil principle! Allow the prevailing evil genius of your
book to escape scot free, without administering any of that condign
punishment which it would have been so easy for you to allot to them!
Had you not treadmills to your hand, and all manner of new prison
disciplines? Should not Matthew have repented in the sackcloth of
solitary confinement, and Aby have munched and crunched between his
teeth the bitter ashes of prison bread and water? Nay, for such
offences as those did you wot of no penal settlements? Were not
Portland and Spike Islands gaping for them? Had you no memory of
Dartmoor and the Bermudas?"

Gentle readers, no; not in this instance shall Spike Island or the
Bermudas be asked to give us their assistance. There is a sackcloth
harsher to the skin than that of the penal settlement, and ashes more
bitter in the crunching than convict rations. It would be sad indeed
if we thought that those rascals who escape the law escape also the
just reward of their rascality. May it not rather be believed that
the whole life of the professional rascal is one long wretched
punishment, to which, if he could but know it, the rations and
comparative innocence of Bermuda would be so preferable? Is he not
always rolling the stone of Sysiphus, gyrating on the wheel of Ixion,
hankering after the waters of Tantalus, filling the sieves of the
daughters of Danaus? He pours into his sieve stolen corn beyond
measure, but no grain will stay there. He lifts to his lips rich
cups, but Rhadamanthus the policeman allows him no moment for a
draught. The wheel of justice is ever going, while his poor hanging
head is in a whirl. The stone which he rolls never perches for a
moment at the top of the hill, for the trade which he follows admits
of no rest. Have I not said truly that he is hunted like a fox,
driven from covert to covert with his poor empty craving belly?
prowling about through the wet night, he returns with his prey, and
finds that he is shut out from his lair; his bloodshot eye is ever
over his shoulder, and his advanced foot is ever ready for a start;
he stinks in the nostrils of the hounds of the law, and is held by
all men to be vermin.

One would say that the rascal, if he but knew the truth, would
look forward to Spike Island and the Bermudas with impatience and
raptures. The cold, hungry, friendless, solitary doom of unconvicted
rascaldom has ever seemed to me to be the most wretched phase of
human existence,--that phase of living in which the liver can trust
no one, and be trusted by none; in which the heart is ever quailing
at the policeman's hat, and the eye ever shrinking from the
policeman's gaze. The convict does trust his gaoler, at any rate his
master gaoler, and in so doing is not all wretched. It is Bill Sikes
before conviction that I have ever pitied. Any man can endure to be
hanged; but how can any man have taken that Bill Sikes' walk and have
lived through it?

To such punishments will we leave the Molletts, hoping of the elder
one, that under the care of those ministering angels in Spinny Lane,
his heart may yet be softened; hoping also for the younger one that
some ministering angel may be appointed also for his aid. 'Tis a
grievous piece of work though, that of a ministering angel to such a
soul as his. And now, having seen them so far on their mortal career,
we will take our leave of both of them.

Mr. Prendergast's object in sparing them was of course that of saving
Lady Fitzgerald from the terrible pain of having her name brought
forward at any trial. She never spoke of this, even to Herbert,
allowing those in whom she trusted to manage those things for her
without an expression of anxiety on her own part; but she was not the
less thankful when she found that no public notice was to be taken of
the matter.

Very shortly after Herbert's return to Castle Richmond, it was
notified to him that he need have no fear as to his inheritance; and
it was so notified with the great additional comfort of an assuring
opinion from Mr. Die. He then openly called himself Sir Herbert, took
upon himself the property which became his by right of the entail,
and issued orders for the preparation of his marriage settlement.
During this period he saw Owen Fitzgerald; but he did so in the
presence of Mr. Somers, and not a word was then said about Lady
Clara Desmond. Both the gentlemen, Herbert and Mr. Somers, cordially
thanked the master of Hap House for the way in which he had behaved
to the Castle Richmond family, and in reference to the Castle
Richmond property during the terrible events of the last two months;
but Owen took their thanks somewhat haughtily. He shook hands warmly
enough with his cousin, wishing him joy on the arrangement of his
affairs, and was at first less distant than usual with Mr. Somers;
but when they alluded to his own conduct, and expressed their
gratitude, he declared that he had done nothing for which thanks were
due, and that he begged it to be understood that he laid claim to no
gratitude. Had he acted otherwise, he said, he would have deserved to
be kicked out of the presence of all honest men; and to be thanked
for the ordinary conduct of a gentleman was almost an insult. This he
said looking chiefly at Mr. Somers, and then turning to his cousin,
he asked him if he intended to remain in the country.

"Oh, certainly," said Herbert.

"I shall not," said Owen; "and if you know any one who will take a
lease of Hap House for ten or twelve years, I shall be glad to find a
tenant."

"And you, where are you going?"

"To Africa in the first instance," said he; "there seems to be some
good hunting there, and I think that I shall try it."

The new tidings were not long in reaching Desmond Court, and the
countess was all alone when she first heard them. With very great
difficulty, taking as it were the bit between her teeth, Clara had
managed to get over to Castle Richmond that she might pay a last
visit to the Fitzgerald girls. At this time Lady Desmond's mind was
in a terribly distracted state. The rumour was rife about the country
that Owen had refused to accept the property; and the countess
herself had of course been made aware that he had so refused. But she
was too keenly awake to the affairs of the world to suppose that such
a refusal could continue long in force; neither, as she knew well,
could Herbert accept of that which was offered to him. It might be
that for some years to come the property might be unenjoyed; the rich
fruit might fall rotten from the wall; but what would that avail to
her or to her child? Herbert would still be a nameless man, and could
never be master of Castle Richmond.

Nevertheless Clara carried her point, and went over to her friends,
leaving the countess all alone. She had now permitted her son to
return to Eton, finding that he was powerless to aid her. The young
earl was quite willing that his sister should marry Owen Fitzgerald;
but he was not willing to use any power of persuasion that he might
have, in what his mother considered a useful or legitimate manner.
He talked of rewarding Owen for his generosity; but Clara would have
nothing to do either with the generosity or with the reward. And so
Lady Desmond was left alone, hearing that even Owen, Owen himself,
had now given up the quest, and feeling that it was useless to have
any further hope. "She will make her own bed," the countess said to
herself, "and she must lie on it."

And then came this rumour that after all Herbert was to be the man.
It first reached her ears about the same time that Herbert arrived at
his own house, but it did so in such a manner as to make but little
impression at the moment. Lady Desmond had but few gossips, and in
a general way heard but little of what was doing in the country.
On this occasion the Caleb Balderston of her house came in, making
stately bows to his mistress, and with low voice, and eyes wide
open, told her what a gossoon running over from Castle Richmond had
reported in the kitchen of Desmond Court. "At any rate, my lady,
Mr. Herbert is expected this evening at the house;" and then Caleb
Balderston, bowing stately again, left the room. This did not make
much impression, but it made some.

And then on the following day Clara wrote to her: this she did after
deep consideration and much consultation with her friends. It would
be unkind, they argued, to leave Lady Desmond in ignorance on such
a subject; and therefore a note was written very guardedly, the
joint production of the three, in which, with the expression of many
doubts, it was told that perhaps after all Herbert might yet be the
man. But even then the countess did not believe it.

But during the next week the rumour became a fact through the
country, and everybody knew, even the Countess of Desmond, that all
that family history was again changed. Lady Fitzgerald, whom they had
all known, was Lady Fitzgerald still, and Herbert was once more on
his throne. When rumours thus became a fact, there was no longer any
doubt about the matter. The countryside did not say that, "perhaps
after all so and so would go in such and such a way," or that "legal
doubts having been entertained, the gentlemen of the long robe were
about to do this and that." By the end of the first week the affair
was as surely settled in county Cork as though the line of the
Fitzgeralds had never been disturbed; and Sir Herbert was fully
seated on his throne.

It was well then for poor Owen that he had never assumed the regalia
of royalty: had he done so his fall would have been very dreadful; as
it was, not only were all those pangs spared to him, but he achieved
at once an immense popularity through the whole country. Everybody
called him poor Owen, and declared how well he had behaved. Some
expressed almost a regret that his generosity should go unrewarded,
and others went so far as to give him his reward: he was to
marry Emmeline Fitzgerald, they said at the clubs in Cork, and a
considerable slice of the property was destined to give additional
charms to the young lady's hand and heart. For a month or so Owen
Fitzgerald was the most popular man in the south of Ireland; that is,
as far as a man can be popular who never shows himself.

And the countess had to answer her daughter's letter. "If this be
so," she said, "of course I shall be well pleased. My anxiety has
been only for your welfare, to further which I have been willing to
make any possible sacrifice." Clara when she read this did not know
what sacrifice had been made, nor had the countess thought as she
wrote the words what had been the sacrifice to which she had thus
alluded, though her heart was ever conscious of it, unconsciously.
And the countess sent her love to them all at Castle Richmond. "She
did not fear," she said, "that they would misinterpret her. Lady
Fitzgerald, she was sure, would perfectly understand that she had
endeavoured to do her duty by her child." It was by no means a
bad letter, and, which was better, was in the main a true letter.
According to her light she had striven to do her duty, and her
conduct was not misjudged, at any rate at Castle Richmond.

"You must not think harshly of mamma," said Clara to her future
mother-in-law.

"Oh no," said Lady Fitzgerald. "I certainly do not think harshly of
her. In her position I should probably have acted as she has done."
The difference, however, between them was this, that it was all
but impossible that Lady Fitzgerald should not sympathize with her
children, while it was almost impossible that the Countess of Desmond
should do so.

And so Lady Desmond remained all alone at Desmond Court, brooding
over the things as they now were. For the present it was better that
Clara should remain at Castle Richmond, and nothing therefore was
said of her return on either side. She could not add to her mother's
comfort at home, and why should she not remain happy where she was?
She was already a Fitzgerald in heart rather than a Desmond; and
was it not well that she should be so? If she could love Herbert
Fitzgerald, that was well also. Since the day on which he had
appeared at Desmond Court, wet and dirty and wretched, with a broken
spirit and fortunes as draggled as his dress, he had lost all claim
to be a hero in the estimation of Lady Desmond. To her those only
were heroes whose pride and spirit were never draggled; and such a
hero there still was in her close neighbourhood.

Lady Desmond herself was a woman of a mercenary spirit; so at least
it will be said and thought of her. But she was not altogether so,
although the two facts were strong against her that she had sold
herself for a title, and had been willing to sell her daughter for
a fortune. Poverty she herself had endured upon the whole with
patience; and though she hated and scorned it from her very soul, she
would now have given herself in marriage to a poor man without rank
or station,--she, a countess, and the mother of an earl; and that
she would have done with all the romantic love of a girl of sixteen,
though she was now a woman verging upon forty!

Men and women only know so much of themselves and others as
circumstances and their destiny have allowed to appear. Had it
perchance fallen to thy lot, O my forensic friend, heavy laden
with the wisdom of the law, to write tales such as this of mine,
how charmingly might not thy characters have come forth upon the
canvas--how much more charmingly than I can limn them! While, on the
other hand, ignorant as thou now tellest me that I am of the very
alphabet of the courts, had thy wig been allotted to me, I might have
gathered guineas thick as daisies in summer, while to thee perhaps
they come no faster than snow-drops in the early spring. It is all
in our destiny. Chance had thrown that terrible earl in the way of
the poor girl in her early youth, and she had married him. She had
married him, and all idea of love had flown from her heart. All idea
of love, but not all the capacity--as now within this last year or
two she had learned, so much to her cost.

Long months had passed since she had first owned this to herself,
since she had dared to tell herself that it was possible even for her
to begin the world again, and to play the game which women love to
play, once at least before they die. She could have worshipped this
man, and sat at his feet, and endowed him in her heart with heroism,
and given him her soft brown hair to play with when it suited her
Hercules to rest from his labours. She could have forgotten her
years, and have forgotten too the children who had now grown up to
seize the world from beneath her feet--to seize it before she herself
had enjoyed it. She could have forgotten all that was past, and have
been every whit as young as her own daughter. If only--!

It is so, I believe, with most of us who have begun to turn the hill.
I myself could go on to that common that is at this moment before me,
and join that game of rounders with the most intense delight. "By
George! you fellow, you've no eyes; didn't you see that he hadn't
put his foot in the hole. He'll get back now that long-backed,
hard-hitting chap, and your side is done for the next half-hour!" But
then they would all be awestruck for a while; and after that, when
they grew to be familiar with me, they would laugh at me because
I loomed large in my running, and returned to my ground scant of
breath. Alas, alas! I know that it would not do. So I pass by,
imperious in my heavy manhood, and one of the lads respectfully
abstains from me though the ball is under my very feet.

But then I have had my game of rounders. No horrible old earl with
gloating eyes carried me off in my childhood and robbed me of the
pleasure of my youth. That part of my cake has been eaten, and, in
spite of some occasional headache, has been digested not altogether
unsatisfactorily. Lady Desmond had as yet been allowed no slice of
her cake. She had never yet taken her side in any game of rounders.
But she too had looked on and seen how jocund was the play; she also
had acknowledged that that running in the ring, that stout hitting of
the ball, that innocent craft, that bringing back by her own skill
and with her own hand of some long-backed fellow, would be pleasant
to her as well as to others. If only she now could be chosen in at
that game! But what if the side that she cared for would not have
her?

But _tempus edax rerum_, though it had hardly nibbled at her heart or
wishes, had been feeding on the freshness of her brow and the bloom
of her lips. The child with whom she would have loved to play kept
aloof from her too, and would not pick up the ball when it rolled
to his feet. All this, if one thinks of it, is hard to bear. It is
very hard to have had no period for rounders, not to be able even to
look back to one's games, and to talk of them to one's old comrades!
"But why then did she allow herself to be carried off by the wicked
wrinkled earl with the gloating eyes?" asks of me the prettiest girl
in the world, just turned eighteen. Oh heavens! Is it not possible
that one should have one more game of rounders? Quite impossible, O
my fat friend! And therefore I answer the young lady somewhat grimly.
"Take care that thou also art not carried off by a wrinkled earl. Is
thy heart free from all vanity? Of what nature is the heroism that
thou worshippest?" "A nice young man!" she says, boldly, though in
words somewhat different. "If so it will be well for thee; but did I
not see thine eyes hankering the other day after the precious stones
of Ophir, and thy mouth watering for the flesh-pots of Egypt? Was
I not watching thee as thou sattest at that counter, so frightfully
intent? Beware!" "The grumpy old fellow with the bald head!" she said
shortly afterwards to her bosom friend, not careful that her words
should be duly inaudible.

Some idea that all was not yet over with her had come upon her poor
heart,--upon Lady Desmond's heart, soon after Owen Fitzgerald had
made himself familiar in her old mansion. We have read how that idea
was banished, and how she had ultimately resolved that that man whom
she could have loved herself should be given up to her own child when
she thought that he was no longer poor and of low rank. She could not
sympathize with her daughter,--love with her love, and rejoice with
her joy; but she could do her duty by her, and according to her
lights she endeavoured so to do.

But now again all was turned and changed and altered. Owen of Hap
House was once more Owen of Hap House only, but still in her eyes
heroic, as it behoved a man to be. He would not creep about the
country with moaning voice and melancholy eyes, with draggled dress
and outward signs of wretchedness. He might be wretched, but he would
still be manly. Could it be possible that to her should yet be given
the privilege of soothing that noble, unbending wretchedness? By no
means possible, poor, heart-laden countess; thy years are all against
thee. Girls whose mouths will water unduly for the flesh-pots of
Egypt must in after life undergo such penalties as these. Art thou
not a countess?

But not so did she answer herself. Might it not be possible? Ah,
might it not be possible? And as the question was even then being
asked, perhaps for the ten thousandth time, Owen Fitzgerald stood
before her. She had not yet seen him since the new news had gone
abroad, and had hardly yet conceived how it might be possible that
she should do so. But now as she thought of him there he was. They
two were together,--alone together; and the door by which he had
entered had closed upon him before she was aware of his presence.

"Owen Fitzgerald!" she said, starting up and giving him both her
hands. This she did, not of judgment, nor yet from passion, but of
impulse. She had been thinking of him with such kindly thoughts,
and now he was there it became natural that her greeting should be
kindly. It was more so than it had ever been to any but her son since
the wrinkled, gloating earl had come and fetched her.

"Yes, Owen Fitzgerald," said he, taking the two hands that were
offered to him, and holding them awhile; not pressing them as a man
who loved her, who could have loved her, would have done. "After all
that has gone and passed between us, Lady Desmond, I cannot leave the
country without saying one word of farewell to you."

"Leave the country!" she exclaimed. "And where are you going?"

As she looked into his face with her hands still in his,--for she did
not on the moment withdraw them, she felt that he had never before
looked so noble, so handsome, so grand. Leave the country! ah, yes;
and why should not she leave it also? What was there to bind her to
those odious walls in which she had been immolated during the best
half of her life?

"Where are you going?" she asked, looking almost wildly up at him.

"Somewhere very far a-field, Lady Desmond," he said; and then the
hands dropped from him. "You will understand at any rate that Hap
House will not be a fitting residence for me."

"I hate the whole country," said she, "the whole place hereabouts.
I have never been happy here. Happy! I have never been other than
unhappy. I have been wretched. What would I not give to leave it
also?"

"To you it cannot be intolerable as it will be to me. You have known
so thoroughly where all my hopes were garnered, that I need not tell
you why I must go from Hap House. I think that I have been wronged,
but I do not desire that others should think so. And as for you and
