
"I understand," said the Duke, "and will delay Master Chiffinch,--for
he, you must know, is my conductor,--no longer.--Well, Chiffinch, let
them drive on.--_Vogue la Galere!_" he exclaimed, as the carriage went
onward; "I have sailed through worse perils than this yet."

"It is not for me to judge," said Chiffinch; "your Grace is a bold
commander; and Christian hath the cunning of the devil for a pilot;
but----However, I remain your Grace's poor friend, and will heartily
rejoice in your extrication."

"Give me a proof of your friendship," said the Duke. "Tell me what you
know of Christian's familiar, as he calls her."

"I believe it to be the same dancing wench who came with Empson to my
house on the morning that Mistress Alice made her escape from us. But
you have seen her, my lord?"

"I?" said the Duke; "when did I see her?"

"She was employed by Christian, I believe, to set his niece at liberty,
when he found himself obliged to gratify his fanatical brother-in-law,
by restoring his child; besides being prompted by a private desire, as I
think, of bantering your Grace."

"Umph! I suspected so much. I will repay it," said the Duke. "But first
to get out of this dilemma.--That little Numidian witch, then, was his
familiar; and she joined in the plot to tantalise me?--But here we
reach Whitehall.--Now, Chiffinch, be no worse than thy word, and--now,
Buckingham, be thyself!"

But ere we follow Buckingham into the presence, where he had so
difficult a part to sustain, it may not be amiss to follow Christian
after his brief conversation with him. On re-entering the house, which
he did by a circuitous passage, leading from a distant alley, and
through several courts, Christian hastened to a low matted apartment, in
which Bridgenorth sat alone, reading the Bible by the light of a small
brazen lamp, with the utmost serenity of countenance.

"Have you dismissed the Peverils?" said Christian hastily.

"I have," said the Major.

"And upon what pledge--that they will not carry information against you
to Whitehall?"

"They gave me their promise voluntarily, when I showed them our armed
friends were dismissed. To-morrow, I believe, it is their purpose to
lodge informations."

"And why not to-night, I pray you?" said Christian.

"Because they allow us that time for escape."

"Why, then, do you not avail yourself of it? Wherefore are you here?"
said Christian.

"Nay, rather, why do _you_ not fly?" said Bridgenorth. "Of a surety, you
are as deeply engaged as I."

"Brother Bridgenorth, I am the fox, who knows a hundred modes of
deceiving the hounds; you are the deer, whose sole resource is in
hasty flight. Therefore lose no time--begone to the country--or rather,
Zedekiah Fish's vessel, the _Good Hope_, lies in the river, bound for
Massachusetts--take the wings of the morning, and begone--she can fall
down to Gravesend with the tide."

"And leave to thee, brother Christian," said Bridgenorth, "the charge of
my fortune and my daughter? No, brother; my opinion of your good faith
must be re-established ere I again trust thee."

"Go thy ways, then, for a suspicious fool," said Christian, suppressing
his strong desire to use language more offensive; "or rather stay where
thou art, and take thy chance of the gallows!"

"It is appointed to all men to die once," said Bridgenorth; "my life
hath been a living death. My fairest boughs have been stripped by the
axe of the forester--that which survives must, if it shall blossom, be
grafted elsewhere, and at a distance from my aged trunk. The sooner,
then, the root feels the axe, the stroke is more welcome. I had been
pleased, indeed, had I been called to bringing yonder licentious Court
to a purer character, and relieving the yoke of the suffering people of
God. That youth too--son to that precious woman, to whom I owe the
last tie that feebly links my wearied spirit to humanity--could I have
travailed with _him_ in the good cause!--But that, with all my other
hopes is broken for ever; and since I am not worthy to be an instrument
in so great a work, I have little desire to abide longer in this vale of
sorrow."

"Farewell, then, desponding fool!" said Christian, unable, with all
his calmness, any longer to suppress his contempt for the resigned and
hopeless predestinarian. "That fate should have clogged me with such
confederates!" he muttered, as he left the apartment--"this bigoted fool
is now nearly irreclaimable--I must to Zarah; for she, or no one, must
carry us through these straits. If I can but soothe her sullen temper,
and excite her vanity to action,--betwixt her address, the King's
partiality for the Duke, Buckingham's matchless effrontery, and my own
hand upon the helm, we may yet weather the tempest that darkens around
us. But what we do must be hastily done."

In another apartment he found the person he sought--the same who visited
the Duke of Buckingham's harem, and, having relieved Alice Bridgenorth
from her confinement there, had occupied her place as has been already
narrated, or rather intimated. She was now much more plainly attired
than when she had tantalised the Duke with her presence; but her dress
had still something of the Oriental character, which corresponded with
the dark complexion and quick eye of the wearer. She had the kerchief at
her eyes as Christian entered the apartment, but suddenly withdrew it,
and, flashing on him a glance of scorn and indignation, asked him what
he meant by intruding where his company was alike unsought for and
undesired.

"A proper question," said Christian, "from a slave to her master!"

"Rather, say, a proper question, and of all questions the most proper,
from a mistress to her slave! Know you not, that from the hour in which
you discovered your ineffable baseness, you have made me mistress of
your lot? While you seemed but a demon of vengeance, you commanded
terror, and to good purpose; but such a foul fiend as thou hast of late
shown thyself--such a very worthless, base trickster of the devil--such
a sordid grovelling imp of perdition, can gain nothing but scorn from a
soul like mine."

"Gallantly mouthed," said Christian, "and with good emphasis."

"Yes," answered Zarah, "I can speak--sometimes--I can also be mute; and
that no one knows better than thou."

"Thou art a spoiled child, Zarah, and dost but abuse the indulgence I
entertain for your freakish humour," replied Christian; "thy wits have
been disturbed since ever you landed in England, and all for the sake
of one who cares for thee no more than for the most worthless object who
walks the streets, amongst whom he left you to engage in a brawl for one
he loved better."

"It is no matter," said Zarah, obviously repressing very bitter emotion;
"it signifies not that he loves another better; there is none--no,
none--that ever did, or can, love him so well."

"I pity you, Zarah!" said Christian, with some scorn.

"I deserve your pity," she replied, "were your pity worth my accepting.
Whom have I to thank for my wretchedness but you?--You bred me up in
thirst of vengeance, ere I knew that good and evil were anything better
than names;--to gain your applause, and to gratify the vanity you had
excited, I have for years undergone a penance, from which a thousand
would have shrunk."

"A thousand, Zarah!" answered Christian; "ay, a hundred thousand, and a
million to boot; the creature is not on earth, being mere mortal woman,
that would have undergone the thirtieth part of thy self-denial."

"I believe it," said Zarah, drawing up her slight but elegant figure;
"I believe it--I have gone through a trial that few indeed could have
sustained. I have renounced the dear intercourse of my kind; compelled
my tongue only to utter, like that of a spy, the knowledge which my
ear had only collected as a base eavesdropper. This I have done for
years--for years--and all for the sake of your private applause--and
the hope of vengeance on a woman, who, if she did ill in murdering my
father, has been bitterly repaid by nourishing a serpent in her bosom,
that had the tooth, but not the deafened ear, of the adder."

"Well--well--well," reiterated Christian; "and had you not your
reward in my approbation--in the consequences of your own unequalled
dexterity--by which, superior to anything of thy sex that history has
ever known, you endured what woman never before endured, insolence
without notice, admiration without answer, and sarcasm without reply?"

"Not without reply!" said Zarah fiercely. "Gave not Nature to my
feelings a course of expression more impressive than words? and did not
those tremble at my shrieks, who would have little minded my entreaties
or my complaints? And my proud lady, who sauced her charities with the
taunts she thought I heard not--she was justly paid by the passing her
dearest and most secret concerns into the hands of her mortal enemy;
and the vain Earl--yet he was a thing as insignificant as the plume that
nodded in his cap;--and the maidens and ladies who taunted me--I had, or
can easily have, my revenge upon them. But there is _one_," she added,
looking upward, "who never taunted me; one whose generous feelings could
treat the poor dumb girl even as his sister; who never spoke word of her
but was to excuse or defend--and you tell me I must not love him, and
that it is madness to love him!--I _will_ be mad then, for I will love
till the latest breath of my life!"

"Think but an instant, silly girl--silly but in one respect, since
in all others thou mayest brave the world of women. Think what I have
proposed to thee, for the loss of this hopeless affection, a career so
brilliant!--Think only that it rests with thyself to be the wife--the
wedded wife--of the princely Buckingham! With my talents--with thy wit
and beauty--with his passionate love of these attributes--a short space
might rank you among England's princesses.--Be but guided by me--he
is now at deadly pass--needs every assistance to retrieve his
fortunes--above all, that which we alone can render him. Put yourself
under my conduct, and not fate itself shall prevent your wearing a
Duchess's coronet."

"A coronet of thistle-down, entwined with thistle-leaves," said
Zarah.--"I know not a slighter thing than your Buckingham! I saw him
at your request--saw him when, as a man, he should have shown himself
generous and noble--I stood the proof at your desire, for I laugh at
those dangers from which the poor blushing wailers of my sex shrink
and withdraw themselves. What did I find him?--a poor wavering
voluptuary--his nearest attempt to passion like the fire on a wretched
stubble-field, that may singe, indeed, or smoke, but can neither warm
nor devour. Christian! were his coronet at my feet this moment, I would
sooner take up a crown of gilded gingerbread, than extend my hand to
raise it."

"You are mad, Zarah--with all your taste and talent, you are utterly
mad! But let Buckingham pass--Do you owe _me_ nothing on this
emergency?--Nothing to one who rescued you from the cruelty of your
owner, the posture-master, to place you in ease and affluence?"

"Christian," she replied, "I owe you much. Had I not felt I did so, I
would, as I have been often tempted to do, have denounced thee to the
fierce Countess, who would have gibbeted you on her feudal walls of
Castle Rushin, and bid your family seek redress from the eagles, that
would long since have thatched their nest with your hair, and fed their
young ospreys with your flesh."

"I am truly glad you have had so much forbearance for me," answered
Christian.

"I have it, in truth and in sincerity," replied Zarah--"Not for your
benefits to me--such as they were, they were every one interested, and
conferred from the most selfish considerations. I have overpaid them a
thousand times by the devotion to your will, which I have displayed at
the greatest personal risk. But till of late I respected your powers of
mind--your inimitable command of passion--the force of intellect which I
have ever seen you exercise over all others, from the bigot Bridgenorth
to the debauched Buckingham--in that, indeed, I have recognised my
master."

"And those powers," said Christian, "are unlimited as ever; and with thy
assistance, thou shalt see the strongest meshes that the laws of civil
society ever wove to limit the natural dignity of man, broke asunder
like a spider's web."

She paused and answered, "While a noble motive fired thee--ay, a noble
motive, though irregular--for I was born to gaze on the sun which the
pale daughters of Europe shrink from--I could serve thee--I could
have followed, while revenge or ambition had guided thee--but love of
_wealth_, and by what means acquired!--What sympathy can I hold with
that?--Wouldst thou not have pandered to the lust of the King, though
the object was thine own orphan niece?--You smile?--Smile again when I
ask you whether you meant not my own prostitution, when you charged
me to remain in the house of that wretched Buckingham?--Smile at that
question, and by Heaven, I stab you to the heart!" And she thrust her
hand into her bosom, and partly showed the hilt of a small poniard.

"And if I smile," said Christian, "it is but in scorn of so odious an
accusation. Girl, I will not tell thee the reason, but there exists
not on earth the living thing over whose safety and honour I would
keep watch as over thine. Buckingham's wife, indeed, I wished thee; and
through thy own beauty and thy wit, I doubted not to bring the match to
pass."

"Vain flatterer," said Zarah, yet seeming soothed even by the flattery
which she scoffed at, "you would persuade me that it was honourable love
which you expected the Duke was to have offered me. How durst you urge
a gross a deception, to which time, place, and circumstance gave the
lie?--How dare you now again mention it, when you well know, that at the
time you mention, the Duchess was still in life?"

"In life, but on her deathbed," said Christian; "and for time, place,
and circumstance, had your virtue, my Zarah, depended on these, how
couldst thou have been the creature thou art? I knew thee all-sufficient
to bid him defiance--else--for thou art dearer to me than thou
thinkest--I had not risked thee to win the Duke of Buckingham; ay, and
the kingdom of England to boot. So now, wilt thou be ruled and go on
with me?"

Zarah, or Fenella, for our readers must have been long aware of the
identity of these two personages, cast down her eyes, and was silent for
a long time. "Christian," she said at last, in a solemn voice, "if my
ideas of right and of wrong be wild and incoherent, I owe it, first, to
the wild fever which my native sun communicated to my veins; next, to my
childhood, trained amidst the shifts, tricks, and feats of jugglers and
mountebanks; and then, to a youth of fraud and deception, through
the course thou didst prescribe me, in which I might, indeed, hear
everything, but communicate with no one. The last cause of my wild
errors, if such they are, originates, O Christian, with you alone; by
whose intrigues I was placed with yonder lady, and who taught me, that
to revenge my father's death, was my first great duty on earth, and
that I was bound by nature to hate and injure her by whom I was fed and
fostered, though as she would have fed and caressed a dog, or any other
mute animal. I also think--for I will deal fairly with you--that you had
not so easily detected your niece, in the child whose surprising agility
was making yonder brutal mountebank's fortune; nor so readily induced
him to part with his bond-slave, had you not, for your own purposes,
placed me under his charge, and reserved the privilege of claiming me
when you pleased. I could not, under any other tuition, have identified
myself with the personage of a mute, which it has been your desire that
I should perform through life."

"You do me injustice, Zarah," said Christian--"I found you capable
of the avenging of your father's death--I consecrated you to it, as I
consecrated my own life and hopes; and you held the duty sacred, till
these mad feeling towards a youth who loves your cousin----"

"Who--loves--my--cousin," repeated Zarah (for we will continue to call
her by her real name) slowly, and as if the words dropped unconsciously
from her lips. "Well--be it so!--Man of many wiles, I will follow thy
course for a little, a very little farther; but take heed--tease me not
with remonstrances against the treasure of my secret thoughts--I mean
my most hopeless affection to Julian Peveril--and bring me not as an
assistant to any snare which you may design to cast around him. You and
your Duke shall rue the hour most bitterly, in which you provoke me. You
may suppose you have me in your power; but remember, the snakes of my
burning climate are never so fatal as when you grasp them."

"I care not for these Peverils," said Christian--"I care not for their
fate a poor straw, unless where it bears on that of the destined woman,
whose hands are red in your father's blood. Believe me, I can divide
her fate and theirs. I will explain to you how. And for the Duke, he may
pass among men of the town for wit, and among soldiers for valour, among
courtiers for manners and for form; and why, with his high rank and
immense fortune, you should throw away an opportunity, which, as I could
now improve it----"

"Speak not of it," said Zarah, "if thou wouldst have our truce--remember
it is no peace--if, I say, thou wouldst have our truce grow to be an
hour old!"

"This, then," said Christian, with a last effort to work upon the vanity
of this singular being, "is she who pretended such superiority to human
passion, that she could walk indifferently and unmoved through the halls
of the prosperous, and the prison cells of the captive, unknowing and
unknown, sympathising neither with the pleasures of the one, nor the
woes of the other, but advancing with sure, though silent steps, her own
plans, in despite and regardless of either!"

"My own plans!" said Zarah--"_Thy_ plans, Christian--thy plans of
extorting from the surprised prisoners, means whereby to convict
them--thine own plans, formed with those more powerful than thyself, to
sound men's secrets, and, by using them as a matter of accusation, to
keep up the great delusion of the nation."

"Such access was indeed given you as my agent," said Christian, "and for
advancing a great national change. But how did you use it?--to advance
your insane passion."

"Insane!" said Zarah--"Had he been less than insane whom I addressed, he
and I had ere now been far from the toils which you have pitched for us
both. I had means prepared for everything; and ere this, the shores of
Britain had been lost to our sight for ever."

"The dwarf, too," said Christian--"Was it worthy of you to delude that
poor creature with flattering visions--lull him asleep with drugs! Was
_that_ my doing?"

"He was my destined tool," said Zarah haughtily. "I remembered your
lessons too well not to use him as such. Yet scorn him not too much.
I tell you, that yon very miserable dwarf, whom I made my sport in the
prison--yon wretched abortion of nature, I would select for a husband,
ere I would marry your Buckingham;--the vain and imbecile pigmy has yet
the warm heart and noble feelings, that a man should hold his highest
honour."

"In God's name, then, take your own way," said Christian; "and, for my
sake, let never man hereafter limit a woman in the use of her tongue,
since he must make it amply up to her, in allowing her the privilege of
her own will. Who would have thought it? But the colt has slipped the
bridle, and I must needs follow, since I cannot guide her."

Our narrative returns to the Court of King Charles at Whitehall.




CHAPTER XLVIII

                                   ----But oh!
          What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop; thou cruel,
          Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature!
          Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
          That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
          That almost mightst have coined me into gold,
          Wouldst thou have practised on me for thy use?
                                                   --HENRY V.

At no period of his life, not even when that life was in imminent
danger, did the constitutional gaiety of Charles seem more overclouded,
than when waiting for the return of Chiffinch with the Duke of
Buckingham. His mind revolted at the idea, that the person to whom he
had been so particularly indulgent, and whom he had selected as the
friend of his lighter hours and amusements, should prove capable of
having tampered with a plot apparently directed against his liberty
and life. He more than once examined the dwarf anew, but could extract
nothing more than his first narrative contained. The apparition of the
female to him in the cell of Newgate, he described in such fanciful and
romantic colours, that the King could not help thinking the poor man's
head a little turned; and, as nothing was found in the kettledrum, and
other musical instruments brought for the use of the Duke's band of
foreigners, he nourished some slight hope that the whole plan might be
either a mere jest, or that the idea of an actual conspiracy was founded
in mistake.

The persons who had been despatched to watch the motions of Mr. Weiver's
congregation, brought back word that they had quietly dispersed. It was
known, at the same time, that they had met in arms, but this augured
no particular design of aggression, at a time when all true Protestants
conceived themselves in danger of immediate massacre; when the fathers
of the city had repeatedly called out the Train-Bands, and alarmed the
citizens of London, under the idea of an instant insurrection of the
Catholics; and when, to sum the whole up, in the emphatic words of an
alderman of the day, there was a general belief that they would all
waken some unhappy morning with their throats cut. Who was to do these
dire deeds, it was more difficult to suppose; but all admitted the
possibility that they might be achieved, since one Justice of the Peace
was already murdered. There was, therefore, no inference of hostile
intentions against the State, to be decidedly derived from a
congregation of Protestants _par excellence_, military from old
associations, bringing their arms with them to a place of worship, in
the midst of a panic so universal.

Neither did the violent language of the minister, supposing that to be
proved, absolutely infer meditated violence. The favourite parables of
the preachers, and the metaphors and ornaments which they selected, were
at all times of a military cast; and the taking the kingdom of heaven
by storm, a strong and beautiful metaphor, when used generally as in
Scripture, was detailed in their sermons in all the technical language
of the attack and defence of a fortified place. The danger, in short,
whatever might have been its actual degree, had disappeared as suddenly
as a bubble upon the water, when broken by a casual touch, and had left
as little trace behind it. It became, therefore, matter of much doubt,
whether it had ever actually existed.

While various reports were making from without, and while their tenor
was discussed by the King, and such nobles and statesmen as he thought
proper to consult on the occasion, a gradual sadness and anxiety
mingled with, and finally silenced, the mirth of the evening. All became
sensible that something unusual was going forward; and the unwonted
distance which Charles maintained from his guests, while it
added greatly to the dulness that began to predominate in the
presence-chamber, gave intimation that something unusual was labouring
in the King's mind.

Thus play was neglected--the music was silent, or played without being
heard--gallants ceased to make compliments, and ladies to expect them;
and a sort of apprehensive curiosity pervaded the circle. Each asked the
others why they were grave; and no answer was returned, any more than
could have been rendered by a herd of cattle instinctively disturbed by
the approach of a thunderstorm.

To add to the general apprehension, it began to be whispered, that one
or two of the guests, who were desirous of leaving the palace, had been
informed no one could be permitted to retire until the general hour
of dismissal. And these, gliding back into the hall, communicated in
whispers that the sentinels at the gates were doubled, and that there
was a troop of the Horse Guards drawn up in the court--circumstances so
unusual, as to excite the most anxious curiosity.

Such was the state of the Court, when wheels were heard without, and
the bustle which took place denoted the arrival of some person of
consequence.

"Here comes Chiffinch," said the King, "with his prey in his clutch."

It was indeed the Duke of Buckingham; nor did he approach the royal
presence without emotion. On entering the court, the flambeaux which
were borne around the carriage gleamed on the scarlet coats, laced
hats, and drawn broadswords of the Horse Guards--a sight unusual, and
calculated to strike terror into a conscience which was none of the
clearest.

The Duke alighted from the carriage, and only said to the officer, whom
he saw upon duty, "You are late under arms to-night, Captain Carleton."

"Such are our orders, sir," answered Carleton, with military brevity;
and then commanded the four dismounted sentinels at the under gate to
make way for the Duke of Buckingham. His Grace had no sooner entered,
than he heard behind him the command, "Move close up, sentinels--closer
yet to the gate." And he felt as if all chance of rescue were excluded
by the sound.

As he advanced up the grand staircase, there were other symptoms of
alarm and precaution. The Yeomen of the Guard were mustered in unusual
numbers, and carried carabines instead of their halberds; and
the Gentlemen-pensioners, with their partisans, appeared also in
proportional force. In short, all that sort of defence which the royal
household possesses within itself, seemed, for some hasty and urgent
reason, to have been placed under arms, and upon duty.

Buckingham ascended the royal staircase with an eye attentive to these
preparations, and a step steady and slow, as if he counted each step
on which he trode. "Who," he asked himself, "shall ensure Christian's
fidelity? Let him but stand fast, and we are secure. Otherwise----"

As he shaped the alternative, he entered the presence-chamber.

The King stood in the midst of the apartment, surrounded by the
personages with whom he had been consulting. The rest of the brilliant
assembly, scattered into groups, looked on at some distance. All were
silent when Buckingham entered, in hopes of receiving some explanation
of the mysteries of the evening. All bent forward, though etiquette
forbade them to advance, to catch, if possible, something of what was
about to pass betwixt the King and his intriguing statesman. At the same
time, those counsellors who stood around Charles, drew back on either
side, so as to permit the Duke to pay his respects to his Majesty in the
usual form. He went through the ceremonial with his accustomed grace,
but was received by Charles with much unwonted gravity.

"We have waited for you some time, my Lord Duke. It is long since
Chiffinch left us, to request your attendance here. I see you are
elaborately dressed. Your toilette was needless on the present
occasion."

"Needless to the splendour of your Majesty's Court," said the Duke, "but
not needless on my part. This chanced to be Black Monday at York Place,
and my club of _Pendables_ were in full glee when your Majesty's summons
arrived. I could not be in the company of Ogle, Maniduc, Dawson, and so
forth, but what I must needs make some preparation, and some ablution,
ere entering the circle here."

"I trust the purification will be complete," said the King, without any
tendency to the smile which always softened features, that, ungilded by
its influence, were dark, harsh, and even severe. "We wished to ask your
Grace concerning the import of a sort of musical mask which you designed
us here, but which miscarried, as we are given to understand."

"It must have been a great miscarriage indeed," said the Duke, "since
your Majesty looks so serious on it. I thought to have done your
Majesty pleasure (as I have seen you condescend to be pleased with such
passages), by sending the contents of that bass-viol; but I fear
the jest has been unacceptable--I fear the fireworks may have done
mischief."

"Not the mischief they were designed for, perhaps," said the King
gravely; "you see, my lord, we are all alive, and unsinged."

"Long may your Majesty remain so," said the Duke; "yet I see there is
something misconstrued on my part--it must be a matter unpardonable,
however little intended, since it hath displeased so indulgent a
master."

"Too indulgent a master, indeed, Buckingham," replied the King; "and the
fruit of my indulgence has been to change loyal men into traitors."

"May it please your Majesty, I cannot understand this," said the Duke.

"Follow us, my lord," answered Charles, "and we will endeavour to
explain our meaning."

Attended by the same lords who stood around him, and followed by the
Duke of Buckingham, on whom all eyes were fixed, Charles retired into
the same cabinet which had been the scene of repeated consultations in
the course of the evening. There, leaning with his arms crossed on the
back of an easy-chair, Charles proceeded to interrogate the suspected
nobleman.

"Let us be plain with each other. Speak out, Buckingham. What, in one
word, was to have been the regale intended for us this evening?"

"A petty mask, my lord. I had destined a little dancing-girl to come
out of that instrument, who, I thought, would have performed to your
Majesty's liking--a few Chinese fireworks there were, thinking the
entertainment was to have taken place in the marble hall, might, I
hoped, have been discharged with good effect, and without the slightest
alarm, at the first appearance of my little sorceress, and were designed
to have masked, as it were, her entrance upon the stage. I hope there
have been no perukes singed--no ladies frightened--no hopes of noble
descent interrupted by my ill-fancied jest."

"We have seen no such fireworks, my lord; and your female dancer, of
whom we now hear for the first time, came forth in the form of our old
acquaintance Geoffrey Hudson, whose dancing days are surely ended."

"Your Majesty surprises me! I beseech you, let Christian be sent
for--Edward Christian--he will be found lodging in a large old house
near Sharper the cutler's, in the Strand. As I live by bread, sire,
I trusted him with the arrangement of this matter, as indeed the
dancing-girl was his property. If he has done aught to dishonour my
concert, or disparage my character, he shall die under the baton."

"It is singular," said the King, "and I have often observed it, that
this fellow Christian bears the blame of all men's enormities--he
performs the part which, in a great family, is usually assigned to that
mischief-doing personage, Nobody. When Chiffinch blunders, he always
quotes Christian. When Sheffield writes a lampoon, I am sure to hear of
Christian having corrected, or copied, or dispersed it--he is the _ame
damnee_ of every one about my Court--the scapegoat, who is to carry away
all their iniquities; and he will have a cruel load to bear into the
wilderness. But for Buckingham's sins, in particular, he is the regular
and uniform sponsor; and I am convinced his Grace expects Christian
should suffer every penalty he has incurred, in this world or the next."

"Not so," with the deepest reverence replied the Duke. "I have no hope
of being either hanged or damned by proxy; but it is clear some one hath
tampered with and altered my device. If I am accused of aught, let me at
least hear the charge, and see my accuser."

"That is but fair," said the King. "Bring our little friend from behind
the chimney-board. [Hudson being accordingly produced, he continued.]
There stands the Duke of Buckingham. Repeat before him the tale you told
us. Let him hear what were those contents of the bass-viol which were
removed that you might enter it. Be not afraid of any one, but speak the
truth boldly."

"May it please your Majesty," said Hudson, "fear is a thing unknown to
me."

"His body has no room to hold such a passion; or there is too little of
it to be worth fearing for," said Buckingham.--"But let him speak."

Ere Hudson had completed his tale, Buckingham interrupted him by
exclaiming, "Is it possible that I can be suspected by your Majesty on
the word of this pitiful variety of the baboon tribe?"

"Villain-Lord, I appeal thee to the combat!" said the little man, highly
offended at the appellation thus bestowed on him.

"La you there now!" said the Duke--"The little animal is quite crazed,
and defies a man who need ask no other weapon than a corking-pin to run
him through the lungs, and whose single kick could hoist him from Dover
to Calais without yacht or wherry. And what can you expect from an
idiot, who is _engoue_ of a common rope-dancing girl, that capered on a
pack-thread at Ghent in Flanders, unless they were to club their talents
to set up a booth at Bartholomew Fair?--Is it not plain, that supposing
the little animal is not malicious, as indeed his whole kind bear a
general and most cankered malice against those who have the ordinary
proportions of humanity--Grant, I say, that this were not a malicious
falsehood of his, why, what does it amount to?--That he has mistaken
squibs and Chinese crackers for arms! He says not he himself touched or
handled them; and judging by the sight alone, I question if the infirm
old creature, when any whim or preconception hath possession of his
noddle, can distinguish betwixt a blunderbuss and a black-pudding."

The horrible clamour which the dwarf made so soon as he heard this
disparagement of his military skill--the haste with which he blundered
out a detail of this warlike experiences--and the absurd grimaces which
he made in order to enforce his story, provoked not only the risibility
of Charles, but even of the statesmen around him, and added absurdity to
the motley complexion of the scene. The King terminated this dispute, by
commanding the dwarf to withdraw.

A more regular discussion of his evidence was then resumed, and Ormond
was the first who pointed out, that it went farther than had been
noticed, since the little man had mentioned a certain extraordinary and
treasonable conversation held by the Duke's dependents, by whom he had
been conveyed to the palace.

"I am sure not to lack my lord of Ormond's good word," said the Duke
scornfully; "but I defy him alike, and all my other enemies, and shall
find it easy to show that this alleged conspiracy, if any grounds for
it at all exist, in a mere sham-plot, got up to turn the odium justly
attached to the Papists upon the Protestants. Here is a half-hanged
creature, who, on the very day he escapes from the gallows, which many
believe was his most deserved destiny, comes to take away the reputation
of a Protestant Peer--and on what?--on the treasonable conversation
of three or four German fiddlers, heard through the sound-holes of a
violoncello, and that, too, when the creature was incased in it, and
mounted on a man's shoulders! The urchin, too, in repeating their
language, shows he understands German as little as my horse does; and if
he did rightly hear, truly comprehend, and accurately report what they
said, still, is my honour to be touched by the language held by such
persons as these are, with whom I have never communicated, otherwise
than men of my rank do with those of their calling and capacity?--Pardon
me, sire, if I presume to say, that the profound statesmen who
endeavoured to stifle the Popish conspiracy by the pretended Meal-tub
Plot, will take little more credit by their figments about fiddles and
concertos."

The assistant counsellors looked at each other; and Charles turned on
his heel, and walked through the room with long steps.

At this period the Peverils, father and son, were announced to have
reached the palace, and were ordered into the royal presence.

These gentlemen had received the royal mandate at a moment of great
interest. After being dismissed from their confinement by the elder
Bridgenorth, in the manner and upon the terms which the reader must
have gathered from the conversation of the latter with Christian, they
reached the lodgings of Lady Peveril, who awaited them with joy, mingled
with terror and uncertainty. The news of the acquittal had reached her
by the exertions of the faithful Lance Outram, but her mind had been
since harassed by the long delay of their appearance, and rumours of
disturbances which had taken place in Fleet Street and in the Strand.

When the first rapturous meeting was over, Lady Peveril, with an anxious
look towards her son, as if recommending caution, said she was now about
to present to him the daughter of an old friend, whom he had _never_
(there was an emphasis on the word) seen before. "This young lady," she
continued, "was the only child of Colonel Mitford, in North Wales, who
had sent her to remain under her guardianship for an interval, finding
himself unequal to attempt the task of her education."

"Ay, ay," said Sir Geoffrey, "Dick Mitford must be old now--beyond the
threescore and ten, I think. He was no chicken, though a cock of the
game, when he joined the Marquis of Hertford at Namptwich with two
hundred wild Welshmen.--Before George, Julian, I love that girl as
if she was my own flesh and blood! Lady Peveril would never have got
through this work without her; and Dick Mitford sent me a thousand
pieces, too, in excellent time, when there was scarce a cross to keep
the devil from dancing in our pockets, much more for these law-doings. I
used it without scruple, for there is wood ready to be cut at Martindale
when we get down there, and Dick Mitford knows I would have done the
like for him. Strange that he should have been the only one of my
friends to reflect I might want a few pieces."

Whilst Sir Geoffrey thus run on, the meeting betwixt Alice and Julian
Peveril was accomplished, without any particular notice on his side,
except to say, "Kiss her, Julian--kiss her. What the devil! is that the
way you learned to accost a lady at the Isle of Man, as if her lips were
a red-hot horseshoe?--And do not you be offended, my pretty one; Julian
is naturally bashful, and has been bred by an old lady, but you will
find him, by-and-by, as gallant as thou hast found me, my princess.--And
now, Dame Peveril, to dinner, to dinner! the old fox must have his
belly-timber, though the hounds have been after him the whole day."

Lance, whose joyous congratulations were next to be undergone, had the
consideration to cut them short, in order to provide a plain but hearty
meal from the next cook's shop, at which Julian sat, like one enchanted,
betwixt his mistress and his mother. He easily conceived that the last
was the confidential friend to whom Bridgenorth had finally committed
the charge of his daughter, and his only anxiety now was, to anticipate
the confusion that was likely to arise when her real parentage was
made known to his father. Wisely, however, he suffered not these
anticipations to interfere with the delight of his present situation,
in the course of which many slight but delightful tokens of recognition
were exchanged, without censure, under the eye of Lady Peveril, under
cover of the boisterous mirth of the old Baronet, who spoke for two, ate
for four, and drank wine for half-a-dozen. His progress in the
latter exercise might have proceeded rather too far, had he not been
interrupted by a gentleman bearing the King's orders, that he should
instantly attend upon the presence at Whitehall, and bring his son along
with him.

Lady Peveril was alarmed, and Alice grew pale with sympathetic anxiety;
but the old Knight, who never saw more than what lay straight before
him, set it down to the King's hasty anxiety to congratulate him on
his escape; an interest on his Majesty's part which he considered by no
means extravagant, conscious that it was reciprocal on his own side.
It came upon him, indeed, with the more joyful surprise that he had
received a previous hint, ere he left the court of justice, that it
would be prudent in him to go down to Martindale before presenting
himself at Court--a restriction which he supposed as repugnant to his
Majesty's feelings as it was to his own.

While he consulted with Lance Outram about cleaning his buff-belt and
sword-hilt, as well as time admitted, Lady Peveril had the means to give
Julian more distinct information, that Alice was under her protection by
her father's authority, and with his consent to their union, if it could
be accomplished. She added that it was her determination to employ the
mediation of the Countess of Derby, to overcome the obstacles which
might be foreseen on the part of Sir Geoffrey.




CHAPTER XLIX

                  In the King's name,
                  Let fall your swords and daggers!
                                                 --CRITIC.

When the father and son entered the cabinet of audience, it was easily
visible that Sir Geoffrey had obeyed the summons as he would have
done the trumpet's call to horse; and his dishevelled grey locks and
half-arranged dress, though they showed zeal and haste, such as he would
have used when Charles I. called him to attend a council of war, seemed
rather indecorous in a pacific drawing-room. He paused at the door of
the cabinet, but when the King called on him to advance, came hastily
forward, with every feeling of his earlier and later life afloat, and
contending in his memory, threw himself on his knees before the King,
seized his hand, and, without even an effort to speak, wept aloud.
Charles, who generally felt deeply so long as an impressive object was
before his eyes, indulged for a moment the old man's rapture.--"My good
Sir Geoffrey," he said, "you have had some hard measure; we owe you
amends, and will find time to pay our debt."

"No suffering--no debt," said the old man; "I cared not what the rogues
said of me--I knew they could never get twelve honest fellows to believe
a word of their most damnable lies. I did long to beat them when they
called me traitor to your Majesty--that I confess--But to have such an
early opportunity of paying my duty to your Majesty, overpays it all.
The villains would have persuaded me I ought not to come to Court--aha!"

The Duke of Ormond perceived that the King coloured much; for in truth
it was from the Court that the private intimation had been given to Sir
Geoffrey to go down to the country, without appearing at Whitehall; and
he, moreover, suspected that the jolly old Knight had not risen from
his dinner altogether dry-lipped, after the fatigues of a day so
agitating.--"My old friend," he whispered, "you forget that your son is
to be presented--permit me to have that honour."

"I crave your Grace's pardon humbly," said Sir Geoffrey, "but it is
an honour I design for myself, as I apprehend no one can so utterly
surrender and deliver him up to his Majesty's service as the father that
begot him is entitled to do.--Julian, come forward, and kneel.--Here
he is, please your Majesty--Julian Peveril--a chip of the old block--as
stout, though scarce so tall a tree, as the old trunk, when at the
freshest. Take him to you, sir, for a faithful servant, _a pendre_,
as the French say; if he fears fire or steel, axe or gallows, in your
Majesty's service, I renounce him--he is no son of mine--I disown him,
and he may go to the Isle of Man, the Isle of Dogs, or the Isle of
Devils, for what I care."

