      he was chosen king, and accompanied the Trojan expedition. After his
      death, certain games were instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the
      victors being rewarded with crowns of poplar.

  154 These heroes' names have since passed into a kind of proverb,
      designating the _oi polloi_ or mob.

  155 --_Spontaneous open._

        "Veil'd with his gorgeous wings, upspringing light
        Flew through the midst of heaven; th' angelic quires,
        On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
        Through all th' empyreal road; till at the gate
        Of heaven arrived, the gate self-open'd wide,
        On golden hinges turning."

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," v. 250.

          156 "Till Morn,
        Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand
        Unbarr'd the gates of light."

                                                  --"Paradise Lost," vi, 2.

  157 --_Far as a shepherd._ "With what majesty and pomp does Homer exalt
      his deities! He here measures the leap of the horses by the extent
      of the world. And who is there, that, considering the exceeding
      greatness of the space would not with reason cry out that 'If the
      steeds of the deity were to take a second leap, the world would want
      room for it'?"--Longinus, Section 8.

  158 "No trumpets, or any other instruments of sound, are used in the
      Homeric action itself; but the trumpet was known, and is introduced
      for the purpose of illustration as employed in war. Hence arose the
      value of a loud voice in a commander; Stentor was an indispensable
      officer... In the early Saracen campaigns frequent mention is made
      of the service rendered by men of uncommonly strong voices; the
      battle of Honain was restored by the shouts and menaces of Abbas,
      the uncle of Mohammed," &c.--Coleridge, p. 213.

          159 "Long had the wav'ring god the war delay'd,
        While Greece and Troy alternate own'd his aid."

                                    Merrick's "Tryphiodorus," vi. 761, sq.

  160 --_Paeon_ seems to have been to the gods, what Podaleirius and
      Machaon were to the Grecian heroes.

  161 --_Arisbe,_ a colony of the Mitylenaeans in Troas.

  162 --_Pedasus,_ a town near Pylos.

  163 --_Rich heaps of brass._ "The halls of Alkinous and Menelaus glitter
      with gold, copper, and electrum; while large stocks of yet
      unemployed metal--gold, copper, and iron are stored up in the
      treasure-chamber of Odysseus and other chiefs. Coined money is
      unknown in the Homeric age--the trade carried on being one of barter.
      In reference also to the metals, it deserves to be remarked, that
      the Homeric descriptions universally suppose copper, and not iron,
      to be employed for arms, both offensive and defensive. By what
      process the copper was tempered and hardened, so as to serve the
      purpose of the warrior, we do not know; but the use of iron for
      these objects belongs to a later age."--Grote, vol. ii. p. 142.

  164 --_Oh impotent,_ &c. "In battle, quarter seems never to have been
      given, except with a view to the ransom of the prisoner. Agamemnon
      reproaches Menelaus with unmanly softness, when he is on the point
      of sparing a fallen enemy, and himself puts the suppliant to the
      sword."--Thirlwall, vol. i. p. 181

          165 "The ruthless steel, impatient of delay,
        Forbade the sire to linger out the day.
        It struck the bending father to the earth,
        And cropt the wailing infant at the birth.
        Can innocents the rage of parties know,
        And they who ne'er offended find a foe?"

                                                     Rowe's Lucan, bk. ii.

          166 "Meantime the Trojan dames, oppress'd with woe,
        To Pallas' fane in long procession go,
        In hopes to reconcile their heav'nly foe:
        They weep; they beat their breasts; they rend their hair,
        And rich embroider'd vests for presents bear."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, i. 670

  167 The manner in which this episode is introduced, is well illustrated
      by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298: "The poet's method
      of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a curious manner
      his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where, for example,
      one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to be executed
      at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of this task
      is not, as a general rule, immediately described. A certain interval
      is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action, which
      interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary
      continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a
      while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further
      account of the mission is resumed."

  168 --_With tablets sealed._ These probably were only devices of a
      hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric
      times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq.

  169 --_Solymaean crew,_ a people of Lycia.

  170 From this "melancholy madness" of Bellerophon, hypochondria received
      the name of "Morbus Bellerophonteus." See my notes in my prose
      translation, p. 112. The "Aleian field," _i.e._ "the plain of
      wandering," was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in
      Cilicia.

  171 --_His own, of gold._ This bad bargain has passed into a common
      proverb. See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23.

  172 --_Scaean, i e._ left hand.

  173 --_In fifty chambers._

        "The fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,
        So large a promise of a progeny,)
        The ports of plated gold, and hung with spoils."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, ii.658

  174 --_O would kind earth,_ &c. "It is apparently a sudden, irregular
      burst of popular indignation to which Hector alludes, when he
      regrets that the Trojans had not spirit enough to cover Paris with a
      mantle of stones. This, however, was also one of the ordinary formal
      modes of punishment for great public offences. It may have been
      originally connected with the same feeling--the desire of avoiding
      the pollution of bloodshed--which seems to have suggested the
      practice of burying prisoners alive, with a scantling of food by
      their side. Though Homer makes no mention of this horrible usage,
      the example of the Roman Vestals affords reasons for believing that,
      in ascribing it to the heroic ages, Sophocles followed an authentic
      tradition."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 171, sq.

  175 --_Paris' lofty dome._ "With respect to the private dwellings, which
      are oftenest described, the poet's language barely enables us to
      form a general notion of their ordinary plan, and affords no
      conception of the style which prevailed in them or of their effect
      on the eye. It seems indeed probable, from the manner in which he
      dwells on their metallic ornaments that the higher beauty of
      proportion was but little required or understood, and it is,
      perhaps, strength and convenience, rather than elegance, that he
      means to commend, in speaking of the fair house which Paris had
      built for himself with the aid of the most skilful masons of
      Troy."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 231.

  176 --_The wanton courser._

        "Come destrier, che da le regie stalle
          Ove a l'usa de l'arme si riserba,
        Fugge, e libero al fiu per largo calle
          Va tragl' armenti, o al fiume usato, o a l'herba."

                                                        Gier, Lib. ix. 75.

  177 --_Casque._ The original word is stephanae, about the meaning of
      which there is some little doubt. Some take it for a different kind
      of cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone, of the
      helmet.

  178 --_Athenian maid:_ Minerva.

  179 --_Celadon,_ a river of Elis.

  180 --_Oileus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of Oileus, in contradistinction to
      Ajax, son of Telamon.

  181 --_In the general's helm._ It was customary to put the lots into a
      helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his
      choice.

  182 --_God of Thrace._ Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian
      epithet. Hence "Mavortia Moenia."

  183 --_Grimly he smiled._

          "And death
        Grinn'd horribly a ghastly smile."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," ii. 845.

          "There Mavors stands
        Grinning with ghastly feature."

                                                  --Carey's Dante: Hell, v.

          184 "Sete o guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro,
        Con pari honor di pari ambo possenti,
        Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotte
        Le ragioni, e 'l riposo, e de la notte."

                                                       --Gier. Lib. vi. 51.

  185 It was an ancient style of compliment to give a larger portion of
      food to the conqueror, or person to whom respect was to be shown.
      See Virg. AEn. viii. 181. Thus Benjamin was honoured with a "double
      portion." Gen. xliii. 34.

  186 --_Embattled walls._ "Another essential basis of mechanical unity in
      the poem is the construction of the rampart. This takes place in the
      seventh book. The reason ascribed for the glaring improbability that
      the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet unfortified during
      nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely poetical
      one: 'So long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name sufficed to
      keep every foe at a distance.' The disasters consequent on his
      secession first led to the necessity of other means of protection.
      Accordingly, in the battles previous to the eighth book, no allusion
      occurs to a rampart; in all those which follow it forms a prominent
      feature. Here, then, in the anomaly as in the propriety of the
      Iliad, the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis of
      it, forms the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem."--Mure,
      vol. i., p. 257.

  187 --_What cause of fear,_ &c.

        "Seest thou not this? Or do we fear in vain
        Thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?"

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, iv. 304.

  188 --_In exchange._ These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the Roman
      lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. Section 1, as exhibiting the most ancient
      mention of barter.

  189 "A similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the
      narrative, is the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of
      the eighth book, against any further interference of the gods in the
      battles. In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is
      withdrawn. During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily
      in view. No interposition takes place but on the part of the
      specially authorised agents of Jove, or on that of one or two
      contumacious deities, described as boldly setting his commands at
      defiance, but checked and reprimanded for their disobedience; while
      the other divine warriors, who in the previous and subsequent cantos
      are so active in support of their favourite heroes, repeatedly
      allude to the supreme edict as the cause of their present
      inactivity."--Mure, vol. i. p 257. See however, Muller, "Greek
      Literature," ch. v. Section 6, and Grote, vol. ii. p. 252.

          190 "As far removed from God and light of heaven,
        As from the centre thrice to th' utmost pole."

                                                         --"Paradise Lost."

        "E quanto e da le stelle al basso inferno,
        Tanto e piu in su de la stellata spera"

                                                         --Gier. Lib. i. 7.

      "Some of the epithets which Homer applies to the heavens seem to
      imply that he considered it as a solid vault of metal. But it is not
      necessary to construe these epithets so literally, nor to draw any
      such inference from his description of Atlas, who holds the lofty
      pillars which keep earth and heaven asunder. Yet it would seem, from
      the manner in which the height of heaven is compared with the depth
      of Tartarus, that the region of light was thought to have certain
      bounds. The summit of the Thessalian Olympus was regarded as the
      highest point on the earth, and it is not always carefully
      distinguished from the aerian regions above The idea of a seat of
      the gods--perhaps derived from a more ancient tradition, in which it
      was not attached to any geographical site--seems to be indistinctly
      blended in the poet's mind with that of the real
      mountain."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 217, sq.

          191 "Now lately heav'n, earth, another world
        Hung e'er my realm, link'd in a golden chain
        To that side heav'n."

                                               --"Paradise Lost," ii. 1004.

  192 --_His golden scales._

        "Jove now, sole arbiter of peace and war,
        Held forth the fatal balance from afar:
        Each host he weighs; by turns they both prevail,
        Till Troy descending fix'd the doubtful scale."

                                       Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v 687, sqq.

        "Th' Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
        Hung forth in heav'n his golden scales,
        Wherein all things created first he weighed;
        The pendulous round earth, with balanced air
        In counterpoise; now ponders all events,
        Battles and realms. In these he puts two weights,
        The sequel each of parting and of fight:
        The latter quick up flew, and kick'd the beam."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," iv. 496.

  193 --_And now,_ &c.

          "And now all heaven
        Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread;
        Had not th' Almighty Father, where he sits
        ... foreseen."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 669.

  194 --_Gerenian Nestor._ The epithet _Gerenian_ either refers to the name
      of a place in which Nestor was educated, or merely signifies
      honoured, revered. See Schol. Venet. in II. B. 336; Strabo, viii. p.
      340.

  195 --_AEgae, Helice._ Both these towns were conspicuous for their worship
      of Neptune.

  196 --_As full blown,_ &c.

        "Il suo Lesbia quasi bel fior succiso,
        E in atto si gentil languir tremanti
        Gl' occhi, e cader siu 'l tergo il collo mira."

                                                        Gier. Lib. ix. 85.

  197 --_Ungrateful,_ because the cause in which they were engaged was
      unjust.

        "Struck by the lab'ring priests' uplifted hands
        The victims fall: to heav'n they make their pray'r,
        The curling vapours load the ambient air.
        But vain their toil: the pow'rs who rule the skies
        Averse beheld the ungrateful sacrifice."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 527, sqq.

          198 "As when about the silver moon, when aire is free from
                    winde,
        And stars shine cleare, to whose sweet beams high prospects on the
                    brows
        Of all steepe hills and pinnacles thrust up themselves for shows,
        And even the lowly valleys joy to glitter in their sight;
        When the unmeasured firmament bursts to disclose her light,
        And all the signs in heaven are seene, that glad the shepherd's
                    heart."

                                                                  Chapman.

  199 This flight of the Greeks, according to Buttmann, Lexil. p. 358, was
      not a supernatural flight caused by the gods, but "a great and
      general one, caused by Hector and the Trojans, but with the approval
      of Jove."

  200 Grote, vol. ii. p. 91, after noticing the modest calmness and
      respect with which Nestor addresses Agamemnon, observes, "The
      Homeric Council is a purely consultative body, assembled not with
      any power of peremptorily arresting mischievous resolves of the
      king, but solely for his information and guidance."

  201 In the heroic times, it is not unfrequent for the king to receive
      presents to purchase freedom from his wrath, or immunity from his
      exactions. Such gifts gradually became regular, and formed the
      income of the German, (Tacit. Germ. Section 15) Persian, (Herodot.
      iii.89), and other kings. So, too, in the middle ages, 'The feudal
      aids are the beginning of taxation, of which they for a long time
      answered the purpose.' (Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. 189)
      This fact frees Achilles from the apparent charge of sordidness.
      Plato, however, (De Rep. vi. 4), says, "We cannot commend Phoenix,
      the tutor of Achilles, as if he spoke correctly, when counselling
      him to accept of presents and assist the Greeks, but, without
      presents, not to desist from his wrath, nor again, should we commend
      Achilles himself, or approve of his being so covetous as to receive
      presents from Agamemnon," &c.

  202 It may be observed, that, brief as is the mention of Briseis in the
      Iliad, and small the part she plays--what little is said is
      pre-eminently calculated to enhance her fitness to be the bride of
      Achilles. Purity, and retiring delicacy, are features well
      contrasted with the rough, but tender disposition of the hero.

  203 --_Laodice._ Iphianassa, or Iphigenia, is not mentioned by Homer,
      among the daughters of Agamemnon.

  204 "Agamemnon, when he offers to transfer to Achilles seven towns
      inhabited by wealthy husbandmen, who would enrich their lord by
      presents and tribute, seems likewise to assume rather a property in
      them, than an authority over them. And the same thing may be
      intimated when it is said that Peleus bestowed a great people, the
      Dolopes of Phthia, on Phoenix."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i Section
      6, p. 162, note.

  205 --_Pray in deep silence._ Rather: "use well-omened words;" or, as
      Kennedy has explained it, "Abstain from expressions unsuitable to
      the solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might
      defeat the object of their supplications."

  206 --_Purest hands._ This is one of the most ancient superstitions
      respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in
      tradition.

  207 It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled
      siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in
      piratical expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of
      which Achilles now speaks. From the following verses, it is evident
      that fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the
      expedition, and not to the successful plunderer.

  208 --_Pthia,_ the capital of Achilles' Thessalian domains.

  209 --_Orchomenian town._ The topography of Orchomenus, in Boeotia,
      "situated," as it was, "on the northern bank of the lake AEpais,
      which receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of
      Phocis, but also other rivers from Parnassus and Helicon" (Grote,
      vol. p. 181), was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay.
      "As long as the channels of these waters were diligently watched and
      kept clear, a large portion of the lake was in the condition of
      alluvial land, pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels
      came to be either neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy,
      the water accumulated in such a degree as to occupy the soil of more
      than one ancient islet, and to occasion the change of the site of
      Orchomenus itself from the plain to the declivity of Mount
      Hyphanteion." (Ibid.)

  210 The phrase "hundred gates," &c., seems to be merely expressive of a
      great number. See notes to my prose translation, p. 162.

  211 Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dyce's Select
      Translations, p 88).--

          "Many gifts he gave, and o'er
        Dolopia bade me rule; thee in his arms
        He brought an infant, on my bosom laid
        The precious charge, and anxiously enjoin'd
        That I should rear thee as my own with all
        A parent's love. I fail'd not in my trust
        And oft, while round my neck thy hands were lock'd,
        From thy sweet lips the half articulate sound
        Of Father came; and oft, as children use,
        Mewling and puking didst thou drench my tunic."

      "This description," observes my learned friend (notes, p. 121) "is
      taken from the passage of Homer, II ix, in translating which, Pope,
      with that squeamish, artificial taste, which distinguished the age
      of Anne, omits the natural (and, let me add, affecting)
      circumstance."

          "And the wine
        Held to thy lips, and many a time in fits
        Of infant frowardness the purple juice
        Rejecting thou hast deluged all my vest,
        And fill'd my bosom."

                                                                  --Cowper.

  212 --_Where Calydon._ For a good sketch of the story of Meleager, too
      long to be inserted here, see Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq.; and for
      the authorities, see my notes to the prose translation, p. 166.

  213 "_Gifts can conquer_"--It is well observed by Bishop Thirlwall,
      "Greece," vol. i. p, 180, that the law of honour among the Greeks
      did not compel them to treasure up in their memory the offensive
      language which might be addressed to them by a passionate adversary,
      nor to conceive that it left a stain which could only be washed away
      by blood. Even for real and deep injuries they were commonly willing
      to accept a pecuniary compensation."

  214 "The boon of sleep."--Milton

          215 "All else of nature's common gift partake:
        Unhappy Dido was alone awake."

                                                --Dryden's Virgil, iv. 767.

  216 --_The king of Crete:_ Idomeneus.

  217 --_Soft wool within, i e._ a kind of woollen stuffing, pressed in
      between the straps, to protect the head, and make the helmet fit
      close.

  218 "All the circumstances of this action--the night, Rhesus buried in a
      profound sleep, and Diomede with the sword in his hand hanging over
      the head of that prince--furnished Homer with the idea of this
      fiction, which represents Rhesus lying fast asleep, and, as it were,
      beholding his enemy in a dream, plunging the sword into his bosom.
      This image is very natural; for a man in his condition awakes no
      farther than to see confusedly what environs him, and to think it
      not a reality but a dream."--Pope.

        "There's one did laugh in his sleep, and one cry'd murder;
        They wak'd each other."

                                                               --_Macbeth._

          219 "Aurora now had left her saffron bed,
        And beams of early light the heavens o'erspread."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, iv. 639

  220 --_Red drops of blood._ "This phenomenon, if a mere fruit of the
      poet's imagination, might seem arbitrary or far-fetched. It is one,
      however, of ascertained reality, and of no uncommon occurrence in
      the climate of Greece."--Mure, i p. 493. Cf. Tasso, Gier. Lib. ix.
      15:

        "La terra in vece del notturno gelo
        Bagnan rugiade tepide, e sanguigne."

          221 "No thought of flight,
        None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
        That argued fear."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 236.

  222 --_One of love._ Although a bastard brother received only a small
      portion of the inheritance, he was commonly very well treated. Priam
      appears to be the only one of whom polygamy is directly asserted in
      the Iliad. Grote, vol. ii. p. 114, note.

          223 "Circled with foes as when a packe of bloodie jackals cling
        About a goodly palmed hart, hurt with a hunter's bow
        Whose escape his nimble feet insure, whilst his warm blood doth
                    flow,
        And his light knees have power to move: but (maistred by his
                    wound)
        Embost within a shady hill, the jackals charge him round,
        And teare his flesh--when instantly fortune sends in the powers
        Of some sterne lion, with whose sighte they flie and he devours.
        So they around Ulysses prest."

                                                                 --Chapman.

  224 --_Simois, railing,_ &c.

          "In those bloody fields
        Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
        Of heroes."

                                                 --Dryden's Virgil, i. 142.

          225 "Where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies,
        Stones rent from stones,--where clouds of dust arise,--
        Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place,
        Below the wall's foundation drives his mace,
        And heaves the building from the solid base."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 825.

  226 --_Why boast we._

          "Wherefore do I assume
        These royalties and not refuse to reign,
        Refusing to accept as great a share
        Of hazard as of honour, due alike to him
        Who reigns, and so much to him due
        Of hazard more, as he above the rest
        High honour'd sits."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," ii. 450.

  227 --_Each equal weight._

          "Long time in even scale
        The battle hung."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 245.

          228 "He on his impious foes right onward drove,
        _Gloomy as night._"

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," vi. 831

  229 --_Renown'd for justice and for length of days,_ Arrian. de Exp.
      Alex. iv. p. 239, also speaks of the independence of these people,
      which he regards as the result of their poverty and uprightness.
      Some authors have regarded the phrase "Hippomolgian," _i.e._
      "milking their mares," as an epithet applicable to numerous tribes,
      since the oldest of the Samatian nomads made their mares' milk one
      of their chief articles of diet. The epithet abion or abion, in this
      passage, has occasioned much discussion. It may mean, according as
      we read it, either "long-lived," or "bowless," the latter epithet
      indicating that they did not depend upon archery for subsistence.

  230 Compare Chapman's quaint, bold verses:--

        "And as a round piece of a rocke, which with a winter's flood
        Is from his top torn, when a shoure poured from a bursten cloud,
        Hath broke the naturall band it had within the roughftey rock,
        Flies jumping all adourne the woods, resounding everie shocke,
        And on, uncheckt, it headlong leaps till in a plaine it stay,
        And then (tho' never so impelled), it stirs not any way:--
        So Hector,--"

  231 This book forms a most agreeable interruption to The continuous
      round of battles, which occupy the latter part of the Iliad. It is
      as well to observe, that the sameness of these scenes renders many
      notes unnecessary.

  232 --_Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed.

  233 Compare Tasso:--

        Teneri sdegni, e placide, e tranquille
        Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci,
        Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci stille
        Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci."

                                                        Gier. Lib. xvi. 25

  234 Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando Furioso,
      bk. vi.

          235 "Twice seven, the charming daughters of the main--
        Around my person wait, and bear my train:
        Succeed my wish, and second my design,
        The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine."

                                         Dryden's Virgil, AEn. i. 107, seq.

  236 --_And Minos._ "By Homer, Minos is described as the son of Jupiter,
      and of the daughter of Phoenix, whom all succeeding authors name
      Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of
      Cretan antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero,
      Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow
      his descent to be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy
      recorded by later writers, he is likewise the adopted son of
      Asterius, as descendant of Dorus, the son of Helen, and is thus
      connected with a colony said to have been led into Creta by
      Tentamus, or Tectamus, son of Dorus, who is related either to have
      crossed over from Thessaly, or to have embarked at Malea after
      having led his followers by land into Laconia."--Thirlwall, p. 136,
      seq.

  237 Milton has emulated this passage, in describing the couch of our
      first parents:--

          "Underneath the violet,
        Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
        'Broider'd the ground."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 700.

  238 --_He lies protected,_

        "Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
        By angels many and strong, who interpos'd
        Defence, while others bore him on their shields
        Back to his chariot, where it stood retir'd
        From off the files of war; there they him laid,
        Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame."

                                            "Paradise Lost," vi. 335, seq.

  239 --_The brazen dome._ See the note on Bk. viii. Page 142.

  240 --_For, by the gods! who flies._ Observe the bold ellipsis of "he
      cries," and the transition from the direct to the oblique
      construction. So in Milton:--

        "Thus at their shady lodge arriv'd, both stood,
        Both turn'd, and under open sky ador'd
        The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
        Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe,
        And starry pole.--Thou also mad'st the night,
        Maker omnipotent, and thou the day."

                                         Milton, "Paradise Lost," Book iv.

  241 --_So some tall rock._

        "But like a rock unmov'd, a rock that braves
        The raging tempest, and the rising waves--
        Propp'd on himself he stands: his solid sides
        Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 809.

  242 Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he
      leaped from the vessel to the Trojan shore. He was buried on the
      Chersonese, near the city of Plagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. on
      Lycophr. 245, 528. There is a most elegant tribute to his memory in
      the Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus.

  243 --_His best beloved._ The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall
      (Greece, vol. i, p. 176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the
      friendship subsisting between these two heroes--

      "One of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek character,
      is the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate and
      durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in the
      earliest than in later times. It was indeed connected with the
      comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but
      the devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were
      maintained, was not the less admirable and engaging. The heroic
      companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in
      traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the
      same feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a
      wish or object apart, and only to live as they are always ready to
      die for one another. It is true that the relation between them is
      not always one of perfect equality; but this is a circumstance
      which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the poetical
      description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it
      presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of
      Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may
      owe the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even
      dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the
      period to which the traditions are referred. The argument of the
      Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus, whose
      love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for his
      higher birth and his unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard which
      united Idomeneus and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus, though, as
      the persons themselves are less important, it is kept more in the
      back-ground, is manifestly viewed by the poet in the same light. The
      idea of a Greek hero seems not to have been thought complete,
      without such a brother in arms by his side."--Thirlwall, Greece, vol.
      i. p. 176, seq.

          244 "As hungry wolves with raging appetite,
        Scour through the fields, ne'er fear the stormy night--
        Their whelps at home expect the promised food,
        And long to temper their dry chaps in blood--
        So rush'd we forth at once."

                                                --Dryden's Virgil, ii. 479.

  245 --_The destinies ordain._--"In the mythology, also, of the Iliad,
      purely Pagan as it is, we discover one important truth unconsciously
      involved, which was almost entirely lost from view amidst the nearly
      equal scepticism and credulity of subsequent ages. Zeus or Jupiter
      is popularly to be taken as omnipotent. No distinct empire is
      assigned to fate or fortune; the will of the father of gods and men
      is absolute and uncontrollable. This seems to be the true character
      of the Homeric deity, and it is very necessary that the student of
      Greek literature should bear it constantly in mind. A strong
      instance in the Iliad itself to illustrate this position, is the
      passage where Jupiter laments to Juno the approaching death of
      Sarpedon. 'Alas me!' says he 'since it is fated (moira) that
      Sarpedon, dearest to me of men, should be slain by Patroclus, the
      son of Menoetius! Indeed, my heart is divided within me while I
      ruminate it in my mind, whether having snatched him up from out of
      the lamentable battle, I should not at once place him alive in the
      fertile land of his own Lycia, or whether I should now destroy him
      by the hands of the son of Menoetius!' To which Juno answers--'Dost
      thou mean to rescue from death a mortal man, long since destined by
      fate (palai pepromenon)? You may do it--but we, the rest of the gods,
      do not sanction it.' Here it is clear from both speakers, that
      although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter might still,
      if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of the reach of
      any such event, and further, in the alternative, that Jupiter
      himself would destroy him by the hands of another."--Coleridge, p.
      156. seq.

  246 --_Thrice at the battlements._ "The art military of the Homeric age
      is upon a level with the state of navigation just described,
      personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the
      ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale.
      The chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights
      of romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a
      captain in the guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a
      ditch or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself
      was accessible without a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of
      earth with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in
      armour. The Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive
      assistance from their allies to the very end."--Coleridge, p. 212.

  247 --_Ciconians._--A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus.

  248 --_They wept._

        "Fast by the manger stands the inactive steed,
        And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;
        He stands, and careless of his golden grain,
        Weeps his associates and his master slain."

                                         Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.

        "Nothing is heard upon the mountains now,
        But pensive herds that for their master low,
        Straggling and comfortless about they rove,
        Unmindful of their pasture and their love."

                                         Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._

        "To close the pomp, AEthon, the steed of state,
        Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait.
        Stripp'd of his trappings, with a sullen pace
        He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, bk. ii

  249 --_Some brawny bull._

        "Like to a bull, that with impetuous spring
        Darts, at the moment when the fatal blow
        Hath struck him, but unable to proceed
        Plunges on either side."

                                             --Carey's Dante: Hell, c. xii.

  250 This is connected with the earlier part of last book, the regular
      narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and the
      lamentations of Achilles.

  251 --_Far in the deep._ So Oceanus hears the lamentations of Prometheus,
      in the play of AEschylus, and comes from the depths of the sea to
      comfort him.

  252 Opuntia, a city of Locris.

  253 Quintus Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his
      description of the shield of the same hero. A few extracts from Mr.
      Dyce's version (Select Translations, p. 104, seq.) may here be
      introduced.

        "In the wide circle of the shield were seen
        Refulgent images of various forms,
        The work of Vulcan; who had there described
        The heaven, the ether, and the earth and sea,
        The winds, the clouds, the moon, the sun, apart
        In different stations; and you there might view
        The stars that gem the still-revolving heaven,
        And, under them, the vast expanse of air,
        In which, with outstretch'd wings, the long-beak'd bird
        Winnow'd the gale, as if instinct with life.
        Around the shield the waves of ocean flow'd,
        The realms of Tethys, which unnumber'd streams,
        In azure mazes rolling o'er the earth,
        Seem'd to augment."

  254 --_On seats of stone._ "Several of the old northern Sagas represent
      the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting on great
      stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsring"-- Grote,
      ii. p. 100, note. On the independence of the judicial office in The
      heroic times, see Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 166.

  255 --_Another part,_ &c.

          "And here
        Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale
        Were heroes lying with their slaughter'd steeds
        Upon the ground incarnadin'd with blood.
        Stern stalked Bellona, smear'd with reeking gore,
        Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen,
        And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife
        Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames:
        Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape
        Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng,
        Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat;
        And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes.
        That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
        Such were the horrors of dire war."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  256 --_A field deep furrowed._

        "Here was a corn field; reapers in a row,
        Each with a sharp-tooth'd sickle in his hand,
        Work'd busily, and, as the harvest fell,
        Others were ready still to bind the sheaves:
        Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away
        The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here
        The plough were drawing, and the furrow'd glebe
        Was black behind them, while with goading wand
        The active youths impell'd them. Here a feast
        Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre
        A band of blooming virgins led the dance.
        As if endued with life."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  257 Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently
      compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by
      Hesiod. He remarks that, "with two or three exceptions, the imagery
      differs in little more than the names and arrangements; and the
      difference of arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether
      for the worse. The natural consecution of the Homeric images needs
      no exposition: it constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the
      work. The Hesiodic images are huddled together without connection or
