
At last Smid spoke--

'Heroes, this is Odin's doom; and the All-father is just. Had we
listened to Prince Wulf four months ago, this had never been. We have
been cowards and sluggards, and Odin is angry with his children. Let us
swear to be Prince Wulf's men and follow him to-morrow where he will!'

Wulf grasped his outstretched hand lovingly-- 'No, Smid, son of Troll!
These words are not yours to speak. Agilmund son of Cniva, Goderic son
of Ermenric, you are Balts, and to you the succession appertains. Draw
lots here, which of you shall be our chieftain.'

'No! no! Wulf!' cried both the youths at once. 'You are the hero! you
are the Sagaman! We are not worthy; we have been cowards and sluggards,
like the rest. Wolves of the Goths, follow the Wolf, even though he lead
you to the land of the giants!'

A roar of applause followed.

'Lift him on the shield,' cried Goderic, tearing off his buckler. 'Lift
him on the shield! Hail, Wulf king! Wulf, king of Egypt!'

And the rest of the Goths, attracted by the noise, rushed up the
tower-stairs in time to join in the mighty shout of 'Wulf, king of
Egypt!'--as careless of the vast multitude which yelled and surged
without, as boys are of the snow against the window-pane.

'No!' said Wulf solemnly, as he stood on the uplifted shield. 'If I be
indeed your king, and ye my men, wolves of the Goths, to-morrow we will
go forth of this place, hated of Odin, rank with the innocent blood of
the Alruna maid. Back to Adolf; back to our own people! Will you go?'

'Back to Adolf!' shouted the men.

'You will not leave us to be murdered?' cried one of the girls. 'The mob
are breaking the gates already!'

'Silence, silly one! Men--we have one thing to do. The Amal must not go
to the Valhalla without fair attendance.'

'Not the poor girls?' said Agilmund, who took for granted that Wulf
would wish to celebrate the Amal's funeral in true Gothic fashion by a
slaughter of slaves.

'No.... One of them I saw behave this very afternoon worthy of a Vala.
And they, too--they may make heroes' wives after all, yet .... Women are
better than I fancied, even the worst of them. No. Go down, heroes, and
throw the gates open; and call in the Greek hounds to the funeral supper
of a son of Odin.'

'Throw the gates open?'

'Yes. Goderic, take a dozen men, and be ready in the east hall.
Agilmund, go with a dozen to the west side of the court--there in the
kitchen; and wait till you hear my war-cry. Smid and the rest of you,
come with me through the stables close to the gate--as silent as Hela.'

And they went down--to meet, full on the stairs below, old Miriam.

Breathless and exhausted by her exertion, she had fallen heavily before
Philammon's strong arm; and lying half stunned for a while, recovered
just in time to meet her doom.

She knew that it was come, and faced it like herself.

'Take the witch!' said Wulf slowly--'Take the corrupter of heroes--the
cause of all our sorrows!'

Miriam looked at him with a quiet smile.

'The witch is accustomed long ago to hear fools lay on her the
consequences of their own lust and laziness.'

'Hew her down, Smid, son of Troll, that she may pass the Amal's soul and
gladden it on her way to Niflheim.'

Smid did it: but so terrible were the eyes which glared upon him from
those sunken sockets, that his sight was dazzled. The axe turned aside,
and struck her shoulder. She reeled, but did not fall.

'It is enough,' she said quietly.

'The accursed Grendel's daughter numbed my arm!' said Smid. 'Let her go!
No man shall say that I struck a woman twice.'

'Nidhogg waits for her, soon or late,' answered Wulf.

And Miriam, coolly folding her shawl around her, turned and walked
steadily down the stair; while all men breathed more freely, as if
delivered from some accursed and supernatural spell.

'And now,' said Wulf, 'to your posts, and vengeance!'

The mob had weltered and howled ineffectually around the house for some
half-hour. But the lofty walls, opening on the street only by a few
narrow windows in the higher stories, rendered it an impregnable
fortress. Suddenly, the iron gates were drawn back, disclosing to
the front rank the court, glaring empty and silent and ghastly in the
moonlight. For an instant they recoiled, with a vague horror, and dread
of treachery: but the mass behind pressed them onward, and in swept
the murderers of Hypatia, till the court was full of choking wretches,
surging against the walls and pillars in aimless fury. And then, from
under the archway on each side, rushed a body of tall armed men, driving
back all incomers more; the gates slid together again upon their grooves
and the wild beasts of Alexandria were trapped at last.

And then began a murder grim and great. From three different doors
issued a line of Goths, whose helmets and mail-shirts made them
invulnerable to the clumsy weapons of the mob, and began hewing their
way right through the living mass, helpless from their close-packed
array. True, they were but as one to ten; but what are ten curs before
one lion?.... And the moon rose higher and higher, staring down ghastly
and unmoved upon that doomed court of the furies, and still the bills
and swords hewed on and on, and the Goths drew the corpses, as they
found room, towards a dark pile in the midst, where old Wulf sat upon
a heap of slain, singing the praises of the Amal and the glories of
Valhalla, while the shrieks of his lute rose shrill above the shrieks of
the flying and the wounded, and its wild waltz-time danced and rollicked
on swifter and swifter as the old singer maddened, in awful mockery of
the terror and agony around.

And so, by men and purposes which recked not of her, as is the wont of
Providence, was the blood of Hypatia avenged in part that night. In part
only. For Peter the Reader, and his especial associates, were safe in
sanctuary at the Caesareum, clinging to the altar. Terrified at the
storm which they had raised, and fearing the consequences of an attack
upon the palace, they had left the mob to run riot at its will; and
escaped the swords of the Goths to be reserved for the more awful
punishment of impunity.



CHAPTER XXX: EVERY MAN TO HIS OWN PLACE


It was near midnight. Raphael had been sitting some three hours in
Miriam's inner chamber, waiting in vain for her return. To recover, if
possible, his ancestral wealth; to convey it, without a day's delay, to
Cyrene; and, if possible, to persuade the poor old Jewess to accompany
him, and there to soothe, to guide, perhaps to convert her, was his next
purpose:--at all events, with or without his wealth, to flee from that
accursed city. And he counted impatiently the slow hours and minutes
which detained him in an atmosphere which seemed reeking with innocent
blood, black with the lowering curse of an avenging God. More than once,
unable to bear the thought, he rose to depart, and leave his wealth
behind: but he was checked again by the thought of his own past
life. How had he added his own sin to the great heap of Alexandrian
wickedness! How had he tempted others, pampered others in evil! Good
God! how had he not only done evil with all his might, but had pleasure
in those who did the same! And now, now he was reaping the fruit of his
own devices. For years past, merely to please his lust of power, his
misanthropic scorn, he had been malting that wicked Orestes wickeder
than he was even by his own base will and nature; and his puppet had
avenged itself upon him! He, he had prompted him to ask Hypatia's
hand.... He had laid, half in sport, half in envy of her excellence,
that foul plot against the only human being whom he loved.... and he had
destroyed her! He, and not Peter, was the murderer of Hypatia! True,
he had never meant her death.... No; but had he not meant for her worse
than death? He had never foreseen.... No; but only because he did not
choose to foresee. He had chosen to be a god; to kill and to make alive
by his own will and law; and behold, he had become a devil by that very
act. Who can--and who dare, even if he could--withdraw the sacred veil
from those bitter agonies of inward shame and self-reproach, made all
the more intense by his clear and undoubting knowledge that he was
forgiven? What dread of punishment, what blank despair, could have
pierced that great heart so deeply as did the thought that the God whom
he had hated and defied had returned him good for evil, and rewarded him
not according to his iniquities? That discovery, as Ezekiel of old had
warned his forefathers, filled up the cup of his self-loathing.... To
have found at last the hated and dreaded name of God: and found that
it was Love!.... To possess Victoria, a living, human likeness, however
imperfect, of that God; and to possess in her a home, a duty, a purpose,
a fresh clear life of righteous labour, perhaps of final victory....
That was his punishment; that was the brand of Cain upon his forehead;
and he felt it greater than he could bear.

But at least there was one thing to be done. Where he had sinned, there
he must make amends; not as a propitiation, not even as a restitution;
but simply as a confession of the truth which he had found. And as his
purpose shaped itself, he longed and prayed that Miriam might return,
and make it possible.

And Miriam did return. He heard her pass slowly through the outer room,
learn from the girls who was within, order them out of the apartments,
close the outer door upon them; at last she entered, and said quietly--

'Welcome! I have expected you. You could not surprise old Miriam. The
teraph told me last night that you would be here....'

Did she see the smile of incredulity upon Raphael's face, or was it some
sudden pang of conscience which made her cry out--

'.... No! I did not! I never expected you! I am a liar, a miserable old
liar, who cannot speak the truth, even if I try! Only look kind! Smile
at me, Raphael!--Raphael come back at last to his poor, miserable,
villainous old mother! Smile on me but once, my beautiful, my son! my
son!'

And springing to him, she clasped him in her arms.

'Your son?'

'Yes, my son! Safe at last! Mine at last! I can prove it now! The son of
my womb, though not the son of my vows!' And she laughed hysterically.
'My child, my heir, for whom I have toiled and hoarded for
three-and-thirty years! Quick! here are my keys. In that cabinet are all
my papers--all I have is yours. Your jewels are safe--buried with mine.
The negro-woman, Eudaimon's wife, knows where. I made her swear secrecy
upon her little wooden idol, and, Christian as she is, she has been
honest. Make her rich for life. She hid your poor old mother, and
kept her safe to see her boy come home. But give nothing to her little
husband: he is a bad fellow, and beats her.--Go, quick! take your
riches, and away!.... No; stay one moment just one little moment--that
the poor old wretch may feast her eyes with the sight of her darling
once more before she dies!'

'Before you die? Your son? God of my fathers, what is the meaning of
all this, Miriam? This morning I was the son of Ezra the merchant of
Antioch!'

'His son and heir, his son and heir! He knew all at last. We told him on
his death-bed! I swear that we told him, and he adopted you!'

'We! Who?'

'His wife and I. He craved for a child, the old miser, and we gave
him one--a better one than ever came of his family. But he loved you,
accepted you, though he did know all. He was afraid of being laughed at
after he was dead--afraid of having it known that he was childless, the
old dotard! No--he was right--true Jew in that, after all!'

'Who was my father, then?' interrupted Raphael, in utter bewilderment.

The old woman laughed a laugh so long and wild, that Raphael shuddered.

'Sit down at your mother's feet. Sit down.... just to please the poor
old thing! Even if you do not believe her, just play at being her child,
her darling, for a minute before she dies; and she will tell you all....
perhaps there is time yet!'

And he sat down.... 'What if this incarnation of all wickedness were
really my mother?.... And yet--why should I shrink thus proudly from the
notion? Am I so pure myself as to deserve a purer source?'.... And
the old woman laid her hand fondly on his head, and her skinny fingers
played with his soft locks, as she spoke hurriedly and thick.

'Of the house of Jesse, of the seed of Solomon; not a rabbi from Babylon
to Rome dare deny that! A king's daughter I am, and a king's heart I
had, and have, like Solomon's own, my son!.... A kingly heart.... It
made me dread and scorn to be a slave, a plaything, a soul-less doll,
such as Jewish women are condemned to be by their tyrants, the men. I
craved for wisdom, renown, power--power--power! and my nation refused
them to me; because, forsooth, I was a woman! So I left them. I went
to the Christian priests.... They gave me what I asked.... They gave
me more.... They pampered my woman's vanity, my pride, my self-will, my
scorn of wedded bondage, and bade me be a saint, the judge of angels and
archangels, the bride of God! Liars! liars! And so--if you laugh, you
kill me, Raphael--and so Miriam, the daughter of Jonathan--Miriam, of
the house of David--Miriam, the descendant of Ruth and Rachab, of Rachel
and Sara, became a Christian nun, and shut herself up to see visions,
and dream dreams, and fattened her own mad self-conceit upon the impious
fancy that she was the spouse of the Nazarene, Joshua Bar-Joseph, whom
she called Jehovah Ishi--Silence! If you stop me a moment, it may be
too late. I hear them calling me already; and I made them promise not to
take me before I had told all to my son--the son of my shame!'

'Who calls you?' asked Raphael; but after one strong shudder she ran on,
unheeding--

'But they lied, lied, lied! I found them out that day.... Do not look
up at me, and I will tell you all. There was a riot--a fight between
the Christian devils and the Heathen devils--and the convent was sacked,
Raphael, my son!--Sacked!.... Then I found out their blasphemy.... Oh
God! I shrieked to Him, Raphael! I called on Him to rend His heavens and
come down--to pour out His thunderbolts upon them--to cleave the earth
and devour them--to save the wretched helpless girl who adored Him,
who had given up father, mother, kinsfolk, wealth, the light of heaven,
womanhood itself, for Him--who worshipped, meditated over Him, dreamed
of Him night and day .... And, Raphael, He did not hear me.... He did
not hear me! .... did not hear the!.... And then I knew it all for a
lie! a lie!'

'And you knew it for what it is!' cried Raphael through his sobs, as he
thought of Victoria, and felt every vein burning with righteous wrath.

--'There was no mistaking that test, was there?.... For nine months I
was mad. And then your voice, my baby, my joy, my pride that brought me
to myself once more! And I shook off the dust of my feet against those
Galilean priests, and went back to my own nation, where God had set me
from the beginning. I made them--the Rabbis, my father, my kin--I made
them all receive me. They could not stand before my eye. I can stake
people do what I will, Raphael! I could--I could make you emperor now,
if I had but time left! I went back. I palmed you off on Ezra as his
son, I and his wife, and made him believe that you had been born to him
while he was in Byzantium .... And then--to live for you! And I did live
for you. For you I travelled from India to Britain, seeking wealth. For
you I toiled, hoarded, lied, intrigued, won money by every means, no
matter how base--for was it not for you? And I have conquered! You are
the richest Jew south of the Mediterranean, you, my son! And you deserve
your wealth. You have your mother's soul in you, my boy! I watched
you, gloried in you--in your cunning, your daring, your learning, your
contempt for these Gentile hounds. You felt the royal blood of Solomon
within you! You felt that you were a young lion of Judah, and they the
jackals who followed to feed upon your leavings! And now, now! Your only
danger is past! The cunning woman is gone--the sorceress who tried to
take my young lion in her pitfall, and has fallen into the midst of it
herself; and he is safe, and returned to take the nations for a prey,
and grind their bones to powder, as it is written, "He couched like a
lion, he lay down like a lioness's whelp, and who dare rouse him up?"'

'Stop!' said Raphael, 'I must speak! Mother! I must! As you love me, as
you expect me to love you, answer! Had you a hand in her death? Speak!'

'Did I not tell you that I was no more a Christian? Had I remained
one--who can tell what I might not have done? All I, the Jewess, dare
do was--Fool that I am! I have forgotten all this time the proof--the
proof--'

'I need no proof, mother. Your words are enough,' said Raphael, as
he clasped her hand between his own, and pressed it to his burning
forehead. But the old woman hurried on 'See! See the black agate which
you gave her in your madness!'

'How did you obtain that?'

'I stole it--stole it, my son; as thieves steal, and are crucified for
stealing. What was the chance of the cross to a mother yearning for
her child?--to a mother who put round her baby's neck, three-and-thirty
black years ago, that broken agate, and kept the other half next her own
heart by day and night? See! See how they fit! Look, and believe your
poor old sinful mother! Look, I say!' and she thrust the talisman into
his hands.

'Now, let me die! I vowed never to tell this secret but to you: never
to tell it to you, until the night I died. Farewell, my son! Kiss me but
once--once, my child, my joy! Oh, this makes up for all! Makes up even
for that day, the last on which I ever dreamed myself the bride of the
Nazarene!'

Raphael felt that he must speak, now or never. Though it cost him the
loss of all his wealth, and a mother's curse, he must speak. And not
daring to look up, he said gently--

'Men have lied to you about Him, mother: but has He ever lied to you
about Himself? He did not lie to me when He sent me out into the world
to find a man, and sent me back again to you with the good news that The
Man is born into the world.'

But to his astonishment, instead of the burst of bigoted indignation
which he had expected, Miriam answered in a low, confused, abstracted
voice--

'And did He send you hither? Well--that was more like what I used to
fancy Him....A grand thought it is after all--a Jew the king of heaven
and earth!.... Well--I shall know soon.... I loved Him once,.... and
perhaps....perhaps....'

Why did her head drop heavily upon his shoulder? He turned--a dark
stream of blood was flowing from her lips! He sprang to his feet. The
girls rushed in. They tore open her shawl, and saw the ghastly wound,
which she had hidden with such iron resolution to the last. But it was
too late. Miriam the daughter of Solomon was gone to her own place.
...............

Early the next morning, Raphael was standing in Cyril's anteroom,
awaiting an audience. There were loud voices within; and after a while a
tribune--whom he knew well hurried out, muttering curses--

'What brings you here, friend?'said Raphael.

'The scoundrel will not give them up,' answered he, in an undertone.

'Give up whom?'

'The murderers. They are in sanctuary now at the Caesareum. Orestes sent
me to demand them: and this fellow defies him openly!' And the tribune
hurried out.

Raphael, sickened with disgust, half-turned to follow him: but his
better angel conquered, and he obeyed the summons of the deacon who
ushered him in.

Cyril was walking up and down, according to his custom, with great
strides. When he saw who was his visitor, he stopped short with a look
of fierce inquiry. Raphael entered on business at once, with a cold calm
voice.

'You know me, doubtless; and you know what I was. I am now a Christian
catechumen. I come to make such restitution as I can for certain past
ill-deeds done in this city. You will find among these papers the
trust-deeds for such a yearly sum of money as will enable you to hire
a house of refuge for a hundred fallen women, and give such dowries to
thirty of them yearly as will enable them to find suitable husbands. I
have set down every detail of my plan. On its exact fulfilment depends
the continuance of my gift.'

Cyril took the document eagerly, and was breaking out with some
commonplace about pious benevolence, when the Jew stopped him.

'Your Holiness's compliments are unnecessary. It is to your office, not
to yourself, that this business relates.'

Cyril, whose conscience was ill enough at ease that morning, felt
abashed before Raphael's dry and quiet manner, which bespoke, as he well
knew, reproof more severe than all open upbraidings. So looking down,
not without something like a blush, he ran his eye hastily over the
paper; and then said, in his blandest tone-- 'My brother will forgive me
for remarking, that while I acknowledge his perfect right to dispose
of his charities as he will, it is somewhat startling to me, as
Metropolitan of Egypt to find not only the Abbot Isidore of Pelusium,
but the secular Defender of the Plebs, a civil officer, implicated, too,
in the late conspiracy, associated with me as co-trustees.'

'I have taken the advice of more than one Christian bishop on the
matter. I acknowledge your authority by my presence here. If the
Scriptures say rightly, the civil magistrates are as much God's
ministers as you; and I am therefore bound to acknowledge their
authority also. I should have preferred associating the Prefect with you
in the trust: but as your dissensions with the present occupant of that
post might have crippled my scheme, I have named the Defender of the
Plebs, and have already put into his hands a copy of this document.
Another copy has been sent to Isidore, who is empowered to receive all
moneys from my Jewish bankers in Pelusium.'

'You doubt, then, either my ability or my honesty?' said Cyril, who was
becoming somewhat nettled.

'If your Holiness dislikes my offer, it is easy to omit your name in the
deed. One word more. If you deliver up to justice the murderers of my
friend Hypatia, I double my bequest on the spot.'

Cyril burst out instantly--

'Thy money perish with thee! Do you presume to bribe me into delivering
up my children to the tyrant?'

'I offer to give you the means of showing more mercy, provided that you
will first do simple justice.'

'Justice?' cried Cyril. 'Justice? If it be just that Peter should die,
sir, see first whether it was not just that Hypatia should die. Not that
I compassed it. As I live, I would have given my own right hand that
this had not happened! But now that it is done--let those who talk of
justice look first in which scale of the balance it lies! Do you fancy,
sir, that the people do not know their enemies from their friends? Do
you fancy that they are to sit with folded hands, while a pedant makes
common cause with a profligate, to drag them back again into the very
black gulf of outer darkness, ignorance, brutal lust, grinding slavery,
from which the Son of God died to free them, from which they are
painfully and slowly struggling upward to the light of day? You, sir, if
you be a Christian catechumen, should know for yourself what would
have been the fate of Alexandria had the devil's plot of two days since
succeeded. What if the people struck too fiercely? They struck in the
right place. What if they have given the reins to passions fit only
for heathens? Recollect the centuries of heathendom which bred those
passions in them, and blame not my teaching, but the teaching of their
forefathers. That very Peter.... What if he have for once given place to
the devil, and avenged where he should have forgiven? Has he no memories
which may excuse him for fancying, in a just paroxysm of dread, that
idolatry and falsehood must be crushed at any risk?--He who counts back
for now three hundred years, in persecution after persecution, martyrs,
sir! martyrs--if you know what that word implies--of his own blood and
kin; who, when he was but a seven years' boy, saw his own father made a
sightless cripple to this day, and his elder sister, a consecrated nun,
devoured alive by swine in the open streets, at the hands of those who
supported the very philosophy, the very gods, which Hypatia attempted
yesterday to restore. God shall judge such a man; not I, nor you!'

'Let God judge him, then, by delivering him to God's minister.'

'God's minister? That heathen and apostate Prefect? When he has expiated
his apostasy by penance, and returned publicly to the bosom of the
Church, it will be time enough to obey him: till then he is the minister
of none but the devil. And no ecclesiastic shall suffer at the tribunal
of an infidel. Holy Writ forbids us to go to law before the unjust.--Let
the world say of me what it will. I defy it and its rulers. I have to
establish the kingdom of God in this city, and do it I will, knowing
that other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is
Christ.'

'Wherefore you proceed to lay it afresh. A curious method of proving
that it is laid already.'

'What do you mean?' asked Cyril angrily.

'Simply that God's kingdom, if it exist at all, must be a sort of
kingdom, considering Who is The King of it, which would have established
itself without your help some time since; probably, indeed, if the
Scriptures of my Jewish forefathers are to be believed, before the
foundation of the world; and that your business was to believe that God
was King of Alexandria, and had put the Roman law there to crucify
all murderers, ecclesiastics included, and that crucified they must be
accordingly, as high as Haman himself.'

'I will hear no more of this, sir! I am responsible to God alone, and
not to you: let it be enough that by virtue of the authority committed
to me, I shall cut off these men from the Church of God, by solemn
excommunication, for three years to come.'

'They are not cut off, then, it seems, as yet?'

'I tell you, sir, that I shall cut them off! Do you come here to doubt
my word?'

'Not in the least, most august sir. But I should have fancied that,
according to my carnal notions of God's Kingdom and The Church, they had
cut off themselves most effectually already, from the moment when they
cast away the Spirit of God, and took to themselves the spirit of
murder and cruelty; and that all which your most just and laudable
excommunication could effect, would be to inform the public of that
fact. However, farewell! My money shall be forthcoming in due time; and
that is the most important matter between us at this moment. As for your
client Peter and his fellows, perhaps the most fearful punishment which
can befall them, is to go on as they have begun. I only hope that you
will not follow in the same direction.'

'I?' cried Cyril, trembling with rage.

'Really I wish your Holiness well when I say so. If my notions seem to
you somewhat secular, yours--forgive me--seem to the somewhat atheistic;
and I advise you honestly to take care lest while you are busy trying
to establish God's kingdom, you forget what it is like, by shutting your
eyes to those of its laws which are established already. I have no doubt
that with your Holiness's great powers you will succeed in establishing
something. My only dread is, that when it is established, you should
discover to your horror that it is the devil's kingdom and not God's.'

And without waiting for an answer, Raphael bowed himself out of the
august presence, and sailing for Berenice that very day, with Eudaimon
and his negro wife, went to his own place; there to labour and to
succour, a sad and stern, and yet a loving and a much-loved man, for
many a year to come.

And now we will leave Alexandria also, and taking a forward leap of some
twenty years, see how all other persons mentioned in this history went,
likewise, each to his own place. ...............

A little more than twenty years after, the wisest and holiest man in the
East was writing of Cyril, just deceased--

'His death made those who survived him joyful; but it grieved most
probably the dead; and there is cause to fear, lest, finding his
presence too troublesome, they should send him back to us.... May it
come to pass, by your prayers, that he may obtain mercy and forgiveness,
that the immeasurable grace of God may prevail over his wickedness!....'

So wrote Theodoret in days when men had not yet intercalated into Holy
Writ that line of an obscure modern hymn, which proclaims to man the
good news that 'There is no repentance in the grave.' Let that be as it
may, Cyril has gone to his own place. What that place is in history is
but too well known. What it is in the sight of Him unto whom all live
for ever, is no concern of ours. May He whose mercy is over all His
works, have mercy upon all, whether orthodox or unorthodox, Papist or
Protestant, who, like Cyril, begin by lying for the cause of truth; and
setting off upon that evil road, arrive surely, with the Scribes and
Pharisees of old, sooner or later at their own place!

True, he and his monks had conquered; but Hypatia did not die unavenged.
In the hour of that unrighteous victory, the Church of Alexandria
received a deadly wound. It had admitted and sanctioned those habits of
doing evil that good may come, of pious intrigue, and at last of open
persecution, which are certain to creep in wheresoever men attempt to
set up a merely religious empire, independent of human relationships and
civil laws; to 'establish,' in short, a 'theocracy,' and by that very
act confess their secret disbelief that God is ruling already. And the
Egyptian Church grew, year by year, more lawless and inhuman. Freed from
enemies without, and from the union which fear compels, it turned its
ferocity inward, to prey on its own vitals, and to tear itself in pieces
by a voluntary suicide, with mutual anathemas and exclusions, till it
ended as a mere chaos of idolatrous sects, persecuting each other for
metaphysical propositions, which, true or false, were equally heretical
in their mouths, because they used them only as watch-words of division.
Orthodox or unorthodox, they knew not God, for they knew neither
righteousness, nor love, nor peace.... They 'hated their brethren, and
walked on still in darkness, not knowing whither they were going'....
till Amrou and his Mohammedans appeared; and whether they discovered the
fact or not, they went to their own place....

Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small;
Though He stands and waits with patience, with exactness grinds He all--

And so found, in due time, the philosophers as well as the ecclesiastics
of Alexandria.

Twenty years after Hypatia's death, philosophy was flickering down
to the very socket. Hypatia's murder was its death-blow. In language
tremendous and unmistakable, philosophers had been informed that mankind
had done with them; that they had been weighed in the balances, and
found wanting; that if they had no better Gospel than that to preach,
they must make way for those who had. And they did make way. We hear
little or nothing of them or their wisdom henceforth, except at Athens,
where Proclus, Marinus, Isidore, and others kept up 'the golden chain of
the Platonic succession,' and descended deeper and deeper, one after the
other, into the realms of confusion--confusion of the material with
the spiritual, of the subject with the object, the moral with the
intellectual; self-consistent in one thing only,--namely, in their
exclusive Pharisaism utterly unable to proclaim any good news for man
as man, or even to conceive of the possibility of such, and gradually
looking with more and more complacency on all superstitious which
did not involve that one idea, which alone they stated,--namely,
the Incarnation; craving after signs and wonders, dabbling in magic,
astrology, and barbarian fetichisms; bemoaning the fallen age, and
barking querulously at every form of human thought except their own;
writing pompous biographies, full of bad Greek, worse taste, and still
worse miracles....

--That last drear mood Of envious sloth, and proud decrepitude; No
faith, no art, no king, no priest, no God; While round the freezing
founts of life in snarling ring, Crouch'd on the bareworn sod, Babbling
about the unreturning spring, And whining for dead gods, who cannot
save, The toothless systems shiver to their grave.

The last scene of their tragedy was not without a touch of pathos
.... In the year 629, Justinian finally closed, by imperial edict, the
schools of Athens. They had nothing more to tell the world, but what the
world had yawned over a thousand times before: why should they break
the blessed silence by any more such noises? The philosophers felt so
themselves. They had no mind to be martyrs, for they had nothing for
which to testify. They had no message for mankind, and mankind no
interest for them. All that was left for them was to take care of their
own souls; and fancying that they saw something like Plato's ideal
republic in the pure monotheism of the Guebres, their philosophic
emperor the Khozroo, and his holy caste of magi, seven of them set
