of lobby, opening upon the porter's lodge, which in turn adjoined the
law-courts. From this lodge fifteen steps led down into a vast courtyard
closed by an iron gate and railing. Usually this gate was only locked at
night. If it should happen to be open on this occasion it would offer a
possibility of escape.

Morgan found the key of the prisoners' court, opened the door, and
rushed with his companions to the porter's lodge and to the portico,
from which the fifteen steps led down into the courtyard. From there the
three young men could see that all hope was lost.

The iron gate was closed, and eighty men, dragoons and gendarmes, were
drawn up in front of it.

When the four prisoners, free and armed to the teeth, sprang from the
porter's lodge to the portico, a great cry, a cry of astonishment and
terror, burst from the crowd in the street beyond the railing.

Their aspect was formidable, indeed; for to preserve the freedom of
their movements, perhaps to hide the shedding of blood, which would have
shown so quickly on their white linen, they were naked to the waist. A
handkerchief knotted around their middle bristled with weapons.

A glance sufficed to show them that they were indeed masters of their
own lives, but not of their liberty. Amid the clamoring of the crowd and
the clanking of the sabres, as they were drawn from their scabbards, the
young men paused an instant and conferred together. Then Montbar, after
shaking hands with his companions, walked down the fifteen steps and
advanced to the gate.

When he was within four yards of the gate he turned, with a last glance
at his comrades, bowed graciously to the now silent mob, and said to
the soldiers: "Very well, gentlemen of the gendarmerie! Very well,
dragoons!"

Then, placing the muzzle of his pistol to his mouth, he blew out his
brains.

Confused and frantic cries followed the explosion, but ceased almost
immediately as Valensolle came down the steps, holding in his hand a
dagger with a straight and pointed blade. His pistols, which he did not
seem inclined to use, were still in his belt.

He advanced to a sort of shed supported on three pillars, stopped at the
first pillar, rested the hilt of his dagger upon it, and, with a last
salutation to his friends, clasped the column with one arm till
the blade had disappeared in his breast. For an instant he remained
standing, then a mortal pallor overspread his face, his arm loosened its
hold, and he fell to the ground, stone-dead.

The crowd was mute, paralyzed with horror.

It was now Ribier's turn. He advanced to the gate, and, once there,
aimed the two pistols he held at the gendarmes. He did not fire, but the
gendarmes did. Three or four shots were heard, and Ribier fell, pierced
by two balls.

Admiration seized upon the spectators at sight of these successive
catastrophes. They saw that the young men were willing to die, but
to die with honor, and as they willed, and also with the grace of the
gladiators of antiquity. Silence therefore reigned when Morgan, now left
alone, came smiling down the steps of the portico and held up his hand
in sign that he wished to speak. Besides, what more could it want--this
eager mob; watching for blood?

A greater sight had been given to it than it came to see. Four dead men
had been promised to it; four heads were to be cut off; but here was
variety in death, unexpected, picturesque. It was natural, therefore,
that the crowd should keep silence when Morgan was seen to advance.

He held neither pistols nor daggers in his hands; they were in his belt.
He passed the body of Valensolle, and placed himself between those of
Jayat and Ribier.

"Gentlemen," said he, "let us negotiate."

The hush that followed was so great that those present seemed scarcely
to breathe. Morgan said: "There lies a man who has blown out his brains
[he pointed to Jayat]; here lies one who stabbed himself [he designated
Valensolle]; a third who has been shot [he indicated Ribier]; you want
to see the fourth guillotined. I understand that."

A dreadful shudder passed through the crowd.

"Well," continued Morgan, "I am willing to give you that satisfaction. I
am ready, but I desire to go to the scaffold in my own way. No one
shall touch me; if any one does come near me I shall blow out his
brains--except that gentleman," continued Morgan, pointing to the
executioner. "This is his affair and mine only."

The crowd apparently thought this request reasonable, for from all sides
came the cry, "Yes, yes, yes."

The officer saw that the quickest way to end the matter was to yield to
Morgan's demand.

"Will you promise me," he asked, "that if your hands and feet are not
bound you will not try to escape?"

"I give my word of honor," replied Morgan.

"Then," said the officer; "stand aside, and let us take up the bodies of
your comrades."

"That is but right," said Morgan, and he turned aside to a wall about
ten paces distant and leaned against it.

The gate opened. Three men dressed in black entered the courtyard and
picked up the bodies one after the other. Ribier was not quite dead; he
opened his eyes and seemed to look for Morgan.

"Here I am," said the latter. "Rest easy, dear friend, I follow."

Ribier closed his eyes without uttering a word.

When the three bodies had been removed, the officer of the gendarmerie
addressed Morgan.

"Are you ready, sir?" he asked.

"Yes," replied Morgan, bowing with exquisite politeness.

"Then come."

"I come."

And he took his place between a platoon of gendarmerie and a detachment
of dragoons.

"Will you mount the cart, sir, or go on foot?" asked the captain.

"On foot, on foot, sir. I am anxious that all shall see it is my
pleasure to be guillotined, and that I am not afraid."

The sinister procession crossed the Place des Lisses and skirted the
walls of the Hotel Montbazon. The cart bearing the three bodies came
first, then the dragoons, then Morgan walking alone in a clear space of
some ten feet before and behind him, then the gendarmes. At the end of
the wall they turned to the left.

Suddenly, through an opening that existed at that time between the wall
and the market-place, Morgan saw the scaffold raising its two posts to
heaven like two bloody arms.

"Faugh!" he exclaimed, "I have never seen a guillotine, and I had no
idea it was so ugly."

Then, without further remark, he drew his dagger and plunged it into his
breast up to the hilt.

The captain of the gendarmerie saw the movement without being in time
to prevent it. He spurred his horse toward Morgan, who, to his own
amazement and that of every one else, remained standing. But Morgan,
drawing a pistol from his belt and cocking it, exclaimed: "Stop! It was
agreed that no one should touch me. I shall die alone, or three of us
will die together."

The captain reined back his horse.

"Forward!" said Morgan.

They reached the foot of the guillotine. Morgan drew out his dagger and
struck again as deeply as before. A cry of rage rather than pain escaped
him.

"My soul must be riveted to my body," he said.

Then, as the assistants wished to help him mount the scaffold on which
the executioner was awaiting him, he cried out: "No, I say again, let no
one touch me."

Then he mounted the three steps without staggering.

When he reached the platform, he drew out the dagger again and struck
himself a third time. Then a frightful laugh burst from his lips;
flinging the dagger, which he had wrenched from the third ineffectual
wound, at the feet of the executioner, he exclaimed: "By my faith! I
have done enough. It is your turn; do it if you can."

A minute later the head of the intrepid young man fell upon the
scaffold, and by a phenomenon of that unconquerable vitality which he
possessed it rebounded and rolled forward beyond the timbers of the
guillotine.

Go to Bourg, as I did, and they will tell you that, as the head rolled
forward, it was heard to utter the name of Amelie.

The dead bodies were guillotined after the living one; so that the
spectators, instead of losing anything by the events we have just
related, enjoyed a double spectacle.




CHAPTER LIV. THE CONFESSION

Three days after the events we have just recited, a carriage covered
with dust and drawn by two horses white with foam stopped about seven of
the evening before the gate of the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines. To the
great astonishment of the person who was in such haste to arrive, the
gates were open, a crowd of peasants filled the courtyard, and men and
women were kneeling on the portico. Then, his sense of hearing being
rendered more acute by astonishment at what he had seen, he fancied he
heard the ringing of a bell.

He opened the door of the chaise, sprang out, crossed the courtyard
rapidly, went up the portico, and found the stairway leading to the
first floor filled with people.

Up the stairs he ran as he had up the portico, and heard what seemed to
him a murmured prayer from his sister's bedroom. He went to the room.
The door was open. Madame de Montrevel and little Edouard were kneeling
beside Amelie's pillow; Charlotte, Michel, and his son Jacques were
close at hand. The curate of Sainte-Claire was administering the last
sacraments; the dismal scene was lighted only by the light of the
wax-tapers.

The reader has recognized Roland in the traveller whose carriage stopped
at the gate. The bystanders made way for him; he entered the room with
his head uncovered and knelt beside his mother.

The dying girl lay on her back, her hands clasped, her head raised on
her pillows, her eyes fixed upon the sky, in a sort of ecstasy. She
seemed unconscious of Roland's arrival. It was as though her soul were
floating between heaven and earth, while the body still belonged to this
world.

Madame de Montrevel's hand sought that of Roland, and finding it, the
poor mother dropped her head on his shoulder, sobbing. The sobs passed
unnoticed by the dying girl, even as her brother's arrival had done.
She lay there perfectly immovable. Only when the viaticum had been
administered, when the priest's voice promised her eternal blessedness,
her marble lips appeared to live again, and she murmured in a feeble but
intelligible voice: "Amen!"

Then the bell rang again; the choir-boy, who was carrying it, left the
room first, followed by the two acolytes who bore the tapers, then the
cross-bearer, and lastly the priest with the Host. All the strangers
present followed the procession, and the family and household were
left alone. The house, an instant before so full of sound and life, was
silent, almost deserted.

The dying girl had not moved; her lips were closed, her hands clasped,
her eyes raised to heaven. After a few minutes Roland stooped to his
mother's ear, and whispered: "Come out with me, mother, I must speak
to you." Madame de Montrevel rose. She pushed little Edouard toward the
bed, and the child stood on tiptoe to kiss his sister on the forehead.
Then the mother followed him, and, leaning over, with a sob she
pressed a kiss upon the same spot. Roland, with dry eyes but a breaking
heart--he would have given much for tears in which to drown his
sorrow--kissed his sister as his mother and little brother had done. She
seemed as insensible to this kiss as to the preceding ones.

Edouard left the room, followed by Madame de Montrevel and Roland. Just
as they reached the door they stopped, quivering. They had heard the
name of Roland, uttered in a low but distinct tone.

Roland turned. Amelie called him a second time.

"Did you call me, Amelie?" he asked.

"Yes," replied the dying girl.

"Alone, or with my mother?"

"Alone."

That voice, devoid of emphasis, yet perfectly intelligible, had
something glacial about it; it was like an echo from another world.

"Go, mother," said Roland. "You see that she wishes to be alone with
me."

"O my God!" murmured Madame de Montrevel, "can there still be hope?"

Low as these words were, the dying girl heard them.

"No, mother," she said. "God has permitted me to see my brother again;
but to-night I go to Him."

Madame de Montrevel groaned.

"Roland, Roland!" she said, "she is there already."

Roland signed to her to leave them alone, and she went away with little
Edouard. Roland closed the door, and returned to his sister's bedside
with unutterable emotion.

Her body was already stiffening in death; the breath from her lips would
scarcely have dimmed a mirror; the eyes only, wide-open, were fixed and
brilliant, as though the whole remaining life of the body, dead before
its time, were centred, there. Roland had heard of this strange state
called ecstasy, which is nothing else than catalepsy. He saw that Amelie
was a victim of that preliminary death.

"I am here, sister," he said. "What can I do for you?"

"I knew you would come," she replied, still without moving, "and I
waited for you."

"How did you know that I was coming?" asked Roland.

"I saw you coming."

Roland shuddered.

"Did you know why I was coming?" he asked.

"Yes; I prayed God so earnestly in my heart that He gave me strength to
rise and write to you."

"When was that?"

"Last night."

"Where is the letter?"

"Under my pillow. Take it, and read it."

Roland hesitated an instant. Was his sister delirious?

"Poor Amelie!" he murmured.

"Do not pity me," she said, "I go to join him."

"Whom?" asked Roland.

"Him whom I loved, and whom you killed."

Roland uttered a cry. This was delirium; or else--what did his sister
mean?

"Amelie," said he, "I came to question you--"

"About Lord Tanlay; yes, I know," replied the young girl.

"You knew! How could you know?"

"Did I not tell you I saw you coming, and knew why you came?"

"Then answer me."

"Do not turn me from God and from him, Roland. I have written it all;
read my letter."

Roland slipped his hand beneath the pillow, convinced that his sister
was delirious.

To his great astonishment he felt a paper, which he drew out. It was
a sealed letter; on it were written these words: "For Roland, who will
come to-morrow."

He went over to the night-light in order to read the letter, which was
dated the night before at eleven o'clock in the evening.

  My brother, we have each a terrible thing to forgive the
  other.

Roland looked at his sister; she was still motionless. He continued to
read:

  I loved Charles de Sainte-Hermine; I did more than
  love him, he was my lover.

"Oh!" muttered the young man between his teeth, "he shall die."

"He is dead," said Amelie.

The young man gave a cry of astonishment. He had uttered the words to
which Amelie had replied too low even to hear them himself. His eyes
went back to the letter.

  There was no legal marriage possible between the sister
  of Roland de Montrevel and the leader of the Companions
  of Jehu: that was the terrible secret which I bore--and
  it crushed me.

  One person alone had to know it, and I told him; that
  person was Sir John Tanlay.

  May God forever bless that noble-hearted man, who
  promised to break off an impossible marriage, and who
  kept his word. Let his life be sacred to you, Roland; he
  has been my only friend in sorrow, and his tears have
  mingled with mine.

  I loved Charles de Saint-Hermine; I was his mistress;
  that is the terrible thing you must forgive.

  But, in exchange, you caused his death; that is the
  terrible thing I now forgive you.

  Oh! come fast, Roland, for I cannot die till you are
  here.

  To die is to see him again; to die is to be with him and
  never to leave him again. I am glad to die.

All was clearly and plainly written; there was no sign of delirium in
the letter.

Roland read it through twice, and stood for an instant silent,
motionless, palpitating, full of bitterness; then pity got the better
of his anger. He went to Amelie, stretched his hand over her, and said:
"Sister, I forgive you."

A slight quiver shook the dying body.

"And now," she said, "call my mother, that I may die in her arms."

Roland opened the door and called Madame de Montrevel. She was waiting
and came at once.

"Is there any change?" she asked, eagerly.

"No," replied Roland, "only Amelie wishes to die in your arms."

Madame de Montrevel fell upon her knees beside her daughter's bed.

Then Amelie, as though an invisible hand had loosened the bonds that
held her rigid body to the bed, rose slowly, parted the hands that
were clasped upon her breast, and let one fall slowly into those of her
mother.

"Mother," she said, "you gave me life and you have taken it from me; I
bless you. It was a mother's act. There was no happiness possible for
your daughter in this life."

Then, letting her other hand fall into that of Roland, who was kneeling
on the other side of the bed, she said: "We have forgiven each other,
brother?"

"Yes, dear Amelie," he replied, "and from the depths of our hearts, I
hope."

"I have still one last request to make."

"What is it?"

"Do not forget that Lord Tanlay has been my best friend."

"Fear nothing," said Roland; "Lord Tanlay's life is sacred to me."

Amelie drew a long breath; then in a voice which showed her growing
weakness, she said: "Farewell, mother; farewell, Roland; kiss Edouard
for me."

Then with a cry from her soul, in which there was more of joy than
sadness, she said: "Here I am, Charles, here I am!"

She fell back upon her bed, withdrawing her two hands as she did so, and
clasping them upon her breast again.

Roland and his mother rose and leaned over her. She had resumed her
first position, except that her eyelids were closed and her breath
extinguished. Amelie's martyrdom was over, she was dead.




CHAPTER LV. INVULNERABLE

Amelie died during the night of Monday and Tuesday, that is to say,
the 2d and 3d of June. On the evening of Thursday, the 5th of June, the
Grand Opera at Paris was crowded for the second presentation of "Ossian,
or the Bards."

The great admiration which the First Consul professed for the poems of
Macpherson was universally known; consequently the National Academy,
as much in flattery as from literary choice, had brought out an opera,
which, in spite of all exertions, did not appear until a month after
General Bonaparte had left Paris to join the Army of the Reserves.

In the balcony to the left sat a lover of music who was noticeable
for the deep attention he paid to the performance. During the interval
between the acts, the door-keeper came to him and said in a low voice:

"Pardon me, sir, are you Sir John Tanlay?"

"I am."

"In that case, my lord, a gentleman has a message to give you; he says
it is of the utmost importance, and asks if you will speak to him in the
corridor."

"Oh!" said Sir John, "is he an officer?"

"He is in civilian's dress, but he looks like an officer."

"Very good," replied Sir John; "I know who he is."

He rose and followed the woman. Roland was waiting in the corridor. Lord
Tanlay showed no surprise on seeing him, but the stern look on the young
man's face repressed the first impulse of his deep affection, which was
to fling himself upon his friend's breast.

"Here I am, sir," said Sir John.

Roland bowed.

"I have just come from your hotel," he said. "You have, it seems, taken
the precaution to inform the porter of your whereabout every time you
have gone out, so that persons who have business with you should know
where to find you."

"That is true, sir."

"The precaution is a good one, especially for those who, like myself,
come from a long distance and are hurried and have no time to spare."

"Then," said Sir John, "was it to see me that you left the army and came
to Paris?"

"Solely for that honor, sir; and I trust that you will guess my motives,
and spare me the necessity of explaining them."

"From this moment I am at your service, sir," replied Sir John.

"At what hour to-morrow can two of my friends wait upon you?"

"From seven in the morning until midnight; unless you prefer that it
should be now."

"No, my lord; I have but just arrived, and I must have time to find my
friends and give them my instructions. If it will not inconvenience you,
they will probably call upon you to-morrow between ten and eleven. I
shall be very much obliged to you if the affair we have to settle could
be arranged for the same day."

"I believe that will be possible, sir; as I understand it to be your
wish, the delay will not be from my side."

"That is all I wished to know, my lord; pray do not let me detain you
longer."

Roland bowed, and Sir John returned the salutation. Then the young man
left the theatre and Sir John returned to his seat in the balcony. The
words had been exchanged in such perfectly well modulated voices, and
with such an impassible expression of countenance on both sides, that
no one would have supposed that a quarrel had arisen between the two men
who had just greeted each other so courteously.

It happened to be the reception day of the minister of war. Roland
returned to his hotel, removed the traces of his journey, jumped into a
carriage, and a little before ten he was announced in the salon of the
citizen Carnot.

Two purposes took him there: in the first place, he had a verbal
communication to make to the minister of war from the First Consul; in
the second place, he hoped to find there the two witnesses he was in
need of to arrange his meeting with Sir John.

Everything happened as Roland had hoped. He gave the minister of war all
the details of the crossing of the Mont Saint-Bernard and the situation
of the army; and he himself found the two friends of whom he was in
search. A few words sufficed to let them know what he wished; soldiers
are particularly open to such confidences.

Roland spoke of a grave insult, the nature of which must remain a secret
even to his seconds. He declared that he was the offended party, and
claimed the choice of weapons and mode of fighting--advantages which
belong to the challenger.

The young fellows agreed to present themselves to Sir John the following
morning at the Hotel Mirabeau, Rue de Richelieu, at nine o'clock, and
make the necessary arrangements with Sir John's seconds. After that they
would join Roland at the Hotel de Paris in the same street.

Roland returned to his room at eleven that evening, wrote for about an
hour, then went to bed and to sleep.

At half-past nine the next morning his friends came to him. They had
just left Sir John. He admitted all Roland's contentions; declared that
he would not discuss any of the arrangements; adding that if Roland
regarded himself as the injured party, it was for him to dictate the
conditions. To their remark that they had hoped to discuss such matters
with two of his friends and not with himself, he replied that he knew no
one in Paris intimately enough to ask their assistance in such a matter,
and that he hoped, once on the ground, that one of Roland's seconds
would consent to act in his behalf. The two officers were agreed that
Lord Tanlay had conducted himself with the utmost punctiliousness in
every respect.

Roland declared that Sir John's request for the services of one of his
two seconds was not only just but suitable, and he authorized either
one of them to act for Sir John and to take charge of his interests. All
that remained for Roland to do was to dictate his conditions. They were
as follows!

Pistols were chosen. When loaded the adversaries were to stand at five
paces. At the third clap of the seconds' hands they were to fire. It
was, as we see, a duel to the death, in which, if either survived, he
would be at the mercy of his opponent. Consequently the young officers
made many objections; but Roland insisted, declaring that he alone
could judge of the gravity of the insult offered him, and that no other
reparation than this would satisfy him. They were obliged to yield
to such obstinacy. But the friend who was to act as Sir John's second
refused to bind himself for his principal, declaring that unless Sir
John ordered it he would refuse to be a party to such a murder.

"Don't excite yourself, dear friend," said Roland, "I know Sir John, and
I think he will be more accommodating than you."

The seconds returned to Sir John; they found him at his English
breakfast of beefsteak, potatoes and tea. On seeing them he rose,
invited them to share his repast, and, on their refusing, placed himself
at their disposal. They began by assuring him that he could count upon
one of them to act as his second. The one acting for Roland announced
the conditions. At each stipulation Sir John bowed his head in token of
assent and merely replied: "Very good!"

The one who had taken charge of his interests attempted to make some
objections to a form of combat that, unless something impossible to
foresee occurred, must end in the death of both parties; but Lord Tanlay
begged him to make no objections.

"M. de Montrevel is a gallant man," he said; "I do not wish to thwart
him in anything; whatever he does is right."

It only remained to settle the hour and the place of meeting. On these
points Sir John again placed himself at Roland's disposal. The two
seconds left even more delighted with him after this interview than they
had been after the first. Roland was waiting for them and listened to
what had taken place.

"What did I tell you?" he asked.

They requested him to name the time and place. He selected seven o'clock
in the evening in the Allee de la Muette. At that hour the Bois was
almost deserted, but the light was still good enough (it will be
remembered that this was in the month of June) for the two adversaries
to fight with any weapon.

No one had spoken of the pistols. The young men proposed to get them at
an armorer's.

"No," said Roland, "Sir John has an excellent pair of duelling pistols
which I have already used. If he is not unwilling to fight with those
pistols I should prefer them to all others."

The young man who was now acting as Sir John's second went to him with
the three following questions: Whether the time and place suited him,
and whether he would allow his pistols to be used.

Lord Tanlay replied by regulating his watch by that of his second and by
handing him the box of pistols.

"Shall I call for you, my lord?" asked the young man.

Sir John smiled sadly.

"Needless," he replied; "you are M. de Montrevel's friend, and you will
find the drive pleasanter with him than with me. I will go on horseback
with my servant. You will find me on the ground."

The young officer carried this reply to Roland.

"What did I tell you?" observed Roland again.

It was then mid-day, there were still seven hours before them, and
Roland dismissed his friends to their various pleasures and occupations.
At half-past six precisely they were to be at his door with three horses
and two servants. It was necessary, in order to avoid interference, that
the trip should appear to be nothing more than an ordinary promenade.

At half-past six precisely the waiter informed Roland that his friends
were in the courtyard. Roland greeted them cordially and sprang into his
saddle. The party followed the boulevards as far as the Place Louis XV.
and then turned up the Champs Elysees. On the way the strange phenomenon
that had so much astonished Sir John at the time of Roland's duel with
M. de Barjols recurred. Roland's gayety might have been thought an
affectation had it not been so evidently genuine. The two young
men acting as seconds were of undoubted courage, but even they were
bewildered by such utter indifference. They might have understood it
had this affair been an ordinary duel, for coolness and dexterity insure
their possessor a great advantage over his adversary; but in a combat
like this to which they were going neither coolness nor dexterity would
avail to save the combatants, if not from death at least from some
terrible wound.

Furthermore, Roland urged on his horse like a man in haste, so that
they reached the end of the Allee de la Muette five minutes before the
appointed time.

A man was walking in the allee. Roland recognized Sir John. The seconds
watched the young man's face as he caught sight of his adversary. To
their great astonishment it expressed only tender good-will.

A few more steps and the four principal actors in the scene that was
about to take place met.

Sir John was perfectly calm, but his face wore a look of profound
sadness. It was evident that this meeting grieved him as deeply as it
seemed to rejoice Roland.

The party dismounted. One of the seconds took the box of pistols from
the servants and ordered them to lead away the horses, and not to return
until they heard pistol-shots. The principals then entered the part of
the woods that seemed the thickest, and looked about them for a suitable
spot. For the rest, as Roland had foreseen, the Bois was deserted; the
approach of the dinner hour had called every one home.

They found a small open spot exactly suited to their needs. The seconds
looked at Roland and Sir John. They both nodded their heads in approval.

"Is there to be any change?" one of the seconds asked Sir John.

"Ask M. de Montrevel," replied Lord Tanlay; "I am entirely at his
disposal."

"Nothing," said Roland.

The seconds took the pistols from the box and loaded them. Sir
John stood apart, switching the heads of the tall grasses with his
riding-whip.

Roland watched him hesitatingly for a moment, then taking his resolve,
he walked resolutely toward him. Sir John raised his head and looked at
him with apparent hope.

"My lord," said Roland, "I may have certain grievances against you, but
I know you to be, none the less, a man of your word."

"You are right," replied Sir John.

"If you survive me will you keep the promise that you made me at
Avignon?"

"There is no possibility that I shall survive you, but so long as I have
any breath left in my body, you can count upon me."

"I refer to the final disposition to be made of my body."

"The same, I presume, as at Avignon?"

"The same, my lord."

"Very well, you may set your mind at rest."

Roland bowed to Sir John and returned to his friends.

"Have you any wishes in case the affair terminates fatally?" asked one
of them.

"One only."

"What is it?"

"That you permit Sir John to take entire charge of the funeral
arrangements. For the rest, I have a note in my left hand for him. In
case I have not time to speak after the affair is over, you are to open
my hand and give him the note."

"Is that all?"

"Yes."

"The pistols are loaded, then."

"Very well, inform Sir John."

One of the seconds approached Sir John. The other measured off five
paces. Roland saw that the distance was greater than he had supposed.

"Excuse me," he said, "I said three paces."

"Five," replied the officer who was measuring the distance.

"Not at all, dear friend, you are wrong."

He turned to Sir John and to the other second questioningly.

"Three paces will do very well," replied Sir John, bowing.

There was nothing to be said if the two adversaries were agreed. The
five paces were reduced to three. Then two sabres were laid on the
ground to mark the limit. Sir John and Roland took their places,
standing so that their toes touched the sabres. A pistol was then handed
to each of them.

They bowed to say that they were ready. The two seconds stepped aside.
They were to give the signal by clapping their hands three times. At the
first clap the principals were to cock their pistols; at the second to
take aim; at the third to fire.

The three claps were given at regular intervals amid the most profound
silence; the wind itself seemed to pause and the rustle of the trees
was hushed. The principals were calm, but the seconds were visibly
distressed.

At the third clap two shots rang out so simultaneously that they seemed
but one. But to the utter astonishment of the seconds the combatants
remained standing. At the signal Roland had lowered his pistol and fired
into the ground. Sir John had raised his and cut the branch of a tree
three feet behind Roland. Each was clearly amazed--amazed that he
himself was still living, after having spared his antagonist.

Roland was the first to speak.

"Ah!" he cried, "my sister was right in saying that you were the most
generous man on earth."

And throwing his pistol aside he opened his arms to Sir John, who rushed
into them.

"Ah! I understand," he said. "You wanted to die; but, God be thanked, I
am not your murderer."

The two seconds came up.

"What is the matter?" they asked together.

"Nothing," said Roland, "except that I could not die by the hand of the
man I love best on earth. You saw for yourselves that he preferred to
die rather than kill me."

Then throwing himself once more into Sir John's arms, and grasping the
hands of his two friends, he said: "I see that I must leave that to the
Austrians. And now, gentlemen, you must excuse me. The First Consul is
on the eve of a great battle in Italy, and I have not a moment to lose
if I am to be there."

Leaving Sir John to make what explanations he thought suitable to the
seconds, Roland rushed to the road, sprang upon his horse, and returned
to Paris at a gallop.




CHAPTER LVI. CONCLUSION

In the meantime the French army continued its march, and on the 5th of
June it entered Milan.

There was little resistance. The fort of Milan was invested. Murat,
sent to Piacenza, had taken the city without a blow. Lannes had defeated
General Ott at Montebello. Thus disposed, the French army was in the
rear of the Austrians before the latter were aware of it.

During the night of the 8th of June a courier arrived from Murat,
who, as we have said, was occupying Piacenza. Murat had intercepted a
despatch from General Melas, and was now sending it to Bonaparte. This
despatch announced the capitulation of Genoa; Massena, after eating
horses, dogs, cats and rats, had been forced to surrender. Melas spoke
of the Army of the Reserves with the utmost contempt; he declared that
the story of Bonaparte's presence in Italy was a hoax; and asserted that
he knew for certain that the First Consul was in Paris.

Here was news that must instantly be imparted to Bonaparte, for it came
