CHORUS

  Who [3] gave sea-safety; may he bless on land!
      [Footnote:   3: Poseidon] DANAUS

  This next is Hermes, carved in Grecian wise.

CHORUS

  Then let him herald help to freedom won.

DANAUS

  Lastly, adore this altar consecrate
  To many lesser gods in one; then crouch
  On holy ground, a flock of doves that flee,
  Scared by no alien hawks, a kin not kind,
  Hateful, and fain of love more hateful still.
  Foul is the bird that rends another bird,
  And foul the men who hale unwilling maids,
  From sire unwilling, to the bridal bed.
  Never on earth, nor in the lower world,
  Shall lewdness such as theirs escape the ban:
  There too, if men say right, a God there is
  Who upon dead men turns their sin to doom,
  To final doom. Take heed, draw hitherward,
  That from this hap your safety ye may win.
                                      [_Enter the_ KING OF ARGOS.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Speak--of what land are ye? No Grecian band
  Is this to whom I speak, with Eastern robes
  And wrappings richly dight: no Argive maid,
  No woman in all Greece such garb doth wear.
  This too gives marvel, how unto this land,
  Unheralded, unfriended, without guide,
  And without fear, ye came? yet wands I see,
  True sign of suppliance, by you laid down
  On shrines of these our gods of festival.
  No land but Greece can read such signs aright.
  Much else there is, conjecture well might guess,
  But let words teach the man who stands to hear.

CHORUS

  True is the word thou spakest of my garb;
  But speak I unto thee as citizen,
  Or Hermes' wandbearer, or chieftain king?

THE KING OF ARGOS

  For that, take heart and answer without fear.
  I am Pelasgus, ruler of this land,
  Child of Palaichthon, whom the earth brought forth;
  And, rightly named from me, the race who reap
  This country's harvests are Pelasgian called.
  And o'er the wide and westward-stretching land,
  Through which the lucent wave of Strymon flows
  I rule;  Perrhaebia's land my boundary is
  Northward, and Pindus' further slopes, that watch
  Paeonia, and Dodona's mountain ridge.
  West, east, the limit of the washing seas
  Restrains my rule--the interspace is mine.
  But this whereon we stand is Apian land,
  Styled so of old from the great healer's name;
  For Apis, coming from Naupactus' shore
  Beyond the strait, child of Apollo's self
  And like him seer and healer, cleansed this land
  From man-devouring monsters, whom the earth,
  Stained with pollution of old bloodshedding,
  Brought forth in malice, beasts of ravening jaws,
  A grisly throng of serpents manifold.
  And healings of their hurt, by knife and charm,
  Apis devised, unblamed of Argive men,
  And in their prayers found honour, for reward.
  --Lo, thou hast heard the tokens that I give:
  Speak now thy race, and tell a forthright tale;
  In sooth, this people loves not many words.

CHORUS

  Short is my word and clear. Of Argive race
  We come, from her, the ox-horned maiden who
  Erst bare the sacred child. My word shall give
  Whate'er can 'stablish this my soothfast tale.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  O stranger maids, I may not trust this word,
  That ye have share in this our Argive race.
  No likeness of our country do ye bear,
  But semblance as of Libyan womankind.
  Even such a stock by Nilus' banks might grow;
  Yea and the Cyprian stamp, in female forms,
  Shows to the life, what males impressed the same.
  And, furthermore, of roving Indian maids
  Whose camping-grounds by Aethiopia lie,
  And camels burdened even as mules, and bearing
  Riders, as horses bear, mine ears have heard;
  And tales of flesh-devouring mateless maids
  Called Amazons: to these, if bows ye bare,
  I most had deemed you like. Speak further yet,
  That of your Argive birth the truth I learn.

CHORUS

  Here in this Argive land--so runs the tale--
  Io was priestess once of Hera's fane.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Yea, truth it is, and far this word prevails:
  Is't said that Zeus with mortal mingled love?

CHORUS

  Ay, and that Hera that embrace surmised.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  How issued then this strife of those on high?

CHORUS

  By Hera's will, a heifer she became.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Held Zeus aloof then from the horned beast?

CHORUS

  'Tis said, he loved, in semblance of a bull.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  And his stern consort, did she aught thereon?

CHORUS

  One myriad-eyed she set, the heifer's guard.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  How namest thou this herdsman many-eyed?

CHORUS

  Argus, the child of Earth, whom Hermes slew.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Still did the goddess vex the beast ill-starred?

CHORUS

  She wrought a gadfly with a goading sting.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Thus drave she Io hence, to roam afar?

CHORUS

  Yea--this thy word coheres exact with mine.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Then to Canopus and to Memphis came she?

CHORUS

  And by Zeus' hand was touched, and bare a child.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Who vaunts him the Zeus-mated creature's son?

CHORUS

  Epaphus, named rightly from the saving touch.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  And whom in turn did Epaphus beget?[4]

[Footnote:   4: Here one verse at least has been lost. The conjecture
of Bothe seems to be verified, as far as substance is concerned, by
the next line, and has consequently been adopted.]

CHORUS

  Libya, with name of a wide land endowed.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  And who from her was born unto the race?

CHORUS

  Belus: from him two sons, my father one.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Speak now to me his name, this greybeard wise.

CHORUS

  Revere the gods thus crowned, who steer the State.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Awe thrills me, seeing these shrines with leafage crowned.

CHORUS

  Yea, stern the wrath of Zeus, the suppliants' lord.
    Child of Palaichthon, royal chief
      Of thy Pelasgians, hear!
    Bow down thine heart to my relief--
      A fugitive, a suppliant, swift with fear,
    A creature whom the wild wolves chase
    O'er toppling crags; in piteous case
      Aloud, afar she lows,
  Calling the herdsman's trusty arm to save her from her foes!

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Lo, with bowed heads beside our city shrines
  Ye sit 'neath shade of new-plucked olive-boughs.
  Our distant kin's resentment Heaven forefend!
  Let not this hap, unhoped and unforeseen,
  Bring war on us: for strife we covet not.

CHORUS

  Justice, the daughter of right-dealing Zeus,
  Justice, the queen of suppliants, look down,
    That this our plight no ill may loose
      Upon your town!
    This word, even from the young, let age and wisdom learn:
    If thou to suppliants show grace,
    Thou shalt not lack Heaven's grace in turn,
  So long as virtue's gifts on heavenly shrines have place.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Not at my private hearth ye sit and sue;
  And if the city bear a common stain,
  Be it the common toil to cleanse the same:
  Therefore no pledge, no promise will I give,
  Ere counsel with the commonwealth be held.

CHORUS

  Nay, but the source of sway, the city's self, art thou,
    A power unjudged! thine, only thine,
    To rule the right of hearth and shrine!
  Before thy throne and sceptre all men bow!
  Thou, in all causes lord, beware the curse divine!

THE KING OF ARGOS

  May that curse fall upon mine enemies!
  I cannot aid you without risk of scathe,
  Nor scorn your prayers--unmerciful it were.
  Perplexed, distraught I stand, and fear alike
  The twofold chance, to do or not to do.

CHORUS

  Have heed of him who looketh from on high,
    The guard of woeful mortals, whosoe'er
      Unto their fellows cry,
    And find no pity, find no justice there.
  Abiding in his wrath, the suppliants' lord
  Doth smite,  unmoved by cries, unbent by prayerful word.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  But if Aegyptus' children grasp you here,
  Claiming, their country's right, to hold you theirs
  As next of kin, who dares to counter this?
  Plead ye your country's laws, if plead ye may,
  That upon you they lay no lawful hand.

CHORUS

  Let me not fall, O nevermore,
    A prey into the young men's hand;
  Rather than wed whom I abhor,
    By pilot-stars I flee this land;
  O king, take justice to thy side,
  And with the righteous powers decide!

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Hard is the cause--make me not judge thereof.
  Already I have vowed it, to do nought
  Save after counsel with my people ta'en,
  King though I be; that ne'er in after time,
  If ill fate chance, my people then may say--
  _In aid of strangers thou the state hast slain_.

CHORUS

  Zeus, lord of kinship, rules at will
    The swaying balance, and surveys
  Evil and good; to men of ill
    Gives evil, and to good men praise.
  And thou--since true those scales do sway--
  Shall thou from justice shrink away?

THE KING OF ARGOS

  A deep, a saving counsel here there needs--
  An eye that like a diver to the depth
  Of dark perplexity can pass and see,
  Undizzied, unconfused. First must we care
  That to the State and to ourselves this thing
  Shall bring no ruin; next, that wrangling hands
  Shall grasp you not as prey, nor we ourselves
  Betray you thus embracing sacred shrines,
  Nor make the avenging all-destroying god,
  Who not in hell itself sets dead men free,
  A grievous inmate, an abiding bane.--
  Spake I not right, of saving counsel's need?

CHORUS

  Yea, counsel take and stand to aid
    At Justice' side and mine.
  Betray not me, the timorous maid
    Whom far beyond the brine
  A godless violence cast forth forlorn.
    O King, wilt thou behold--
  Lord of this land, wilt thou behold me torn
    From altars manifold?
  Bethink thee of the young men's wrath and lust,
    Hold off their evil pride;
  Steel not thyself to see the suppliant thrust
    From hallowed statues' side,
  Haled by the frontlet on my forehead bound,
    As steeds are led, and drawn
  By hands that drag from shrine and altar-mound
    My vesture's fringed lawn.
  Know thou that whether for Aegyptus' race
    Thou dost their wish fulfil,
  Or for the gods and for each holy place--
    Be thy choice good or ill,
  Blow is with blow requited, grace with grace
    Such is Zeus' righteous will.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Yea, I have pondered: from the sea of doubt
  Here drives at length the bark of thought ashore;
  Landward with screw and windlass haled, and firm,
  Clamped to her props, she lies. The need is stern;
  With men or gods a mighty strife we strive
  Perforce, and either hap in grief concludes.
  For, if a house be sacked, new wealth for old
  Not hard it is to win--if Zeus the lord
  Of treasure favour--more than quits the loss,
  Enough to pile the store of wealth full high;
  Or if a tongue shoot forth untimely speech,
  Bitter and strong to goad a man to wrath,
  Soft words there be to soothe that wrath away:
  But what device shall make the war of kin
  Bloodless? that woe, the blood of many beasts,
  And victims manifold to many gods,
  Alone can cure. Right glad I were to shun
  This strife, and am more fain of ignorance
  Than of the wisdom of a woe endured.
  The gods send better than my soul foretells!

CHORUS

  Of many cries for mercy, hear the end.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Say on, then, for it shall not 'scape mine ear.

CHORUS

  Girdles we have, and bands that bind our robes.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Even so; such things beseem a woman's wear.
