
"I never said that I loved you in the sense in which you use the word.
I told you that the love which you have described in your verse, and
which," she added, falteringly, with heightened colour and with hands
tightly clasped, "I have conceived possible in my dreams, it was not
mine to give. You declared you were satisfied with such affection as
I could bestow. Hush! let me go on. You said that affection would
increase, would become love, in proportion as I knew you more. It has
not done so. Nay, it passed away; even before this time of trial and of
grief, I became aware how different from the love you professed was the
neglect which needs no excuse, for it did not pain me."

"You are cruel indeed, Mademoiselle."

"No, indeed, I am kind. I wish you to feel no pang at our parting. Truly
I had resolved, when the siege terminated, and the time to speak frankly
of our engagement came, to tell you that I shrank from the thought of
a union between us; and that it was for the happiness of both that our
promises should be mutually cancelled. The moment has come sooner than
I thought. Even had I loved you, Gustave, as deeply as--as well as
the beings of Romance love, I would not dare to wed one who calls upon
mortals to deny God, demolish His altars, treat His worship as a crime.
No; I would sooner die of a broken heart, that I might the sooner be one
of those souls privileged to pray the Divine Intercessor for merciful
light on those beloved and left dark on earth."

"Isaura!" exclaimed Gustave, his mobile temperament impressed, not by
the words of Isaura, but by the passionate earnestness with which they
were uttered, and by the exquisite spiritual beauty which her face
took from the combined sweetness and fervour of its devout
expression,--"Isaura, I merit your censure, your sentence of
condemnation; but do not ask me to give back your plighted troth. I have
not the strength to do so. More than ever, more than when first pledged
to me, I need the aid, the companionship, of my guardian angel. You
were that to me once; abandon me not now. In these terrible times of
revolution, excitable natures catch madness from each other. A writer in
the heat of his passion says much that he does not mean to be literally
taken, which in cooler moments he repents and retracts. Consider, too,
the pressure of want, of hunger. It is the opinions that you so condemn
which alone at this moment supply bread to the writer. But say you will
yet pardon me,--yet give me trial if I offend no more--if I withdraw
my aid to any attacks on your views, your religion--if I say, 'Thy God
shall be my God, and thy people shall be my people.'"

"Alas!" said Isaura, softly, "ask thyself if those be words which I can
believe again. Hush!" she continued, checking his answer with a more
kindling countenance and more impassioned voice. "Are they, after all,
the words that man should address to woman? Is it on the strength of
Woman that Man should rely? Is it to her that he should say, 'Dictate
my opinions on all that belongs to the Mind of man; change the doctrines
that I have thoughtfully formed and honestly advocate; teach me how
to act on earth, clear all my doubts as to my hopes of heaven'? No,
Gustave; in this task man never should repose on woman. Thou are honest
at this moment, my poor friend; but could I believe thee to-day, thou
wouldst laugh tomorrow at what woman can be made to believe."

Stung to the quick by the truth of Isaura's accusation, Gustave
exclaimed with vehemence: "All that thou sayest is false, and thou
knowest it. The influence of woman on man for good or for evil defies
reasoning. It does mould his deeds on earth; it does either make or mar
all that future which lies between his life and his gravestone, and
of whatsoever may lie beyond the grave. Give me up now, and thou art
responsible for me, for all I do, it may be against all that thou
deemest holy. Keep thy troth yet awhile, and test me. If I come to
thee showing how I could have injured, and how for thy dear sake I have
spared, nay, aided, all that thou dost believe and reverence, then wilt
thou dare to say, 'Go thy ways alone--I forsake thee!'"

Isaura turned aside her face, but she held out her hand--it was as cold
as death. He knew that she had so far yielded, and his vanity exulted:
he smiled in secret triumph as he pressed his kiss on that icy hand and
was gone.

"This is duty--it must be duty," said Isaura to herself. "But where is
the buoyant delight that belongs to a duty achieved?--where? oh where?"
And then she stole with drooping head and heavy step into her own room,
fell on her knees, and prayed.




CHAPTER VIII.

In vain persons, be they male or female, there is a complacent
self-satisfaction in any momentary personal success, however little that
success may conduce to--nay, however much it may militate against--the
objects to which their vanity itself devotes its more permanent desires.
A vain woman may be very anxious to win A------, the magnificent, as a
partner for life; and yet feel a certain triumph when a glance of her
eye has made an evening's conquest of the pitiful B-------, although
by that achievement she incurs the imminent hazard of losing A------
altogether. So, when Gustave Rameau quitted Isaura, his first feeling
was that of triumph. His eloquence had subdued her will; she had not
finally discarded him. But as he wandered abstractedly in the biting
air, his self-complacency was succeeded by mortification and discontent.
He felt that he had committed himself to promises which he was by no
means prepared to keep. True, the promises were vague in words; but in
substance they were perfectly clear--"to spare, nay, to aid all that
Isaura esteemed and reverenced." How was this possible to him? How could
he suddenly change the whole character of his writings?--how become the
defender of marriage and property, of church and religion?--how proclaim
himself so utter an apostate? If he did, how become a leader of
the fresh revolution? how escape being its victim? Cease to write
altogether?

But then how live? His pen was his sole subsistence, save 30 sous a-day
as a National Guard--30 sous a day to him, who, in order to be Sybarite
in tastes, was Spartan in doctrine. Nothing better just at that moment
than Spartan doctrine, "Live on black broth and fight the enemy." And
the journalists in vogue so thrived upon that patriotic sentiment, that
they were the last persons compelled to drink the black broth or to
fight the enemy.

"Those women are such idiots when they meddle in politics," grumbled
between his teeth the enthusiastic advocate of Woman's Rights on all
matters of love. "And," he continued, soliloquising, "it is not as if
the girl had any large or decent dot; it is not as if she said, 'In
return for the sacrifice of your popularity, your prospects, your
opinions, I give you not only a devoted heart, but an excellent table
and a capital fire and plenty of pocket-money.' Sacre bleu! when I think
of that frozen salon, and possibly the leg of a mouse for dinner, and a
virtuous homily by way of grace, the prospect is not alluring; and the
girl herself is not so pretty as she was--grown very thin. Sur mon ame,
I think she asks too much--far more than she is worth. No, No; I had
better have accepted her dismissal. Elle n'est pas digne de moi."

Just as he arrived at that conclusion, Gustave Rameau felt the touch of
a light, a soft, a warm, yet a firm hand, on his aria. He turned, and
beheld the face of the woman whom, through so many dreary weeks, he had
sought to shun--the face of Julie Caumartin. Julie was not, as Savarin
had seen her, looking pinched and wan, with faded robes, nor, as when
met in the cafe by Lemercier, in the faded robes of a theatre. Julie
never looked more beautiful, more radiant, than she did now; and there
was a wonderful heartfelt fondness in her voice when she cried, "Mon
homme! mon homme! seul homme au monde a mon coeur, Gustave, cheri adore!
I have found thee-at last--at last!" Gustave gazed upon her, stupefied.
Involuntarily his eye glanced from the freshness of bloom in her face
which the intense cold of the atmosphere only seemed to heighten into
purer health, to her dress, which was new and handsome--black--he did
not know that it was mourning--the cloak trimmed with costly sables.
Certainly it was no mendicant for alms who thus reminded the shivering
Adonis of the claims of a pristine Venus. He stammered out her naive,
"Julie!"--and then he stopped.

"Oui, ta Julie! Petit ingrat! how I have sought for thee! how I have
hungered for the sight of thee! That monster Savarin! he would not give
me any news of thee. That is ages ago. But at least Frederic Lemercier,
whom I saw since, promised to remind thee that I lived still. He did not
do so, or I should have seen thee--n'est ce, pas?"

"Certainly, certainly--only--chere amie--you know that--that--as I
before announced to thee, I--I--was engaged in marriage--and--and--"

"But are you married?"

"No, no. Hark! Take care--is not that the hiss of an obus?"

"What then? Let it come! Would it might slay us both while my hand is in
thine!"

"Ah!" muttered Gustave, inwardly, "what a difference! This is love! No
preaching here! Elle est plus digne de moi que d'autre."

"No," he said, aloud, "I am not married. Marriage is at best a pitiful
ceremony. But if you wished for news of me, surely you must have heard
of my effect as an orator not despised in the Salle Favre. Since, I have
withdrawn from that arena. But as a journalist I flatter myself that I
have had a beau succes."

"Doubtless, doubtless, my Gustave, my Poet! Wherever thou art, thou must
be first among men. But, alas it is my fault--my misfortune. I have not
been in the midst of a world that perhaps rings of thy name."

"Not my name. Prudence compelled me to conceal that. Still, Genius
pierces under any name. You might have discovered me under my nom de
plume."

"Pardon me--I was always bete. But, oh! for so many weeks I was so
poor--so destitute. I could go nowhere, except--don't be ashamed of
me--except--"

"Yes? Go on."

"Except where I could get some money. At first to dance--you remember
my bolero. Then I got a better engagement. Do you not remember that you
taught me to recite verses? Had it been for myself alone, I might have
been contented to starve. Without thee, what was life? But thou wilt
recollect Madeleine, the old bonne who lived with me. Well, she had
attended and cherished me since I was so high-lived with my mother.
Mother! no; it seems that Madame Surville was not my mother after all.
But, of course, I could not let my old Madeleine starve; and therefore,
with a heart as heavy as lead, I danced and declaimed. My heart was not
so heavy when I recited thy songs."

"My songs! Pauvre ange!" exclaimed the Poet.

"And then, too, I thought, 'Ah, this dreadful siege! He, too, may
be poor--he may know want and hunger;' and so all I could save from
Madeleine I put into a box for thee, in case thou shouldst come back to
me some day. Mon homme, how could I go to the Salle Favre? How could
I read journals, Gustave? But thou art not married, Gustave? Parole
d'honneur?"

"Parole d'honneur! What does that matter?"

"Everything! Ah! I am not so mechante, so mauvaise tete as I was some
months ago. If thou went married, I should say, 'Blessed and sacred be
thy wife! Forget me.' But as it is, one word more. Dost thou love the
young lady, whoever she be? or does she love thee so well that it would
be sin in thee to talk trifles to Julie? Speak as honestly as if thou
wert not a poet."

"Honestly, she never said she loved me. I never thought she did. But,
you see, I was very ill, and my parents and friends and my physician
said that it was right for me to arrange my life, and marry, and so
forth. And the girl had money, and was a good match. In short, the thing
was settled. But oh, Julie, she never learned my songs by heart! She did
not love as thou mayst, and still dost. And--ah! well--now that we meet
again--now that I look in thy face--now that I hear thy voice--No, I do
not love her as I loved, and might yet love thee. But--but--"

"Well, but? oh, I guess. Thou seest me well dressed, no longer dancing
and declaiming at cafes: and thou thinkest that Julie has disgraced
herself? she is unfaithful?"

Gustave had not anticipated that frankness, nor was the idea which it
expressed uppermost in his mind when he said, "but, but--" There were
many buts all very confused, struggling through his mind as he spoke.
However, he answered as a Parisian sceptic, not ill-bred, naturally
would answer:

"My dear friend, my dear child" (the Parisian is very fond of the word
child or enfant in addressing a woman), "I have never seen thee so
beautiful as thou art now; and when thou tellest me that thou are no
longer poor, and the proof of what thou sayest is visible in the furs,
which, alas'. I cannot give thee, what am I to think?"

"Oh, mon homme, mon homme! thou art very spirituel, and that is why I
loved thee. I am very bete, and that is excuse enough for thee if thou
couldst not love me. But canst thou look me in the face and not know
that my eyes could not meet thine as they do, if I had been faithless to
thee even in a thought, when I so boldly touched thine arm? Viens chez
moi, come and let me explain all. Only--only let me repeat, if another
has rights over thee which forbid thee to come, say so kindly, and I
will never trouble thee again."

Gustave had been hitherto walking slowly by the side of Julie, amidst
the distant boom of the besiegers' cannon, while the short day began to
close; and along the dreary boulevards sauntered idlers turning to look
at the young, beautiful, well-dressed woman who seemed in such contrast
to the capital whose former luxuries the "Ondine" of imperial Paris
represented. He now offered his arm to Julie; and, quickening his pace,
said, "There is no reason why I should refuse to attend thee home,
and listen to the explanations thou dost generously condescend to
volunteer."




CHAPTER IX.

"Ah, indeed! what a difference! what a difference!" said Gustave to
himself when he entered Julie's apartment. In her palmier days, when
he had first made her acquaintance, the apartment no doubt had been
infinitely more splendid, more abundant in silks and fringes and flowers
and nicknacks; but never had it seemed so cheery and comfortable and
home-like as now. What a contrast to Isaura's dismantled chilly salon!
She drew him towards the hearth, on which, blazing though it was, she
piled fresh billets, seated him in the easiest of easy-chairs, knelt
beside him, and chafed his numbed hands in hers; and as her bright eyes
fixed tenderly on his, she looked so young and so innocent! You would
not then have called her the "Ondine of Paris."

But when, a little while after, revived by the genial warmth and moved
by the charm of her beauty, Gustave passed his arm round her neck and
sought to draw her on his lap, she slid from his embrace, shaking
her head gently, and seated herself, with a pretty air of ceremonious
decorum, at a little distance.

Gustave looked at her amazed.

"Causons," said she, gravely, "thou wouldst know why I am so well
dressed, so comfortably lodged, and I am longing to explain to thee all.
Some days ago I had just finished my performance at the cafe--, and was
putting on my shawl, when a tall Monsieur, fort bel homme, with the
air of a grand seigneur, entered the cafe, and approaching me politely,
said, 'I think I have the honour to address Mademoiselle Julie
Caumartin?' 'That is my name,' I said, surprised; and, looking at him
more intently, I recognised his face. He had come into the cafe a few
days before with thine old acquaintance Frederic Lemercier, and stood
by when I asked Frederic to give me news of thee. 'Mademoiselle,' he
continued, with a serious melancholy smile, 'I shall startle you when I
say that I am appointed to act as your guardian by the last request of
your mother.' 'Of Madame Surville?' 'Madame Surville adopted you, but
was not your mother. We cannot talk at ease here. Allow me to request
that you will accompany me to Monsieur -----, the avoue. It is not
very far from this--and by the way--I will tell you some news that may
sadden, and some news that may rejoice.'

"There was an earnestness in the voice and look of this Monsieur that
impressed me. He did not offer me his arm; but I walked by his side in
the direction he chose. As we walked he told me in very few words that
my mother had been separated from her husband, and for certain family
reasons had found it so difficult to rear and provide for me herself,
that she had accepted the offer of Madame Surville to adopt me as her
own child. While he spoke, there came dimly back to me the remembrance
of a lady who had taken me from my first home, when I had been, as
I understood, at nurse, and left me with poor dear Madame Surville,
saying, 'This is henceforth your mamma.'

"I never again saw that lady. It seems that many years afterwards my
true mother desired to regain me. Madame Surville was then dead. She
failed to trace me out, owing, alas! to my own faults and change of
name. She then entered a nunnery, but, before doing so, assigned a sum
of 100,000 francs to this gentleman, who was distantly connected with
her, with full power to him to take it to himself, or give it to my use
should he discover me, at his discretion. 'I ask you,' continued the
Monsieur, 'to go with me to Mons. N------'s, because the sum is still in
his hands. He will confirm my statement. All that I have now to say is
this, If you accept my guardianship, if you obey implicitly my advice,
I shall consider the interest of this sum which has accumulated since
deposited with M. ----- due to you; and the capital will be your dot on
marriage, if the marriage be with my consent.'"

Gustave had listened very attentively, and without interruption, until
now; when he looked up, and said with his customary sneer, "Did your
Monsieur, fort bel homme, you say, inform you of the value of the
advice, rather of the commands, you were implicitly to obey?"

"Yes," answered Julie, "not then, but later. Let me go on. We arrived at
M. N-----'s, an elderly grave man. He said that all he knew was that he
held the money in trust for the Monsieur with me, to be given to him,
with the accumulations of interest, on the death of the lady who had
deposited it. If that Monsieur had instructions how to dispose of the
money, they were not known to him. All he had to do was to transfer it
absolutely to him on the proper certificate of the lady's death. So you
see, Gustave, that the Monsieur could have kept all from me if he had
liked."

"Your Monsieur is very generous. Perhaps you will now tell me his name."

"No; he forbids me to do it yet."

"And he took this apartment for you, and gave you money to buy that
smart dress and these furs. Bah! mon enfant, why try to deceive me? Do I
not know my Paris? A fort bel homme does not make himself guardian to
a fort belle fine so young and fair as Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin
without certain considerations which shall be nameless, like himself."

Julie's eyes flashed. "Ah, Gustave! ah, Monsieur!" she said, half
angrily, half plaintively, "I see that my guardian knew you better than
I did. Never mind; I will not reproach. Thou halt the right to despise
me."

"Pardon! I did not mean to offend thee," said Gustave, somewhat
disconcerted. "But own that thy story is strange; and this guardian, who
knows me better than thou--does he know me at all? Didst thou speak to
him of me?"

"How could I help it? He says that this terrible war, in which he takes
an active part, makes his life uncertain from day to day. He wished to
complete the trust bequeathed to him by seeing me safe in the love of
some worthy man who"--she paused for a moment with an expression of
compressed anguish, and then hurried on--"who would recognise what was
good in me,--would never reproach me for--for--the past. I then said
that my heart was thine: I could never marry any one but thee."

"Marry me," faltered Gustave--"marry!"

"And," continued the girl, not heeding his interruption, "he said thou
wert not the husband he would choose for me: that thou wert not--no, I
cannot wound thee by repeating what he said unkindly, unjustly. He bade
me think of thee no more. I said again, that is impossible."

"But," resumed Rameau, with an affected laugh, "why think of anything
so formidable as marriage? Thou lovest me, and--" He approached again,
seeking to embrace her. She recoiled. "No, Gustave, no. I have sworn
solemnly by the memory of my lost mother--O--that I will never sin
again. I will never be to thee other than thy friend--or thy wife."

Before Gustave could reply to these words, which took him wholly by
surprise, there was a ring at the outer door, and the old bonne
ushered in Victor de Mauleon. He halted at the threshold, and his brow
contracted.

"So you have already broken faith with me, Mademoiselle?"

"No, Monsieur, I have not broken faith," cried Julie; passionately. "I
told you that I would not seek to find out Monsieur Rameau. I did
not seek, but I met him unexpectedly. I owed to him an explanation. I
invited him here to give that explanation. Without it, what would he
have thought of me? Now he may go, and I will never admit him again
without your sanction."

The Vicomte turned his stern look upon Gustave, who though, as we know,
not wanting in personal courage, felt cowed by his false position; and
his eye fell, quailed before De Mauleon's gaze.

"Leave us for a few minutes alone, Mademoiselle," said the Vicomte.
"Nay, Julie," he added, in softened tones, "fear nothing. I, too, owe
explanation--friendly explanation--to M. Rameau."

With his habitual courtesy towards women, he extended his hand to Julie,
and led her from the room. Then, closing the door, he seated himself,
and made a sign to Gustave to do the same.

"Monsieur," said De Mauleon, "excuse me if I detain you. A very few
words will suffice for our present interview. I take it for granted that
Mademoiselle has told you that she is no child of Madame Surville's:
that her own mother bequeathed her to my protection and guardianship
with a modest fortune which is at my disposal to give or withhold. The
little I have seen already of Mademoiselle impresses me with sincere
interest in her fate. I look with compassion on what she may have been
in the past; I anticipate with hope what she may be in the future. I do
not ask you to see her in either with my eyes. I say frankly that it is
my intention, and I may add, my resolve, that the ward thus left to my
charge shall be henceforth safe from the temptations that have seduced
her poverty, her inexperience, her vanity, if you will, but have not yet
corrupted her heart. Bref, I must request you to give me your word of
honour that you will hold no further communication with her. I can allow
no sinister influence to stand between her fate and honour."

"You speak well and nobly, M. le Vicomte," said Rameau, "and I give the
promise you exact." He added, feelingly: "It is true her heart has never
been corrupted that is good, affectionate, unselfish as a child's. J'ai
l'honneur de vous saluer, M. le Vicomte."

He bowed with a dignity unusual to him, and tears were in his eyes as he
passed by De Mauleon and gained the anteroom. There a side-door suddenly
opened, and Julie's face, anxious, eager, looked forth.

Gustave paused: "Adieu, Mademoiselle! Adieu, though we may never meet
again,--though our fates divide us,--believe me that I shall ever
cherish your memory--and--"

The girl interrupted him, impulsively seizing his arm, and looking him
in the face with a wild fixed stare. "Hush! dost thou mean to say that
we are parted,--parted forever?"

"Alas!" said Gustave, "what option is before us? Your guardian rightly
forbids my visits; and even were I free to offer you my hand, you
yourself say that I am not a suitor he would approve."

Julie turned her eyes towards De Mauleon, who, following Gustave into
the ante-room, stood silent and impassive, leaning against the wall.

He now understood and replied to the pathetic appeal in the girl's eyes.

"My young ward," he said, "M. Rameau expresses himself with propriety
and truth. Suffer him to depart. He belongs to the former life;
reconcile yourself to the new."

He advanced to take her hand, making a sign to Gustave to depart. But
as he approached Julie, she uttered a weak piteous wail, and fell at his
feet senseless. De Mauleon raised and carried her into her room, where
he left her to the care of the old bonne. On re-entering the anteroom,
he found Gustave still lingering by the outer door. "You will pardon
me, Monsieur," he said to the Vicomte, "but in fact I feel so uneasy, so
unhappy. Has she--? You see, you see that there is danger to her health,
perhaps to her reason, in so abrupt a separation, so cruel a rupture
between us. Let me call again, or I may not have strength to keep my
promise."

De Mauleon remained a few minutes musing. Then he said in a whisper,
"Come back into the salon. Let us talk frankly."




CHAPTER X.

"M. Rameau," said De Mauleon, when the two men had reseated themselves
in the salon, "I will honestly say that my desire is to rid myself as
soon as I can of the trust of guardian to this young lady. Playing as I
do with fortune, my only stake against her favours is my life. I feel
as if it were my duty to see that Mademoiselle is not left alone and
friendless in the world at my decease. I have in my mind for her a
husband that I think in every way suitable: a handsome and brave
young fellow in my battalion, of respectable birth, without any living
relations to consult as to his choice. I have reason to believe that if
Julie married him, she need never fear as a reproach to her antecedents.
Her dot would suffice to enable him to realise his own wish of a country
town in Normandy. And in that station, Paris and its temptations would
soon pass from the poor child's thoughts, as an evil dream. But I
cannot dispose of her hand without her own consent; and if she is to be
reasoned out of her fancy for you, I have no time to devote to the task.
I come to the point, You are not the man I would choose for her husband.
But, evidently, you are the man she would choose. Are you disposed to
marry her? You hesitate, very naturally; I have no right to demand an
immediate answer to a question so serious. Perhaps you will think over
it, and let me know in a day or two? I take it for granted that if you
were, as I heard, engaged before the siege to marry the Signora Cicogna,
that engagement is annulled?"

"Why take it for granted?" asked Gustave, perplexed. "Simply because I
find you here. Nay, spare explanations and excuses. I quite understand
that you were invited to come. But a man solemnly betrothed to a
mademoiselle like the Signora Cicogna, in a time of such dire calamity
and peril, could scarcely allow himself to be tempted to accept the
invitation of one so beautiful, and so warmly attached to him, as is
Mademoiselle Julie; and on witnessing the passionate strength of that
attachment, say that he cannot keep a promise not to repeat his visits.
But if I mistake, and you are still betrothed to the Signorina, of
course all discussion is at an end."

Gustave hung his head in some shame, and in much bewildered doubt.

The practised observer of men's characters, and of shifting phases of
mind, glanced at the poor poet's perturbed countenance with a half-smile
of disdain.

"It is for you to judge how far the very love to you so ingenuously
evinced by my ward--how far the reasons against marriage with one
whose antecedents expose her to reproach--should influence one of your
advanced opinions upon social ties. Such reasons do not appear to have
with artists the same weight they have with the bourgeoisie. I have but
to add that the husband of Julie will receive with her hand a dot of
nearly 120,000 francs; and I have reason to believe that that fortune
will be increased--how much, I cannot guess-when the cessation of the
siege will allow communication with England. One word more. I should
wish to rank the husband of my ward in the number of my friends. If
he did not oppose the political opinions with which I identify my own
career, I should be pleased to make any rise in the world achieved by me
assist to the raising of himself. But my opinions, as during the time we
were brought together you were made aware, are those of a practical man
of the world, and have nothing in common with Communists, Socialists,
Internationalists, or whatever sect would place the aged societies
of Europe in Medea's caldron of youth. At a moment like the present,
fanatics and dreamers so abound that the number of such sinners will
necessitate a general amnesty when order is restored. What a poet so
young as you may have written or said at such a time will be readily
forgotten and forgiven a year or two hence, provided he does not put his
notions into violent action. But if you choose to persevere in the
views you now advocate, so be it. They will not make poor Julie less a
believer in your wisdom and genius. Only they will separate you from me,
and a day may come when I should have the painful duty of ordering you
to be shot--Die meliora. Think over all I have thus frankly said.
Give me your answer within forty-eight hours; and meanwhile hold no
communication with my ward. I have the honour to wish you good-day."




CHAPTER XI.

The short grim day was closing when Gustave, quitting Julie's apartment,
again found himself in the streets. His thoughts were troubled and
confused. He was the more affected by Julie's impassioned love for
him, by the contrast with Isaura's words and manner in their recent
interview. His own ancient fancy for the "Ondine of Paris" became
revived by the difficulties between their ancient intercourse which her
unexpected scruples and De Mauleon's guardianship interposed. A
witty writer thus defines une passion, "une caprice inflamme par des
obstacles." In the ordinary times of peace, Gustave, handsome, aspiring
to reputable position in the beau monde, would not have admitted any
considerations to compromise his station by marriage with a fagurante.
But now the wild political doctrines he had embraced separated his
ambition from that beau monde, and combined it with ascendancy over the
revolutionists of the populace--a direction which he must abandon if
he continued his suit to Isaura. Then, too, the immediate possession of
Julie's dot was not without temptation to a man who was so fond of his
personal comforts, and who did not see where to turn for a dinner, if,
obedient to Isaura's "prejudices," he abandoned his profits as a writer
in the revolutionary press. The inducements for withdrawal from the
cause he had espoused, held out to him with so haughty a coldness by
De Mauleon, were not wholly without force, though they irritated his
self-esteem. He was dimly aware of the Vicomte's masculine talents
for public life; and the high reputation he had already acquired
among military authorities, and even among experienced and thoughtful
civilians, had weight upon Gustave's impressionable temperament. But
though De Mauleon's implied advice here coincided in much with the
tacit compact he had made with Isaura, it alienated him more from Isaura
herself, for Isaura did not bring to him the fortune which would enable
him to suspend his lucubrations, watch the turn of events, and live at
ease in the meanwhile; and the dot to be received with De Mauleon's ward
had those advantages.

While thus meditating Gustave turned into one of the cantines still
open, to brighten his intellect with a petit verre, and there he found
the two colleagues in the extinct Council of Ten, Paul Grimm and Edgar
Ferrier. With the last of these revolutionists Gustave had become
intimately lie. They wrote in the same journal, and he willingly
accepted a distraction from his self-conflict which Edgar offered him in
a dinner at the cafe Riche, which still offered its hospitalities at no
exorbitant price. At this repast, as the drink circulated, Gustave waxed
confidential. He longed, poor youth, for an adviser. Could he marry a
girl who had been a ballet-dancer, and who had come into an unexpected
heritage? "Es-tu fou d'en douter?" cried Edgar. "What a sublime occasion
to manifest thy scorn of the miserable banalities of the bourgeoisie! It
will but increase thy moral power over the people. And then think of the
money. What an aid to the cause! What a capital for the launch!--journal
all thine own! Besides, when our principles triumph--as triumph they
must--what would be marriage but a brief and futile ceremony, to be
broken the moment thou hast cause to complain of thy wife or chafe at
the bond? Only get the dot into thine own hands. L'amour passe--reste la
cassette."

Though there was enough of good in the son of Madame Rameau to revolt at
the precise words in which the counsel was given, still, as the fumes of
the punch yet more addled his brains, the counsel itself was acceptable;
and in that sort of maddened fury which intoxication produces in some
excitable temperaments, as Gustave reeled home that night leaning on
the arm of stouter Edgar Ferrier, he insisted on going out of his way
to pass the house in which Isaura lived, and, pausing under her window,
gasped out some verses of a wild song, then much in vogue among the
votaries of Felix Pyat, in which everything that existent society deems
sacred was reviled in the grossest ribaldry. Happily Isaura's ear heard
it not. The girl was kneeling by her bedside absorbed in prayer.




CHAPTER XII.

Three days after the evening thus spent by Gustave Rameau, Isaura was
startled by a visit from M. de Mauleon. She had not seen him since the
commencement of the siege, and she did not recognise him at first glance
in his military uniform.

"I trust you will pardon my intrusion, Mademoiselle," he said, in the
low sweet voice habitual to him in his gentler moods, "but I thought
it became me to announce to you the decease of one who, I fear, did not
discharge with much kindness the duties her connection with you imposed.
Your father's second wife, afterwards Madame Selby, is no more. She died
some days since in a convent to which she had retired."

Isaura had no cause to mourn the dead, but she felt a shock in the
suddenness of this information; and in that sweet spirit of womanly
compassion which entered so largely into her character, and made a part
of her genius itself, she murmured tearfully, "The poor Signora! Why
could I not have been with her in illness? She might then have learned
to love me. And she died in a convent, you say? Ah, her religion was
then sincere! Her end was peaceful?"

"Let us not doubt that, Mademoiselle. Certainly she lived to regret any
former errors, and her last thought was directed towards such atonement
as might be in her power. And it is that desire of atonement which now
strangely mixes me up, Mademoiselle, in your destinies. In that desire
for atonement, she left to my charge, as a kinsman distant indeed, but
still, perhaps, the nearest with whom she was personally acquainted--a
young ward. In accepting that trust, I find myself strangely compelled
to hazard the risk of offending you."

"Offending me? How? Pray speak openly."

"In so doing, I must utter the name of Gustave Rameau."

Isaura turned pale and recoiled, but she did not speak. "Did he inform
me rightly that, in the last interview with him three days ago, you
expressed a strong desire that the engagement between him and yourself
should cease; and that you only, and with reluctance, suspended your
rejection of the suit he had pressed on you, in consequence of his
entreaties, and of certain assurances as to the changed direction of the
talents of which we will assume that he is possessed?"

"Well, well, Monsieur," exclaimed Isaura, her whole face brightening;
"and you come on the part of Gustave Rameau to say that on reflection he
does not hold me to our engagement--that in honour and in conscience I
am free?"

"I see," answered De Mauleon, smiling, "that I am pardoned already.
It would not pain you if such were my instructions in the embassy I
undertake?"

"Pain me? No. But--"

"But what?"

"Must he persist in a course which will break his mother's heart, and
make his father deplore the hour that he was born? Have you influence
over him, M. de Mauleon? If so, will you not exert it for his good?"

"You interest yourself still in his fate, Mademoiselle?"

"How can I do otherwise? Did I not consent to share it when my heart
shrank from the thought of our union? And now when, if I understand you
rightly, I am free, I cannot but think of what was best in him."

"Alas! Mademoiselle, he is but one of many--a spoilt child of that
Circe, imperial Paris. Everywhere I look around, I see but corruption.
It was hidden by the halo which corruption itself engenders. The halo
is gone, the corruption is visible. Where is the old French manhood?
Banished from the heart, it comes out only at the tongue. Were our
deeds like our words, Prussia would beg on her knee to be a province of
France. Gustave is the fit poet for this generation. Vanity--desire to
be known for something, no matter what, no matter by whom--that is the
Parisian's leading motive power;--orator, soldier, poet, all alike.
Utterers of fine phrases; despising knowledge, and toil, and discipline;
railing against the Germans as barbarians, against their generals as
traitors; against God for not taking their part. What can be done to
weld this mass of hollow bubbles into the solid form of a nation--the
nation it affects to be? What generation can be born out of the unmanly
race, inebriate with brag and absinthe? Forgive me this tirade; I have
been reviewing the battalion I command. As for Gustave Rameau,--if
we survive the siege, and see once more a Government that can enforce
order, and a public that will refuse renown for balderdash,--I should
not be surprised if Gustave Rameau were among the prettiest imitators
of Lamartine's early Meditations. Had he been born under Louis XIV. how
loyal he would have been! What sacred tragedies in the style of Athalie
he would have written, in the hope of an audience at Versailles! But I
detain you from the letter I was charged to deliver you. I have done so
purposely, that I might convince myself that you welcome that release
which your too delicate sense of honour shrank too long from demanding."

Here he took forth and placed a letter in Isaura's hand; and, as if to
allow her to read it unobserved, retired to the window recess.

Isaura glanced over the letter. It ran thus:

"I feel that it was only to your compassion that I owed your consent to
my suit. Could I have doubted that before, your words when we last met
sufficed to convince me. In my selfish pain at the moment, I committed
a great wrong. I would have held you bound to a promise from which you
desired to be free. Grant me pardon for that; and for all the faults
by which I have offended you. In cancelling our engagement, let me hope
that I may rejoice in your friendship, your remembrance of me, some
gentle and kindly thought. My life may henceforth pass out of contact
with yours; but you will ever dwell in my heart, an image pure and
holy as the saints in whom you may well believe-they are of your own
kindred."

"May I convey to Gustave Rameau any verbal reply to his letter?" asked
De Mauleon, turning as she replaced the letter on the table.

"Only my wishes for his welfare. It might wound him if I added, my
gratitude for the generous manner in which he has interpreted my heart,
and acceded to its desires."

"Mademoiselle, accept my congratulations. My condolences are for the
poor girl left to my guardianship. Unhappily she loves this man; and
there are reasons why I cannot withhold my consent to her union with
him, should he demand it, now that, in the letter remitted to you, he
has accepted your dismissal. If I can keep him out of all the follies
and all the evils into which he suffers his vanity to mislead his
reason, I will do so;--would I might say, only in compliance with your
compassionate injunctions. But henceforth the infatuation of my ward
compels me to take some interest in his career. Adieu, Mademoiselle! I
have no fear for your happiness now."

Left alone, Isaura stood as one transfigured. All the bloom of her
youth seemed suddenly restored. Round her red lips the dimples opened,
countless mirrors of one happy smile. "I am free, I am free," she
murmured--"joy, joy!" and she passed from the room to seek the Venosta,
singing clear, singing loud, as a bird that escapes from the cage and
warbles to the heaven it regains the blissful tale of its release.




CHAPTER XIII.

In proportion to the nearer roar of the besiegers' cannon, and the
sharper gripe of famine within the walls, the Parisians seemed to
increase their scorn for the skill of the enemy, and their faith in
the sanctity of the capital. All false news was believed as truth; all
truthful news abhorred as falsehood. Listen to the groups round the
cafes. "The Prussian funds have fallen three per cent. at Berlin," says
a threadbare ghost of the Bourse (he had been a clerk of Louvier's).
"Ay," cries a National Guard, "read extracts from La Liberte. The
barbarians are in despair. Nancy is threatened, Belfort is freed.
Bourbaki is invading Baden. Our fleets are pointing their cannon upon
Hamburg. Their country endangered, their retreat cut off, the sole hope
of Bismarck and his trembling legions is to find a refuge in Paris. The
increasing fury of the bombardment is a proof of their despair."

"In that case," whispered Savarin to De Breze, "suppose we send a flag
of truce to Versailles with a message from Trochu that, on disgorging
their conquests, ceding the left bank of the Rhine, and paying the
expenses of the war, Paris, ever magnanimous to the vanquished; will
allow the Prussians to retire."

"The Prussians! Retire!" cried Edgar Ferrier, catching the last word and
glancing fiercely at Savarin. "What Prussian spy have we among us? Not
one of the barbarians shall escape. We have but to dismiss the traitors
who have usurped the government, proclaim the Commune and the rights
of labour, and we give birth to a Hercules that even in its cradle can
strangle the vipers."

Edgar Ferrier was the sole member of his political party among the group
which he thus addressed; but such was the terror which the Communists
already began to inspire among the bourgeoisie that no one volunteered a
reply.

Savarin linked his arm in De Breze's, and prudently drew him off.

"I suspect," said the former, "that we shall soon have worse calamities
to endure than the Prussian obus and the black loaf. The Communists will
have their day."

"I shall be in my grave before then," said De Breze, in hollow accents.
"It is twenty-four hours since I spent my last fifty sous on the
purchase of a rat, and I burnt the legs of my bedstead for the fuel by
which that quadruped was roasted."

"Entre nous, my poor friend, I am much in the same condition," said
Savarin, with a ghastly attempt at his old pleasant laugh. "See how I
am shrunken! My wife would be unfaithful to the Savarin of her dreams
if she accepted a kiss from the slender gallant you behold in me. But I
thought you were in the National Guard, and therefore had not to vanish
into air."

"I was a National Guard, but I could not stand the hardships, and being
above the age, I obtained my exemption. As to pay, I was then too proud
to claim my wage of 1 franc 25 centimes. I should not be too proud now.
Ah, blessed be Heaven! here comes Lemercier; he owes me a dinner--he
shall pay it."

"Bon jour, my dear Frederic! How handsome you look in your kepi! Your
uniform is brilliantly fresh from the soil of powder. What a contrast to
the tatterdemalions of the Line!"

"I fear," said Lemercier, ruefully, "that my costume will not look so
well a day or two hence. I have just had news that will no doubt seem
very glorious--in the news papers. But then newspapers are not subjected
to cannonballs."

"What do you mean?" answered De Breze.

"I met, as I emerged from my apartment a few minutes ago, that
fire-eater, Victor de Mauleon, who always contrives to know what passes
at headquarters. He told me that preparations are being made for a great
sortie. Most probably the announcement will appear in a proclamation
tomorrow, and our troops march forth to-morrow night. The National Guard
(fools and asses who have been yelling out for decisive action) are to
have their wish, and to be placed in the van of battle,--amongst the
foremost, the battalion in which I am enrolled. Should this be our last
meeting on earth, say that Frederic Lemercier has finished his part in
life with eclat."

"Gallant friend," said De Breze, feebly seizing him by the arm, "if it
be true that thy mortal career is menaced, die as thou hast lived. An
honest man leaves no debt unpaid. Thou owest me a dinner."

"Alas! ask of me what is possible. I will give thee three, however, if I
survive and regain my rentes. But today I have not even a mouse to share
with Fox."

"Fox lives then?" cried De Breze, with sparkling hungry eyes.

"Yes. At present he is making the experiment how long an animal can live
without food."

"Have mercy upon him, poor beast! Terminate his pangs by a noble death.
Let him save thy friends and thyself from starving. For myself alone I
do not plead; I am but an amateur in polite literature. But Savarin, the
illustrious Savarin,--in criticism the French Longinus--in poetry
the Parisian Horace--in social life the genius of gaiety in
pantaloons,--contemplate his attenuated frame! Shall he perish for want
of food while thou hast such superfluity in thy larder? I appeal to thy
heart, thy conscience, thy patriotism. What, in the eyes of France, are
a thousand Foxes compared to a single Savarin?"

"At this moment," sighed Savarin, "I could swallow anything, however
nauseous, even thy flattery, De Breze. But, my friend Frederic, thou
goest into battle--what will become of Fox if thou fall? Will he not be
devoured by strangers? Surely it were a sweeter thought to his faithful
heart to furnish a repast to thy friends?--his virtues acknowledged, his
memory blest!"

"Thou dost look very lean, my poor Savarin! And how hospitable thou wert
when yet plump!" said Frederic, pathetically. "And certainly, if I live,
Fox will starve; if I am slain, Fox will be eaten. Yet, poor Fox, dear
Fox, who lay on my breast when I was frostbitten. No; I have not the
heart to order him to the spit for you. Urge it not."

"I will save thee that pang," cried De Breze. "We are close by thy
rooms. Excuse me for a moment: I will run in and instruct thy bonne."

So saying, he sprang forward with an elasticity of step which no one
could have anticipated from his previous languor. Frederic would have
followed, but Savarin clung to him, whimpering: "Stay; I shall fall like
an empty sack, without the support of thine arm, young hero. Pooh! of
course De Breze is only joking--a pleasant joke. Hist! a secret: he
has moneys, and means to give us once more a dinner at his own cost,
pretending that we dine on thy dog. He was planning this when thou
camest up. Let him have his joke, and we shall have a festin de
Balthazar."

"Hein!" said Frederic, doubtfully; "thou art sure he has no designs upon
Fox?"

"Certainly not, except in regaling us. Donkey is not bad, but it is 14
francs a pound. A pullet is excellent, but it is 30 francs. Trust to
De Breze; we shall have donkey and pullet, and Fox shall feast upon the
remains."

Before Frederic could reply, the two men were jostled and swept on by a
sudden rush of a noisy crowd in their rear. They could but distinguish
the words--Glorious news--victory--Faidherbe--Chanzy. But these words
were sufficient to induce them to join willingly in the rush. They
forgot their hunger; they forget Fox. As they were hurried on, they
learned that there was a report of a complete defeat of the Prussians
by Faidherbe near Amiens, of a still more decided one on the Loire by
Chanzy. These generals, with armies flushed with triumph, were pressing
on towards Paris to accelerate the destruction of the hated Germans. How
the report arose no one exactly knew.

All believed it, and were making their way to the Hotel de Ville to hear
it formally confirmed.

