the contrivance of means, she so ordered it that ere the troops were
fully on march, Quentin Durward received from an unknown hand the billet
of Lady Hameline, marked with three crosses opposite to the postscript,
and having these words subjoined: "He who feared not the arms of Orleans
when on the breast of their gallant owner, cannot dread them when
displayed on that of a tyrant and murderer."

A thousand thousand times was this intimation kissed and pressed to the
bosom of the young Scot! for it marshalled him on the path where both
Honour and Love held out the reward, and possessed him with a secret
unknown to others, by which to distinguish him whose death could alone
give life to his hopes, and which he prudently resolved to lock up in
his own bosom.

But Durward saw the necessity of acting otherwise respecting the
information communicated by Hayraddin, since the proposed sally of De la
Marck, unless heedfully guarded against, might prove the destruction of
the besieging army, so difficult was it, in the tumultuous warfare of
those days, to recover from a nocturnal surprise. After pondering on
the matter, he formed the additional resolution, that he would not
communicate the intelligence save personally, and to both the Princes
while together, perhaps because he felt that to mention so well
contrived and hopeful a scheme to Louis whilst in private, might be too
strong a temptation to the wavering probity of that Monarch, and lead
him to assist, rather than repel, the intended sally. He determined,
therefore, to watch for an opportunity of revealing the secret whilst
Louis and Charles were met, which, as they were not particularly fond of
the constraint imposed by each other's society, was not likely soon to
occur.

Meanwhile the march continued, and the confederates soon entered the
territories of Liege. Here the Burgundian soldiers, at least a part of
them, composed of those bands who had acquired the title of Ecorcheurs,
or flayers, showed, by the usage which they gave the inhabitants, under
pretext of avenging the Bishop's death, that they well deserved that
honourable title; while their conduct greatly prejudiced the cause
of Charles, the aggrieved inhabitants, who might otherwise have been
passive in the quarrel, assuming arms in self defence, harassing his
march by cutting off small parties, and falling back before the main
body upon the city itself, thus augmenting the numbers and desperation
of those who had resolved to defend it. The French, few in number, and
those the choice soldiers of the country, kept, according to the King's
orders, close by their respective standards, and observed the strictest
discipline, a contrast which increased the suspicions of Charles, who
could not help remarking that the troops of Louis demeaned themselves as
if they were rather friends to the Liegeois than allies of Burgundy.

At length, without experiencing any serious opposition, the army arrived
in the rich valley of the Maes, and before the large and populous
city of Liege. The Castle of Schonwaldt they found had been totally
destroyed, and learned that William de la Marck, whose only talents were
of a military cast, had withdrawn his whole forces into the city, and
was determined to avoid the encounter of the chivalry of France
and Burgundy in the open field. But the invaders were not long of
experiencing the danger which must always exist in attacking a large
town, however open, if the inhabitants are disposed to defend it
desperately.

A part of the Burgundian vanguard, conceiving that, from the dismantled
and breached state of the walls, they had nothing to do but to march
into Liege at their ease, entered one of the suburbs with the shouts
of "Burgundy, Burgundy, Kill, kill--all is ours!--Remember Louis of
Bourbon!"

But as they marched in disorder through the narrow streets, and were
partly dispersed for the purpose of pillage, a large body of the
inhabitants issued suddenly from the town, fell furiously upon them,
and made considerable slaughter. De la Marck even availed himself of
the breaches in the walls, which permitted the defenders to issue out
at different points, and, by taking separate routes into the contested
suburb, to attack, in the front, flank, and rear at once the assailants,
who, stunned by the furious, unexpected, and multiplied nature of the
resistance offered, could hardly stand to their arms. The evening, which
began to close, added to their confusion.

When this news was brought to Duke Charles, he was furious with rage,
which was not much appeased by the offer of King Louis to send the
French men at arms into the suburbs, to rescue and bring off the
Burgundian vanguard. Rejecting this offer briefly, he would have put
himself at the head of his own Guards, to extricate those engaged in the
incautious advance; but D'Hymbercourt and Crevecoeur entreated him to
leave the service to them, and, marching into the scene of action at two
points with more order and proper arrangement for mutual support, these
two celebrated captains succeeded in repulsing the Liegeois, and in
extricating the vanguard, who lost, besides prisoners, no fewer than
eight hundred men, of whom about a hundred were men at arms. The
prisoners, however, were not numerous, most of them having been rescued
by D'Hymbercourt, who now proceeded to occupy the contested suburb, and
to place guards opposite to the town, from which it was divided by an
open space, or esplanade, of five or six hundred yards, left free of
buildings for the purposes of defence. There was no moat betwixt the
suburb and town, the ground being rocky in that place. A gate fronted
the suburb, from which sallies might be easily made, and the wall was
pierced by two or three of those breaches which Duke Charles had caused
to be made after the battle of Saint Tron, and which had been hastily
repaired with mere barricades of timber.

D'Hymbercourt turned two culverins on the gate, and placed two others
opposite to the principal breach, to repel any sally from the city, and
then returned to the Burgundian army, which he found in great disorder.
In fact, the main body and rear of the numerous army of the Duke had
continued to advance, while the broken and repulsed vanguard was in the
act of retreating; and they had come into collision with each other, to
the great confusion of both. The necessary absence of D'Hymbercourt, who
discharged all the duties of Marechal du Camp, or, as we should now say,
of Quartermaster General, augmented the disorder; and to complete the
whole, the night sank down dark as a wolf's mouth; there fell a thick
and heavy rain, and the ground on which the beleaguering army must needs
take up their position, was muddy and intersected with many canals. It
is scarce possible to form an idea of the confusion which prevailed in
the Burgundian army, where leaders were separated from their soldiers,
and soldiers from their standards and officers. Every one, from the
highest to the lowest, was seeking shelter and accommodation where he
could individually find it; while the wearied and wounded, who had been
engaged in the battle, were calling in vain for shelter and refreshment;
and while those who knew nothing of the disaster were pressing on to
have their share in the sack of the place, which they had no doubt was
proceeding merrily.

When D'Hymbercourt returned, he had a task to perform of incredible
difficulty, and imbittered by the reproaches of his master, who made
no allowance for the still more necessary duty in which he had been
engaged, until the temper of the gallant soldier began to give way under
the Duke's unreasonable reproaches.

"I went hence to restore some order in the van," he said, "and left the
main body under your Grace's own guidance, and now, on my return, I
can neither find that we have front, flank, nor rear, so utter is the
confusion."

"We are the more like a barrel of herrings," answered Le Glorieux,
"which is the most natural resemblance for a Flemish army."

The jester's speech made the Duke laugh, and perhaps prevented a farther
prosecution of the altercation betwixt him and his general.

By dint of great exertion, a small lusthaus, or country villa of some
wealthy citizen of Liege, was secured and cleared of other occupants,
for the accommodation of the Duke and his immediate attendants; and the
authority of D'Hymbercourt and Crevecoeur at length established a guard
in the vicinity, of about forty men at arms, who lighted a very large
fire, made with the timber of the outhouses, which they pulled down for
the purpose.

A little to the left of this villa, and betwixt it and the suburb,
which, as we have said, was opposite to the city gate, and occupied by
the Burgundian Vanguard, lay another pleasure house, surrounded by a
garden and courtyard, and having two or three small enclosures or
fields in the rear of it. In this the King of France established his own
headquarters. He did not himself pretend to be a soldier further than
a natural indifference to danger and much sagacity qualified him to be
called such; but he was always careful to employ the most skilful in
that profession, and reposed in them the confidence they merited. Louis
and his immediate attendants occupied this second villa, a part of his
Scottish Guard were placed in the court, where there were outhouses and
sheds to shelter them from the weather; the rest were stationed in the
garden. The remainder of the French men at arms were quartered closely
together and in good order, with alarm posts stationed, in case of their
having to sustain an attack.

Dunois and Crawford, assisted by several old officers and soldiers,
amongst whom Le Balafre was conspicuous for his diligence, contrived, by
breaking down walls, making openings through hedges, filling up ditches,
and the like, to facilitate the communication of the troops with each
other, and the orderly combination of the whole in case of necessity.

Meanwhile, the King judged it proper to go without farther ceremony to
the quarters of the Duke of Burgundy, to ascertain what was to be the
order of proceeding, and what cooperation was expected from him. His
presence occasioned a sort of council of war to be held, of which
Charles might not otherwise have dreamed.

It was then that Quentin Durward prayed earnestly to be admitted, as
having something of importance to deliver to the two Princes. This was
obtained without much difficulty, and great was the astonishment of
Louis, when he heard him calmly and distinctly relate the purpose of
William de la Marck to make a sally upon the camp of the besiegers,
under the dress and banners of the French. Louis would probably have
been much better pleased to have had such important news communicated
in private, but as the whole story had been publicly told in presence
of the Duke of Burgundy, he only observed, that, whether true or false,
such a report concerned them most materially.

"Not a whit!--not a whit!" said the Duke carelessly. "Had there been
such a purpose as this young man announces, it had not been communicated
to me by an Archer of the Scottish Guard."

"However that may be," answered Louis, "I pray you, fair cousin, you and
your captains, to attend, that to prevent the unpleasing consequences of
such an attack, should it be made unexpectedly, I will cause my soldiers
to wear white scarfs over their armour.--Dunois, see it given out on
the instant--that is," he added, "if our brother and general approves of
it."

"I see no objection," replied the Duke, "if the chivalry of France are
willing to run the risk of having the name of the Knights of the Smock
Sleeve bestowed on them in future."

"It would be a right well adapted title, friend Charles," said Le
Glorieux, "considering that a woman is the reward of the most valiant."

"Well spoken, Sagacity," said Louis. "Cousin, good night, I will go arm
me.--By the way, what if I win the Countess with mine own hand?

"Your Majesty," said the Duke, in an altered tone of voice, "must then
become a true Fleming."

"I cannot," answered Louis, in a tone of the most sincere confidence,
"be more so than I am already, could I but bring you, my dear cousin, to
believe it."

The Duke only replied by wishing the King good night in a tone
resembling the snort of a shy horse, starting from the caress of the
rider when he is about to mount, and is soothing him to stand still.

"I could pardon all his duplicity," said the Duke to Crevecoeur, "but
cannot forgive his supposing me capable of the gross folly of being
duped by his professions."

Louis, too, had his confidences with Oliver le Dain, when he returned to
his own quarters. "This," he said, "is such a mixture of shrewdness and
simplicity, that I know not what to make of him. Pasques dieu! think of
his unpardonable folly in bringing out honest De la Marck's plan of a
sally before the face of Burgundy, Crevecoeur, and all of them, instead
of rounding it in my ear, and giving me at least the choice of abetting
or defeating it!"

"It is better as it is, Sire," said Oliver; "there are many in your
present train who would scruple to assail Burgundy undefied, or to ally
themselves with De la Marck."

"Thou art right, Oliver. Such fools there are in the world, and we have
no time to reconcile their scruples by a little dose of self interest.
We must be true men, Oliver, and good allies of Burgundy, for this night
at least--time may give us a chance of a better game. Go, tell no man to
unarm himself; and let them shoot, in case of necessity, as sharply on
those who cry France and St. Denis! as if they cried Hell and Satan! I
will myself sleep in my armour. Let Crawford place Quentin Durward on
the extreme point of our line of sentinels, next to the city. Let him
e'en have the first benefit of the sally which he has announced to
us--if his luck bear him out, it is the better for him. But take an
especial care of Martius Galeotti, and see he remain in the rear, in a
place of the most absolute safety--he is even but too venturous, and,
like a fool, would be both swordsman and philosopher. See to these
things, Oliver, and good night.--Our Lady of Clery, and Monseigneur St.
Martin of Tours, be gracious to my slumbers!"

[The Duke of Burgundy, full of resentment for the usage which the Bishop
had received from the people of Liege (whose death, as already noticed,
did not take place for some years after), and knowing that the walls of
the town had not been repaired since they were breached by himself after
the battle of Saint Tron, advanced recklessly to their chastisement. His
commanders shared his presumptuous confidence: for the advanced guard
of his army, under the Marechal of Burgundy, and Seigneur D'Hymbercourt,
rushed upon one of the suburbs, without waiting for the rest of their
army, which, commanded by the Duke in person, remained about seven or
eight leagues in the rear. The night was closing, and, as the Burgundian
troops observed no discipline, they were exposed to a sudden attack from
a party of the citizens commanded by Jean de Vilde, who, assaulting them
in the front and rear, threw them into great disorder, and killed more
than eight hundred men, of whom one hundred were men at arms. When
Charles and the King of France came up, they took up their quarters in
two villas situated near to the wall of the city. In the two or three
days which followed, Louis was distinguished for the quiet and regulated
composure with which he pressed the siege, and provided for defence
in case of sallies; while the Duke of Burgundy, no way deficient in
courage, and who showed the rashness and want of order which was his
principal characteristic, seemed also extremely suspicious that the King
would desert him and join with the Liegeois. They lay before the town
for five or six days, and at length fixed the 30th of October, 1468,
for a general storm. The citizens, who had probably information of their
intent, resolved to prevent their purpose and determined on anticipating
it by a desperate sally through the breaches in their walls. They
placed at their head six hundred of the men of the little territory of
Fraudemont, belonging to the Bishopric of Liege, and reckoned the
most valiant of their troops. They burst out of the town on a sudden,
surprised the Duke of Burgundy's quarters, ere his guards could put on
their armour, which they had laid off to enjoy some repose before
the assault. The King of France's lodgings were also attacked and
endangered. A great confusion ensued, augmented incalculably by the
mutual jealousy and suspicions of the French and Burgundians. The people
of Liege were, however, unable to maintain their hardy enterprise,
when the men at arms of the king and Duke began to recover from their
confusion, and were finally forced to retire within their walls, after
narrowly missing the chance of surprising both King Louis and the Duke
of Burgundy, the most powerful princes of their time. At daybreak the
storm took place, as had been originally intended, and the citizens,
disheartened and fatigued by the nocturnal sally, did not make so much
resistance as was expected. Liege was taken and miserably pillaged,
without regard to sex or age, things sacred or things profane. These
particulars are fully related by Comines in his Memoires, liv. ii, chap.
11, 12, 13, and do not differ much from the account of the same events
given in the text. S.]



CHAPTER XXXVII: THE SALLY

     He look'd, and saw what numbers numberless
     The city gates outpour'd.

     PARADISE REGAINED


A dead silence soon reigned over that great host which lay in leaguer
before Liege. For a long time the cries of the soldiers repeating their
signals, and seeking to join their several banners, sounded like
the howling of bewildered dogs seeking their masters. But at length,
overcome with weariness by the fatigues of the day, the dispersed
soldiers crowded under such shelter as they could meet with, and those
who could find none sunk down through very fatigue under walls, hedges,
and such temporary protection, there to await for morning--a morning
which some of them were never to behold. A dead sleep fell on almost
all, excepting those who kept a faint and wary watch by the lodgings
of the King and the Duke. The dangers and hopes of the morrow--even the
schemes of glory which many of the young nobility had founded upon the
splendid prize held out to him who should avenge the murdered Bishop of
Liege--glided from their recollection as they lay stupefied with fatigue
and sleep. But not so with Quentin Durward. The knowledge that he
alone was possessed of the means of distinguishing La Marck in
the contest--the recollection by whom that information had been
communicated, and the fair augury which might be drawn from her
conveying it to him--the thought that his fortune had brought him to a
most perilous and doubtful crisis indeed, but one where there was still,
at least, a chance of his coming off triumphant--banished every desire
to sleep and strung his nerves with vigour which defied fatigue.

Posted, by the King's express order, on the extreme point between the
French quarters and the town, a good way to the right of the suburb
which we have mentioned, he sharpened his eye to penetrate the mass
which lay before him, and excited his ears to catch the slightest sound
which might announce any commotion in the beleaguered city. But its
huge clocks had successively knelled three hours after midnight, and all
continued still and silent as the grave.

At length, and just when Quentin began to think the attack would be
deferred till daybreak, and joyfully recollected that there would be
then light enough to descry the Bar Sinister across the Fleur de lis of
Orleans, he thought he heard in the city a humming murmur, like that
of disturbed bees mustering for the defence of their hives.
He listened--the noise continued, but it was of a character so
undistinguished by any peculiar or precise sound, that it might be the
murmur of a wind arising among the boughs of a distant grove, or perhaps
some stream, swollen by the late rain, which was discharging itself into
the sluggish Maes with more than usual clamour. Quentin was prevented
by these considerations from instantly giving the alarm, which, if done
carelessly, would have been a heavy offence. But, when the noise rose
louder, and seemed pouring at the same time towards his own post, and
towards the suburb, he deemed it his duty to fall back as silently as
possible and call his uncle, who commanded the small body of Archers
destined to his support. All were on their feet in a moment, and with
as little noise as possible. In less than a second Lord Crawford was
at their head, and, dispatching an Archer to alarm the King and his
household, drew back his little party to some distance behind their
watchfire, that they might not be seen by its light. The rushing sound,
which had approached them more nearly, seemed suddenly to have ceased,
but they still heard distinctly the more distant heavy tread of a large
body of men approaching the suburb.

"The lazy Burgundians are asleep on their post," whispered Crawford;
"make for the suburb, Cunningham, and awaken the stupid oxen."

"Keep well to the rear as you go," said Durward; "if ever I heard the
tread of mortal men, there is a strong body interposed between us and
the suburb."

"Well said, Quentin, my dainty callant," said Crawford; "thou art a
soldier beyond thy years. They only made halt till the others come
forward.--I would I had some knowledge where they are!"

"I will creep forward, my Lord," said Quentin, "and endeavour to bring
you information."

"Do so, my bonny chield; thou hast sharp ears and eyes, and good
will--but take heed--I would not lose thee for two and a plack [an
homely Scottish expression for something you value]."

Quentin, with his harquebuss ready prepared, stole forward, through
ground which he had reconnoitred carefully in the twilight of the
preceding evening, until he was not only certain that he was in the
neighbourhood of a very large body of men, who were standing fast
betwixt the King's quarters and the suburbs, but also that there was a
detached party of smaller number in advance, and very close to him. They
seemed to whisper together, as if uncertain what to do next. At last the
steps of two or three Enfans perdus [literally, lost children], detached
from that smaller party, approached him so near as twice a pike's
length. Seeing it impossible to retreat undiscovered, Quentin called
out aloud, "Qui vive? [who goes there?]" and was answered, by "Vive
Li--Li--ege--c'est a dire [that is to say]" (added he who spoke,
correcting himself), "Vive--la France!"

Quentin instantly fired his harquebuss--a man groaned and fell, and he
himself, under the instant but vague discharge of a number of pieces,
the fire of which ran in a disorderly manner along the column, and
showed it to be very numerous, hastened back to the main guard.

"Admirably done, my brave boy!" said Crawford. "Now, callants, draw in
within the courtyard--they are too many to mell with in the open field."

They drew within the courtyard and garden accordingly, where they found
all in great order and the King prepared to mount his horse.

"Whither away, Sire!" said Crawford; "you are safest here with your own
people."

"Not so," said Louis, "I must instantly to the Duke. He must be
convinced of our good faith at this critical moment, or we shall have
both Liegeois and Burgundians upon us at once."

And, springing on his horse, he bade Dunois command the French troops
without the house, and Crawford the Archer Guard and other household
troops to defend the lusthaus and its enclosures. He commanded them
to bring up two sakers and as many falconets (pieces of cannon for the
field), which had been left about half a mile in the rear; and, in the
meantime, to make good their posts, but by no means to advance, whatever
success they might obtain; and having given these orders, he rode off,
with a small escort, to the Duke's quarters. The delay which permitted
these arrangements to be carried fully into effect was owing to
Quentin's having fortunately shot the proprietor of the house, who
acted as guide to the column which was designed to attack it, and whose
attack, had it been made instantly, might have had a chance of being
successful.

Durward, who, by the King's order, attended him to the Duke's, found the
latter in a state of choleric distemperature, which almost prevented his
discharging the duties of a general, which were never more necessary;
for, besides the noise of a close and furious combat which had now
taken place in the suburb upon the left of their whole army--besides the
attack upon the King's quarters, which was fiercely maintained in the
centre--a third column of Liegeois, of even superior numbers, had filed
out from a more distant breach, and, marching by lanes, vineyards,
and passes known to themselves, had fallen upon the right flank of the
Burgundian army, who, alarmed at their war cries of Vive la France! and
Denis Montjoie! which mingled with those of Liege! and Rouge Sanglier!
and at the idea thus inspired, of treachery on the part of the French
confederates, made a very desultory and imperfect resistance; while
the Duke, foaming and swearing and cursing his liege Lord and all that
belonged to him, called out to shoot with bow and gun on all that was
French whether black or white,--alluding to the sleeves with which
Louis's soldiers had designated themselves.

The arrival of the King, attended only by Le Balafre and Quentin
and half a score of Archers, restored confidence between France and
Burgundy. D'Hymbercourt, Crevecoeur, and others of the Burgundian
leaders, whose names were then the praise and dread of war, rushed
devotedly into the conflict; and, while some commanders hastened to
bring up more distant troops, to whom the panic had not extended, others
threw themselves into the tumult, reanimated the instinct of discipline,
and while the Duke toiled in the front, shouting, hacking, and hewing,
like an ordinary man at arms, brought their men by degrees into array,
and dismayed the assailants by the use of their artillery. The conduct
of Louis, on the other hand, was that of a calm, collected, sagacious
leader, who neither sought nor avoided danger, but showed so much self
possession and sagacity, that the Burgundian leaders readily obeyed the
orders which he issued.

The scene was now become in the utmost degree animated and horrible. On
the left the suburb, after a fierce contest, had been set on fire, and
a wide and dreadful conflagration did not prevent the burning ruins from
being still disputed. On the centre, the French troops, though pressed
by immense odds, kept up so close and constant a fire, that the little
pleasure house shone bright with the glancing flashes, as if surrounded
with a martyr's crown of flames. On the left, the battle swayed
backwards and forwards, with varied success, as fresh reinforcements
poured out of the town, or were brought forward from the rear of the
Burgundian host; and the strife continued with unremitting fury for
three mortal hours, which at length brought the dawn, so much desired by
the besiegers. The enemy, at this period, seemed to be slackening their
efforts upon the right and in the centre, and several discharges of
cannon were heard from the lusthaus.

"Go," said the King to Le Balafre and Quentin, the instant his ear
had caught the sound; "they have got up the sakers and falconets--the
pleasure house is safe, blessed be the Holy Virgin!--Tell Dunois to
move this way, but rather nearer the walls of Liege, with all our men at
arms, excepting what he may leave for the defence of the house, and cut
in between those thick headed Liegeois on the right and the city from
which they are supplied with recruits."

The uncle and nephew galloped off to Dunois and Crawford, who, tired of
their defensive war, joyfully obeyed the summons, and, filing out at the
head of a gallant body of about two hundred French gentlemen, besides
squires, and the greater part of the Archers and their followers,
marched across the field, trampling down the wounded till they gained
the flank of the large body of Liegeois, by whom the right of the
Burgundians had been so fiercely assailed. The increasing daylight
discovered that the enemy were continuing to pour out from the city,
either for the purpose of continuing the battle on that point, or of
bringing safely off the forces who were already engaged.

"By Heaven!" said old Crawford to Dunois, "were I not certain it is thou
that art riding by my side, I would say I saw thee among yonder banditti
and burghers, marshalling and arraying them with thy mace--only, if yon
be thou, thou art bigger than thou art wont to be. Art thou sure yonder
armed leader is not thy wraith, thy double man, as these Flemings call
it?"

"My wraith!" said Dunois; "I know not what you mean. But yonder is a
caitiff with my bearings displayed on crest and shield, whom I will
presently punish for his insolence."

"In the name of all that is noble, my lord, leave the vengeance to me!"
said Quentin.

"To thee, indeed, young man," said Dunois; "that is a modest request.

"No--these things brook no substitution." Then turning on his saddle,
he called out to those around him, "Gentlemen of France, form your line,
level your lances! Let the rising sunbeams shine through the battalions
of yonder swine of Liege and hogs of Ardennes, that masquerade in our
ancient coats."

The men at arms answered with a loud shout of "A Dunois! a Dunois! Long
live the bold Bastard!--Orleans to the rescue!"

And, with their leader in the centre, they charged at full gallop. They
encountered no timid enemy. The large body which they charged consisted
(excepting some mounted officers) entirely of infantry, who, setting the
butt of their lances against their feet, the front rank kneeling, the
second stooping, and those behind presenting their spears over their
heads, offered such resistance to the rapid charge of the men at arms
as the hedgehog presents to his enemy. Few were able to make way through
that iron Wall; but of those few was Dunois, who, giving spur to his
horse, and making the noble animal leap wore than twelve feet at a
bound, fairly broke his way into the middle of the phalanx, and made
toward the object of his animosity. What was his surprise to find
Quentin still by his side, and fighting in the same front with
himself--youth, desperate courage, and the determination to do or die
having still kept the youth abreast with the best knight in Europe; for
such was Dunois reported, and truly reported at the period.

Their spears were soon broken, but the lanzknechts Were unable to
withstand the blows of their long, heavy swords; while the horses and
riders, armed in complete steel, sustained little injury from their
lances. Still Dunois and Durward were contending with rival efforts to
burst forward to the spot where he who had usurped the armorial bearings
of Dunois was doing the duty of a good and valiant leader, when Dunois,
observing the boar's head and tusks--the usual bearing of William de la
Marck--in another part of the conflict, called out to Quentin, "Thou art
worthy to avenge the arms of Orleans! I leave thee the task.--Balafre,
support your nephew; but let none dare to interfere with Dunois's boar
hunt!"

That Quentin Durward joyfully acquiesced in this division of labour
cannot be doubted, and each pressed forward upon his separate object,
followed, and defended from behind, by such men at arms as were able to
keep up with them.

But at this moment the column which De la Marck had proposed to support,
when his own course was arrested by the charge of Dunois, had lost all
the advantages they had gained during the night; while the Burgundians,
with returning day, had begun to show the qualities which belong to
superior discipline. The great mass of Liegeois were compelled to
retreat, and at length to fly; and, falling back on those who were
engaged with the French men at arms, the whole became a confused tide
of fighters, fliers, and pursuers, which rolled itself towards the
city walls, and at last was poured into the ample and undefended breach
through which the Liegeois had sallied.

Quentin made more than human exertions to overtake the special object of
his pursuit, who was still in his sight, striving, by voice and
example, to renew the battle, and bravely supported by a chosen party of
lanzknechts. Le Balafre and several of his comrades attached themselves
to Quentin, much marvelling at the extraordinary gallantry displayed by
so young a soldier. On the very brink of the breach, De la Marck--for
it was himself--succeeded in effecting a momentary stand, and repelling
some of the most forward of the pursuers. He had a mace of iron in his
hand, before which everything seemed to go down, and was so much covered
with blood that it was almost impossible to discern those bearings on
his shield which had so much incensed Dunois.

Quentin now found little difficulty in singling him out, for the
commanding situation of which he had possessed himself, and the use he
made of his terrible mace, caused many of the assailants to seek safer
points of attack than that where so desperate a defender presented
himself. But Quentin, to whom the importance attached to victory over
this formidable antagonist was better known, sprung from his horse at
the bottom of the breach, and, letting the noble animal, the gift of
the Duke of Orleans, run loose through the tumult, ascended the ruins to
measure swords with the Boar of Ardennes. The latter, as if he had seen
his intention, turned towards Durward with mace uplifted; and they were
on the point of encounter, when a dreadful shout of triumph, of tumult,
and of despair, announced that the besiegers were entering the city
at another point, and in the rear of those who defended the breach.
Assembling around him, by voice and bugle, the desperate partners of his
desperate fortune, De la Marck, at those appalling sounds, abandoned the
breach, and endeavoured to effect his retreat towards a part of the city
from which he might escape to the other side of the Maes. His immediate
followers formed a deep body of well disciplined men, who, never having
given quarter, were resolved now not to ask it, and who, in that hour of
despair, threw themselves into such firm order that their front occupied
the whole breadth of the street, through which they slowly retired,
making head from time to time, and checking the pursuers, many of
whom began to seek a safer occupation, by breaking into the houses for
plunder. It is therefore probable that De la Marck might have effected
his escape, his disguise concealing him from those who promised
themselves to win honour and grandeur upon his head, but for the stanch
pursuit of Quentin, his uncle Le Balafre, and some of his comrades. At
every pause which was made by the lanzknechts, a furious combat took
place betwixt them and the Archers, and in every melee Quentin sought De
la Marck; but the latter, whose present object was to retreat, seemed
to evade the young Scot's purpose of bringing him to single combat.
The confusion was general in every direction. The shrieks and cries of
women, the yelling of the terrified inhabitants, now subjected to the
extremity of military license, sounded horribly shrill amid the shouts
of battle--like the voice of misery and despair contending with that of
fury and violence, which should be heard farthest and loudest.

It was just when De la Marck, retiring through this infernal scene, had
passed the door of a small chapel of peculiar sanctity, that the shouts
of "France! France!--Burgundy! Burgundy!" apprised him that a part of
the besiegers were entering the farther end of the street, which was a
narrow one, and that his retreat was cut off.

"Comrade," he said, "take all the men with you.--Charge yonder fellows
roundly, and break through if you can--with me it is over. I am man
enough, now that I am brought to bay, to send some of these vagabond
Scots to hell before me."

His lieutenant obeyed, and, with most of the few lanzknechts who
remained alive, hurried to the farther end of the street, for the
purpose of charging those Burgundians who were advancing, and so forcing
their way, so as to escape. About six of De la Marck's best men remained
to perish with their master, and fronted the Archers, who were not many
more in number.

"Sanglier! Sanglier! Hola! gentlemen of Scotland," said the ruffian
but undaunted chief, waving his mace, "who longs to gain a coronet--who
strikes at the Boar of Ardennes?--You, young man, have, methinks, a
hankering; but you must win ere you wear it."

Quentin heard but imperfectly the words, which were partly lost in the
hollow helmet; but the action could not be mistaken, and he had but time
to bid his uncle and comrades, as they were gentlemen, to stand back,
when De la Marck sprang upon him with a bound like a tiger, aiming, at
the same time a blow with his mace, so as to make his hand and foot keep
time together, and giving his stroke full advantage of the descent of
his leap, but, light of foot and quick of eye, Quentin leaped aside, and
disappointed an aim which would have been fatal had it taken effect.

They then closed, like the wolf and the wolf dog, their comrades on
either side remaining inactive spectators, for Le Balafre roared out
for fair play, adding that he would venture his nephew on him were he as
wight as Wallace.

Neither was the experienced soldier's confidence unjustified; for,
although the blows of the despairing robber fell like those of the
hammer on the anvil, yet the quick motions and dexterous swordsmanship
of the young Archer enabled him to escape, and to requite them with the
point of his less noisy, though more fatal weapon; and that so often,
and so effectually, that the huge strength of his antagonist began to
give way to fatigue, while the ground on which he stood became a puddle
of blood. Yet, still unabated in courage and ire, the wild Boar of
