and half a dozen of my friends, with rifles, in the woods round
about me; which would get the better? You know best, Mr. Braddock's
aide-de-camp!"

There was no arguing with such a determination as this. "Thou knowest my
way of thinking, Hal," I said; "and having surprised you at your work, I
must tell my lord what I have seen."

"Tell him, of course. You have seen our county militia exercising. You
will see as much in every colony from here to the Saint Lawrence or
Georgia. As I am an old soldier, they have elected me colonel. What more
natural? Come, brother, let us trot on; dinner will be ready, and Mrs.
Fan does not like me to keep it waiting." And so we made for his house,
which was open like all the houses of our Virginian gentlemen, and where
not only every friend and neighbour, but every stranger and traveller,
was sure to find a welcome.

"So, Mrs. Fan," I said, "I have found out what game my brother has been
playing."

"I trust the Colonel will have plenty of sport ere long," says she, with
a toss of her head.

My wife thought Harry had been hunting, and I did not care to undeceive
her, though what I had seen and he had told me, made me naturally very
anxious.




CHAPTER LXXXIX. A Colonel without a Regiment


When my visit to my brother was concluded, and my wife and young child
had returned to our maternal house at Richmond, I made it my business to
go over to our Governor, then at his country house, near Williamsburg,
and confer with him regarding these open preparations for war, which
were being made not only in our own province, but in every one of the
colonies as far as we could learn. Gentlemen, with whose names history
has since made all the world familiar, were appointed from Virginia as
Delegates to the General Congress about to be held in Philadelphia. In
Massachusetts the people and the Royal troops were facing each other
almost in open hostility: in Maryland and Pennsylvania we flattered
ourselves that a much more loyal spirit was prevalent: in the Carolinas
and Georgia the mother country could reckon upon staunch adherents, and
a great majority of the inhabitants: and it never was to be supposed
that our own Virginia would forgo its ancient loyalty. We had but few
troops in the province, but its gentry were proud of their descent from
the Cavaliers of the old times: and round about our Governor were swarms
of loud and confident Loyalists who were only eager for the moment when
they might draw the sword, and scatter the rascally rebels before them.
Of course, in these meetings I was forced to hear many a hard word
against my poor Harry. His wife, all agreed (and not without good
reason, perhaps), had led him to adopt these extreme anti-British
opinions which he had of late declared; and he was infatuated by his
attachment to the gentleman of Mount Vernon, it was farther said, whose
opinions my brother always followed, and who, day by day, was committing
himself farther in the dreadful and desperate course of resistance.
"This is your friend," the people about his Excellency said, "this is
the man you favoured, who has had your special confidence, and who has
repeatedly shared your hospitality!" It could not but be owned much of
this was true: though what some of our eager Loyalists called treachery
was indeed rather a proof of the longing desire Mr. Washington and other
gentlemen had, not to withdraw from their allegiance to the Crown, but
to remain faithful, and exhaust the very last chance of reconciliation,
before they risked the other terrible alternative of revolt and
separation. Let traitors arm, and villains draw the parricidal sword! We
at least would remain faithful; the unconquerable power of England would
be exerted, and the misguided and ungrateful provinces punished and
brought back to their obedience. With what cheers we drank his Majesty's
health after our banquets! We would die in defence of his rights; we
would have a Prince of his Royal house to come and govern his ancient
dominions! In consideration of my own and my excellent mother's loyalty,
my brother's benighted conduct should be forgiven. Was it yet too late
to secure him by offering him a good command? Would I not intercede
with him, who, it was known, had a great influence over him? In our
Williamsburg councils we were alternately in every state of exaltation
and triumph, of hope, of fury against the rebels, of anxious expectancy
of home succour, of doubt, distrust, and gloom.

I promised to intercede with my brother; and wrote to him, I own, with
but little hope of success, repeating, and trying to strengthen the
arguments which I had many a time used in our conversations. My mother,
too, used her authority; but from this, I own, I expected little
advantage. She assailed him, as her habit was, with such texts of
Scripture as she thought bore out her own opinion, and threatened
punishment to him. She menaced him with the penalties which must fall
upon those who were disobedient to the powers that be. She pointed to
his elder brother's example; and hinted, I fear, at his subjection to
his wife, the very worst argument she could use in such a controversy.
She did not show me her own letter to him; possibly she knew I might
find fault with the energy of some of the expressions she thought proper
to employ; but she showed me his answer, from which I gathered what the
style and tenor of her argument had been. And if Madam Esmond brought
Scripture to her aid, Mr. Hal, to my surprise, brought scores of texts
to bear upon her in reply, and addressed her in a very neat, temperate,
and even elegant composition, which I thought his wife herself was
scarcely capable of penning. Indeed, I found he had enlisted the
services of Mr. Belman, the New Richmond clergyman, who had taken up
strong opinions on the Whig side, and who preached and printed sermons
against Hagan (who, as I have said, was of our faction), in which I fear
Belman had the best of the dispute.

My exhortations to Hal had no more success than our mother's. He did
not answer my letters. Being still farther pressed by the friends of the
Government, I wrote over most imprudently to say I would visit him at
the end of the week at Fanny's Mount; but on arriving, I only found my
sister, who received me with perfect cordiality, but informed me that
Hal was gone into the country, ever so far towards the Blue Mountains
to look at some horses, and was to be away--she did not know how long he
was to be away!

I knew then there was no hope. "My dear," I said, "as far as I can judge
from the signs of the times, the train that has been laid these years
must have a match put to it before long. Harry is riding away. God knows
to what end."

"The Lord prosper the righteous cause, Sir George," says she.

"Amen, with all my heart. You and he speak as Americans; I as an
Englishman. Tell him from me, that when anything in the course of nature
shall happen to our mother, I have enough for me and mine in England,
and shall resign all our land here in Virginia to him."

"You don't mean that, George?" she cries, with brightening eyes. "Well,
to be sure, it is but right and fair," she presently added. "Why should
you, who are the eldest but by an hour, have everything? a palace and
lands in England--the plantation here--the title--and children--and
my poor Harry none? But 'tis generous of you all the same--leastways
handsome and proper, and I didn't expect it of you; and you don't take
after your mother in this, Sir George, that you don't, nohow. Give my
love to sister Theo!" And she offers me a cheek to kiss, ere I ride away
from her door. With such a woman as Fanny to guide him, how could I hope
to make a convert of my brother?

Having met with this poor success in my enterprise, I rode back to our
Governor, with whom I agreed that it was time to arm in earnest, and
prepare ourselves against the shock that certainly was at hand. He and
his whole Court of Officials were not a little agitated and excited;
needlessly savage, I thought, in their abuse of the wicked Whigs, and
loud in their shouts of Old England for ever; but they were all eager
for the day when the contending parties could meet hand to hand, and
they could have an opportunity of riding those wicked Whigs down. And I
left my lord, having received the thanks of his Excellency in Council,
and engaged to do my best endeavours to raise a body of men in defence
of the Crown. Hence the corps, called afterwards the Westmoreland
Defenders, had its rise, of which I had the honour to be appointed
Colonel, and which I was to command when it appeared in the field. And
that fortunate event must straightway take place, so soon as the county
knew that a gentleman of my station and name would take the command of
the force. The announcement was duly made in the Government Gazette, and
we filled in our officers readily enough; but the recruits, it must
be owned, were slow to come in, and quick to disappear. Nevertheless,
friend Hagan eagerly came forward to offer himself as chaplain. Madam
Esmond gave us our colours, and progressed about the country engaging
volunteers; but the most eager recruiter of all was my good old tutor,
little Mr. Dempster, who had been out as a boy on the Jacobite side in
Scotland, and who went specially into the Carolinas, among the children
of his banished old comrades, who had worn the white cockade of Prince
Charles, and who most of all showed themselves in this contest still
loyal to the Crown.

Hal's expedition in search of horses led him not only so far as the Blue
Mountains in our colony, but thence on a long journey to Annapolis
and Baltimore; and from Baltimore to Philadelphia, to be sure; where
a second General Congress was now sitting, attended by our Virginian
gentlemen of the last year. Meanwhile, all the almanacs tell what had
happened. Lexington had happened, and the first shots were fired in the
war which was to end in the independence of our native country. We still
protested of our loyalty to his Majesty; but we stated our determination
to die or be free; and some twenty thousand of our loyal petitioners
assembled round about Boston with arms in their hands and cannon, to
which they had helped themselves out of the Government stores. Mr.
Arnold had begun that career which was to end so brilliantly, by the
daring and burglarious capture of two forts, of which he forced the
doors. Three generals from Bond Street, with a large reinforcement,
were on their way to help Mr. Gage out of his ugly position at Boston.
Presently the armies were actually engaged; and our British generals
commenced their career of conquest and pacification in the colonies by
the glorious blunder of Breed's Hill. Here they fortified themselves,
feeling themselves not strong enough for the moment to win any more
glorious victories over the rebels; and the two armies lay watching
each other whilst Congress was deliberating at Philadelphia who should
command the forces of the confederated colonies.

We all know on whom the most fortunate choice of the nation fell. Of the
Virginian regiment which marched to join the new General-in-Chief, one
was commanded by Henry Esmond Warrington, Esq., late a Captain in
his Majesty's service; and by his side rode his little wife, of whose
bravery we often subsequently heard. I was glad, for one, that she had
quitted Virginia; for, had she remained after her husband's departure,
our mother would infallibly have gone over to give her battle; and I was
thankful, at least, that that terrific incident of civil war was spared
to our family and history.

The rush of our farmers and country-folk was almost all directed towards
the new northern army; and our people were not a little flattered at
the selection of a Virginian gentleman for the principal command. With
a thrill of wrath and fury the provinces heard of the blood drawn
at Lexington; and men yelled denunciations against the cruelty and
wantonness of the bloody British invader. The invader was but doing his
duty, and was met and resisted by men in arms, who wished to prevent him
from helping himself to his own; but people do not stay to weigh their
words when they mean to be angry; the colonists had taken their side;
and, with what I own to be a natural spirit and ardour, were determined
to have a trial of strength with the braggart domineering mother
country. Breed's Hill became a mountain, as it were, which all men of
the American Continent might behold, with Liberty, Victory, Glory, on
its flaming summit. These dreaded troops could be withstood, then, by
farmers and ploughmen. These famous officers could be outgeneralled by
doctors, lawyers, and civilians! Granted that Britons could conquer
all the world;--here were their children who could match and conquer
Britons! Indeed, I don't know which of the two deserves the palm, either
for bravery or vainglory. We are in the habit of laughing at our French
neighbours for boasting, gasconading, and so forth; but for a steady
self-esteem and indomitable confidence in our own courage, greatness,
magnanimity;--who can compare with Britons, except their children across
the Atlantic?

The people round about us took the people's side for the most part
in the struggle, and, truth to say, Sir George Warrington found his
regiment of Westmoreland Defenders but very thinly manned at the
commencement, and woefully diminished in numbers presently, not only
after the news of battle from the north, but in consequence of the
behaviour of my Lord our Governor, whose conduct enraged no one more
than his own immediate partisans, and the loyal adherents of the Crown
throughout the colony. That he would plant the King's standard, and
summon all loyal gentlemen to rally round it, had been a measure agreed
in countless meetings, and applauded over thousands of bumpers. I have a
pretty good memory, and could mention the name of many a gentleman, now
a smug officer of the United States Government, whom I have heard hiccup
out a prayer that he might be allowed to perish under the folds of his
country's flag; or roar a challenge to the bloody traitors absent with
the rebel army. But let bygones be bygones. This, however, is matter of
public history, that his lordship, our Governor, a peer of Scotland, the
Sovereign's representative in his Old Dominion, who so loudly invited
all the lieges to join the King's standard, was the first to put it in
his pocket, and fly to his ships out of reach of danger. He would not
leave them, save as a pirate at midnight to burn and destroy. Meanwhile,
we loyal gentry remained on shore, committed to our cause, and only
subject to greater danger in consequence of the weakness and cruelty of
him who ought to have been our leader. It was the beginning of June, our
orchards and gardens were all blooming with plenty and summer; a week
before I had been over at Williamsburg, exchanging compliments with his
Excellency, devising plans for future movements by which we should be
able to make good head against rebellion, shaking hands heartily at
parting, and vincere aut mori the very last words upon all our lips. Our
little family was gathered at Richmond, talking over, as we did daily,
the prospect of affairs in the north, the quarrels between our own
Assembly and his Excellency, by whom they had been afresh convened, when
our ghostly Hagan rushes into our parlour, and asks, "Have we heard the
news of the Governor?"

"Has he dissolved the Assembly again, and put that scoundrel Patrick
Henry in irons?" asks Madam Esmond.

"No such thing! His lordship with his lady and family have left their
palace privately at night. They are on board a man-of-war off York,
whence my lord has sent a despatch to the Assembly, begging them to
continue their sitting, and announcing that he himself had only quitted
his Government House out of fear of the fury of the people."

What was to become of the sheep, now the shepherd had run away? No
entreaties could be more pathetic than those of the gentlemen of the
House of Assembly, who guaranteed their Governor security if he would
but land, and implored him to appear amongst them, if but to pass bills
and transact the necessary business. No: the man-of-war was his seat of
government, and my lord desired his House of Commons to wait upon him
there. This was erecting the King's standard with a vengeance. Our
Governor had left us; our Assembly perforce ruled in his stead; a rabble
of people followed the fugitive Viceroy on board his ships. A mob of
negroes deserted out of the plantations to join this other deserter. He
and his black allies landed here and there in darkness, and emulated the
most lawless of our opponents in their alacrity at seizing and burning.
He not only invited runaway negroes, but he sent an ambassador to
Indians with entreaties to join his standard. When he came on shore it
was to burn and destroy: when the people resisted, as at Norfolk and
Hampton, he retreated and betook himself to his ships again.

Even my mother, after that miserable flight of our chief, was scared
at the aspect of affairs, and doubted of the speedy putting down of
the rebellion. The arming of the negroes was, in her opinion, the most
cowardly blow of all. The loyal gentry were ruined, and robbed, many of
them, of their only property. A score of our worst hands deserted from
Richmond and Castlewood, and fled to our courageous Governor's fleet;
not all of them, though some of them, were slain, and a couple hung by
the enemy for plunder and robbery perpetrated whilst with his lordship's
precious army. Because her property was wantonly injured, and his
Majesty's chief officer an imbecile, would Madam Esmond desert the
cause of Royalty and Honour? My good mother was never so prodigiously
dignified, and loudly and enthusiastically loyal, as after she heard of
our Governor's lamentable defection. The people round about her, though
most of them of quite a different way of thinking, listened to her
speeches without unkindness. Her oddities were known far and wide
through our province; where, I am afraid, many of the wags amongst our
young men were accustomed to smoke her, as the phrase then was, and draw
out her stories about the Marquis her father, about the splendour of
her family, and so forth. But along with her oddities, her charities and
kindness were remembered, and many a rebel, as she called them, had a
sneaking regard for the pompous little Tory lady.

As for the Colonel of the Westmoreland Defenders, though that
gentleman's command dwindled utterly away after the outrageous conduct
of his chief, yet I escaped from some very serious danger which might
have befallen me and mine in consequence of some disputes which I was
known to have had with my Lord Dunmore. Going on board his ship after
he had burned the stores at Hampton, and issued the proclamation calling
the negroes to his standard, I made so free as to remonstrate with him
in regard to both measures; I implored him to return to Williamsburg,
where hundreds of us, thousands, I hoped, would be ready to defend him
to the last extremity; and in my remonstrance used terms so free, or
rather, as I suspect, indicated my contempt for his conduct so clearly
by my behaviour, that his lordship flew into a rage, said I was a rebel
like all the rest of them, and ordered me under arrest there on board
his own ship. In my quality of militia officer (since the breaking out
of the troubles I commonly used a red coat, to show that I wore the
King's colour) I begged for a court-martial immediately; and turning
round to two officers who had been present during our altercation,
desired them to remember all that had passed between his lordship
and me. These gentlemen were no doubt of my way of thinking as to
the chief's behaviour, and our interview ended in my going ashore
unaccompanied by a guard. The story got wind amongst the Whig gentry,
and was improved in the telling. I had spoken out my mind manfully to
the Governor; no Whig could have uttered sentiments more liberal. When
riots took place in Richmond, and of the Loyalists remaining there, many
were in peril of life and betook themselves to the ships, my mother's
property and house were never endangered, nor her family insulted.
We were still at the stage when a reconciliation was fondly thought
possible. "Ah! if all the Tories were like you," a distinguished Whig
has said to me, "we and the people at home should soon come together
again." This, of course, was before the famous Fourth of July, and that
Declaration which rendered reconcilement impossible. Afterwards, when
parties grew more rancorous, motives much less creditable were assigned
for my conduct, and it was said I chose to be a Liberal Tory because
I was a cunning fox, and wished to keep my estate whatever way things
went. And this, I am bound to say, is the opinion regarding my humble
self which has obtained in very high quarters at home, where a profound
regard for my own interest has been supposed not uncommonly to have
occasioned my conduct during the late unhappy troubles.

There were two or three persons in the world (for I had not told my
mother how I was resolved to cede to my brother all my life-interest
in our American property) who knew that I had no mercenary motives in
regard to the conduct I pursued. It was not worth while to undeceive
others; what were life worth, if a man were forced to feel himself a la
piste of all the calumnies uttered against him? And I do not quite know
to this present day, how it happened that my mother, that notorious
Loyalist, was left for several years quite undisturbed in her house at
Castlewood, a stray troop or company of Continentals being occasionally
quartered upon her. I do not know for certain, I say, how this piece of
good fortune happened, though I can give a pretty shrewd guess as to the
cause of it. Madam Fanny, after a campaign before Boston, came back to
Fanny's Mount, leaving her Colonel. My modest Hal, until the conclusion
of the war, would accept no higher rank, believing that in command of
a regiment he could be more useful than in charge of a division. Madam
Fanny, I say, came back, and it was remarkable after her return how
her old asperity towards my mother seemed to be removed, and what an
affection she showed for her and all the property. She was great friends
with the Governor and some of the most influential gentlemen of the new
Assembly:--Madam Esmond was harmless, and for her son's sake, who
was bravely battling for his country, her errors should be lightly
visited:--I know not how it was, but for years she remained unharmed,
except in respect of heavy Government requisitions, which of course she
had to pay, and it was not until the redcoats appeared about our house,
that much serious evil came to it.




CHAPTER XC

In which we both fight and run away


What was the use of a Colonel without a regiment? The Governor and
Council who had made such a parade of thanks in endowing me with mine,
were away out of sight, skulking on board ships, with an occasional
piracy and arson on shore. My Lord Dunmore's black allies frightened
away those of his own blood; and besides these negroes whom he had
summoned round him in arms, we heard that he had sent an envoy among
the Indians of the South, and that they were to come down in numbers
and tomahawk our people into good behaviour. "And these are to be our
allies!" I say to my mother, exchanging ominous looks with her, and
remembering, with a ghastly distinctness, that savage whose face glared
over mine, and whose knife was at my throat when Florac struck him down
on Braddock's Field. We put our house of Castlewood into as good a state
of defence as we could devise; but, in truth, it was more of the red men
and the blacks than of the rebels we were afraid. I never saw my mother
lose courage but once, and then when she was recounting to us the
particulars of our father's death in a foray of Indians more than forty
years ago. Seeing some figures one night moving in front of our house,
nothing could persuade the good lady but that they were savages, and
she sank on her knees crying out, "The Lord have mercy upon us! The
Indians--the Indians!"

My lord's negro allies vanished on board his ships, or where they could
find pay and plunder; but the painted heroes from the South never made
their appearance, though I own to have looked at my mother's grey head,
my wife's brown hair, and our little one's golden ringlets, with a
horrible pang of doubt lest these should fall the victims of ruffian
war. And it was we who fought with such weapons, and enlisted these
allies! But that I dare not (so to speak) be setting myself up as
interpreter of Providence, and pointing out the special finger of Heaven
(as many people are wont to do), I would say our employment of these
Indians, and of the German mercenaries, brought their own retribution
with them in this war. In the field, where the mercenaries were attacked
by the Provincials, they yielded, and it was triumphing over them that
so raised the spirit of the Continental army; and the murder of one
woman (Miss McCrea) by a half-dozen drunken Indians, did more harm
to the Royal cause than the loss of a battle or the destruction of
regiments.

Now, the Indian panic over, Madam Esmond's courage returned: and she
began to be seriously and not unjustly uneasy at the danger which I ran
myself, and which I brought upon others, by remaining in Virginia.

"What harm can they do me," says she, "a poor woman? If I have one son
a colonel without a regiment, I have another with a couple of hundred
Continentals behind him in Mr. Washington's camp. If the Royalists come,
they will let me off for your sake; if the rebels appear, I shall have
Harry's passport. I don't wish, sir, I don't like that your delicate
wife and this dear little baby should be here, and only increase the
risk of all of us! We must have them away to Boston or New York. Don't
talk about defending me! Who will think of hurting a poor, harmless,
old woman? If the rebels come, I shall shelter behind Mrs. Fanny's
petticoats, and shall be much safer without you in the house than in
it." This she said in part, perhaps, because 'twas reasonable; more so
because she would have me and my family out of the danger; and danger
or not, for her part felt that she was determined to remain in the land
where her father was buried, and she was born. She was living backwards,
so to speak. She had seen the new generation, and blessed them, and bade
them farewell. She belonged to the past, and old days and memories.

While we were debating about the Boston scheme, comes the news that
the British have evacuated that luckless city altogether, never having
ventured to attack Mr. Washington in his camp at Cambridge (though he
lay there for many months without powder at our mercy); but waiting
until he procured ammunition, and seized and fortified Dorchester
heights, which commanded the town, out of which the whole British army
and colony was obliged to beat a retreat. That the King's troops won the
battle at Bunker's Hill, there is no more doubt than that they beat the
French at Blenheim; but through the war their chiefs seem constantly to
have been afraid of assaulting entrenched Continentals afterwards; else
why, from July to March, hesitate to strike an almost defenceless enemy?
Why the hesitation at Long Island, when the Continental army was in our
hand? Why that astonishing timorousness--of Howe before Valley Forge,
where the relics of a force starving, sickening, and in rags, could
scarcely man the lines, which they held before a great, victorious, and
perfectly appointed army?

As the hopes and fears of the contending parties rose and fell, it was
curious to mark the altered tone of the partisans of either. When the
news came to us in the country of the evacuation of Boston, every little
Whig in the neighbourhood made his bow to Madam, and advised her to
a speedy submission. She did not carry her loyalty quite so openly as
heretofore, and flaunt her flag in the faces of the public, but she
never swerved. Every night and morning in private poor Hagan prayed for
the Royal Family in our own household, and on Sundays any neighbours
were welcome to attend the service, where my mother acted as a very
emphatic clerk, and the prayer for the High Court of Parliament under
our most religious and gracious King was very stoutly delivered. The
brave Hagan was a parson without a living, as I was a Militia Colonel
without a regiment. Hagan had continued to pray stoutly for King George
in Williamsburg, long after his Excellency our Governor had run away:
but on coming to church one Sunday to perform his duty, he found a
corporal's guard at the church-door, who told him that the Committee of
Safety had put another divine in his place, and he was requested to keep
a quiet tongue in his head. He told the men to "lead him before
their chiefs" (our honest friend always loved tall words and tragic
attitudes); and accordingly was marched through the streets to the
Capitol, with a chorus of white and coloured blackguards at the skirts
of his gown; and had an interview with Messrs. Henry and the new State
officers, and confronted the robbers, as he said, in their den. Of
course he was for making an heroic speech before these gentlemen (and
was one of many men who perhaps would have no objection to be made
martyrs, so that they might be roasted coram populo, or tortured in a
full house), but Mr. Henry was determined to give him no such chance.
After keeping Hagan three or four hours waiting in an anteroom in
the company of negroes, when the worthy divine entered the new chief
magistrate's room with an undaunted mien, and began a prepared speech
with--"Sir, by what authority am I, a minister of the----" "Mr. Hagan,"
says the other, interrupting him, "I am too busy to listen to speeches.
And as for King George, he has henceforth no more authority in this
country than King Nebuchadnezzar. Mind you that, and hold your tongue,
if you please! Stick to King John, sir, and King Macbeth; and if you
will send round your benefit-tickets, all the Assembly shall come and
hear you. Did you ever see Mr. Hagan on the boards, when you was
in London, General?" And, so saying, Henry turns round upon Mr.
Washington's second in command, General Lee, who was now come into
Virginia upon State affairs, and our shamefaced good Hagan was bustled
out of the room, reddening, and almost crying with shame. After this
event we thought that Hagan's ministrations were best confined to us in
the country, and removed the worthy pastor from his restive lambs in the
city.

The selection of Virginians to the very highest civil and military
appointments of the new government bribed and flattered many of our
leading people, who, otherwise, and but for the outrageous conduct of
our government, might have remained faithful to the Crown, and made
good head against the rising rebellion. But, although we Loyalists were
gagged and muzzled, though the Capitol was in the hands of the Whigs,
and our vaunted levies of loyal recruits so many Falstaff's regiments
for the most part, the faithful still kept intelligences with one
another in the colony, and with our neighbours; and though we did
not rise, and though we ran away, and though, in examination before
committees, justices, and so forth, some of our frightened people gave
themselves Republican airs, and vowed perdition to kings and nobles; yet
we knew each other pretty well, and--according as the chances were more
or less favourable to us, the master more or less hard--we concealed
our colours, showed our colours, half showed our colours, or downright
apostatised for the nonce, and cried, "Down with King George!" Our
negroes bore about, from house to house, all sorts of messages and
tokens. Endless underhand plots and schemes were engaged in by those who
could not afford the light. The battle over, the neutrals come and join
the winning side, and shout as loudly as the patriots. The runaways
are not counted. Will any man tell me that the signers and ardent
well-wishers of the Declaration of Independence were not in a minority
of the nation, and that the minority did not win? We knew that apart
of the defeated army of Massachusetts was about to make an important
expedition southward, upon the success of which the very greatest hopes
were founded; and I, for one, being anxious to make a movement as soon
as there was any chance of activity, had put myself in communication
with the ex-Governor Martin, of North Carolina, whom I proposed to join,
with three or four of our Virginian gentlemen, officers of that notable
corps of which we only wanted privates. We made no particular mystery
about our departure from Castlewood; the affairs of Congress were
not going so well yet that the new government could afford to lay any
particular stress or tyranny upon persons of a doubtful way of thinking.
Gentlemen's houses were still open; and in our southern fashion we would
visit our friends for months at a time. My wife and I, with our infant
and a fitting suite of servants, took leave of Madam Esmond on a visit
to a neighbouring plantation. We went thence to another friend's house,
and then to another, till finally we reached Wilmington, in North
Carolina, which was the point at which we expected to stretch a hand to
the succours which were coming to meet us.

Ere our arrival, our brother Carolinian Royalists had shown themselves
in some force. Their encounters with the Whigs had been unlucky. The
poor Highlanders had been no more fortunate in their present contest in
favour of King George, than when they had drawn their swords against him
in their own country. We did not reach Wilmington until the end of May,
by which time we found Admiral Parker's squadron there, with General
Clinton and five British regiments on board, whose object was a descent
upon Charleston.

The General, to whom I immediately made myself known, seeing that my
regiment consisted of Lady Warrington, our infant, whom she was nursing,
and three negro servants, received us at first with a very grim welcome.
But Captain Horner of the Sphinx frigate, who had been on the Jamaica
station, and received, like all the rest of the world, many kindnesses
from our dear Governor there, when he heard that my wife was General
Lambert's daughter, eagerly received her on board, and gave up his
best cabin to our service; and so we were refugees, too, like my Lord
Dunmore, having waved our flag, to be sure, and pocketed it, and
slipped out at the back door. From Wilmington we bore away quickly to
Charleston, and in the course of the voyage and our delay in the river,
previous to our assault on the place, I made some acquaintance with
Mr. Clinton, which increased to a further intimacy. It was the King's
birthday when we appeared in the river: we determined it was a glorious
day for the commencement of the expedition.

It did not take place for some days after, and I leave out, purposely,
all descriptions of my Penelope parting from her Hector, going forth on
this expedition. In the first place, Hector is perfectly well (though
a little gouty), nor has any rascal of a Pyrrhus made a prize of his
widow: and in times of war and commotion, are not such scenes of woe and
terror, and parting, occurring every hour? I can see the gentle face yet
over the bulwark, as we descend the ship's side into the boats, and the
smile of the infant on her arm. What old stories, to be sure! Captain
Miles, having no natural taste for poetry, you have forgot the verses,
no doubt, in Mr. Pope's Homer, in which you are described as parting
with your heroic father; but your mother often read them to you as
a boy, and keeps the gorget I wore on that day somewhere amongst her
dressing-boxes now.

My second venture at fighting was no more lucky than my first. We came
back to our ships that evening thoroughly beaten. The madcap Lee, whom
Clinton had faced at Boston, now met him at Charleston. Lee, and the
gallant garrison there, made a brilliant and most successful resistance.
The fort on Sullivan's Island, which we attacked, was a nut we could not
crack. The fire of all our frigates was not strong enough to pound its
shell; the passage by which we moved up to the assault of the place was
not fordable, as those officers found--Sir Henry at the head of them,
who was always the first to charge--who attempted to wade it. Death by
shot, by drowning, by catching my death of cold, I had braved before I
returned to my wife; and our frigate being aground for a time and got
off with difficulty, was agreeably cannonaded by the enemy until she got
off her bank.

A small incident in the midst of this unlucky struggle was the occasion
of a subsequent intimacy which arose between me and Sir Harry Clinton,
and bound me to that most gallant officer during the Period in which
it was my fortune to follow the war. Of his qualifications as a leader
there may be many opinions: I fear to say, regarding a man I heartily
respect and admire, there ought only to be one. Of his personal bearing
and his courage there can be no doubt; he was always eager to show it;
and whether at the final charge on Breed's Hill, when at the head of
the rallied troops he carried the Continental lines, or here before
Sullivan's Fort, or a year later at Fort Washington, when, standard in
hand, he swept up the height, and entered the fort at the head of the
storming column, Clinton was always foremost in the race of battle, and
the King's service knew no more admirable soldier.

We were taking to the water from our boats, with the intention of
forcing a column to the fort, through a way which our own guns had
rendered practicable, when a shot struck a boat alongside of us, so
well aimed, as actually to put three-fourths of the boat's crew hors de
combat, and knock down the officer steering, and the flag behind him.
I could not help crying out, "Bravo! well aimed!" for no ninepins ever
went down more helplessly than these poor fellows before the round shot.
Then the General, turning round to me, says, rather grimly, "Sir, the
behaviour of the enemy seems to please you!" "I am pleased, sir," says
I, "that my countrymen, yonder, should fight as becomes our nation."
We floundered on towards the fort in the midst of the same amiable
attentions from small arms and great, until we found the water was up
to our breasts and deepening at every step, when we were fain to take
to our boats again and pull out of harm's way. Sir Henry waited upon my
Lady Warrington on board the Sphinx after this, and was very gracious to
her, and mighty facetious regarding the character of the humble writer
of the present memoir, whom his Excellency always described as a rebel
at heart. I pray my children may live to see or engage in no great
revolutions,--such as that, for instance, raging in the country of our
miserable French neighbours. Save a very, very few indeed, the actors in
those great tragedies do not bear to be scanned too closely; the chiefs
are often no better than ranting quacks; the heroes ignoble puppets; the
heroines anything but pure. The prize is not always to the brave. In our
revolution it certainly did fall, for once and for a wonder, to the
most deserving: but who knows his enemies now? His great and surprising
triumphs were not in those rare engagements with the enemy where he
obtained a trifling mastery; but over Congress; over hunger and disease;
over lukewarm friends, or smiling foes in his own camp, whom his great
spirit had to meet and master. When the struggle was over, and our
important chiefs who had conducted it began to squabble and accuse
each other in their own defence before the nation--what charges and
counter-charges were brought; what pretexts of delay were urged; what
piteous excuses were put forward that this fleet arrived too late; that
that regiment mistook its orders; that these cannon-balls would not fit
those guns; and so to the end of the chapter! Here was a general who
beat us with no shot at times, and no powder, and no money; and he never
thought of a convention; his courage never capitulated! Through all the
doubt and darkness, the danger and long tempest of the war, I think it
was only the American leader's indomitable soul that remained entirely
steady.

Of course our Charleston expedition was made the most of, and pronounced
a prodigious victory by the enemy, who had learnt (from their parents,
perhaps) to cry victory if a corporal's guard were surprised, as loud
as if we had won a pitched battle. Mr. Lee rushed back to New York, the
conqueror of conquerors, trumpeting his glory, and by no man received
with more eager delight than by the Commander-in-Chief of the American
Army. It was my dear Lee and my dear General between them, then; and it
hath always touched me in the history of our early Revolution to note
that simple confidence and admiration with which the General-in-Chief
was wont to regard officers under him, who had happened previously to
serve with the King's army. So the Mexicans of old looked and wondered
when they first saw an armed Spanish horseman! And this mad, flashy
braggart (and another Continental general, whose name and whose luck
afterwards were sufficiently notorious) you may be sure took advantage
of the modesty of the Commander-in-Chief, and advised, and blustered,
and sneered, and disobeyed orders; daily presenting fresh obstacles
(as if he had not enough otherwise!) in the path over which only Mr.
Washington's astonishing endurance could have enabled him to march.

Whilst we were away on our South Carolina expedition, the famous Fourth
of July had taken place, and we and the thirteen United States were
parted for ever. My own native state of Virginia had also distinguished
itself by announcing that all men are equally free; that all power is
vested in the people, who have an inalienable right to alter, reform,
or abolish their form of government at pleasure, and that the idea of
an hereditary first magistrate is unnatural and absurd! Our General
presented me with this document fresh from Williamsburg, as we were
sailing northward by the Virginia capes, and, amidst not a little
amusement and laughter, pointed out to me the faith to which, from the
Fourth inst. inclusive, I was bound. There was no help for it; I was a
Virginian--my godfathers had promised and vowed, in my name, that all
men were equally free (including, of course, the race of poor Gumbo),
that the idea of a monarchy is absurd, and that I had the right to alter
my form of government at pleasure. I thought of Madam Esmond at home,
and how she would look when these articles of faith were brought her to
subscribe; how would Hagan receive them? He demolished them in a sermon,
in which all the logic was on his side, but the U.S. Government has not,
somehow, been affected by the discourse; and when he came to touch upon
the point that all men being free, therefore Gumbo and Sady, and Nathan,
had assuredly a right to go to Congress: "Tut, tut! my good Mr. Hagan,"
says my mother, "let us hear no more of this nonsense; but leave such
wickedness and folly to the rebels!"

By the middle of August we were before New York, whither Mr. Howe had
brought his army that had betaken itself to Halifax after its inglorious
expulsion from Boston. The American Commander-in-Chief was at New
York, and a great battle inevitable; and I looked forward to it with
an inexpressible feeling of doubt and anxiety, knowing that my dearest
brother and his regiment formed part of the troops whom we must attack,
and could not but overpower. Almost the whole of the American army came
over to fight on a small island, where every officer on both sides knew
that they were to be beaten, and whence they had not a chance of escape.
Two frigates, out of a hundred we had placed so as to command the
enemy's entrenched camp and point of retreat across East River to New
York, would have destroyed every bark in which he sought to fly, and
compelled him to lay down his arms on shore. He fought: his hasty levies
were utterly overthrown; some of his generals, his best troops, his
artillery taken; the remnant huddled into their entrenched camp after
their rout, the pursuers entering it with them. The victors were called
back; the enemy was then pent up in a corner of the island, and could
not escape. "They are at our mercy, and are ours to-morrow," says the
gentle General. Not a ship was set to watch the American force; not
a sentinel of ours could see a movement in their camp. A whole army
crossed under our eyes in one single night to the mainland without the
loss of a single man; and General Howe was suffered to remain in command
after this feat, and to complete his glories of Long Island and Breed's
Hill, at Philadelphia! A friend, to be sure, crossed in the night to say
the enemy's army was being ferried over, but he fell upon a picket of
Germans: they could not understand him: their commander was boozing or
asleep. In the morning, when the spy was brought to some one who could
comprehend the American language, the whole Continental force had
crossed the East River, and the empire over thirteen colonies had
slipped away.

The opinions I had about our chief were by no means uncommon in the
army; though, perhaps, wisely kept secret by gentlemen under Mr. Howe's
immediate command. Am I more unlucky than other folks, I wonder? or why
are my imprudent sayings carried about more than my neighbours'? My rage
that such a use was made of such a victory was no greater than that of
scores of gentlemen with the army. Why must my name forsooth be given up
to the Commander-in-Chief as that of the most guilty of the
grumblers? Personally, General Howe was perfectly brave, amiable, and
good-humoured.

"So, Sir George," says he, "you find fault with me, as a military
man, because there was a fog after the battle on Long Island, and your
friends, the Continentals, gave me the slip! Surely we took and killed
enough of them; but there is no satisfying you gentlemen amateurs!" and
he turned his back on me, and shrugged his shoulders, and talked to some
one else. Amateur I might be, and he the most amiable of men; but if
King George had said to him, "Never more be officer of mine," yonder
agreeable and pleasant Cassio would most certainly have had his desert.

I soon found how our Chief had come in possession of his information
regarding myself. My admirable cousin, Mr. William Esmond--who of course
had forsaken New York and his post, when all the Royal authorities fled
out of the place, and Washington occupied it,--returned along with our
troops and fleets; and, being a gentleman of good birth and name, and
well acquainted with the city, made himself agreeable to the newcomers
of the Royal army, the young bloods, merry fellows, and macaronis, by
introducing them to play-tables, taverns, and yet worse places, with
which the worthy gentleman continued to be familiar in the New World
as in the Old. Coelum non animum. However Will had changed his air, or
whithersoever he transported his carcase, he carried a rascal in his
skin.

I had heard a dozen stories of his sayings regarding my family, and was
determined neither to avoid him nor seek him; but to call him to account
whensoever we met; and, chancing one day to be at a coffee-house in a
friend's company, my worthy kinsman swaggered in with a couple of young
lads of the army, whom he found it was his pleasure and profit now
to lead into every kind of dissipation. I happened to know one of Mr.
Will's young companions, an aide-de-camp of General Clinton's, who had
been in my close company both at Charleston, before Sullivan's Island,
and in the action of Brooklyn, where our General gloriously led the
right wing of the English army. They took a box without noticing us
at first, though I heard my name three or four times mentioned by
my brawling kinsman, who ended some drunken speech he was making by
slapping his fist on the table, and swearing, "By----, I will do for
him, and the bloody rebel, his brother!"

"Ah! Mr. Esmond," says I, coming forward with my hat on. (He looked a
little pale behind his punch-bowl.) "I have long wanted to see you, to
set some little matters right about which there has been a difference
between us."

"And what may those be, sir?" says he, with a volley of oaths.

"You have chosen to cast a doubt upon my courage, and say that I shirked
a meeting with you when we were young men. Our relationship and our age
ought to prevent us from having recourse to such murderous follies" (Mr.
Will started up, looking fierce and relieved), "but I give you notice,
that though I can afford to overlook lies against myself, if I hear from
you a word in disparagement of my brother, Colonel Warrington, of the
Continental Army, I will hold you accountable."

"Indeed, gentlemen! Mighty fine, indeed! You take notice of Sir George
Warrington's words!" cries Mr. Will over his punch-bowl.

"You have been pleased to say," I continued, growing angry as I spoke,
and being a fool therefore for my pains, "that the very estates we hold
in this country are not ours, but of right revert to your family!"

"So they are ours! By George, they're ours! I've heard my brother
Castlewood say so a score of times!" swears Mr. Will.

"In that case, sir," says I, hotly, "your brother, my Lord Castlewood,
tells no more truth than yourself. We have the titles at hone in
Virginia. They are registered in the courts there; and if ever I hear
one word more of this impertinence, I shall call you to account where no
constables will be at hand to interfere!"

"I wonder," cries Will, in a choking voice, "that I don't cut him into
twenty thousand pieces as he stands there before me with his confounded
yellow face. It was my brother Castlewood won his money--no, it was his
brother; d---- you, which are you, the rebel or the other? I hate the
ugly faces of both of you, and, hic!--if you are for the King, show you
are for the King, and drink his health!" and he sank down into his box
with a hiccup and a wild laugh, which he repeated a dozen times, with
a hundred more oaths and vociferous outcries that I should drink the
King's health.

To reason with a creature in this condition, or ask explanations or
apologies from him, was absurd. I left Mr. Will to reel to his lodgings
under the care of his young friends--who were surprised to find an old
toper so suddenly affected and so utterly prostrated by liquor--and
limped home to my wife, whom I found happy in possession of a brief
letter from Hal, which a countryman had brought in; and who said not a
word about the affairs of the Continentals with whom he was engaged,
but wrote a couple of pages of rapturous eulogiums upon his brother's
behaviour in the field, which my dear Hal was pleased to admire, as he
admired everything I said and did.

I rather looked for a messenger from my amiable kinsman in consequence
of the speeches which had passed between us the night before, and did
not know but that I might be called by Will to make my words good; and
when accordingly Mr. Lacy (our companion of the previous evening) made
his appearance at an early hour of the forenoon, I was beckoning my Lady
Warrington to leave us, when, with a laugh and a cry of "Oh dear, no!"
Mr. Lacy begged her ladyship not to disturb herself.

"I have seen," says he, "a gentleman who begs to send you his apologies
if he uttered a word last night which could offend you."

"What apologies? what words?" asks the anxious wife.

I explained that roaring Will Esmond had met me in a coffee-house on the
previous evening, and quarrelled with me, as he had done with hundreds
before. "It appears the fellow is constantly abusive, and invariably
pleads drunkenness, and apologises the next morning, unless he is caned
over-night," remarked Captain Lacy. And my lady, I dare say, makes a
little sermon, and asks why we gentlemen will go to idle coffee-houses
and run the risk of meeting roaring, roystering Will Esmonds?

Our sojourn in New York was enlivened by a project for burning the city
which some ardent patriots entertained and partially executed. Several
such schemes were laid in the course of the war, and each one of the
principal cities was doomed to fire; though, in the interests of peace
and goodwill, I hope it will be remembered that these plans never
originated with the cruel government of a tyrant king, but were always
proposed by gentlemen on the Continental side, who vowed that, rather
than remain under the ignominious despotism of the ruffian of Brunswick,
the fairest towns of America should burn. I presume that the sages who
were for burning down Boston were not actual proprietors in that
place, and the New York burners might come from other parts of the
country--from Philadelphia, or what not. Howbeit, the British spared
you, gentlemen, and we pray you give us credit for this act of
moderation.

I had not the fortune to be present in the action on the White Plains,
being detained by the hurt which I had received at Long Island, and
which broke out again and again, and took some time in the healing. The
tenderest of nurses watched me through my tedious malady, and was eager
for the day when I should doff my militia coat and return to the quiet
English home where Hetty and our good General were tending our children.
Indeed I don't know that I have yet forgiven myself for the pains and
terrors that I must have caused my poor wife, by keeping her separate
from her young ones, and away from her home, because, forsooth, I wished
to see a little more of the war then going on. Our grand tour in Europe
had been all very well. We had beheld St. Peter's at Rome, and the
Bishop thereof; the Dauphiness of France (alas, to think that glorious
head should ever have been brought so low!) at Paris; and the rightful
King of England at Florence. I had dipped my gout in a half-dozen baths
and spas, and played cards in a hundred courts, as my Travels in Europe
(which I propose to publish after my completion of the History of the
American War) will testify. [Neither of these two projected works of Sir
George Warrington were brought, as it appears, to a completion.] And,
during our peregrinations, my hypochondria diminished (which plagued me
woefully at home); and my health and spirits visibly improved. Perhaps
it was because she saw the evident benefit I had from excitement and
change, that my wife was reconciled to my continuing to enjoy them; and
though secretly suffering pangs at being away from her nursery and her
eldest boy (for whom she ever has had an absurd infatuation), the
dear hypocrite scarce allowed a look of anxiety to appear on her face;
encouraged me with smiles; professed herself eager to follow me; asked
why it should be a sin in me to covet honour? and, in a word, was ready
to stay, to go, to smile, to be sad; to scale mountains, or to go down
to the sea in ships; to say that cold was pleasant, heat tolerable,
hunger good sport, dirty lodgings delightful; though she is wretched
sailor, very delicate about the little she eats, and an extreme sufferer
both of cold and heat. Hence, as I willed to stay on yet a while on my
native continent, she was certain nothing was so good for me; and when
I was minded to return home--oh, how she brightened, and kissed her
infant, and told him how he should see the beautiful gardens at home,
and Aunt Theo, and grandpapa, and his sister, and Miles. "Miles!" cries
the little parrot, mocking its mother--and crowing; as if there was any
mighty privilege in seeing Mr. Miles, forsooth, who was under Doctor
Sumner's care at Harrow-on-the-Hill, where, to do the gentleman justice,
he showed that he could eat more tarts than any boy in the school, and
took most creditable prizes at football and hare-and-hounds.




CHAPTER XCI. Satis Pugnae


It has always seemed to me (I speak under the correction of military
gentlemen) that the entrenchments of Breed's Hill served the Continental
army throughout the whole of our American war. The slaughter inflicted
upon us from behind those lines was so severe, and the behaviour of the
enemy so resolute, that the British chiefs respected the barricades
of the Americans hereafter; and were they firing from behind a row of
blankets, certain of our generals rather hesitated to force them. In the
affair of the White Plains, when, for a second time, Mr. Washington's
army was quite at the mercy of the victors, we subsequently heard
that our conquering troops were held back before a barricade actually
composed of cornstalks and straw. Another opportunity was given us, and
lasted during a whole winter, during which the dwindling and dismayed
troops of Congress lay starving and unarmed under our grasp, and the
magnanimous Mr. Howe left the famous camp of Valley Forge untouched,
whilst his great, brave, and perfectly appointed army fiddled and
gambled and feasted in Philadelphia. And, by Byng's countrymen,
triumphal arches were erected, tournaments were held in pleasant mockery
of the middle ages, and wreaths and garlands offered by beautiful ladies
to this clement chief, with fantastical mottoes and posies announcing
that his laurels should be immortal! Why have my ungrateful countrymen
in America never erected statues to this general? They had not in all
their army an officer who fought their battles better; who enabled them
to retrieve their errors with such adroitness; who took care that their
defeats should be so little hurtful to themselves; and when, in the
course of events, the stronger force naturally got the uppermost, who
showed such an untiring tenderness, patience, and complacency in helping
the poor disabled opponent on to his legs again. Ah! think of eighteen
years before and the fiery young warrior whom England had sent out to
fight her adversary on the American continent. Fancy him for ever pacing
round the defences behind which the foe lies sheltered; by night and by
day alike sleepless and eager; consuming away in his fierce wrath and
longing, and never closing his eye, so intent is it in watching; winding
the track with untiring scent that pants and hungers for blood and
battle; prowling through midnight forests, or climbing silent over
precipices before dawn; and watching till his great heart is almost worn
out, until the foe shows himself at last, when he springs on him and
grapples with him, and, dying, slays him! Think of Wolfe at Quebec,
and hearken to Howe's fiddles as he sits smiling amongst the dancers at
Philadelphia!

A favourite scheme with our ministers at home and some of our generals
in America, was to establish a communication between Canada and New
York, by which means it was hoped New England might be cut off from
the neighbouring colonies, overpowered in detail, and forced into
submission. Burgoyne was entrusted with the conduct of the plan, and he
set forth from Quebec, confidently promising to bring it to a
successful issue. His march began in military state: the trumpets of
his proclamations blew before him; he bade the colonists to remember the
immense power of England; and summoned the misguided rebels to lay down
their arms. He brought with him a formidable English force, an army of
German veterans not less powerful, a dreadful band of Indian warriors,
and a brilliant train of artillery. It was supposed that the people
round his march would rally to the Royal cause and standards. The
Continental force in front of him was small at first, and Washington's
army was weakened by the withdrawal of troops who were hurried forward
to meet this Canadian invasion. A British detachment from New York was
to force its way up the Hudson, sweeping away the enemy on the route,
and make a junction with Burgoyne at Albany. Then was the time when
Washington's weakened army should have been struck too; but a greater
Power willed otherwise: nor am I, for one, even going to regret the
termination of the war. As we look over the game now, how clear seem the
blunders which were made by the losing side! From the beginning to the
end we were for ever arriving too late. Our supplies and reinforcements
from home were too late. Our troops were in difficulty, and our succours
reached them too late. Our fleet appeared off York Town just too
late, after Cornwallis had surrendered. A way of escape was opened
to Burgoyne, but he resolved upon retreat too late. I have heard
discomfited officers in after days prove infallibly how a different wind
would have saved America to us; how we must have destroyed the French
fleet but for a tempest or two; how once, twice, thrice, but for
nightfall, Mr. Washington and his army were in our power. Who has not
speculated, in the course of his reading of history, upon the "Has been"
and the "Might have been" in the world? I take my tattered old map-book
from the shelf, and see the board on which the great contest was played;
I wonder at the curious chances which lost it: and, putting aside any
idle talk about the respective bravery of the two nations, can't but see
that we had the best cards, and that we lost the game.

I own the sport had a considerable fascination for me, and stirred up
my languid blood. My brother Hal, when settled on his plantation in
Virginia, was perfectly satisfied with the sports and occupations he
found there. The company of the country neighbours sufficed him; he
never tired of looking after his crops and people, taking his fish,
shooting his ducks, hunting in his woods, or enjoying his rubber and
his supper. Happy Hal, in his great barn of a house, under his roomy
porches, his dogs lying round his feet; his friends, the Virginian Will
Wimbles, at free quarters in his mansion; his negroes fat, lazy, and
ragged: his shrewd little wife ruling over them and her husband, who
always obeyed her implicitly when living, and who was pretty speedily
consoled when she died! I say happy, though his lot would have been
intolerable to me: wife, and friends, and plantation, and town life at
Richmond (Richmond succeeded to the honour of being the capital when our
Province became a State). How happy he whose foot fits the shoe which
fortune gives him! My income was five times as great, my house in
England as large, and built of bricks and faced with freestone; my
wife--would I have changed her for any other wife in the world? My
children--well, I am contented with my Lady Warrington's opinion about
them. But with all these plums and peaches and rich fruits out of
Plenty's horn poured into my lap, I fear I have been but an ingrate;
and Hodge, my gatekeeper, who shares his bread and scrap of bacon with
a family as large as his master's, seems to me to enjoy his meal as much
as I do, though Mrs. Molly prepares her best dishes and sweetmeats, and
Mr. Gumbo uncorks the choicest bottle from the cellar. Ah me! sweetmeats
have lost their savour for me, however they may rejoice my young ones
from the nursery, and the perfume of claret palls upon old noses!
Our parson has poured out his sermons many and many a time to me, and
perhaps I did not care for them much when he first broached them. Dost
thou remember, honest friend? (sure he does, for he has repeated the
story over the bottle as many times as his sermons almost, and my Lady
Warrington pretends as if she had never heard it)--I say, Joe Blake,
thou rememberest full well, and with advantages, that October evening
when we scrambled up an embrasure at Fort Clinton and a clubbed musket
would have dashed these valuable brains out, had not Joe's sword whipped
my rebellious countryman through the gizzard. Joe wore a red coat in
those days (the uniform of the brave Sixty-third, whose leader, the bold
Sill, fell pierced with many wounds beside him). He exchanged his red
for black and my pulpit. His doctrines are sound, and his sermons short.
We read the papers together over our wine. Not two months ago we read
our old friend Howe's glorious deed of the first of June. We were told
how the noble Rawdon, who fought with us at Fort Clinton, had joined the
Duke of York: and to-day his Royal Highness is in full retreat before
Pichegru: and he and my son Miles have taken Valenciennes for nothing!
Ah, parson! would you not like to put on your old Sixty-third coat?
(though I doubt Mrs. Blake could never make the buttons and button-holes
meet again over your big body). The boys were acting a play with my
militia sword. Oh, that I were young again, Mr. Blake! that I had not
the gout in my toe; and I would saddle Rosinante and ride back into
the world, and feel the pulses beat again, and play a little of life's
glorious game!

The last "hit" which I saw played, was gallantly won by our side; though
'tis true that even in this parti the Americans won the rubber--our
people gaining only the ground they stood on, and the guns, stores, and
ships which they captured and destroyed, whilst our efforts at rescue
were too late to prevent the catastrophe impending over Burgoyne's
unfortunate army. After one of those delays which always were happening
to retard our plans and weaken the blows which our chiefs intended to
deliver, an expedition was got under weigh from New York at the close
of the month of September, '77; that, could it have but advanced a
fortnight earlier, might have saved the doomed force of Burgoyne. Sed
Dis aliter visum. The delay here was not Sir Henry Clinton's fault, who
could not leave his city unprotected; but the winds and weather which
delayed the arrival of reinforcements which we had long awaited from
England. The fleet which brought them brought us long and fond letters
from home, with the very last news of the children under the care of
their good Aunt Hetty and their grandfather. The mother's heart yearned
towards the absent young ones. She made me no reproaches: but I could
read her importunities in her anxious eyes, her terrors for me, and her
longing for her children. "Why stay longer?" she seemed to say. "You
who have no calling to this war, or to draw the sword against your
countrymen--why continue to imperil your life and my happiness?" I
understood her appeal. We were to enter upon no immediate service of
danger; I told her Sir Henry was only going to accompany the expedition
for a part of the way. I would return with him, the reconnaissance over,
and Christmas, please Heaven, should see our family once more united in
England.

A force of three thousand men, including a couple of slender regiments
of American Loyalists and New York Militia (with which latter my
distinguished relative, Mr. Will Esmond, went as captain), was embarked
at New York, and our armament sailed up the noble Hudson River, that
presents finer aspects than the Rhine in Europe to my mind: nor was
any fire opened upon us from those beetling cliffs and precipitous
"palisades," as they are called, by which we sailed; the enemy, strange
to say, being for once unaware of the movement we contemplated. Our
first landing was on the Eastern bank, at a place called Verplancks
Point, whence the Congress troops withdrew after a slight resistance,
their leader, the tough old Putnam (so famous during the war) supposing
that our march was to be directed towards the Eastern Highlands, by
which we intended to penetrate to Burgoyne. Putnam fell back to occupy
these passes, a small detachment of ours being sent forward as if in
pursuit, which he imagined was to be followed by the rest of our force.
Meanwhile, before daylight, two thousand men without artillery, were
carried over to Stoney Point on the Western shore, opposite Verplancks,
and under a great hill called the Dunderberg by the old Dutch lords of
the stream, and which hangs precipitously over it. A little stream
at the northern base of this mountain intersects it from the opposite
height on which Fort Clinton stood, named not after our general, but
after one of the two gentlemen of the same name, who were amongst the
oldest and most respected of the provincial gentry of New York, and who
were at this moment actually in command against Sir Henry. On the next
height to Clinton is Fort Montgomery; and behind them rises a hill
called Bear Hill; whilst at the opposite side of the magnificent stream
stands "Saint Antony's Nose," a prodigious peak indeed, which the Dutch
had quaintly christened.

The attacks on the two forts were almost simultaneous. Half our men were
detached for the assault on Fort Montgomery, under the brave Campbell,
who fell before the rampart. Sir Henry, who would never be out of danger
where he could find it, personally led the remainder, and hoped, he
said, that we should have better luck than before the Sullivan Island. A
path led up to the Dunderberg, so narrow as scarcely to admit three men
abreast, and in utter silence our whole force scaled it, wondering at
every rugged step to meet with no opposition. The enemy had not even
kept a watch on it; nor were we descried until we were descending the
height, at the base of which we easily dispersed a small force sent
hurriedly to oppose us. The firing which here took place rendered all
idea of a surprise impossible. The fort was before us. With such arms
as the troops had in their hands, they had to assault; and silently
and swiftly, in the face of the artillery playing upon them, the troops
ascended the hill. The men had orders on no account to fire. Taking the
colours of the Sixty-third, and bearing them aloft, Sir Henry mounted
with the stormers. The place was so steep that the men pushed each
other over the wall and through the embrasures; and it was there that
Lieutenant Joseph Blake, the father of a certain Joseph Clinton Blake,
who looks with the eyes of affection on a certain young lady, presented
himself to the living of Warrington by saving the life of the unworthy
patron thereof.

About a fourth part of the garrison, as we were told, escaped out of
the fort, the rest being killed or wounded, or remaining our prisoners
within the works. Fort Montgomery was, in like manner, stormed and taken
by our people; and, at night, as we looked down from the heights where
the king's standard had been just planted, we were treated to a splendid
illumination in the river below. Under Fort Montgomery, and stretching
over to that lofty prominence, called Saint Antony's Nose, a boom and
chain had been laid with a vast cost and labour, behind which several
American frigates and galleys were anchored. The fort being taken, these
ships attempted to get up the river in the darkness, out of the reach of
guns which they knew must destroy them in the morning. But the wind was
unfavourable, and escape was found to be impossible. The crews therefore
took to the boats, and so landed, having previously set the ships on
fire with all their sails set; and we beheld these magnificent pyramids
of flame burning up to the heavens and reflected in the waters below,
until, in the midst of prodigious explosions, they sank and disappeared.

On the next day a parlementaire came in from the enemy, to inquire as to
the state of his troops left wounded or prisoners in our hands, and the
Continental officer brought me a note, which gave me a strange shock,
for it showed that in the struggle of the previous evening my brother
had been engaged. It was dated October 7, from Major-General George
Clinton's divisional headquarters, and it stated briefly that "Colonel
H. Warrington, of the Virginia line, hopes that Sir George Warrington
escaped unhurt in the assault of last evening, from which the Colonel
himself was so fortunate as to retire without the least injury." Never
did I say my prayers more heartily and gratefully than on that night,
devoutly thanking Heaven that my dearest brother was spared, and making
a vow at the same time to withdraw out of the fratricidal contest, into
which I only had entered because Honour and Duty seemed imperatively to
call me.

I own I felt an inexpressible relief when I had come to the resolution
to retire and betake myself to the peaceful shade of my own vines and
fig-trees at home. I longed, however, to see my brother ere I returned,
and asked, and easily obtained an errand to the camp of the American
General Clinton from our own chief. The headquarters of his division
were now some miles up the river, and a boat and a flag of truce quickly
brought me to the point where his out-pickets received me on the shore.
My brother was very soon with me. He had only lately joined General
Clinton's division with letters from headquarters at Philadelphia, and
he chanced to hear, after the attack on Fort Clinton, that I had been
present during the affair. We passed a brief delightful night together:
Mr. Sady, who always followed Hal to the war, cooking a feast in honour
of both his masters. There was but one bed of straw in the hut where we
had quarters, and Hal and I slept on it, side by side, as we had done
when we were boys. We had a hundred things to say regarding past times
and present. His kind heart gladdened when I told him of my resolve to
retire to my acres and to take off the red coat which I wore: he flung
his arms round it. "Praised be God!" said he. "Oh, heavens, George!
think what might have happened had we met in the affair two nights ago!"
And he turned quite pale at the thought. He eased my mind with respect
to our mother. She was a bitter Tory, to be sure, but the Chief had
given special injunctions regarding her safety. "And Fanny" (Hal's
wife) "watches over her, and she is as good as a company!" cried the
enthusiastic husband. "Isn't she clever? Isn't she handsome? Isn't
she good?" cries Hal, never, fortunately, waiting for a reply to these
ardent queries. "And to think that I was nearly marrying Maria once! Oh,
mercy, what an escape I had!" he added. "Hagan prays for the King, every
morning and night, at Castlewood, but they bolt the doors, and nobody
hears. Gracious powers! his wife is sixty if she is a day; and oh,
George! the quantity she drinks is..." But why tell the failings of our
good cousin? I am pleased to think she lived to drink the health of King
George long after his Old Dominion had passed for ever from his sceptre.

The morning came when my brief mission to the camp was ended, and the
truest of friends and fondest of brothers accompanied me to my boat,
which lay waiting at the riverside. We exchanged an embrace at parting,
and his hand held mine yet for a moment ere I stepped into the barge
which bore me rapidly down the stream. "Shall I see thee once more,
dearest and best companion of my youth?" I thought. "Amongst our cold
Englishmen, can I ever hope to meet with a friend like thee? When hadst
thou ever a thought that was not kindly and generous? When a wish, or
a possession, but for me you would sacrifice it? How brave are you,
and how modest; how gentle, and how strong; how simple, unselfish, and
humble; how eager to see others' merit; how diffident of your own!" He
