
Terence was at once assailed with a storm of questions, for with the
exception of O'Grady, no one had suspected the share that he and Dicky
Ryan had had in that affair. Terence knew that the latter had kept the
secret, for he had asked him only two or three days before, and he
therefore assumed an expression of innocence.

"What on earth do you mean, O'Grady?"

"What do I mane? Why, that somehow or other you were at the bottom of that
shindy when all the troops were turned out on a false alarm."

"Really, O'Grady, that is too bad. You know that every trick that was
played at Athlone was your suggestion, and as we never could find out how
that alarm originated, of course you put it down to me, whereas it is just
as likely to have been your own work. Colonel Corcoran knows that Dicky
and I were in the mess-room at the convent at the time when the alarm
broke out."

"That was so," the colonel agreed, "for I know that you were talking to me
when Hoolan ran in and told us that there was a row in the town. On what
do you base your suspicions, O'Grady?"

"Just upon me knowledge of the two lads, Colonel. Faith, there never was a
piece of mischief afloat that they were not mixed up with."

"If that is all you have to say, O'Grady," Terence replied, "I should
advise you not to go hunting for mares' nests again. I know that you can
see as far into a brick wall as most people, but you cannot see what is
going on on the other side."

"All the same, Terence," O'Grady said, doggedly, "to the end of me life I
will always believe that you had a hand in the matter. There is no one
else that I know of except you and Ryan who would have had the cheek to do
such a thing, and I don't believe that you can deny it yourself."

"I shall not trouble myself to plead not guilty, except before a regularly
constituted court," Terence laughed. "At any rate, as when the march
begins we shall go on first as scouts, it may be that I shall send in news
which will turn out a British army again."

"I will forgive you if you do, for it is likely that we should have some
divarsion after turning out, instead of marching out and back again like a
regiment of omadhouns."


CHAPTER XXII

NEWS FROM HOME

A week after arriving at Abrantes, seeing that there was no probability
whatever of fighting for a time, Terence had suggested to Herrara that it
would be a good opportunity for him to run down to Lisbon for a few days
to see his fiancee and his friends in the town.

"I don't know who you really ought to apply to for leave," he said, "but
as we are a sort of half-independent corps, it seems the simplest way for
me to take the responsibility. Nobody is ever likely to ask any questions
about it; and now that it will simply be a matter of hard drill till the
army moves again, you can be very well spared. If it is company work, it
is the captain's business. If the two regiments are manoeuvring together,
they will of course be under Bull and Macwitty, and I should be acting as
brigadier."

"I should like to go very much," Herrara said. "I have not yet had the
pleasure of introducing myself to my family and friends as a
lieutenant-colonel. Of course, I wrote to my people when I received the
commission from Lord Beresford; but it would be really fun to surprise
some of my school-fellows and comrades, so if you think that it will not
be inconvenient I should like very much to go."

"Then if I were you I should start at once. I will give you a sort of
formal letter of leave in case you are questioned as you go down. You can
get to Santarem to-night and to Lisbon to-morrow afternoon."

"Is there anything that I can do for you?"

"Yes; I wish you would ask Don Jose if he will, through his friends at
Oporto, find out whether my cousin's mother was there at the time the
French entered, and if she was, whether she got through that horrible
business unhurt. I have been hearing about it from my friends, who were a
couple of days there before the force marched to Braga. They tell me that,
by all accounts, the business was even worse than we feared. The French
came upon some of their comrades tied to posts in the great square,
horribly mutilated, some of them with their eyes put out, still living,
and after that they spared no one; and upon my word, I can hardly blame
them, and in fact don't blame them at all, so long as they only  their
vengeance on men. The people made it worse for themselves by keeping up a
desultory fire from windows and housetops when resistance had long ceased
to be of any use; and, of course, seeing their comrades shot down in this
way infuriated the troops still further.

"I don't suppose it will make the slightest difference in the world to my
cousin whether her mother is dead or not, for I fancy from what Mary said
that her mother never cared for her in the slightest. Possibly she was
jealous that the child had the first place in the father's affections.
However that may be, there was certainly no great love between them, and
of course her subsequent treatment of my cousin destroyed any affection
that might have existed. That either by some deed executed at the time of
marriage, or by Portuguese law, Mary has a right to the estate at her
mother's death, is clear from the efforts they made to get her to renounce
that right. Still, there is no more chance of her ever inheriting it than
there would be of her flying. As a nun she would naturally have to
renounce all property, and no doubt the law of this priest-ridden country
would decide that she had done so. She tells me--and I am sure,
truly--that she refused to open her lips to say a single word when she was
forced to go through the ceremony; but as, no doubt, a score of witnesses
would be brought forward to swear that she answered all the usual
questions and renounced all worldly possessions, that denial would go for
nothing."

"Besides," Herrara said, "it would never do for her to set foot in
Portugal. She would be seized as an escaped nun immediately, and would
never be heard of again."

"I have no doubt that that would be so, Herrara; and as she has a nice
fortune from her father, you may be sure that she will not trouble about
the estates here, and her mother would be welcome to do as she likes with
them, which is, after all, not unreasonable, as they are her property and
descended to her from her father. Still, I should be glad to learn, if it
does not give any great trouble, whether if, as is almost certain--for the
people from all the country round took refuge there long before the French
arrived--she was in Oporto, and if so, whether she got through the sack of
the town unharmed. No doubt Mary would be glad to hear."

"I am sure Don Jose would be able to find out for you without any
difficulty," Herrara said; "indeed I expect he will soon be going back
there himself. Now that there is a British garrison in the town, that the
bishop must be utterly discredited there, and a good many of his Junta
must have been killed, while the rabble of the town has been thoroughly
discomfited, the place will be more comfortable to live in than it has
been for a long time past. Is there anything else I can do for you?"

"Nothing whatever."

A quarter of an hour later Herrara left for Lisbon, bearing many messages
of kind regards on Terence's part to Don Jose and his family. Terence's
last words were:

"By the way, Herrara, if you should be able to find at any store in Lisbon
some Irish whisky, I wish you would get six dozen cases for me, or what
would be more handy, a sixteen or eighteen gallon keg, and could get it
sent on by some cart coming here, I should be very much obliged. It had
better be sent to me, care of Colonel Corcoran, Mayo Fusiliers, Abrantes.
I should like to be able to give a glass to my friends when they ride out
to see me. But have the barrel or cases sewn up in canvas before the
address is put on; I would not trust it to the escort of any British guard
if they were aware of the nature of the contents. Wine would be safe with
them, for they can get that anywhere, but it would be too much for the
honesty of any Irishman if he were to see a cask labelled Irish whisky."

A week later Colonel Corcoran said when Terence rode in:

"By the bye, O'Connor, there is a cask of wine for you at my quarters; it
was brought up by an ammunition train this morning. The officer said that
a Portuguese colonel had begged him so earnestly to bring it up that he
could not refuse."

 "It was Herrara, no doubt, Colonel; he has gone down to Lisbon for a
week."

"Ah! I suppose he sent you a keg of choice wine."

"You shall taste it next time you come out, Colonel. I have been wishing
that I had something better than the ordinary wine of the country to offer
when you come over to see me. I will send over a couple of men with a cart
in the morning to bring it out to me."

On leaving that evening Terence invited all the officers who could get
away from duty to come over to lunch the next day.

"Bring your knives and forks with you," he said; "and I think you had
better bring your plates, too; I fancy four are all I can muster."

Early next morning Terence told Bull and Macwitty that he expected a dozen
officers out to lunch with him. "And I want you to lunch with me too. I
know that Captain O'Grady and others have asked you several times to go in
and dine at mess, and that you have not gone. I hope to-day you will meet
them at luncheon. I can understand that you feel a little uncomfortable at
this first meeting with a lot of officers as officers yourselves; but, of
course, you must do it sooner or later, and it would be much better doing
so at once.

"The next thing is, what can I give them to eat? I should be glad if you
will send out a dozen foraging parties in different directions; there must
be little villages scattered among the hills that have so far escaped
French and English plunderers. Let each party take four or five dollars
with them. I want anything that can be got, but my idea is a couple of
young kids, three or four ducks, or a couple of geese, as many chickens,
and of course any vegetables that you can get hold of. My man Sancho is a
capital cook, and he will get fires ready and two or three assistants.
They will be here by one o'clock, so the foraging parties had better
return by ten."

"If there is anything to be brought you shall have it, Colonel," Bull
said; "Macwitty and I will both go ourselves, and we will get half a dozen
of the captains to go too; between us it is hard if we don't manage to get
enough."

By ten o'clock the officers rode in, almost every one of them having some
sort of bird or beast hanging from his saddle-bow; there were two kids, a
sucking pig, two hares, half a dozen chickens, three geese, and five
ducks, while the nets which they carried for forage for their horses were
filled with vegetables. Half a dozen fires had already been lighted, and
Sancho had obtained as many assistants, so that by the time the colonel
and fifteen officers rode up lunch was ready.

After chatting for a few minutes with them, Terence led the way to a rough
table that was placed under the shade of a tree. Ammunition boxes were
arranged along for seats. Although but a portion of what had been brought
in had been cooked, the effect of the table was imposing.

"Why, O'Connor," the colonel said, "have you got one of the genii, like
Aladdin, and ordered him to bring up a banquet for you? I have not seen a
winged thing since we marched from Coimbra, and here you have got all the
luxuries of the season. No wonder you like independent action, if this is
what comes of it; there have we been feeding on tough ration beef, and
here are the contents of a whole farmyard."

Almost all the officers had been out before, and Bull and Macwitty had
been introduced to them. They now all sat down to the meal.

"I am sorry Major O'Driscol is not here," Terence said.

"He could not get away," the colonel said, from the other end of the
table. "If the general had come round and there hadn't been a
field-officer left to meet him there would have been a row over it. I have
brought pretty nearly all the officers with me, and I dared not stretch it
further."

"O'Grady," Terence said, "I wish you would carve this hare for me, I have
no idea how it ought to be cut. I can manage a chicken, or a duck, but
this is beyond me altogether."

"I will do it gladly, Terence; faith, it is a comfort to find that there
is something you can't do." And so, with much laughter and fun, the meal
was eaten.

"You have not told us yet where you got all these provisions, O'Connor,"
the colonel said; "it is too bad to keep all the good things to yourself."

"It has been the work of eight officers, Colonel; they rode off this
morning in different directions among the hills, and there was not one of
them who returned empty-handed."

"The wine is fairly good," the colonel said, as he set down his tin mug
after a long draught, "but it was scarce worth sending all the way up from
Lisbon."

"That has to follow, Colonel; I thought you would appreciate it better
after you had done eating."

"I have not had such a male since we left Athlone," O'Grady said, when at
last he reluctantly laid down his knife and fork. "Be jabers, it would be
all up with me if the French were to put in an appearance now, for faith I
don't think I could run a yard to save me life."

The tin mugs were all taken away and washed when the table was cleared.

"You are mighty particular, O'Connor," the colonel said.

"One mug is good enough for us. If we liquored-up a dozen times--which, by
the way, we never do--one of these wines is pretty well like another, and
if there was a slight difference it would not matter."

When the board was cleared a large jug was placed before Terence, and some
water-bottles at various points of the table.

"I thought, Colonel, that you might prefer spirits even to the wine,"
Terence said.

"And you are right, O'Connor. A good glass of wine after a good dinner is
no bad thing, but after such a meal as we have eaten I think that even
this bastely spirit of theirs--which, after all, is not so bad when you
get accustomed to it--is better than wine; it settles matters a bit."

Terence poured some of the spirit from a jug into his tin and filled it up
with water. "Help yourself," he said, passing the jug to O'Grady, who sat
next to him.

O'Grady was about to do so when he suddenly set the jug down.

"By the powers," he exclaimed, in astonishment, "but it is the real
cratur!"

"Go on, O'Grady, go on, the others are all waiting while you are looking
at it. If you feel too surprised to take it, pass the jug on."

O'Grady grasped it. "I will defind it wid me life!" he exclaimed. In the
meantime the colonel had filled his mug.

"Gentlemen," he said, solemnly, after raising it to his lips, "O'Grady is
right; it is Irish whisky, and good at that."

"It is a cruel trick you've played on us," O'Grady said, with a sigh, as
he replaced the empty mug upon the table. "I had almost forgotten the
taste, and had come to take kindly to the stuff here. Now I shall have to
go through it all again. It is like holding the cup to the lips of that
old heathen Tartarus, and taking it away again."

"Tantalus, O'Grady."

"Och, what does it matter, when he has been dead and buried thousands of
years, how he spilt his name. Where did you get it from, Terence?"

"I asked Herrara to try and find some for me at Lisbon; I thought it was
most likely that some English merchant there would have laid in a stock,
and it seems that he has found one."

"Do you hear that, Colonel? There is whisky to be had at Lisbon, and us
not know it."

"Well, Captain O'Grady, all I can say is that I shall at dinner this
evening move a vote of censure upon you as mess president for not having
discovered the fact before."

"Don't talk of dinner, Colonel; there is not one of us could think of
sitting down to ration beef after such a male as we have had--and with
whisky here, too! I move, Colonel, that no further mintion be made of
dinner. I have no doubt that Terence will give us some divilled
bones--there is as much left on the table as we have eaten--before we
start home to-night."

"I will do that with pleasure. In fact, it is exactly what I reckoned
upon," Terence replied.

"I think, O'Grady, we must send to Lisbon for some of this."

"Is it only think, Colonel? Faith, I would go down for it myself, if I had
to walk with pays in my boots and to carry it back on me shoulders. Can I
find Herrara there?" he asked.

"Yes, I can give you the address where he will be found."

"Anyhow, Colonel," O'Flaherty said, "I must--and I'm sure all present will
join me in the matter--protest against Captain O'Grady going down to
Lisbon to fetch whisky for the mess. You must know, sir, as well as I do,
that he would never return again, and we should probably hear some day
that his body had been found by the side of the road with three or four
empty kegs beside him."

There was a general burst of agreement.

"Perhaps, Doctor O'Flaherty," O'Grady said, in a tone of withering
sarcasm, "it's yourself who would like to be the messenger."

"There might be a worse one," O'Flaherty said, calmly; "but as I believe
that Captain Hall is going down on a week's leave to-morrow, I propose
that he, being an Englishman, and therefore more trustworthy than any
Irish member of the mess would be on such a mission, be requested to
purchase some for the use of the mess, and to escort it back again. How
much shall I say, Colonel?"

"That is a grave matter, and not to be answered hastily, Doctor. Let me
see, there are thirty-two officers with the regiment. Now, what would you
say would be a fair allowance per day for each man?"

"I should say half a bottle, Colonel. There are some of them won't take as
much, but O'Grady will square matters up."

"I protest against the insinuation," O'Grady said, rising; "and, moreover,
I would observe, that it is mighty little would be left for me after each
man had taken his whack."

"That is sixteen bottles a day. For a continuance I should consider that
too much; but seeing that we have been out of dacent liquor for a month,
and may have but a fortnight after it arrives to make up for lost time, we
will say sixteen bottles."

"Make it three gallons," O'Grady said, persuasively; "we shall be having
lots of men drop in when it gets known that we have got a supply."

"There is something in that, O'Grady. Well, we will say three
gallons--that is, forty-two gallons for a fortnight. We will commission
Captain Hall to bring back that quantity."

"If you say forty-five, Colonel, it will give us a drop in our flasks to
start with, and we are as likely to be fifteen days as fourteen, anyway."

"Let it be forty-five then," the colonel assented. "Will you undertake
that, Captain Hall?"

"Willingly, Colonel. I will get the whisky emptied into wine casks, and as
I know one of the chief commissaries at Lisbon, I can get it brought up
with the wine for the troops."

After sitting for a couple of hours, the colonel proposed that they should
all go for a walk, while those who preferred it should take a nap in the
shade.

"I move, O'Connor," he said, "that this meeting be adjourned until
sunset."

"I think that will be a very good plan, Colonel."

The proposal was carried out. O'Grady and a few others declared that they
should prefer a nap. The rest started on foot, and sauntered about in the
shade of the wood for a couple of hours, then all gathered at the table
again. At eight o'clock grilled joints of fowls and ducks were put upon
the table, and at nine all mounted and rode back to Abrantes.

"How many of those quart jugs have been filled, Sancho?"

"Eight, sir."

"That is not so bad," Terence said to Macwitty. "That is twelve bottles;
and as there were sixteen and our three selves, that is only about two
bottles between three men."

"I call that vera moderate under the circumstances, Colonel," Macwitty
said, gravely. "I have drank more myself many a time."

"They were a good many hours over it too," Terence added; "you may say it
was two sittings. You will see that we shall have a great many callers
from the camp for the next few days."

A fortnight later Terence received a letter from Don Jose, saying that he
had heard from his friend at Oporto, and that they informed him that the
Senora Johanna O'Connor had been killed at the sack of Oporto. She had
left her own house and taken refuge at the bishop's. That place had been
defended to the last, and when the infuriated French broke in, all within
its walls had been killed.

Terence was not altogether sorry to hear the news. The woman had been a
party to the cruel imprisonment of Mary. No doubt his cousin would feel
her death, but her grief could not be very deep; and it was, he thought,
just as well for her that her connection with Portugal should be
altogether severed. Her mother might have endeavoured to tempt her to
return there; and although he felt sure that she would not succeed in
this, she might at least have caused some trouble, and it was better that
there should be an end of it. As to the woman herself, she had been in
agreement with the bishop, had been mixed up in his intrigues, and her
death was caused by her misplaced confidence in him. Of course she had not
known that he had left the town, and thought that under his protection she
would be safe in the palace.

"She must have been a bad lot," he said to himself.

"Evidently she did not make her husband happy, and persecuted her
daughter, and I regret her death no more than any other of the ten
thousand people who fell in Oporto."

A few days later he received letters both from his father and Mary. Being
under eighteen he opened the former first.

_My Dear Terence,_

_I have heard all about you and your doings from Mary, and I am proud of
you. It is grand satisfaction that you should have won your lieutenancy,
and that you should be on the general's staff; as to your being a colonel,
although only a Portuguese one, it is simply astounding. I don't care so
much about the rank, for the Portuguese officers are poor creatures, not
one in fifty of them knows anything of his duty; but what I do value is
your independent command. That will give you opportunities for
distinguishing yourself that can never fall in the way of a subaltern of
the line, and I fancy, now that you have got Wellesley at the head, there
