hastened upon his way.

There appeared to be more wayfarers on the down than in the forest.
First he passed two Dominicans in their long black dresses, who swept by
him with downcast looks and pattering lips, without so much as a glance
at him. Then there came a gray friar, or minorite, with a good paunch
upon him, walking slowly and looking about him with the air of a man who
was at peace with himself and with all men. He stopped Alleyne to ask
him whether it was not true that there was a hostel somewhere in those
parts which was especially famous for the stewing of eels. The clerk
having made answer that he had heard the eels of Sowley well spoken of,
the friar sucked in his lips and hurried forward. Close at his heels
came three laborers walking abreast, with spade and mattock over their
shoulders. They sang some rude chorus right tunefully as they walked,
but their English was so coarse and rough that to the ears of a
cloister-bred man it sounded like a foreign and barbarous tongue. One
of them carried a young bittern which they had caught upon the moor, and
they offered it to Alleyne for a silver groat. Very glad he was to get
safely past them, for, with their bristling red beards and their fierce
blue eyes, they were uneasy men to bargain with upon a lonely moor.

Yet it is not always the burliest and the wildest who are the most to
be dreaded. The workers looked hungrily at him, and then jogged onwards
upon their way in slow, lumbering Saxon style. A worse man to deal with
was a wooden-legged cripple who came hobbling down the path, so weak and
so old to all appearance that a child need not stand in fear of him.
Yet when Alleyne had passed him, of a sudden, out of pure devilment, he
screamed out a curse at him, and sent a jagged flint stone hurtling past
his ear. So horrid was the causeless rage of the crooked creature, that
the clerk came over a cold thrill, and took to his heels until he was
out of shot from stone or word. It seemed to him that in this country
of England there was no protection for a man save that which lay in the
strength of his own arm and the speed of his own foot. In the cloisters
he had heard vague talk of the law--the mighty law which was higher than
prelate or baron, yet no sign could he see of it. What was the benefit
of a law written fair upon parchment, he wondered, if there were no
officers to enforce it. As it fell out, however, he had that very
evening, ere the sun had set, a chance of seeing how stern was the grip
of the English law when it did happen to seize the offender.

A mile or so out upon the moor the road takes a very sudden dip into a
hollow, with a peat-colored stream running swiftly down the centre
of it. To the right of this stood, and stands to this day, an ancient
barrow, or burying mound, covered deeply in a bristle of heather and
bracken. Alleyne was plodding down the slope upon one side, when he saw
an old dame coming towards him upon the other, limping with weariness
and leaning heavily upon a stick. When she reached the edge of the
stream she stood helpless, looking to right and to left for some ford.
Where the path ran down a great stone had been fixed in the centre of
the brook, but it was too far from the bank for her aged and uncertain
feet. Twice she thrust forward at it, and twice she drew back, until at
last, giving up in despair, she sat herself down by the brink and
wrung her hands wearily. There she still sat when Alleyne reached the
crossing.

"Come, mother," quoth he, "it is not so very perilous a passage."

"Alas! good youth," she answered, "I have a humor in the eyes, and
though I can see that there is a stone there I can by no means be sure
as to where it lies."

"That is easily amended," said he cheerily, and picking her lightly up,
for she was much worn with time, he passed across with her. He could
not but observe, however, that as he placed her down her knees seemed to
fail her, and she could scarcely prop herself up with her staff.

"You are weak, mother," said he. "Hast journeyed far, I wot."

"From Wiltshire, friend," said she, in a quavering voice; "three days
have I been on the road. I go to my son, who is one of the King's
regarders at Brockenhurst. He has ever said that he would care for me in
mine old age."

"And rightly too, mother, since you cared for him in his youth. But when
have you broken fast?"

"At Lyndenhurst; but alas! my money is at an end, and I could but get a
dish of bran-porridge from the nunnery. Yet I trust that I may be able
to reach Brockenhurst to-night, where I may have all that heart can
desire; for oh! sir, but my son is a fine man, with a kindly heart of
his own, and it is as good as food to me to think that he should have a
doublet of Lincoln green to his back and be the King's own paid man."

"It is a long road yet to Brockenhurst," said Alleyne; "but here is such
bread and cheese as I have left, and here, too, is a penny which may
help you to supper. May God be with you!"

"May God be with you, young man!" she cried. "May He make your heart as
glad as you have made mine!" She turned away, still mumbling blessings,
and Alleyne saw her short figure and her long shadow stumbling slowly up
the slope.

He was moving away himself, when his eyes lit upon a strange sight, and
one which sent a tingling through his skin. Out of the tangled scrub on
the old overgrown barrow two human faces were looking out at him; the
sinking sun glimmered full upon them, showing up every line and feature.
The one was an oldish man with a thin beard, a crooked nose, and a broad
red smudge from a birth-mark over his temple; the other was a negro, a
thing rarely met in England at that day, and rarer still in the quiet
southland parts. Alleyne had read of such folk, but had never seen one
before, and could scarce take his eyes from the fellow's broad pouting
lip and shining teeth. Even as he gazed, however, the two came writhing
out from among the heather, and came down towards him with such a
guilty, slinking carriage, that the clerk felt that there was no good in
them, and hastened onwards upon his way.

He had not gained the crown of the slope, when he heard a sudden scuffle
behind him and a feeble voice bleating for help. Looking round, there
was the old dame down upon the roadway, with her red whimple flying on
the breeze, while the two rogues, black and white, stooped over her,
wresting away from her the penny and such other poor trifles as were
worth the taking. At the sight of her thin limbs struggling in weak
resistance, such a glow of fierce anger passed over Alleyne as set his
head in a whirl. Dropping his scrip, he bounded over the stream once
more, and made for the two villains, with his staff whirled over his
shoulder and his gray eyes blazing with fury.

The robbers, however, were not disposed to leave their victim until they
had worked their wicked will upon her. The black man, with the woman's
crimson scarf tied round his swarthy head, stood forward in the centre
of the path, with a long dull-colored knife in his hand, while the
other, waving a ragged cudgel, cursed at Alleyne and dared him to
come on. His blood was fairly aflame, however, and he needed no such
challenge. Dashing at the black man, he smote at him with such good will
that the other let his knife tinkle into the roadway, and hopped howling
to a safer distance. The second rogue, however, made of sterner stuff,
rushed in upon the clerk, and clipped him round the waist with a grip
like a bear, shouting the while to his comrade to come round and stab
him in the back. At this the negro took heart of grace, and picking up
his dagger again he came stealing with prowling step and murderous eye,
while the two swayed backwards and forwards, staggering this way and
that. In the very midst of the scuffle, however, whilst Alleyne braced
himself to feel the cold blade between his shoulders, there came a
sudden scurry of hoofs, and the black man yelled with terror and ran
for his life through the heather. The man with the birth-mark, too,
struggled to break away, and Alleyne heard his teeth chatter and felt
his limbs grow limp to his hand. At this sign of coming aid the clerk
held on the tighter, and at last was able to pin his man down and
glanced behind him to see where all the noise was coming from.

Down the slanting road there was riding a big, burly man, clad in a
tunic of purple velvet and driving a great black horse as hard as
it could gallop. He leaned well over its neck as he rode, and made a
heaving with his shoulders at every bound as though he were lifting the
steed instead of it carrying him. In the rapid glance Alleyne saw that
he had white doeskin gloves, a curling white feather in his flat velvet
cap, and a broad gold, embroidered baldric across his bosom. Behind him
rode six others, two and two, clad in sober brown jerkins, with the
long yellow staves of their bows thrusting out from behind their right
shoulders. Down the hill they thundered, over the brook and up to the
scene of the contest.

"Here is one!" said the leader, springing down from his reeking horse,
and seizing the white rogue by the edge of his jerkin. "This is one of
them. I know him by that devil's touch upon his brow. Where are your
cords, Peterkin? So! Bind him hand and foot. His last hour has come. And
you, young man, who may you be?"

"I am a clerk, sir, travelling from Beaulieu."

"A clerk!" cried the other. "Art from Oxenford or from Cambridge? Hast
thou a letter from the chancellor of thy college giving thee a permit
to beg? Let me see thy letter." He had a stern, square face, with bushy
side whiskers and a very questioning eye.

"I am from Beaulieu Abbey, and I have no need to beg," said Alleyne, who
was all of a tremble now that the ruffle was over.

"The better for thee," the other answered. "Dost know who I am?"

"No, sir, I do not."

"I am the law!"--nodding his head solemnly. "I am the law of England
and the mouthpiece of his most gracious and royal majesty, Edward the
Third."

Alleyne louted low to the King's representative. "Truly you came in good
time, honored sir," said he. "A moment later and they would have slain
me."

"But there should be another one," cried the man in the purple coat.
"There should be a black man. A shipman with St. Anthony's fire, and a
black man who had served him as cook--those are the pair that we are in
chase of."

"The black man fled over to that side," said Alleyne, pointing towards
the barrow.

"He could not have gone far, sir bailiff," cried one of the archers,
unslinging his bow. "He is in hiding somewhere, for he knew well, black
paynim as he is, that our horses' four legs could outstrip his two."

"Then we shall have him," said the other. "It shall never be said,
whilst I am bailiff of Southampton, that any waster, riever, draw-latch
or murtherer came scathless away from me and my posse. Leave that rogue
lying. Now stretch out in line, my merry ones, with arrow on string, and
I shall show you such sport as only the King can give. You on the left,
Howett, and Thomas of Redbridge upon the right. So! Beat high and low
among the heather, and a pot of wine to the lucky marksman."

As it chanced, however, the searchers had not far to seek. The negro had
burrowed down into his hiding-place upon the barrow, where he might have
lain snug enough, had it not been for the red gear upon his head. As
he raised himself to look over the bracken at his enemies, the staring
color caught the eye of the bailiff, who broke into a long screeching
whoop and spurred forward sword in hand. Seeing himself discovered,
the man rushed out from his hiding-place, and bounded at the top of
his speed down the line of archers, keeping a good hundred paces to the
front of them. The two who were on either side of Alleyne bent their
bows as calmly as though they were shooting at the popinjay at the
village fair.

"Seven yards windage, Hal," said one, whose hair was streaked with gray.

"Five," replied the other, letting loose his string. Alleyne gave a gulp
in his throat, for the yellow streak seemed to pass through the man; but
he still ran forward.

"Seven, you jack-fool," growled the first speaker, and his bow twanged
like a harp-string. The black man sprang high up into the air, and
shot out both his arms and his legs, coming down all a-sprawl among
the heather. "Right under the blade bone!" quoth the archer, sauntering
forward for his arrow.

"The old hound is the best when all is said," quoth the bailiff of
Southampton, as they made back for the roadway. "That means a quart of
the best malmsey in Southampton this very night, Matthew Atwood. Art
sure that he is dead?"

"Dead as Pontius Pilate, worshipful sir."

"It is well. Now, as to the other knave. There are trees and to spare
over yonder, but we have scarce leisure to make for them. Draw thy
sword, Thomas of Redbridge, and hew me his head from his shoulders."

"A boon, gracious sir, a boon!" cried the condemned man.

"What then?" asked the bailiff.

"I will confess to my crime. It was indeed I and the black cook, both
from the ship 'La Rose de Gloire,' of Southampton, who did set upon the
Flanders merchant and rob him of his spicery and his mercery, for which,
as we well know, you hold a warrant against us."

"There is little merit in this confession," quoth the bailiff sternly.
"Thou hast done evil within my bailiwick, and must die."

"But, sir," urged Alleyne, who was white to the lips at these bloody
doings, "he hath not yet come to trial."

"Young clerk," said the bailiff, "you speak of that of which you know
nothing. It is true that he hath not come to trial, but the trial hath
come to him. He hath fled the law and is beyond its pale. Touch not that
which is no concern of thine. But what is this boon, rogue, which you
would crave?"

"I have in my shoe, most worshipful sir, a strip of wood which belonged
once to the bark wherein the blessed Paul was dashed up against the
island of Melita. I bought it for two rose nobles from a shipman who
came from the Levant. The boon I crave is that you will place it in my
hands and let me die still grasping it. In this manner, not only shall
my own eternal salvation be secured, but thine also, for I shall never
cease to intercede for thee."

At the command of the bailiff they plucked off the fellow's shoe, and
there sure enough at the side of the instep, wrapped in a piece of fine
sendall, lay a long, dark splinter of wood. The archers doffed caps at
the sight of it, and the bailiff crossed himself devoutly as he handed
it to the robber.

"If it should chance," he said, "that through the surpassing merits of
the blessed Paul your sin-stained soul should gain a way into paradise,
I trust that you will not forget that intercession which you have
promised. Bear in mind too, that it is Herward the bailiff for whom you
pray, and not Herward the sheriff, who is my uncle's son. Now, Thomas, I
pray you dispatch, for we have a long ride before us and sun has already
set."

Alleyne gazed upon the scene--the portly velvet-clad official, the knot
of hard-faced archers with their hands to the bridles of their horses,
the thief with his arms trussed back and his doublet turned down upon
his shoulders. By the side of the track the old dame was standing,
fastening her red whimple once more round her head. Even as he looked
one of the archers drew his sword with a sharp whirr of steel and stept
up to the lost man. The clerk hurried away in horror; but, ere he
had gone many paces, he heard a sudden, sullen thump, with a choking,
whistling sound at the end of it. A minute later the bailiff and four
of his men rode past him on their journey back to Southampton, the other
two having been chosen as grave-diggers. As they passed Alleyne saw that
one of the men was wiping his sword-blade upon the mane of his horse.
A deadly sickness came over him at the sight, and sitting down by the
wayside he burst out weeping, with his nerves all in a jangle. It was a
terrible world thought he, and it was hard to know which were the most
to be dreaded, the knaves or the men of the law.



CHAPTER V. HOW A STRANGE COMPANY GATHERED AT THE "PIED MERLIN."


The night had already fallen, and the moon was shining between the rifts
of ragged, drifting clouds, before Alleyne Edricson, footsore and weary
from the unwonted exercise, found himself in front of the forest inn
which stood upon the outskirts of Lyndhurst. The building was long and
low, standing back a little from the road, with two flambeaux blazing on
either side of the door as a welcome to the traveller. From one window
there thrust forth a long pole with a bunch of greenery tied to the end
of it--a sign that liquor was to be sold within. As Alleyne walked up to
it he perceived that it was rudely fashioned out of beams of wood, with
twinkling lights all over where the glow from within shone through the
chinks. The roof was poor and thatched; but in strange contrast to
it there ran all along under the eaves a line of wooden shields, most
gorgeously painted with chevron, bend, and saltire, and every heraldic
device. By the door a horse stood tethered, the ruddy glow beating
strongly upon his brown head and patient eyes, while his body stood back
in the shadow.

Alleyne stood still in the roadway for a few minutes reflecting
upon what he should do. It was, he knew, only a few miles further to
Minstead, where his brother dwelt. On the other hand, he had never seen
this brother since childhood, and the reports which had come to his ears
concerning him were seldom to his advantage. By all accounts he was a
hard and a bitter man.

It might be an evil start to come to his door so late and claim the
shelter of his roof. Better to sleep here at this inn, and then travel
on to Minstead in the morning. If his brother would take him in, well
and good.

He would bide with him for a time and do what he might to serve him.
If, on the other hand, he should have hardened his heart against him,
he could only go on his way and do the best he might by his skill as
a craftsman and a scrivener. At the end of a year he would be free
to return to the cloisters, for such had been his father's bequest. A
monkish upbringing, one year in the world after the age of twenty, and
then a free selection one way or the other--it was a strange course
which had been marked out for him. Such as it was, however, he had no
choice but to follow it, and if he were to begin by making a friend
of his brother he had best wait until morning before he knocked at his
dwelling.

The rude plank door was ajar, but as Alleyne approached it there came
from within such a gust of rough laughter and clatter of tongues that
he stood irresolute upon the threshold. Summoning courage, however, and
reflecting that it was a public dwelling, in which he had as much right
as any other man, he pushed it open and stepped into the common room.

Though it was an autumn evening and somewhat warm, a huge fire of heaped
billets of wood crackled and sparkled in a broad, open grate, some of
the smoke escaping up a rude chimney, but the greater part rolling out
into the room, so that the air was thick with it, and a man coming from
without could scarce catch his breath. On this fire a great cauldron
bubbled and simmered, giving forth a rich and promising smell. Seated
round it were a dozen or so folk, of all ages and conditions, who set
up such a shout as Alleyne entered that he stood peering at them through
the smoke, uncertain what this riotous greeting might portend.

"A rouse! A rouse!" cried one rough looking fellow in a tattered jerkin.
"One more round of mead or ale and the score to the last comer."

"'Tis the law of the 'Pied Merlin,'" shouted another. "Ho there, Dame
Eliza! Here is fresh custom come to the house, and not a drain for the
company."

"I will take your orders, gentles; I will assuredly take your orders,"
the landlady answered, bustling in with her hands full of leathern
drinking-cups. "What is it that you drink, then? Beer for the lads of
the forest, mead for the gleeman, strong waters for the tinker, and wine
for the rest. It is an old custom of the house, young sir. It has been
the use at the 'Pied Merlin' this many a year back that the company
should drink to the health of the last comer. Is it your pleasure to
humor it?"

"Why, good dame," said Alleyne, "I would not offend the customs of your
house, but it is only sooth when I say that my purse is a thin one. As
far as two pence will go, however, I shall be right glad to do my part."

"Plainly said and bravely spoken, my suckling friar," roared a deep
voice, and a heavy hand fell upon Alleyne's shoulder. Looking up, he saw
beside him his former cloister companion the renegade monk, Hordle John.

"By the thorn of Glastonbury! ill days are coming upon Beaulieu," said
he. "Here they have got rid in one day of the only two men within their
walls--for I have had mine eyes upon thee, youngster, and I know that
for all thy baby-face there is the making of a man in thee. Then there
is the Abbot, too. I am no friend of his, nor he of mine; but he has
warm blood in his veins. He is the only man left among them. The others,
what are they?"

"They are holy men," Alleyne answered gravely.

"Holy men? Holy cabbages! Holy bean-pods! What do they do but live and
suck in sustenance and grow fat? If that be holiness, I could show you
hogs in this forest who are fit to head the calendar. Think you it was
for such a life that this good arm was fixed upon my shoulder, or that
head placed upon your neck? There is work in the world, man, and it is
not by hiding behind stone walls that we shall do it."

"Why, then, did you join the brothers?" asked Alleyne.

"A fair enough question; but it is as fairly answered. I joined them
because Margery Alspaye, of Bolder, married Crooked Thomas of Ringwood,
and left a certain John of Hordle in the cold, for that he was a
ranting, roving blade who was not to be trusted in wedlock. That was
why, being fond and hot-headed, I left the world; and that is why,
having had time to take thought, I am right glad to find myself back in
it once more. Ill betide the day that ever I took off my yeoman's jerkin
to put on the white gown!"

Whilst he was speaking the landlady came in again, bearing a broad
platter, upon which stood all the beakers and flagons charged to the
brim with the brown ale or the ruby wine. Behind her came a maid with
a high pile of wooden plates, and a great sheaf of spoons, one of which
she handed round to each of the travellers. Two of the company, who were
dressed in the weather-stained green doublet of foresters, lifted the
big pot off the fire, and a third, with a huge pewter ladle, served out
a portion of steaming collops to each guest. Alleyne bore his share and
his ale-mug away with him to a retired trestle in the corner, where he
could sup in peace and watch the strange scene, which was so different
to those silent and well-ordered meals to which he was accustomed.

The room was not unlike a stable. The low ceiling, smoke-blackened and
dingy, was pierced by several square trap-doors with rough-hewn ladders
leading up to them. The walls of bare unpainted planks were studded
here and there with great wooden pins, placed at irregular intervals
and heights, from which hung over-tunics, wallets, whips, bridles, and
saddles. Over the fireplace were suspended six or seven shields of
wood, with coats-of-arms rudely daubed upon them, which showed by their
varying degrees of smokiness and dirt that they had been placed there
at different periods. There was no furniture, save a single long
dresser covered with coarse crockery, and a number of wooden benches and
trestles, the legs of which sank deeply into the soft clay floor, while
the only light, save that of the fire, was furnished by three torches
stuck in sockets on the wall, which flickered and crackled, giving
forth a strong resinous odor. All this was novel and strange to the
cloister-bred youth; but most interesting of all was the motley circle
of guests who sat eating their collops round the blaze. They were a
humble group of wayfarers, such as might have been found that night
in any inn through the length and breadth of England; but to him they
represented that vague world against which he had been so frequently and
so earnestly warned. It did not seem to him from what he could see of it
to be such a very wicked place after all.

Three or four of the men round the fire were evidently underkeepers
and verderers from the forest, sunburned and bearded, with the quick
restless eye and lithe movements of the deer among which they lived.
Close to the corner of the chimney sat a middle-aged gleeman, clad in a
faded garb of Norwich cloth, the tunic of which was so outgrown that it
did not fasten at the neck and at the waist. His face was swollen and
coarse, and his watery protruding eyes spoke of a life which never
wandered very far from the wine-pot. A gilt harp, blotched with many
stains and with two of its strings missing, was tucked under one of his
arms, while with the other he scooped greedily at his platter. Next to
him sat two other men of about the same age, one with a trimming of fur
to his coat, which gave him a dignity which was evidently dearer to him
than his comfort, for he still drew it round him in spite of the hot
glare of the faggots. The other, clad in a dirty russet suit with a long
sweeping doublet, had a cunning, foxy face with keen, twinkling eyes and
a peaky beard. Next to him sat Hordle John, and beside him three other
rough unkempt fellows with tangled beards and matted hair--free laborers
from the adjoining farms, where small patches of freehold property
had been suffered to remain scattered about in the heart of the royal
demesne. The company was completed by a peasant in a rude dress of
undyed sheepskin, with the old-fashioned galligaskins about his legs,
and a gayly dressed young man with striped cloak jagged at the edges
and parti-colored hosen, who looked about him with high disdain upon his
face, and held a blue smelling-flask to his nose with one hand, while he
brandished a busy spoon with the other. In the corner a very fat man was
lying all a-sprawl upon a truss, snoring stertorously, and evidently in
the last stage of drunkenness.

"That is Wat the limner," quoth the landlady, sitting down beside
Alleyne, and pointing with the ladle to the sleeping man. "That is he
who paints the signs and the tokens. Alack and alas that ever I should
have been fool enough to trust him! Now, young man, what manner of a
bird would you suppose a pied merlin to be--that being the proper sign
of my hostel?"

"Why," said Alleyne, "a merlin is a bird of the same form as an eagle or
a falcon. I can well remember that learned brother Bartholomew, who is
deep in all the secrets of nature, pointed one out to me as we walked
together near Vinney Ridge."

"A falcon or an eagle, quotha? And pied, that is of two several colors.
So any man would say except this barrel of lies. He came to me, look
you, saying that if I would furnish him with a gallon of ale, wherewith
to strengthen himself as he worked, and also the pigments and a board,
he would paint for me a noble pied merlin which I might hang along with
the blazonry over my door. I, poor simple fool, gave him the ale and all
that he craved, leaving him alone too, because he said that a man's mind
must be left untroubled when he had great work to do. When I came back
the gallon jar was empty, and he lay as you see him, with the board in
front of him with this sorry device." She raised up a panel which was
leaning against the wall, and showed a rude painting of a scraggy and
angular fowl, with very long legs and a spotted body.

"Was that," she asked, "like the bird which thou hast seen?"

Alleyne shook his head, smiling.

"No, nor any other bird that ever wagged a feather. It is most like a
plucked pullet which has died of the spotted fever. And scarlet too!
What would the gentles Sir Nicholas Boarhunte, or Sir Bernard Brocas, of
Roche Court, say if they saw such a thing--or, perhaps, even the King's
own Majesty himself, who often has ridden past this way, and who loves
his falcons as he loves his sons? It would be the downfall of my house."

"The matter is not past mending," said Alleyne. "I pray you, good dame,
to give me those three pigment-pots and the brush, and I shall try
whether I cannot better this painting."

Dame Eliza looked doubtfully at him, as though fearing some other
stratagem, but, as he made no demand for ale, she finally brought the
paints, and watched him as he smeared on his background, talking the
while about the folk round the fire.

"The four forest lads must be jogging soon," she said. "They bide at
Emery Down, a mile or more from here. Yeomen prickers they are, who tend
to the King's hunt. The gleeman is called Floyting Will. He comes from
the north country, but for many years he hath gone the round of the
forest from Southampton to Christchurch. He drinks much and pays little
but it would make your ribs crackle to hear him sing the 'Jest of Hendy
Tobias.' Mayhap he will sing it when the ale has warmed him."

