until he come to the son of Peleus."

Thus spake he, and the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, was not
disobedient unto his word. Straightway beneath his feet he bound on his
fair sandals, golden, divine, that bare him over wet sea and over the
boundless land with the breathings of the wind. And he took up his wand
wherewith he entranceth the eyes of such men as he will, and others he
likewise waketh out of sleep: this did the strong slayer of Argus take
in his hand, and flew. And quickly came he to Troy-land and the
Hellespont, and went on his way in semblance as a young man that is
a prince, with the new down on his chin, as when the youth of men is
the comeliest.

Now the others, when they had driven beyond the great barrow of Ilios,
halted the mules and horses at the river to drink; for darkness was come
down over the earth. Then the herald beheld Hermes from hard by, and
marked him, and spake and said to Priam: "Consider, son of Dardanos;
this is matter of prudent thought. I see a man, methinks we shall full
soon be rent in pieces. Come, let us flee in our chariot, or else at
least touch his knees and entreat him that he have mercy on us."

Thus spake he, and the old man was confounded, and he was dismayed
exceedingly, and the hair on his pliant limbs stood up, and he stood
still amazed. But the Helper came nigh of himself and took the old man's
hand, and spake and questioned him: "Whither, father, dost thou thus
guide these horses and mules through the divine night, when other
mortals are asleep? Hadst thou no fear of the fierce-breathing Achaians,
thy bitter foes that are hard anigh thee? If one of them should espy
thee carrying such treasures through the swift black night, what then
would be thy thought? Neither art thou young thyself, and thy companion
here is old, that ye should make defence against a man that should
assail thee first. But I will no wise harm thee, yea I will keep any
other from thy hurt: for the similitude of my dear father I see in
thee."

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam: "Even so, kind
son, are all these things as thou sayest. Nevertheless hath some god
stretched forth his hand even over me in that he hath sent a wayfarer
such as thou to meet me, a bearer of good luck, by the nobleness of thy
form and semblance; and thou art wise of heart and of blessed parents
art thou sprung."

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: "All this,
old sire, hast thou verily spoken aright. But come say this and tell me
truly whether thou art taking forth a great and goodly treasure unto
alien men, where it may abide for thee in safety, or whether by this ye
are all forsaking holy Ilios in fear; so far the best man among you hath
perished, even thy son; for of battle with the Achaians abated he never
a jot."

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam, "Who art thou,
noble sir, and of whom art born? For meetly hast thou spoken of the fate
of my hapless son."

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: "Thou art
proving me, old sire, in asking me of noble Hector. Him have I full oft
seen with mine eyes in glorious battle, and when at the ships he was
slaying the Argives he drave thither, piercing them with the keen
bronze, and we stood still and marvelled thereat, for Achilles suffered
us not to fight, being wroth against Atreus' son. His squire am I, and
came in the same well-wrought ship. From the Myrmidons I come, and my
father is Polyktor. Wealthy is he, and an old man even as thou, and six
other sons hath he, and I am his seventh. With the others I cast lots,
and it fell to me to fare hither with the host. And now am I come from
the ships to the plain, for at day-break the glancing-eyed Achaians will
set the battle in array around the town. For it chafeth them to be
sitting here, nor can the Achaian lords hold in their fury for the
fray."

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: "If verily thou
art a squire of Achilles Peleus' son, come tell me all the truth,
whether still my son is by the ships, or whether ere now Achilles hath
riven him limb from limb and cast him to the dogs."

Then to him again spake the Messenger the slayer of Argus: "Old sire,
not yet have dogs or birds devoured him, but there lieth he still by
Achilles' ship, even as he fell, among the huts, and the twelfth morn
now hath risen upon him, nor doth his flesh corrupt at all, neither
worms consume it, such as devour men slain in war. Truly Achilles
draggeth him recklessly around the barrow of his dear comrade so oft as
divine day dawneth, yet marreth he him not; thou wouldst marvel if thou
couldst go see thyself how dewy fresh he lieth, and is washed clean of
blood, nor anywhere defiled; and all his wounds wherewith he was
stricken are closed; howbeit many of thy son, though he be but a dead
corpse, for they held him dear at heart."

Thus spake he, and the old man rejoiced, and answered him, saying: "My
son, it is verily a good thing to give due offerings withal to the
Immortals, for never did my child--if that child indeed I had--forget
in our halls the gods who inhabit Olympus. Therefore have they
remembered this for him, albeit his portion is death. But come now take
from me this goodly goblet, and guard me myself and guide me, under
Heaven, that I may come unto the hut of Peleus' son."

Then spake unto him again the Messenger the slayer of Argus: "Thou art
proving me, old sire, who am younger than thou, but thou wilt not
prevail upon me, in that thou biddest me take gifts from thee without
Achilles' privity. I were afraid and shamed at heart to defraud him,
lest some evil come to pass on me hereafter. But as thy guide I would go
even unto famous Argos, accompanying thee courteously in swift ship or
on foot. Not from scorn of thy guide would any assail thee then."

Thus spake the Helper, and leaping on the chariot behind the horses he
swiftly took lash and reins into his hand, and breathed brave spirit
into horses and mules. But when they were come to the towers and trench
of the ships, there were the sentinels just busying them about their
supper. Then the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, shed sleep upon them
all, and straightway opened the gates and thrust back the bars, and
brought within Priam and the splendid gifts upon his wain. And they came
to the lofty hut of the son of Peleus, which the Myrmidons made for
their king and hewed therefor timber of the pine, and thatched it with
downy thatching-rush that they mowed in the meadows, and around it made
for him their lord a great court with close-set palisades; and the door
was barred by a single bolt of pine that three Achaians wont to drive
home, and three drew back that mighty bar--three of the rest, but
Achilles by himself would drive it home. Then opened the Helper Hermes
the door for the old man, and brought in the splendid gifts for Peleus'
fleet-footed son, and descended from the chariot to the earth and spake
aloud: "Old sire, I that have come to thee am an immortal god, even
Hermes, for my father sent me to companion thee on thy way. But now
will I depart from thee nor come within Achilles' sight; it were cause
of wrath that an immortal god should thus show favour openly unto
mortals. But thou go in and clasp the knees of Peleus' son and entreat
him for his father's sake and his mother's of the lovely hair and for
his child's sake that thou mayest move his soul."

Thus Hermes spake, and departed unto high Olympus. But Priam leapt from
the car to the earth, and left Idaios in his place; he stayed to mind
the horses and mules; but the old man made straight for the house where
Achilles dear to Zeus was wont to sit. And therein he found the man
himself, and his comrades sate apart: two only, the hero Automedon and
Alkimos, of the stock of Ares, were busy in attendance; and he was
lately ceased from meat, even from eating and drinking: and still the
table stood beside him. But they were unaware of great Priam as he came
in, and so stood he anigh and clasped in his hands the knees of
Achilles, and kissed his hands, terrible, man-slaying, that slew many of
Priam's sons. And as when a grievous curse cometh upon a man who in his
own country hath slain another and escapeth to a land of strangers, to
the house of some rich man, and wonder possesseth them that look on
him--so Achilles wondered when he saw godlike Priam, and the rest
wondered likewise, and looked upon one another. Then Priam spake and
entreated him, saying: "Bethink thee, O Achilles like to gods, of thy
father that is of like years with me, on the grievous pathway of old
age. Him haply are the dwellers round about entreating evilly, nor is
there any to ward from him ruin and bane. Nevertheless while he heareth
of thee as yet alive he rejoiceth in his heart, and hopeth withal day
after day that he shall see his dear son returning from Troy-land. But
I, I am utterly unblest, since I begat sons the best men in wide
Troy-land, but declare unto thee that none of them is left. Fifty I had,
when the sons of the Achaians came; nineteen were born to me of one
mother, and concubines bare the rest within my halls. Now of the more
part had impetuous Ares unstrung the knees, and he who was yet left and
guarded city and men, him slewest thou but now as he fought for his
country, even Hector. For his sake come I unto the ships of the Achaians
that I may win him back from thee, and I bring with me untold ransom.
Yea, fear thou the gods, Achilles, and have compassion on me, even me,
bethinking thee of thy father. Lo, I am yet more piteous than he, and
have braved what none other man on earth hath braved before, to stretch
forth my hand toward the face of the slayer of my sons."

Thus spake he, and stirred within Achilles desire to make lament for his
father. And he touched the old man's hand and gently moved him back. And
as they both bethought them of their dead, so Priam for man-slaying
Hector wept sore as he was fallen before Achilles' feet, and Achilles
wept for his own father, and now again for Patroklos, and their moan
went up throughout the house. But when noble Achilles had satisfied him
with lament, and the desire thereof departed from his heart and limbs,
straightway he sprang from his seat and raised the old man by his hand,
pitying his hoary head and hoary beard, and spake unto him winged words
and said: "Ah hapless! many ill things verily thou hast endured in thy
heart. How durst thou come alone to the ships of the Achaians and to
meet the eyes of the man who hath slain full many of the brave sons? of
iron verily is thy heart. But come then set thee on a seat, and we will
let our sorrows lie quiet in our hearts for all our pain, for no avail
cometh of chill lament. This is the lot the gods have spun for miserable
men, that they should live in pain; yet themselves are sorrowless. For
two urns stand upon the floor of Zeus filled with his evil gifts, and
one with blessings. To whomsoever Zeus whose joy is in the lightning
dealeth a mingled lot, that man chanceth now upon ill and now again on
good, but to whom he giveth but of the bad kind him he bringeth to
scorn, and evil famine chaseth him over the goodly earth, and he is a
wanderer honoured of neither gods nor men. Even thus to Peleus gave the
gods splendid gifts from his birth, for he excelled all men in good
fortune and wealth, and was king of the Myrmidons, and mortal though he
was the gods gave him a goddess to be his bride. Yet even on him God
brought evil, seeing that there arose to him no offspring of princely
sons in his halls, save that he begat one son to an untimely death.
Neither may I tend him as he groweth old, since very far from my country
I am dwelling in Troy-land, to vex thee and thy children. And of thee,
old sire, we have heard how of old time thou wert happy, even how of all
that Lesbos, seat of Makar, boundeth to the north thereof and Phrygia
farther up and the vast Hellespont--of all these folk, men say, thou
wert the richest in wealth and in sons, but after that the Powers of
Heaven brought this bane on thee, ever are battles and man-slayings
around thy city. Keep courage, and lament not unabatingly in thy heart.
For nothing wilt thou avail by grieving for thy son, neither shalt thou
bring him back to life or ever some new evil come upon thee."

Then made answer unto him the old man, godlike Priam: "Bid me not to a
seat, O fosterling of Zeus, so long as Hector lieth uncared for at the
huts, but straightway give him back that I may behold him with mine
eyes; and accept thou the great ransom that we bring. So mayest thou
have pleasure thereof, and come unto thy native land, since thou hast
spared me from the first."

Then fleet-footed Achilles looked sternly upon him and said: "No longer
chafe me, old sire; of myself am I minded to give Hector back to thee,
for there came to me a messenger from Zeus, even my mother who bare me,
daughter of the Ancient One of the Sea. And I know, O Priam, in my mind,
nor am unaware that some god it is that hath guided thee to the swift
ships of the Achaians. For no mortal man, even though in prime of youth,
would dare to come among the host, for neither could he escape the
watch, nor easily thrust back the bolt of our doors. Therefore now stir
my heart no more amid my troubles, lest I leave not even thee in peace,
old sire, within my hut, albeit thou art my suppliant, and lest I
transgress the commandment of Zeus."

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and obeyed his word. And the son
of Peleus leapt like a lion through the door of the house, not alone,
for with him went two squires, the hero Automedon and Alkimos, they whom
above all his comrades Achilles honoured, save only Patroklos that was
dead. They then loosed from under the yoke the horses and mules, and led
in the old man's crier-herald and set him on a chair, and from the wain
of goodly felloes they took the countless ransom set on Hector's head.
But they left two robes and a well-spun doublet, that Achilles might
wrap the dead therein when he gave him to be carried home. And he called
forth handmaids and bade them wash and anoint him when they had borne
him apart, so that Priam should not look upon his son, lest he should
not refrain the wrath at his sorrowing heart when he should look upon
his son, and lest Achilles' heart be vexed thereat and he slay him and
transgress the commandment of Zeus. So when the handmaids had washed the
body and anointed it with oil, and had thrown over it a fair robe and a
doublet, then Achilles himself lifted it and laid it on a bier, and his
comrades with him lifted it on to the polished waggon. Then he groaned
aloud and called on his dear comrade by his name: "Patroklos, be not
vexed with me if thou hear even in the house of Hades that I have given
back noble Hector unto his dear father, for not unworthy is the ransom
he hath given me, whereof I will deal to thee again thy rightful share."

Thus spake noble Achilles, and went back into the hut, and sate him down
on the cunningly-wrought couch whence he had arisen by the opposite
wall, and spake a word to Priam: "Thy son, old sire, is given back as
thou wouldest and lieth on a bier, and with the break of day thou shalt
see him thyself as thou carriest him. But now bethink we us of supper.
For even fair-haired Niobe bethought her of meat, she whose twelve
children perished in her halls, six daughters and six lusty sons. The
sons Apollo, in his anger against Niobe, slew with arrows from his
silver bow, and the daughters archer Artemis, for that Niobe matched
herself against fair-cheeked Leto, saying that the goddess bare but
twain but herself many children: so they though they were but twain
destroyed the other all. Nine days they lay in their blood, nor was
there any to bury them, for Kronion turned the folk to stones. Yet on
the tenth day the gods of heaven buried them, and she then bethought her
of meat, when she was wearied out with weeping tears. And somewhere now
among the cliffs, on the lonely mountains, even on Sipylos, where they
say are the couching-places of nymphs that dance around Acheloos, there
she, albeit a stone, broodeth still over her troubles from the gods. But
come let us too, noble father, take thought of meat, and afterward thou
shalt mourn over thy dear son as thou carriest him to Ilios; and many
tears shall be his due."

Thus spake fleet Achilles, and sprang up, and slew a pure white sheep,
and his comrades skinned and made it ready in seemly fashion, and
divided it cunningly and pierced it with spits, and roasted it carefully
and drew all off. And Automedon took bread and served it on a table in
fair baskets, while Achilles dealt out the flesh. And they stretched
forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before them. But when
they had put off the desire of meat and drink, then Priam son of
Dardanos marvelled at Achilles to see how great he was and how goodly,
for he was like a god to look upon. And Achilles marvelled at Priam son
of Dardanos, beholding his noble aspect and hearkening to his words. But
when they had gazed their fill upon one another, then first spake the
old man, godlike Priam, to Achilles: "Now presently give me whereon to
lie, fosterling of Zeus, that of sweet sleep also we may now take our
fill at rest: for never yet have mine eyes closed beneath their lids
since at thy hands my son lost his life, but I continually mourn and
brood over countless griefs, grovelling in the courtyard-close amid the
mire. Now at last have I tasted bread and poured bright wine down my
throat, but till now I had tasted naught."

He said, and Achilles bade his comrades and handmaids to set a bedstead
beneath the portico, and to cast thereon fair shining rugs and spread
coverlets above and thereon to lay thick mantles to be a clothing over
all. And the maids went forth from the inner hail with torches in their
hands, and quickly spread two beds in haste. Then with bitter meaning
[in his reference to Agamemnon] said fleet-footed Achilles unto Priam:
"Lie thou without, dear sire, lest there come hither one of the
counsellors of the Achaians, such as ever take counsel with me by my
side, as custom is. If any of such should behold thee through the swift
black night, forthwith he might haply tell it to Agamemnon shepherd of
the host, and thus would there be delay in giving back the dead. But
come say this to me and tell it true, how many days' space thou art fain
to make funeral for noble Hector, so that for so long I may myself abide
and may keep back the host."

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: "If thou art
verily willing that I accomplish noble Hector's funeral, by doing as
thou sayest, O Achilles, thou wilt do me grace. For thou knowest how we
are pent within the city, and wood from the mountain is far to fetch,
and the Trojans are much in fear. Nine days will we make moan for him in
our halls, and on the tenth we will hold funeral and the folk shall
feast, and on the eleventh we will make, a barrow over him, and on the
twelfth we will do battle if need be."

Then again spake the fleet noble Achilles unto him, saying: "All this, O
ancient Priam, shall be as thou biddest; for I will hold back the battle
even so long a time as thou tellest me."

Thus speaking he clasped the old man's right hand at the wrist, lest he
should be anywise afraid at heart. So they in the forepart of the house
laid them down, Priam and the herald, with wise thoughts at their
hearts, but Achilles slept in a recess of the firm-wrought hut, and
beside him lay fair-cheeked Briseis.

Now all other gods and warriors lords of chariots slumbered all night,
by soft sleep overcome. But not on the Helper Hermes did sleep take hold
as he sought within his heart how he should guide forth king Priam from
the ships unespied of the trusty sentinels. And he stood above his head
and spake a word to him: "Old sire, no thought then hast thou of any
evil, seeing thou yet sleepest among men that are thine enemies, for
that Achilles spared thee. Truly now hast thou won back thy dear son,
and at great price. But for thy life will thy sons thou hast left behind
be offering threefold ransom, if but Agamemnon Atreus' son be aware of
thee, and aware be all the Achaians."

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and roused the herald. And Hermes
yoked the horses and mules for them, and himself drave them lightly
through the camp, and none was aware of them.

But when they came to the ford of the fair-flowing river, [even eddying
Xanthos, begotten of immortal Zeus,] then Hermes departed up to high
Olympus, and Morning of the saffron robe spread over all the earth. And
they with wail and moan drave the horses to the city, and the mules drew
the dead. Nor marked them any man or fair-girdled woman until Kassandra,
peer of golden Aphrodite, having gone up upon Pergamos, was aware of her
dear father as he stood in the car, and the herald that was crier to the
town. Then beheld she him that lay upon the bier behind the mules, and
thereat she wailed and cried aloud throughout all the town: "O men and
women of Troy, come ye hither and look upon Hector, if ever while he was
alive ye rejoiced when he came back from battle, since great joy was he
to the city and all the folk."

Thus spake she, nor was man or woman left within the city, for upon all
came unendurable grief. And near the gates they met Priam bringing home
the dead. First bewailed him his dear wife and lady mother, as they cast
them on the fair-wheeled wain and touched his head; and around them
stood the throng and wept. So all day long unto the setting of the sun
they had lamented Hector in tears without the gate, had not the old man
spoken from the car among the folk: "Give me place for the mules to pass
through; hereafter ye shall have your fill of wailing, when I have
brought him unto his home."

Thus spake he, and they parted asunder and gave place to the wain. And
the others when they had brought him to the famous house, laid him on a
fretted bed, and set beside him minstrel leaders of the dirge, who
wailed a mournful lay, while the women made moan with them. And among
the women white-armed Andromache led the lamentation, while in her hands
she held the head of Hector slayer of men: "Husband, thou art gone young
from life, and leavest me a widow in thy halls. And the child is yet but
a little one, child of ill-fated parents, thee and me; nor methinks
shall he grow up to manhood, for ere then shall this city be utterly
destroyed. For thou art verily perished who didst watch over it, who
guardedst it and keptest safe its noble wives and infant little ones.
These soon shall be voyaging in the hollow ships, yea and I too with
them, and thou, my child, shalt either go with me unto a place where
thou shalt toil at unseemly tasks, labouring before the face of some
harsh lord, or else some Achaian will take thee by the arm and hurl thee
from the battlement, a grievous death, for that he is wroth because
Hector slew his brother or father or son, since full many of the
Achaians in Hector's hands have bitten the firm earth. For no light hand
had thy father in the grievous fray. Therefore the folk lament him
throughout the city, and woe unspeakable and mourning hast thou left to
thy parents, Hector, but with me chiefliest shall grievous pain abide.
For neither didst thou stretch thy hands to me from a bed in thy death,
neither didst speak to me some memorable word that I might have thought
on evermore as my tears fall night and day."

Thus spake she wailing, and the women joined their moan. And among them
Hekabe again led the loud lament: "Hector, of all my children far
dearest to my heart, verily while thou wert alive dear wert thou to the
gods, and even in thy doom of death have they had care for thee. For
other sons of mine whom he took captive would fleet Achilles sell beyond
the unvintaged sea unto Samos and Imbros and smoking Lemnos, but when
with keen-edged bronze he had bereft thee of thy life he was fain to
drag thee oft around the tomb of his comrade, even Patroklos whom thou
slewest, yet might he not raise him up thereby. But now all dewy and
fresh thou liest in our halls, like one on whom Apollo, lord of the
silver bow, hath descended and slain him with his gentle darts."

Thus spake she wailing, and stirred unending moan. Then thirdly Helen
led their sore lament: "Hector, of all my brethren of Troy far dearest
to my heart! Truly my lord is godlike Alexandros who brought me to
Troy-land--would I had died ere then. For this is now the twentieth year
since I went thence and am gone from my own native land, but never yet
heard I evil or despiteful word from thee; nay, if any other haply
upbraided me in the palace-halls, whether brother or sister of thine or
brother's fair-robed wife, or thy mother--but thy father is ever kind to
me as he were my own--then wouldst thou soothe such with words and
refrain them, by the gentleness of thy spirit and by thy gentle words.
Therefore bewail I thee with pain at heart, and my hapless self with
thee, for no more is any left in wide Troy-land to be my friend and kind
to me, but all men shudder at me."

Thus spake she wailing, and therewith the great multitude of the people
groaned. But the old man Priam spake a word among the folk: "Bring wood,
men of Troy, unto the city, and be not anywise afraid at heart of a
crafty ambush of the Achaians; for this message Achilles gave me when he
sent me from the black ships, that they should do us no hurt until the
twelfth morn arise."

Thus spake he, and they yoked oxen and mules to wains, and quickly then
they flocked before the city. So nine days they gathered great store of
wood. But when the tenth morn rose with light for men, then bare they
forth brave Hector, weeping tears, and on a lofty pyre they laid the
dead man, and thereon cast fire.

