Islands, also like the Philippines in the Pacific Ocean.

Hawaii was a monarchy, but for a long time the people had been
discontented, and Queen Liliuokalani was the last royal ruler of
Hawaii.  She wanted to be an absolute monarch, and do what she liked.
But when she tried to change the constitution to her liking there
was a revolution.

It was a peaceful revolution, and not a shot was fired on either
side.  It was brought about chiefly by the white people who lived
in the islands.  A company of marines was landed from the United
States cruiser Boston which happened to be in the harbour at the
time.  The Queen was deposed, and a provisional government set up.

Stamford Dole, an American, was chosen head of this new government.
Dole then sent to Washington to ask the United States to annex Hawaii.
Meanwhile the stars and stripes were hoisted over the Government
buildings at Honolulu, the capital of Hawaii.

All this happened just at the end of Harrison's Presidency.  He and
his advisers were quite willing to annex Hawaii.  But before the
matter could be settled his term of office ended, and Cleveland
took his place.  The new President did not feel at all pleased with
what had been done, and he sent a commissioner to Honolulu to find
out exactly what had happened, and if the people really wanted to
be annexed to the United States.

This commissioner came to the conclusion that the Hawaiians did
not want to be annexed and that "a great wrong had been done to a
feeble but independent State."

Cleveland therefore refused to annex the islands.  He even offered
to restore the Queen to her throne if she would promise to forgive
all those who had helped to dethrone her.  At first she would not
promise this, but declared that the leaders of the revolution must
be beheaded.  In the end, however, she gave way.

"I must not feel vengeful to any of my people," she said. "If I am
restored by the United States, I must forget myself, and remember
only my dear people and my country.  I must forgive and forget the
past, permitting no punishment of any one."

But when Dole was asked to give up the islands he refused.  He and
his party were ready to fight rather than allow the Queen to be
set again upon the throne.  And seeing him thus determined President
Cleveland gave up his efforts on behalf of the Queen.

So for several years Hawaii remained a little independent republic
with Dole as President.  Then when McKinley came into power the
United States was again asked to take the islands under protection.
And in July, 1898, while the Spanish War was being fought, Hawaii
was annexed, and with solemn ceremony the flag was once more hoisted
in Honolulu.

A few years later the islands were made a territory.  So the people
are now citizens of the United States, and send a representative
to Congress.

No President perhaps grew in the love of the people as McKinley
did.  At the end of his four years' office he was loved far more than
he had been at the beginning, and he was easily elected a second
time.  And but a few months of his second term had passed when people
began to talk of electing him a third time.

But when McKinley heard of it he was vexed.  He told the people that
they must put such an idea out of their heads, for he would not be
a candidate for a third term on any consideration.

"All I want," he said, "is to serve through my second term in a
way acceptable to my countrymen, and then go on doing my duty as
a private citizen."

But alas! He was not to be allowed even to serve out his second
term.  Only six months of it had gone when he went to visit the great
Pan-American Exhibition at Buffalo.  Here he made a speech which
seemed to show that he was changing his ideas about high tariffs,
and that it was time now, he thought, to lower them.

Next day he held a great reception in one of the buildings of the
Exhibition.  Crowds of all sorts of people streamed into the hall,
eager to see the President and shake hands with him.  Among these
came a well-dressed young man who seemed to have hurt his hand,
for it was covered with a handkerchief.

The man came quite close to the President who held out his hand
with a smile.  Then quickly the man fired two shots.  Not an injured
hand but a pistol had been hidden under the handkerchief.

The President did not fall.  He walked steadily enough to a chair,
and leant his head upon his hand.

"You are wounded," said his secretary.

"Ho, I think not.  I am not much hurt," replied the President.
But his face was white and drawn with pain; blood flowed from his
wounds.  Yet in his pain he thought only of others.

His first thought was for his wife, who was an invalid. "Don't let
her know," he said.  But he thought too of the wretched man who had
shot him. "Don't hurt him," he murmured.

At first it was thought that the wounds were not fatal, and that
the President would recover.  But just as every one believed that
the danger was over his strength seemed to fail him, and in little
more than a week he died.

There was such a shining goodness and honesty about President
McKinley that all who came near him loved and respected him.  Now he
went to his last resting-place mourned not only by his own people
but by Great Britain and nearly every country in Europe besides.
Even his murderer had no special hatred of McKinley.  He was an
anarchist who believed it was a good deed to kill any ruler.

So in the midst of his usefulness a good man was ruthlessly slain.

__________





Chapter 97 - Roosevelt - Taft




Upon McKinley's death Theodore Roosevelt, The Vice-President,
became President.  He was the youngest of all the Presidents, being
only forty-two when he came into office.  Mr.  Roosevelt was in the
mountains with his wife and children when the news that the President
was dying was brought to him.  At nine o'clock at night he started
off on a long drive of thirty-five miles to the railway station.
The road was narrow, and steep, and full of mudholes, and the drive
through the darkness was one of danger.

A little after five in the morning the station was reached.  Here
a special train was waiting which carried the Vice-President to
Buffalo as fast as might be.  But he was too late to see his President
in life.  For while he was still on his wild drive through the night,
President McKinley had passed peacefully to his last rest.

Mr.  Roosevelt was the youngest of all presidents, and he brought to
the White House a youthful energy and "hustle" such as no President
had before.  He had strong opinions to which he never hesitated to
give voice, and perhaps since Lincoln no President had been so much
a dictator.

Perhaps the most interesting thing in Roosevelt's presidency was
the beginning of the Panama Canal.

You remember that when Columbus set forth upon the Sea of Darkness
his idea was to reach the east by sailing west.  And to this day of
his death he imagined that he had reached India by sailing westward.
But soon men found out the mistake, and then began the search for
the North-West Passages by which they might sail past the great
Continent, and so reach India.

The North-West Passage, however, proved a delusion.  The men
turned their attention to the narrow isthmus by which the two vast
continents of North and South America are joined.  And soon the idea
of cutting a canal through this narrow barrier began to be talked
of.  But time went on and the Spaniards who held sway over the
isthmus did no more than talk.  Then an adventurous Scotsman was
seized with the idea of founding a colony at Darien.  He meant to
build a great harbour where all the ships of the world would come.
Merchandise was to be carried across the isthmus by camels, and
soon his colony would be the key of all the commerce of the world.

Such was his golden dream, but it ended in utter failure.

Still the idea grew.  Men of many nations began to discuss the
possibility of building the canal.  And at length the French got
leave from the Government of Columbia and work on the canal was
begun.  But after working for many years the French gave up the
undertaking, which was far more difficult, and had cost far more
money than they had expected.  Meanwhile the Americans had become
much interested in the scheme, and they had begun to think of
cutting a canal through the isthmus at Nicaragua.  Then when the
French company went bankrupt they offered to sell all their rights
to the canal to the United States.  There was a good deal of discussion
over the matter.  For some people thought that the Nicaragua route
would be better.  But in the end it was agreed to take over the
canal already begun, and go with it.

Everything was arranged when the Colombian Senate refused to sign
the treaty.  By this treaty they were to receive ten million dollars,
besides a yearly rent for the land through which the canal ran.
But that sum seemed to them now too small, and they refused to sign
the treaty unless the money to be paid down should be increased to
twenty-five million dollars.

This the United States was unwilling to do.  Everything came down
to a standstill, and it seemed as if the Panama scheme would have
to be given up, when suddenly a new turn was given to affairs.
For the people of Panama rose in rebellion against Colombia, and
declared themselves a republic.

The United States at once recognized the new republic, and before
a month had passed a treaty between the United States and the
Republic of Panama was drawn up and signed, and the work on the
great canal was begun.

A good many people, however, were not very pleased at the manner
in which the struggle had been ended.  They thought that the United
States ought not to have taken the part of rebels in such haste.
But the President was quite satisfied that he had done the right
thing, and that it would have been base not to help the new republic.

In 1902 Mr.  Roosevelt had become president "by accident." If it
had not been for the tragedy of President McKinley's death he would
not have come into power, and the thought grieved him somewhat.  So
when he was again elected president he was quite pleased.  For now
he felt that he held his great office because the people wanted
him, and not because they could not help having him.

Few Presidents have grown so much in popularity after coming into
office as Mr.  Roosevelt.  People felt he was a jolly good fellow,
and throughout the length and breadth of the land he was known as
"Teddy."

"Who is the head of the Government?" a little girl was asked.

"Mr.  Roosevelt," was the reply.

"Yes, but what is his official title?"

"Teddy," answered the little one.

During this presidency Oklahoma was admitted to the Union as the
forty-sixth state.  Oklahoma is an Indian word meaning Redman.  It
was part of the Louisiana Purchase, and had been set aside as an
Indian reservation.  All the land, however, was not occupied and
as some of it was exceedingly fertile the white people began to
agitate to have it opened to them.  So at length the Indians gave up
their claim to part of this territory in return for a sum of money.

This was in 1889 and President Harrison proclaimed that at twelve
o'clock noon on the 22nd of April the land would be opened for
settlement.  Long before the day people set out in all directions
to the borders of Oklahoma.  On the morning of the 22nd of April at
least twenty thousand people had gathered on the borders.  And as
soon as the blowing of a bugle announced that the hour of noon had
struck there was a wild rush over the border.  Before darkness fell
whole towns were staked out.  Yet there was not enough land for all
and many had to return home disappointed.  The population of Oklahoma
went up with a bound but it was not until eighteen years later, in
September, 1907, that it was admitted to the Union as a state.

In 1909 William H.  Taft became president.  Mr.  Taft had been Governor
of the Philippines, and had shown great tact and firmness in that
post.  He and President Roosevelt were friends, and Roosevelt did
all he could to further his election.

During Mr.  Taft's presidency the last two states were admitted to
the Union.  Ever since the Civil War New Mexico had been seeking
admission as a state, and at one time it was proposed to call this
state Lincoln.  That suggestion, however, came to nothing, and some
years later it was proposed to admit New Mexico and Arizona as one
state.  To this Arizona objected, and at length they were admitted
as separate states, New Mexico on the 6th of January and Arizona
on the 11th of February, 1912.  Both these states were made out of
the Mexican Concession and the Gadsden Purchase.

__________





Chapter 98 - Wilson - Troubles With Mexico




In 1913 Mr.  Taft's term of office came to an end, and Mr.  Woodrow
Wilson was elected President.  He came into office at no easy time.
At home many things needed reform and on the borders there was
trouble.  For two years the republic of Mexico, which had always
been a troublous neighbor, had been in a constant state of anarchy.
One revolution followed another, battles and bloodshed became common
events.  Many Americans had settled in Mexico and in the turmoil
American lives were lost and American property ruined.  While Mr.
Taft was in office he tried to protect the Americans in Mexico.

But he could do little, as the Mexicans made it plain that any
interference on the part of America would mean war.  Mr.  Taft avoided
war, but the state of things in Mexico went from bad to worse, and
when Mr.  Wilson became President a settlement with Mexico was one
of the problems he had to face.  But first of all the new President
turned this thoughts to home matters.

Ever since the McKinley Tariff the duties on goods imported into
the country had remained high.  Many people, however, had come to
believe that high tariffs were a mistake, for while they enriched
a few they made living dearer than need be for many.  These people
wished to have tariffs "for revenue only." That is, they thought
duties should only be high enough to produce sufficient income for
the needs of the government.  They objected to tariffs merely for
"protection." That is, they objected to tariffs which "protected"
the manufacturer at the expense of the consumer.

President Wilson held these opinions strongly, and during the first
year of his presidency a bill was passed by which were luxuries,
things which only rich people bought, were heavily taxed, while the
taxes on foodstuffs and wool, things which the poorest need, were
made much lighter.  These changes in the tariff brought in much less
income for the government, and to make up for the loss an Income
Tax was levied for the first time, everyone who had more than 4,000
dollars a year having to pay it.  In this way again the burden of
taxes was shifted from the poor to the rich.

The President next turned his attention to the banks.  Little change
had been made in their way of doing business since the Civil War,
and for some time it had been felt that to meet the growing needs
of trade a change was wanted.  Many people had tried to think out
a new system, but it was not easy, and they failed.  Mr.  Wilson,
however, succeeded, and in December, 1913, the Currency Bill was
passed.

It would take too long, and would be rather difficult, to explain
just what this Act was.  Shortly it was meant to keep too much money
from getting into the hands of a few people, and to give every one
with energy and enterprise a chance.

Other Acts connected with the trade of the country followed these,
all of which intended to make the life of the weak and poor easier.
Of these perhaps the most interesting for us is the Child Labour
Act.  This Act was meant to keep people from making young children
work too hard, and in order to make child labour less profitable to
"exploiters" the Act forbids the sending of goods made by children
under fourteen from one state to another.  If the children are
obliged to work at night, or for more than eight hours during the
day, the age is raised to sixteen.  This Act was signed in September,
1916, but did not come into force until September, 1917.  While
these things were being done within the country troubles beyond
its boarders were increasing.  First there was trouble with Mexico.

A few days before Mr.  Wilson was inaugurated, Madero, the President of
Mexico, was deposed and murdered, and a rebel leader named Huerta
at once proclaimed himself President.  That he had anything to do
with the murder of Madero has never been openly proved, but Mr.
Wilson, believing that he had, looked upon him as an assassin, and
refused to acknowledge him as head of the neighboring republic.  But
beyond that Mr.  Wilson hesitated to mix himself or his country in
the Mexican quarrel, believing that the Mexicans themselves could
best settle their own affairs.

"Shall we deny to Mexico," he asked, a little later, "because she
is weak, the right to settle her own affairs? No, I say.  I am proud
to belong to a great nation that says, 'this country which we could
crush shall have as much freedom in her own affairs as we have in
ours.'"

Whether the President was wise or unwise in his dealings with Mexico
we cannot say.  The trouble is too close to us.  It is not settled yet.
But the one thing we can clearly see is that Mr.  Wilson loved and
desired peace, not only with Mexico but with the whole of America.
He wanted to unite the whole of America, both North and South, in
bonds of kindness.  He wanted to make the small weak republics of
South America feel that the great republic of North America was
a watchful friend, and not a watchful enemy, eager, and able when
she chose, to crush them.  Had the United States put forth her
strength, Mexico could have been conquered, doubtless, in no long
time.  But Mr.  Wilson took a wider view than those who counseled such
a course.  Instead of crushing Mexico, and thereby perhaps arousing
the jealousy and suspicion of other weak republics, he tried to
use the trouble to increase the good will of these republics toward
the United States.  He tried to show them that the United States
was one with them, and had no desire to enlarge her borders at the
expense of another.  Whether the means he used were wise or not time
will show.

For the most part the country was with the President in his desire
to keep out of war with Mexico.  This was partly because they believed
that America was not prepared for war, partly because they knew
that war must certainly end in the defeat of the Mexicans.  Having
defeated them the United States would be forced to annex their
territory, and this no one wanted.

But to keep out of war was no easy matter.  The wild disorder
in Mexico increased daily.  Besides Huerta other claimants for the
presidency appeared and the country swarmed with bandit forces
under various leaders, all fighting against each other.

At length in April, 1914, some United States sailors who had landed
at the Mexican port of Tampico were taken prisoner by the Huertists.
They were soon set free again, but Huerta refused to apologize
in a satisfactory way, and an American squadron was sent to take
possession of Vera Cruz.  War seemed now certain.  But it was averted,
and after holding Vera Cruz for more than seven months the American
troops were withdrawn. "We do not want to fight the Mexicans," said
Mr.  Wilson, at the funeral of the sailors who lost their lives in
the attack. "We do not want to fight the Mexicans; we want to serve
them if we can.  A war of aggression is not a proud thing in which
to die.  But a war of service is one in which it is a grand thing
to die."

On the invitation of the United States three of the South American
republics, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, known from their names as
the A.  B.  C.  Powers, now joined with the United States in trying to
settle the Mexican difficulty.  In May, 1914, they held a Mediation
Conference at Niagara Falls in Canada.  But nothing came of it, and
the disorder in Mexico continued as before.

In July, however, there seemed some hope of a settlement.  Huerta
fled to Europe leaving his friend, Francisco Carbajal, as President.
For a month Carbajal kept his post.  Then anarchy worse than ever
broke loose.  Three men, Carranza, Villa, and Zapata, each declaring
themselves President, filled the land with bloodshed and ruin.

Once again on the invitation of the United States South America
intervened, delegates from six South American republics meeting
at Washington to consider what could be done to bring peace to the
distracted country.  They decided to give the Mexicans three months
in which to settle their quarrels, and warned them that if by that
time order was not restored United America would be forced to take
action.

Soon after this, however, Carranza succeeded in subduing his rivals
to a certain extent, and got possession of the greater part of the
country.  The United States, therefore, recognized him as President
of Mexico, and very shortly many of the European powers did the
same.

It seemed as if peace might really come at last to Mexico.
But although Villa was worsted he was by to means crushed, and he
and his undisciplined followers still kept the country in a state
of unrest, doing many deeds of violence.  In January, 1916, these
marauding troops seized and murdered a party of Americans.  A little
later they crossed frontiers, and were only driven back after a
sharp encounter with United States troops.

This brigandage had to be stopped, and, as Carranza seemed unable
to subdue the rebels, five thousand American troops entered
Mexico intent on punishing Villa and his bandits.  But the task was
no easy one.  Villa was well suited to be a bandit leader, and he
was thoroughly at home in the wild and mountainous country.  The
Americans, however, pressed him hard, and a battle was fought in
which he was believed for a time to have been killed.  Soon, however,
he was discovered to be alive, and as aggressive as before.

Meanwhile President Carranza had grown restless and suspicious
of American interferences, and demanded that the United States
troops should be withdrawn from Mexican soil.  Indeed he became so
threatening that Mr.  Wilson called out the militia, and ordered a
squadron of war vessels to Mexican waters.

Scarcely was this done when the news reached Washington that a
skirmish had taken place between Mexican and United States troops,
in which forty had been killed, and seventeen taken prisoners.

War was now certain.  But once more it was averted.  Carranza set his
prisoners free and proposed that the two republics should settle
their differences by arbitration.

To this Mr.  Wilson agreed, and in the beginning of September a
Commission composed of delegates from both countries came together.
The Commission suggested that both Mexico and the United States
should work together to patrol the frontiers, and safeguard them
from further raids.  But to this Carranza would not agree, and in
February, 1917, the United States troops were withdrawn, and Mexico
was once more left "to save herself."

__________





Chapter 99 - Wilson -The Great War




The disorder in Mexico was distressing to America, it was disastrous
to the Mexicans themselves.  But the effect of America as a whole
was slight, while the world at large felt it scarcely at all.

In August, 1914, while the Mexican trouble was still grave, the
Great War broke out in Europe.  This, strange to say, was to prove
a far greater menace to the peace of the United States than the
war and bloodshed in the turbulent republic on her borders.

In the days of the French Revolution, when France was warring with
a sea of foes, Washington had declared the United States to be
neutral.  He had refused to draw sword even in aid of the friend
who only a few years before had helped Americans so generously in
their struggle for freedom.  He was wise.  For in those days America
was weak.  She was the youngest of the world's great nations, she
had hardly "found herself." Had she mixed herself in the European
quarrel she would have suffered greatly, perhaps might even have
lost her new-found freedom.

All this Washington knew.  Gratitude was due to France, but not
useless sacrifice, which would merely bring ruin on America, and
help France not at all.  So Washington declared for neutrality, and
maintained it.

Thirty years later Monroe announced his famous Doctrine.  That
Doctrine in the words of Henry Jefferson was, "First, never to
entangle ourselves in the broils of Europe; second, never to suffer
Europe to intermeddle with cis-Atlantic affairs." To that doctrine
America has remained faithful.  But in the ninety years which have
passed since it was first announced many changes have taken place.
America is no longer weak, but grown to giant's strength, great
among the great.  The trade of Europe and the trade of America have
become interlocked, discoveries and inventions, the wonders of steam
and electricity, have made light of the broad Atlantic.  Today men
come and go from the one continent to the other with greater ease
than a hundred years ago they went from Boston to Washington.

By a thousand ties of commerce and of brotherhood the old world
is bound to the new.  So the war cloud which darkened Europe cast
its shadow also over America, even although at first there was no
thought that America would be drawn into the war.  Was it possible,
men asked, while Europe was at death grips, for America still to
keep her "splendid isolation," was it not time for her to take a
place, "In the Parliament of man, in the Federation of the world?"

The ties which bind America to Europe bind her to no one country,
but to all; bind her equally, it would seem, to France, Britain and
Germany.  The first founders of the Republic were of British stock,
but with the passing years millions of Germans have found a home
within her hospitable borders, together with natives of every
nation at war.  How then could America take sides? No matter which
side she took it seemed almost certain to lead to civil war at
home.  So on the 11th of August, 1914, Mr.  Wilson proclaimed the
neutrality of the United States.

To the great bulk of the nation this seemed wise, for the nation
as a whole loves and desires peace, and realizes the madness and
uselessness of war.  Indeed America more than the nations of the Old
World has come to see the war is an old-fashioned, worn-out way of
settling quarrels.

But although the United States might proclaim her neutrality she was
none the less entangled in the war.  Germany declared a blockage of
Britain, Britain declared a blockage of Germany, and these Orders
in Council had a far greater effect on American trade than the
Berlin Decrees and the Orders in Council in the day of Napoleon.
Difficulties arose with both countries.  But the difficulties which
arose with Britain were such as wise statesmanship might allay.
They were concerned with such things as the censoring of mails, and
other irritating delays, which interfered with and caused loss of
trade.  With Germany the difficulties were of a far more serious
order, and soon all sane and freedom loving men found it difficult,
if not impossible, to remain neutral in spirit.

The German cause had never been a good one.  No danger threatened
the country.  No European nation desired to make war upon them.
They went to war wantonly, and without just cause.  Soon it became
plain that they meant to wage war with a ruthlessness and inhumanity
the world had never known.  They threw to the winds all the laws
of "fair play." Treaties became for them mere "scraps of paper,"
to be torn if necessity demanded.  They marched through Belgium
murdering and torturing the people, wantonly destroying the splendid
buildings which had been the country's glory and pride.  Zeppelins
attacked watering places and fishing villages, ruining peaceful homes,
slaying women and children, without reason or profit.  Submarines
waged ruthless war on the seas, attacking alike traders, passenger
vessels or hospital ships, belligerent or neutral, without distinction.

As outrage followed outrage the whole world was filled with horror,
and one by one Germany's friends turned from her, estranged by her
deeds of violence.  These were days, as Mr.  Wilson said, "to try
men's souls," and the burden of guiding the ship of state through
the sea of difficulties lay heavy upon him.

At home and abroad his critics were many.  Some praised him because
he kept the nation steadfastly on the difficult path of peace,
others blamed him because it seemed to them he did not sufficiently
uphold American honour, and submitted to German insults rather
than draw the sword.  No great man in a difficult hour can escape
criticism.  Few, in any, can escape mistakes.

Amid the clash of opinions one thing was clear, that Mr.  Wilson was
a patriot.  And when in 1916 the time came to choose a President he
was re-elected for a second term of four years.

In March, 1917, the President entered upon his new term of office
well aware that a hard road lay before him and his country.  As he
took the oath he opened and kissed the Bible at the passage "God
is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble." His
address was imbued with a sense of the dread solemnity of the times.

"I stand here, and have taken the high solemn oath," he said,
"because the people of the United States have chosen me, and by
their gracious judgement have named me their leader in affairs.  I
know now what the task means.

"I pray God that I be given wisdom and prudence to do my duty in
the true spirit of this great people.  I am their servant, and can
succeed only as they sustain and guide me by their confidence, and
their counsel...

"The shadows that now lie dark upon our path will soon be
dispelled.  We shall walk with light all about us if we be but true
to ourselves-to ourselves as we have wished to be known in the
counsels of the world, in the thought of all those who love liberty,
justice, and right exalted."

We cannot here follow in detail all the steps by which Germany
forced America at length to declare war.  It was in a spirit of
service that Mr.  Wilson took up his office for a second time, of
service not only to his own country but to the world.  In the cause
of that service he saw himself forced to lead his country into war.

Germany had filled America with spies, plotting constantly against
her peace and her honour.  She had run amuck upon the seas, and by
her submarine warfare endangered the lives and welfare of all mankind.
She had become a menace to the world's freedom.  The President loves
peace even as the soul of America loves peace.  But both President
and people became at length convinced that the only way to restore
peace to the world was to defeat the authors of the war.

Having arrived at this grave conclusion there was no turning back,
and on the 2nd April, 1917, Mr.  Wilson announced his decision at
a joint session of the two houses of Congress.

It was not lightly undertaken.

"It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war,
into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars, civilization
itself seeming to be in the balance.  But the right is more precious
than peace, and we shall fight for the things which we have always
carried nearest our hearts - for democracy, for the right of those
who submit to authority to have a voice in their own governments,
for the rights and liberties of small nations, for a universal
dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring
peace and safety to all nations, and make the world itself at last
free.

"To such a task we can dedicate our lives and our fortunes, everything
that we are and everything that we have, with the pride of those
who know that the day has come when America is privileged to spend
her blood and her might for the principles that gave her birth and
happiness, and the peace which she has treasured.  God helping her
she can do no other."

In these noble words the President of the United States threw down
the gauge of battle.  There was in his heart no rancour against
the German people, but only a righteous wrath against her criminal
rulers who for their own selfish ends had plunged the world in
misery.  Never in the world's history has a great nation gone to
war in so chivalrous a spirit, for so unselfish ends.

"We have no selfish ends to serve," said the President. "We desire
no conquest, no dominion.  We seek no indemnities for ourselves, no
material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make.  We
are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind.  We shall be
satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith
and the freedom of nations can make them."

The voice was the voice of the President, but he spoke from the
heart of the people.  Brought together from the ends of the earth,
speaking many tongues, worshiping God in many ways, diverse in
character and in custom, the nation which stands behind the President
to-day is one in heart.  In the fiery trail of battle America has
found her soul, and the American by adoption has proved himself as
truly a citizen of the country as the American by birth.  Divided by
birth and language, by religion and custom, they are one in soul,
one in their desire to dedicate themselves to the great unselfish
task they have taken in hand, one in the zeal of sacrifice.

Who can say what days of terror and splendour the future may hold?
As I write it lies before us a blacker sea of darkness and adventure
than that Columbus crossed.  But it would seem that for the great
Republic it can hold no diviner hour than this. "Greater love hath
no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends."

There could be found no more splendid close to a splendid story.

"Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord;
He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored;
He hath loosed the fateful lightning of his terrible swift sword;
His truth is marching on.

He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat;
He is sifting out the hearts of men before His judgment seat;
O, be swift, my soul, to answer Him; be jubilant, my feet,--
Our God is marching on.

In the beauty of the lilies, Christ was born across the sea,
With a glory in His bosom that transfigures you and me;
As He died to make men holy, let us die to make me free,
While God is marching on."
