      congruity: Mars and Pallas are awkwardly introduced among the
      Centaurs and Lapithae;-- but the gap is wide indeed between them and
      Apollo with the Muses, waking the echoes of Olympus to celestial
      harmonies; whence however, we are hurried back to Perseus, the
      Gorgons, and other images of war, over an arm of the sea, in which
      the sporting dolphins, the fugitive fishes, and the fisherman on the
      shore with his casting net, are minutely represented. As to the
      Hesiodic images themselves, the leading remark is, that they catch
      at beauty by ornament, and at sublimity by exaggeration; and upon
      the untenable supposition of the genuineness of this poem, there is
      this curious peculiarity, that, in the description of scenes of
      rustic peace, the superiority of Homer is decisive--while in those of
      war and tumult it may be thought, perhaps, that the Hesiodic poet
      has more than once the advantage."

  258 "This legend is one of the most pregnant and characteristic in the
      Grecian Mythology; it explains, according to the religious ideas
      familiar to the old epic poets, both the distinguishing attributes
      and the endless toil and endurances of Heracles, the most renowned
      subjugator of all the semi-divine personages worshipped by the
      Hellenes,--a being of irresistible force, and especially beloved by
      Zeus, yet condemned constantly to labour for others and to obey the
      commands of a worthless and cowardly persecutor. His recompense is
      reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are
      brought to a close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives
      in marriage Hebe."--Grote, vol. i. p. 128.

  259 --_Ambrosia._

          "The blue-eyed maid,
        In ev'ry breast new vigour to infuse.
        Brings nectar temper'd with ambrosial dews."

                                          Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 249.

  260 "Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He
      stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth
      upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the
      cloud is not rent under them." Job xxvi. 6-8.

          261 "Swift from his throne the infernal monarch ran,
        All pale and trembling, lest the race of man,
        Slain by Jove's wrath, and led by Hermes' rod,
        Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq.

  262 These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might be
      delayed, but never wholly set aside.

  263 It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal, to
      behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22.

          264 "Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow'rs arose,
        In humble vales they built their soft abodes."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, iii. 150.

  265 --_Along the level seas._ Compare Virgil's description of Camilla,
      who

        "Outstripp'd the winds in speed upon the plain,
        Flew o'er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain:
        She swept the seas, and, as she skimm'd along,
        Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung."

                                                        Dryden, vii. 1100.

  266 --_The future father._ "AEneas and Antenor stand distinguished from
      the other Trojans by a dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy
      with the Greeks, which is by Sophocles and others construed as
      treacherous collusion,--a suspicion indirectly glanced at, though
      emphatically repelled, in the AEneas of Virgil."--Grote, i. p. 427.

  267 Neptune thus recounts his services to AEneas:

        "When your AEneas fought, but fought with odds
        Of force unequal, and unequal gods:
        I spread a cloud before the victor's sight,
        Sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secured his flight--
        Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
        The vow'd destruction of ungrateful Troy."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, v. 1058.

  268 --_On Polydore._ Euripides, Virgil, and others, relate that Polydore
      was sent into Thrace, to the house of Polymestor, for protection,
      being the youngest of Priam's sons, and that he was treacherously
      murdered by his host for the sake of the treasure sent with him.

  269 "Perhaps the boldest excursion of Homer into this region of poetical
      fancy is the collision into which, in the twenty-first of the Iliad,
      he has brought the river god Scamander, first with Achilles, and
      afterwards with Vulcan, when summoned by Juno to the hero's aid. The
      overwhelming fury of the stream finds the natural interpretation in
      the character of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor.
      Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to
      be easily forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the
      mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may
      suddenly immerse him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of
      Achilles by the fiery arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same
      ready explanation from physical causes. Yet the subsiding of the
      flood at the critical moment when the hero's destruction appeared
      imminent, might, by a slight extension of the figurative parallel,
      be ascribed to a god symbolic of the influences opposed to all
      atmospheric moisture."--Mure, vol. i. p. 480, sq.

  270 Wood has observed, that "the circumstance of a falling tree, which
      is described as reaching from one of its banks to the other, affords
      a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander."

  271 --_Ignominious._ Drowning, as compared with a death in the field of
      battle, was considered utterly disgraceful.

  272 --_Beneath a caldron._

        "So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
        The bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
        Above the brims they force their fiery way;
        Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 644.

  273 "This tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by order
      of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not unfrequently
      among the incidents of the Mythical world."--Grote, vol. i. p. 156.

  274 --_Not half so dreadful._

          "On the other side,
        Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
        Unterrified, and like a comet burn'd,
        That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
        In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
        Shakes pestilence and war."

                                                 --Paradise Lost," xi. 708.

  275 "And thus his own undaunted mind explores."--"Paradise Lost," vi.
      113.

  276 The example of Nausicaa, in the Odyssey, proves that the duties of
      the laundry were not thought derogatory, even from the dignity of a
      princess, in the heroic times.

  277 --_Hesper shines with keener light._

        "Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
        If better thou belong not to the dawn."

                                                  "Paradise Lost," v. 166.

  278 Such was his fate. After chasing the Trojans into the town, he was
      slain by an arrow from the quiver of Paris, directed under the
      unerring auspices of Apollo. The greatest efforts were made by the
      Trojans to possess themselves of the body, which was however rescued
      and borne off to the Grecian camp by the valour of Ajax and Ulysses.
      Thetis stole away the body, just as the Greeks were about to burn it
      with funeral honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of
      immortality in the isle of Leuke in the Euxine.

  279 --_Astyanax,_ i.e. the _city-king_ or guardian. It is amusing that
      Plato, who often finds fault with Homer without reason, should have
      copied this twaddling etymology into his Cratylus.

  280 This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book, but
      it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for
      comparison.

  281 --_Thrice in order led._ This was a frequent rite at funerals. The
      Romans had the same custom, which they called _decursio._ Plutarch
      states that Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to
      the memory of Achilles himself.

  282 --_And swore._ Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to
      witness. See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436.

          283 "O, long expected by thy friends! from whence
        Art thou so late return'd for our defence?
        Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
        With length of labours, and with, toils of war?
        After so many funerals of thy own,
        Art thou restored to thy declining town?
        But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace
        Deforms the manly features of thy face?"

                                                          Dryden, xi. 369.

  284 --_Like a thin smoke._ Virgil, Georg. iv. 72.

        "In vain I reach my feeble hands to join
        In sweet embraces--ah! no longer thine!
        She said, and from his eyes the fleeting fair
        Retired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air."

                                                                   Dryden.

  285 So Milton:--

          "So eagerly the fiend
        O'er bog, o'er steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
        With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
        And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," ii. 948.

          286 "An ancient forest, for the work design'd
        (The shady covert of the savage kind).
        The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed:
        Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the tow'ring pride
        Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
        And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
        High trunks of trees, fell'd from the steepy crown
        Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, vi. 261.

  287 --_He vowed._ This was a very ancient custom.

  288 The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity of
      the deceased, and the honour in which he was held.

  289 On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern nations,
      see Mallet, p. 213.

  290 --_And calls the spirit._ Such was the custom anciently, even at the
      Roman funerals.

        "Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
        Paternal ashes, now revived in vain."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 106.

  291 Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better moral
      from this episode than Homer. The following lines deserve
      comparison:--

        "The haughty Dares in the lists appears:
        Walking he strides, his head erected bears:
        His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
        And loud applauses echo through the field.
        *          *          *          *
        Such Dares was, and such he strode along,
        And drew the wonder of the gazing throng
        His brawny breast and ample chest he shows;
        His lifted arms around his head he throws,
        And deals in whistling air his empty blows.
        His match is sought, but, through the trembling band,
        No one dares answer to the proud demand.
        Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes,
        Already he devours the promised prize.
        *          *          *          *
        If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
        How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?"

                                             Dryden's Virgil, v. 486, seq.

          292 "The gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore
        His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
        His mouth and nostrils pour'd a purple flood,
        And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 623.

  293 "Troilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also in
      the Cypriad but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an
      object of great interest with the subsequent poets."--Grote, i, p.
      399.

  294 Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of Gabriel,
      "Paradise Lost," bk. v. 266, seq.

          "Down thither prone in flight
        He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
        Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
        Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
        Winnows the buxom air. * * * *
        *           *               *             *
        At once on th' eastern cliff of Paradise
        He lights, and to his proper shape returns
        A seraph wing'd. * * * *
          Like Maia's son he stood,
        And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance fill'd
        The circuit wide."

      Virgil, AEn. iv. 350:--

        "Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
        His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
        And whether o'er the seas or earth he flies,
        With rapid force they bear him down the skies
        But first he grasps within his awful hand
        The mark of sovereign power, his magic wand;
        With this he draws the ghost from hollow graves;
        With this he drives them from the Stygian waves:
        *           *               *             *
        Thus arm'd, the god begins his airy race,
        And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space."

                                                                   Dryden.

  295 In reference to the whole scene that follows, the remarks of
      Coleridge are well worth reading:--

      "By a close study of life, and by a true and natural mode of
      expressing everything, Homer was enabled to venture upon the most
      peculiar and difficult situations, and to extricate himself from
      them with the completest success. The whole scene between Achilles
      and Priam, when the latter comes to the Greek camp for the purpose
      of redeeming the body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly
      skilful, and yet the simplest and most affecting passage in the
      Iliad. Quinctilian has taken notice of the following speech of
      Priam, the rhetorical artifice of which is so transcendent, that if
      genius did not often, especially in oratory, unconsciously fulfil
      the most subtle precepts of criticism, we might be induced, on this
      account alone, to consider the last book of the Iliad as what is
      called spurious, in other words, of later date than the rest of the
      poem. Observe the exquisite taste of Priam in occupying the mind of
      Achilles, from the outset, with the image of his father; in
      gradually introducing the parallel of his own situation; and,
      lastly, mentioning Hector's name when he perceives that the hero is
      softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of
      the conqueror. The ego d'eleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha
      geronta, are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the
      Iliad. They are almost too fine and pathetic. The whole passage
      defies translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no
      name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can
      only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to transfuse
      it into another language."--Coleridge, p. 195.

  296 "Achilles' ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot but
      offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity. The heroic
      age, however, must be judged by its own moral laws. Retributive
      vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated
      by the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that
      evil inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured
      man; but made the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the
      fate of the body from which it had separated. Hence a denial of the
      rites essential to the soul's admission into the more favoured
      regions of the lower world was a cruel punishment to the wanderer on
      the dreary shores of the infernal river. The complaint of the ghost
      of Patroclus to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own
      obsequies, shows how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his
      destroyer must have been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which,
      even after death, was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades.
      Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks
      pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession of his just rights
      of retribution."--Mure, vol. i. 289.

  297 Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.

        "Here, from the tow'r by stern Ulysses thrown,
        Andromache bewail'd her infant son."

                                           Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 675.

  298 The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant and
      interesting view of Helen's character--

      "Few things are more interesting than to observe how the same hand
      that has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us
      also the consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is through
      the Iliad a genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech, noble in
      her associations, full of remorse for a fault for which higher
      powers seem responsible, yet grateful and affectionate towards those
      with whom that fault had committed her. I have always thought the
      following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and hints at her own
      invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as almost the sweetest
      passage in the poem. It is another striking instance of that
      refinement of feeling and softness of tone which so generally
      distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the rest."--Classic
      Poets, p. 198, seq.

  299 "And here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to
      exalt and purify our impression of his character. We had accompanied
      him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of
      his stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full
      influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of
      his great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a
      few short days the mighty being in whom they were united was himself
      to be suddenly cut off in the full vigour of their exercise.

      The frequent and touching allusions, interspersed throughout the
      Iliad, to the speedy termination of its hero's course, and the moral
      on the vanity of human life which they indicate, are among the
      finest evidences of the spirit of ethic unity by which the whole
      framework of the poem is united."--Mure, vol. i. p 201.

  300 Cowper says,--"I cannot take my leave of this noble poem without
      expressing how much I am struck with the plain conclusion of it. It
      is like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has
      entertained magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not
      contemptuous, yet without much ceremony." Coleridge, p. 227,
      considers the termination of "Paradise Lost" somewhat similar.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER***



CREDITS


July 2004

            Posted to Project Gutenberg
            Anne Soulard,
            Juliet Sutherland,
            Charles Franks, and
            The Online Distributed Proofreading Team

September 2006

            Converted to PGTEI v.04
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 6130.txt or 6130.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/1/3/6130/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
