"But I am going," said Matilda

"But I will have up the drawbridge," said the baron.

"But I will swim the moat," said Matilda.

"But I will secure the gates," said the baron.

"But I will leap from the battlement," said Matilda.

"But I will lock you in an upper chamber," said the baron.

"But I will shred the tapestry," said Matilda, "and let myself down."

"But I will lock you in a turret," said the baron, "where you shall only
see light through a loophole."

"But through that loophole," said Matilda, "will I take my flight, like
a young eagle from its eerie; and, father, while I go out freely, I will
return willingly: but if once I slip out through a loop-hole----" She
paused a moment, and then added, singing,--

 The love that follows fain
     Will never its faith betray:
 But the faith that is held in a chain
 Will never be found again,
     If a single link give way.


The melody acted irresistibly on the harmonious propensities of the
friar, who accordingly sang in his turn,--

 For hark! hark! hark!
 The dog doth bark,
     That watches the wild deer's lair.
 The hunter awakes at the peep of the dawn,
 But the lair it is empty, the deer it is gone,
     And the hunter knows not where.

Matilda and the friar then sang together,--

 Then follow, oh follow! the hounds do cry:
 The red sun flames in the eastern sky:
     The stag bounds over the hollow.
 He that lingers in spirit, or loiters in hall,
 Shall see us no more till the evening fall,
 And no voice but the echo shall answer his call:
     Then follow, oh follow, follow:
     Follow, oh follow, follow!


During the process of this harmony, the baron's eyes wandered from his
daughter to the friar, and from the friar to his daughter again, with
an alternate expression of anger differently modified: when he looked
on the friar, it was anger without qualification; when he looked on
his daughter it was still anger, but tempered by an expression of
involuntary admiration and pleasure. These rapid fluctuations of the
baron's physiognomy--the habitual, reckless, resolute merriment in the
jovial face of the friar,--and the cheerful, elastic spirits that played
on the lips and sparkled in the eyes of Matilda,--would have presented a
very amusing combination to Sir Ralph, if one of the three images in
the group had not absorbed his total attention with feelings of intense
delight very nearly allied to pain. The baron's wrath was somewhat
counteracted by the reflection that his daughter's good spirits
seemed to show that they would naturally rise triumphant over all
disappointments; and he had had sufficient experience of her humour to
know that she might sometimes be led, but never could be driven. Then,
too, he was always delighted to hear her sing, though he was not at all
pleased in this instance with the subject of her song. Still he would
have endured the subject for the sake of the melody of the treble, but
his mind was not sufficiently attuned to unison to relish the harmony
of the bass. The friar's accompaniment put him out of all patience,
and--"So," he exclaimed, "this is the way, you teach my daughter to
renounce the devil, is it? A hunting friar, truly! Who ever heard
before of a hunting friar? A profane, roaring, bawling, bumper-bibbing,
neck-breaking, catch-singing friar?"

"Under favour, bold baron," said the friar; but the friar was warm
with canary, and in his singing vein; and he could not go on in plain
unmusical prose. He therefore sang in a new tune,--

 Though I be now a grey, grey friar,
     Yet I was once a hale young knight:
 The cry of my dogs was the only choir
     In which my spirit did take delight.
 Little I recked of matin bell,
     But drowned its toll with my clanging horn:
 And the only beads I loved to tell
     Were the beads of dew on the spangled thorn.


The baron was going to storm, but the friar paused, and Matilda sang in
repetition,--

 Little I reck of matin bell,
     But drown its toll with my clanging horn:
 And the only beads I love to tell
     Are the beads of dew on the spangled thorn.


And then she and the friar sang the four lines together, and rang the
changes upon them alternately.

 Little I reck of matin bell,

sang the friar.

"A precious friar," said the baron.


But drown its toll with my clanging horn, sang Matilda.

"More shame for you," said the baron.

 And the only beads I love to tell
     Are the beads of dew on the spangled thorn,

sang Matilda and the friar together.

"Penitent and confessor," said the baron: "a hopeful pair truly."

The friar went on,--

 An archer keen I was withal,
     As ever did lean on greenwood tree;
 And could make the fleetest roebuck fall,
     A good three hundred yards from me.
 Though changeful time, with hand severe,
     Has made me now these joys forego,
 Yet my heart bounds whene'er I hear
     Yoicks! hark away! and tally ho!


Matilda chimed in as before.

"Are you mad?" said the baron. "Are you insane? Are you possessed? What
do you mean? What in the devil's name do you both mean?"

 Yoicks! hark away! and tally ho!

roared the friar.

The baron's pent-up wrath had accumulated like the waters above the dam
of an overshot mill. The pond-head of his passion being now filled
to the utmost limit of its capacity, and beginning to overflow in the
quivering of his lips and the flashing of his eyes, he pulled up all
the flash-boards at once, and gave loose to the full torrent of his
indignation, by seizing, like furious Ajax, not a messy stone more than
two modern men could raise, but a vast dish of beef more than fifty
ancient yeomen could eat, and whirled it like a coit, in terrorem, over
the head of the friar, to the extremity of the apartment,

 Where it on oaken floor did settle,
 With mighty din of ponderous metal.


"Nay father," said Matilda, taking the baron's hand, "do not harm the
friar: he means not to offend you. My gaiety never before displeased
you. Least of all should it do so now, when I have need of all my
spirits to outweigh the severity of my fortune."

As she spoke the last words, tears started into her eyes, which, as if
ashamed of the involuntary betraying of her feelings, she turned away to
conceal. The baron was subdued at once. He kissed his daughter, held out
his hand to the friar, and said, "Sing on, in God's name, and crack away
the flasks till your voice swims in canary." Then turning to Sir Ralph,
he said, "You see how it is, sir knight. Matilda is my daughter; but she
has me in leading-strings, that is the truth of it."




CHAPTER V

     'T is true, no lover has that power
     To enforce a desperate amour
     As he that has two strings to his bow
     And burns for love and money too.--BUTLER.


The friar had often had experience of the baron's testy humour; but
it had always before confined itself to words, in which the habit of
testiness often mingled more expression of displeasure than the internal
feeling prompted. He knew the baron to be hot and choleric, but at the
same time hospitable and generous; passionately fond of his daughter,
often thwarting her in seeming, but always yielding to her in fact. The
early attachment between Matilda and the Earl of Huntingdon had given
the baron no serious reason to interfere with her habits and
pursuits, which were so congenial to those of her lover; and not being
over-burdened with orthodoxy, that is to say, not being seasoned with
more of the salt of the spirit than was necessary to preserve him from
excommunication, confiscation, and philotheoparoptesism, [1] he was not
sorry to encourage his daughter's choice of her confessor in brother
Michael, who had more jollity and less hypocrisy than any of his
fraternity, and was very little anxious to disguise his love of the good
things of this world under the semblance of a sanctified exterior. The
friar and Matilda had often sung duets together, and had been accustomed
to the baron's chiming in with a stormy capriccio, which was usually
charmed into silence by some sudden turn in the witching melodies of
Matilda. They had therefore naturally calculated, as far as their wild
spirits calculated at all, on the same effects from the same causes. But
the circumstances of the preceding day had made an essential alteration
in the case. The baron knew well, from the intelligence he had received,
that the earl's offence was past remission: which would have been of
less moment but for the awful fact of his castle being in the possession
of the king's forces, and in those days possession was considerably more
than eleven points of the law. The baron was therefore convinced
that the earl's outlawry was infallible, and that Matilda must either
renounce her lover, or become with him an outlaw and a fugitive. In
proportion, therefore, to the baron's knowledge of the strength and
duration of her attachment, was his fear of the difficulty of its ever
being overcome: her love of the forest and the chase, which he had never
before discouraged, now presented itself to him as matter of serious
alarm; and if her cheerfulness gave him hope on the one hand by
indicating a spirit superior to all disappointments, it was suspicious
to him on the other, as arising from some latent certainty of being soon
united to the earl. All these circumstances concurred to render
their songs of the vanished deer and greenwood archery and Yoicks and
Harkaway, extremely mal-a-propos, and to make his anger boil and bubble
in the cauldron of his spirit, till its more than ordinary excitement
burst forth with sudden impulse into active manifestation.

 But as it sometimes happens, from the might
     Of rage in minds that can no farther go,
 As high as they have mounted in despite
     In their remission do they sink as low,
 To our bold baron did it happen so. [2]


For his discobolic exploit proved the climax of his rage, and was
succeeded by an immediate sense that he had passed the bounds of
legitimate passion; and he sunk immediately from the very pinnacle of
opposition to the level of implicit acquiescence. The friar's spirits
were not to be marred by such a little incident. He was half-inclined,
at first, to return the baron's compliment; but his love of Matilda
checked him; and when the baron held out his hand, the friar seized it
cordially, and they drowned all recollection of the affair by pledging
each other in a cup of canary.

The friar, having stayed long enough to see every thing replaced on a
friendly footing, rose, and moved to take his leave. Matilda told him
he must come again on the morrow, for she had a very long confession
to make to him. This the friar promised to do, and departed with the
knight.

Sir Ralph, on reaching the abbey, drew his followers together, and
led them to Locksley Castle, which he found in the possession of his
lieutenant; whom he again left there with a sufficient force to hold it
in safe keeping in the king's name, and proceeded to London to report
the results of his enterprise.

Now Henry our royal king was very wroth at the earl's evasion, and swore
by Saint Thomas-a-Becket (whom he had himself translated into a saint by
having him knocked on the head), that he would give the castle and lands
of Locksley to the man who should bring in the earl. Hereupon ensued
a process of thought in the mind of the knight. The eyes of the fair
huntress of Arlingford had left a wound in his heart which only she who
gave could heal. He had seen that the baron was no longer very partial
to the outlawed earl, but that he still retained his old affection for
the lands and castle of Locksley. Now the lands and castle were very
fair things in themselves, and would be pretty appurtenances to an
adventurous knight; but they would be doubly valuable as certain
passports to the father's favour, which was one step towards that of the
daughter, or at least towards obtaining possession of her either quietly
or perforce; for the knight was not so nice in his love as to consider
the lady's free grace a sine qua non: and to think of being, by any
means whatever, the lord of Locksley and Arlingford, and the husband
of the bewitching Matilda, was to cut in the shades of futurity a vista
very tempting to a soldier of fortune. He set out in high spirits with
a chosen band of followers, and beat up all the country far and wide
around both the Ouse and the Trent; but fortune did not seem disposed
to second his diligence, for no vestige whatever could he trace of the
earl. His followers, who were only paid with the wages of hope, began to
murmur and fall off; for, as those unenlightened days were ignorant of
the happy invention of paper machinery, by which one promise to pay is
satisfactorily paid with another promise to pay, and that again with
another in infinite series, they would not, as their wiser posterity has
done, take those tenders for true pay which were not sterling; so that,
one fine morning, the knight found himself sitting on a pleasant bank of
the Trent, with only a solitary squire, who still clung to the shadow
of preferment, because he did not see at the moment any better chance of
the substance.

The knight did not despair because of the desertion of his followers: he
was well aware that he could easily raise recruits if he could once find
trace of his game; he, therefore, rode about indefatigably over hill
and dale, to the great sharpening of his own appetite and that of his
squire, living gallantly from inn to inn when his purse was full, and
quartering himself in the king's name on the nearest ghostly brotherhood
when it happened to be empty. An autumn and a winter had passed away,
when the course of his perlustations brought him one evening into a
beautiful sylvan valley, where he found a number of young women weaving
garlands of flowers, and singing over their pleasant occupation. He
approached them, and courteously inquired the way to the nearest town.

"There is no town within several miles," was the answer.

"A village, then, if it be but large enough to furnish an inn?"

"There is Gamwell just by, but there is no inn nearer than the nearest
town."

"An abbey, then?"

"There is no abbey nearer than the nearest inn."

"A house then, or a cottage, where I may obtain hospitality for the
night?"

"Hospitality!" said one of the young women; "you have not far to
seek for that. Do you not know that you are in the neighbourhood of
Gamwell-Hall?"

"So far from it," said the knight, "that I never heard the name of
Gamwell-Hall before."

"Never heard of Gamwell-Hall?" exclaimed all the young women together,
who could as soon have dreamed of his never having heard of the sky.

"Indeed, no," said Sir Ralph; "but I shall be very happy to get rid of
my ignorance."

"And so shall I," said his squire; "for it seems that in this case
knowledge will for once be a cure for hunger, wherewith I am grievously
afflicted."

"And why are you so busy, my pretty damsels, weaving these garlands?"
said the knight.

"Why, do you not know, sir," said one of the young women, "that
to-morrow is Gamwell feast?"

The knight was again obliged, with all humility, to confess his
ignorance.

"Oh! sir," said his informant, "then you will have something to see,
that I can tell you; for we shall choose a Queen of the May, and we
shall crown her with flowers, and place her in a chariot of flowers,
and draw it with lines of flowers, and we shall hang all the trees with
flowers, and we shall strew all the ground with flowers, and we shall
dance with flowers, and in flowers, and on flowers, and we shall be all
flowers."

"That you will," said the knight; "and the sweetest and brightest of
all the flowers of the May, my pretty damsels." On which all the pretty
damsels smiled at him and each other.

"And there will be all sorts of May-games, and there will be prizes for
archery, and there will be the knight's ale, and the foresters' venison,
and there will be Kit Scrapesqueak with his fiddle, and little Tom
Whistlerap with his fife and tabor, and Sam Trumtwang with his harp,
and Peter Muggledrone with his bagpipe, and how I shall dance with
Will Whitethorn!" added the girl, clapping her hands as she spoke, and
bounding from the ground with the pleasure of the anticipation.

A tall athletic young man approached, to whom the rustic maidens
courtesied with great respect; and one of them informed Sir Ralph that
it was young Master William Gamwell. The young gentleman invited and
conducted the knight to the hall, where he introduced him to the old
knight his father, and to the old lady his mother, and to the young lady
his sister, and to a number of bold yeomen, who were laying siege to
beef, brawn, and plum pie around a ponderous table, and taking copious
draughts of old October. A motto was inscribed over the interior door,--

EAT, DRINK, AND BE MERRY:

an injunction which Sir Ralph and his squire showed remarkable alacrity
in obeying. Old Sir Guy of Gamwell gave Sir Ralph a very cordial
welcome, and entertained him during supper with several of his best
stories, enforced with an occasional slap on the back, and pointed with
a peg in the ribs; a species of vivacious eloquence in which the old
gentleman excelled, and which is supposed by many of that pleasant
variety of the human spectes, known by the name of choice fellows and
comical dogs, to be the genuine tangible shape of the cream of a good
joke.




CHAPTER VI

     What! shall we have incision? shall we embrew?
     --Henry IV.


Old Sir Guy of Gamwell, and young William Gamwell, and fair Alice
Gamwell, and Sir Ralph Montfaucon and his squire, rode together the
next morning to the scene of the feast. They arrived on a village green,
surrounded with cottages peeping from among the trees by which the
green was completely encircled. The whole circle was hung round with one
continuous garland of flowers, depending in irregular festoons from the
branches. In the centre of the green was a May-pole hidden in boughs
and garlands; and a multitude of round-faced bumpkins and cherry-checked
lasses were dancing around it, to the quadruple melody of Scrapesqueak,
Whistlerap, Trumtwang, and Muggledrone: harmony we must not call it;
for, though they had agreed to a partnership in point of tune, each,
like a true painstaking man, seemed determined to have his time to
himself: Muggledrone played allegretto, Trumtwang allegro, Whistlerap
presto, and Scrapesqueak prestissimo. There was a kind of mathematical
proportion in their discrepancy: while Muggledrone played the tune four
times, Trumtwang played it five, Whistlerap six, and Scrapesqueak eight;
for the latter completely distanced all his competitors, and indeed
worked his elbow so nimbly that its outline was scarcely distinguishable
through the mistiness of its rapid vibration.

While the knight was delighting his eyes and ears with these pleasant
sights and sounds, all eyes were turned in one direction; and Sir Ralph,
looking round, saw a fair lady in green and gold come riding through the
trees, accompanied by a portly friar in grey, and several fair damsels
and gallant grooms. On their nearer approach, he recognised the lady
Matilda and her ghostly adviser, brother Michael. A party of foresters
arrived from another direction, and then ensued cordial interchanges of
greeting, and collisions of hands and lips, among the Gamwells and the
new-comers,--"How does my fair coz, Mawd?" and "How does my sweet coz,
Mawd?" and "How does my wild coz, Mawd?" And "Eh! jolly friar, your
hand, old boy:" and "Here, honest friar:" and "To me, merry friar:" and
"By your favour, mistress Alice:" and "Hey! cousin Robin:" and "Hey!
cousin Will:" and "Od's life! merry Sir Guy, you grow younger every
year,"--as the old knight shook them all in turn with one hand, and
slapped them on the back with the other, in token of his affection. A
number of young men and women advanced, some drawing, and others dancing
round, a floral car; and having placed a crown of flowers on Matilda's
head, they saluted her Queen of the May, and drew her to the place
appointed for the rural sports.

A hogshead of ale was abroach under an oak, and a fire was blazing in
an open space before the trees to roast the fat deer which the foresters
brought. The sports commenced; and, after an agreeable series of
bowling, coiling, pitching, hurling, racing, leaping, grinning,
wrestling or friendly dislocation of joints, and cudgel-playing or
amicable cracking of skulls, the trial of archery ensued. The conqueror
was to be rewarded with a golden arrow from the hand of the Queen of the
May, who was to be his partner in the dance till the close of the feast.
This stimulated the knight's emulation: young Gamwell supplied him with
a bow and arrow, and he took his station among the foresters, but had
the mortification to be out-shot by them all, and to see one of them
lodge the point of his arrow in the golden ring of the centre, and
receive the prize from the hand of the beautiful Matilda, who smiled on
him with particular grace. The jealous knight scrutinised the successful
champion with great attention, and surely thought he had seen that face
before. In the mean time the forester led the lady to the station. The
luckless Sir Ralph drank deep draughts of love from the matchless grace
of her attitudes, as, taking the bow in her left hand, and adjusting the
arrow with her right, advancing her left foot, and gently curving her
beautiful figure with a slight motion of her head that waved her black
feathers and her ringleted hair, she drew the arrow to its head, and
loosed it from her open fingers. The arrow struck within the ring of
gold, so close to that of the victorious forester that the points were
in contact, and the feathers were intermingled. Great acclamations
succeeded, and the forester led Matilda to the dance. Sir Ralph gazed
on her fascinating motions till the torments of baffled love and jealous
rage became unendurable; and approaching young Gamwell, he asked him
if he knew the name of that forester who was leading the dance with the
Queen of the May?
