
"Speak, and fear not."

"My father--hath aught been heard of him?  He promised, that ere the
fifth day were past, he would once more see his child; and, alas! that
date is past, and I am still alone in the dwelling of the stranger."

"Unhappy child!" muttered Isabel to herself; "thou knowest not his
treason nor his fate--yet why shouldst thou?  Ignorant of what would
render thee blest hereafter, continue ignorant of what would afflict thee
here.  Be cheered, maiden," answered the queen, aloud.  "No doubt, there
are reasons sufficient to forbid your meeting.  But thou shalt not lack
friends in the dwelling-house of the stranger."

"Ah, noble queen, pardon me, and one word more!  There hath been with me,
more than once, a stern old man, whose voice freezes the blood within my
veins; he questions me of my father, and in the tone of a foe who would
entrap from the child something to the peril of the sire.  That man--thou
knowest him, gracious queen--he cannot have the power to harm my father?"

"Peace, maiden! the man thou speakest of is the priest of God, and the
innocent have nothing to dread from his reverend zeal.  For thyself, I
say again, be cheered; in the home to which I consign thee thou wilt see
him no more.  Take comfort, poor child--weep not: all have their cares;
our duty is to bear in this life, reserving hope only for the next."

The queen, destined herself to those domestic afflictions which pomp
cannot soothe, nor power allay, spoke with a prophetic sadness which yet
more touched a heart that her kindness of look and tone had already
softened; and, in the impulse of a nature never tutored in the rigid
ceremonials of that stately court, Leila suddenly came forward, and
falling on one knee, seized the hand of her protectress, and kissed it
warmly through her tears.

"Are you, too, unhappy?" she said.  "I will pray for you to _my_ God!"

The queen, surprised and moved at an action which, had witnesses been
present, would only perhaps (for such is human nature) have offended her
Castilian prejudices, left her hand in Leila's grateful clasp; and laying
the other upon the parted and luxuriant ringlets of the kneeling maiden,
said, gently,--"And thy prayers shall avail thee and me when thy God and
mine are the same.  Bless thee, maiden!  I am a mother; thou art
motherless--bless thee!"




CHAPTER II.

THE TEMPTATION OF THE JEWESS,--IN WHICH THE HISTORY PASSES FROM THE
OUTWARD TO THE INTERNAL.

It was about the very hour, almost the very moment, in which Almamen
effected his mysterious escape from the tent of the Inquisition, that the
train accompanying the litter which bore Leila, and which was composed of
some chosen soldiers of Isabel's own body-guard, after traversing the
camp, winding along that part of the mountainous defile which was in the
possession of the Spaniards, and ascending a high and steep acclivity,
halted before the gates of a strongly fortified castle renowned in the
chronicles of that memorable war.  The hoarse challenge of the sentry,
the grating of jealous bars, the clanks of hoofs upon the rough pavement
of the courts, and the streaming glare of torches--falling upon stern and
bearded visages, and imparting a ruddier glow to the moonlit buttresses
and battlements of the fortress--aroused Leila from a kind of torpor
rather than sleep, in which the fatigue and excitement of the day had
steeped her senses.  An old seneschal conducted her, through vast and
gloomy halls (how unlike the brilliant chambers and fantastic arcades of
her Moorish home) to a huge Gothic apartment, hung with the arras of
Flemish looms.  In a few moments, maidens, hastily aroused from slumber,
grouped around her with a respect which would certainly not have been
accorded had her birth and creed been known.  They gazed with surprise at
her extraordinary beauty and foreign garb, and evidently considered the
new guest a welcome addition to the scanty society of the castle.  Under
any other circumstances, the strangeness of all she saw, and the frowning
gloom of the chamber to which she was consigned, would have damped the
spirits of one whose destiny had so suddenly passed from the deepest
quiet into the sternest excitement.  But any change was a relief to the
roar of the camp, the addresses of the prince, and the ominous voice and
countenance of Torquemada; and Leila looked around her, with the feeling
that the queen's promise was fulfilled, and that she was already amidst
the blessings of shelter and repose.  It was long, however, before sleep
revisited her eyelids, and when she woke the noonday sun streamed broadly
through the lattice.  By the bedside sat a matron advanced in years, but
of a mild and prepossessing countenance, which only borrowed a yet more
attractive charm from an expression of placid and habitual melancholy.
She was robed in black; but the rich pearls that were interwoven in the
sleeves and stomacher, the jewelled cross that was appended from a chain
of massive gold, and, still more, a certain air of dignity and command,--
bespoke, even to the inexperienced eye of Leila, the evidence of superior
station.
