stood on the shore till his figure grew dim before, me. There was that
in my eyes which prevented me from seeing him longer.


Brilliant as Sir Henry's success had been, it was achieved, as usual,
too late: and served but as a small set-off against the disaster of
Burgoyne which ensued immediately, and which our advance was utterly
inadequate to relieve. More than one secret messenger was despatched to
him who never reached him, and of whom we never learned the fate. Of
one wretch who offered to carry intelligence to him, and whom Sir
Henry despatched with a letter of his own, we heard the miserable
doom. Falling in with some of the troops of General George Clinton, who
happened to be in red uniform (part of the prize of a British ship's
cargo, doubtless, which had been taken by American privateers), the spy
thought he was in the English army, and advanced towards the sentries.
He found his mistake too late. His letter was discovered upon him, and
he had to die for bearing it. In ten days after the success at the Forts
occurred the great disaster at Saratoga, of which we carried the dismal
particulars in the fleet which bore us home. I am afraid my wife was
unable to mourn for it. She had her children, her father, her sister to
revisit, and daily and nightly thanks to pay to Heaven that had brought
her husband safe out of danger.




CHAPTER XCII. Under Vine and Fig-Tree


Need I describe, young folks, the delights of the meeting at home,
and the mother's happiness with all her brood once more under her fond
wings? It was wrote in her face, and acknowledged on her knees. Our
house was large enough for all, but Aunt Hetty would not stay in it. She
said, fairly, that to resign her motherhood over the elder children, who
had been hers for nearly three years, cost her too great a pang; and she
could not bear for yet a while to be with them, and to submit to take
only the second place. So she and her father went away to a house at
Bury St. Edmunds, not far from us, where they lived, and where she
spoiled her eldest nephew and niece in private. It was the year after we
came home that Mr. B, the Jamaica planter, died, who left her the half
of his fortune; and then I heard, for the first time, how the worthy
gentleman had been greatly enamoured of her in Jamaica, and, though she
had refused him, had thus shown his constancy to her. Heaven knows how
much property of Aunt Hetty's Monsieur Miles hath already devoured!
the price of his commission and outfit; his gorgeous uniforms; his
play-debts and little transactions in the Minories;--do you think,
sirrah, I do not know what human nature is; what is the cost of
Pall Mall taverns, petits soupers, play even in moderation--at the
Cocoa-Tree; and that a gentleman cannot purchase all these enjoyments
with the five hundred a year which I allow him? Aunt Hetty declares she
has made up her mind to be an old maid. "I made a vow never to marry
until I could find a man as good as my dear father," she said; "and I
never did, Sir George. No, my dearest Theo, not half as good; and Sir
George may put that in his pipe and smoke it."

And yet when the good General died (calm, and full of years, and glad to
depart), I think it was my wife who shed the most tears. "I weep because
I think I did not love him enough," said the tender creature: whereas
Hetty scarce departed from her calm, at least outwardly and before any
of us; talks of him constantly still, as though he were alive; recalls
his merry sayings, his gentle, kind ways with his children (when she
brightens up and looks herself quite a girl again), and sits cheerfully
looking up to the slab in church which records his name and some of his
virtues, and for once tells no lies.

I had fancied, sometimes, that my brother Hal, for whom Hetty had a
juvenile passion, always retained a hold of her heart; and when he came
to see us, ten years ago, I told him of this childish romance of Het's,
with the hope, I own, that he would ask her to replace Mrs. Fanny, who
had been gathered to her fathers, and regarding whom my wife (with
her usual propensity to consider herself a miserable sinner) always
reproached herself, because, forsooth, she did not regret Fanny enough.
Hal, when he came to us, was plunged in grief about her loss; and vowed
that the world did not contain such another woman. Our dear old General,
who was still in life then, took him in and housed him, as he had done
in the happy early days. The women played him the very same tunes which
he had heard when a boy at Oakhurst. Everybody's heart was very soft
with old recollections, and Harry never tired of pouring out his griefs
and his recitals of his wife's virtues to Het, and anon of talking
fondly about his dear Aunt Lambert, whom he loved with all his heart,
and whose praises, you may be sure, were welcome to the faithful old
husband, out of whose thoughts his wife's memory was never, I believe,
absent for any three waking minutes of the day.

General Hal went to Paris as an American General Officer in his blue and
yellow (which Mr. Fox and other gentlemen had brought into fashion here
likewise), and was made much of at Versailles, although he was presented
by Monsieur le Marquis de Lafayette to the Most Christian King and
Queen, who did not love Monsieur le Marquis. And I believe a Marquise
took a fancy to the Virginian General, and would have married him out of
hand, had he not resisted, and fled back to England and Warrington and
Bury again, especially to the latter place, where the folks would listen
to him as he talked about his late wife, with an endless patience and
sympathy. As for us, who had known the poor paragon, we were civil, but
not quite so enthusiastic regarding her, and rather puzzled sometimes to
answer our children's questions about Uncle Hal's angel wife.

The two Generals and myself, and Captain Miles, and Parson Blake (who
was knocked over at Monmouth, the year after I left America, and came
home to change his coat, and take my living), used to fight the battles
of the Revolution over our bottle; and the parson used to cry, "By
Jupiter, General" (he compounded for Jupiter, when he laid down his
military habit), "you are the Tory, and Sir George is the Whig! He is
always finding fault with our leaders, and you are for ever standing
up for them; and when I prayed for the King last Sunday, I heard you
following me quite loud."

"And so I do, Blake, with all my heart; I can't forget I wore his coat,"
says Hal.

"Ah, if Wolfe had been alive for twenty years more!" says Lambert.

"Ah, sir," cries Hal, "you should hear the General talk about him!"

"What General?" says I (to vex him).

"My General," says Hal, standing up, and filling a bumper. "His
Excellency General George Washington!"

"With all my heart," cry I, but the parson looks as if he did not like
the toast or the claret.

Hal never tired in speaking of his General; and it was on some such
evening of friendly converse, that he told us how he had actually been
in disgrace with this General whom he loved so fondly. Their difference
seems to have been about Monsieur le Marquis de Lafayette before
mentioned, who played such a fine part in history of late, and who hath
so suddenly disappeared out of it. His previous rank in our own service,
and his acknowledged gallantry during the war, ought to have secured
Colonel Warrington's promotion in the Continental army, where a
whipper-snapper like M. de Lafayette had but to arrive and straightway
to be complimented by Congress with the rank of Major-General. Hal,
with the freedom of an old soldier, had expressed himself somewhat
contemptuously regarding some of the appointments made by Congress, with
whom all sorts of miserable intrigues and cabals were set to work by
unscrupulous officers who were greedy of promotion. Mr. Warrington,
imitating perhaps in this the example of his now illustrious friend of
Mount Vernon, affected to make the war en gentilhomme took his pay, to
be sure, but spent it upon comforts and clothing for his men, and as for
rank, declared it was a matter of no earthly concern to him, and that he
would as soon serve as colonel as in any higher grade. No doubt he added
contemptuous remarks regarding certain General Officers of Congress
army, their origin, and the causes of their advancement: notably he
was very angry about the sudden promotion of the young French lad just
named--the Marquis, as they loved to call him--in the Republican army,
and who, by the way, was a prodigious favourite of the Chief himself.
There were not three officers in the whole Continental force (after
poor madcap Lee was taken prisoner and disgraced) who could speak the
Marquis's language, so that Hal could judge the young Major-General
more closely and familiarly than other gentlemen, including the
Commander-in-Chief himself. Mr. Washington good-naturedly rated friend
Hal for being jealous of the beardless commander of Auvergne; was
himself not a little pleased by the filial regard and profound
veneration which the enthusiastic young nobleman always showed for
him; and had, moreover, the very best politic reasons for treating the
Marquis with friendship and favour.

Meanwhile, as it afterwards turned out, the Commander-in-Chief was most
urgently pressing Colonel Warrington's promotion upon Congress; and, as
if his difficulties before the enemy were not enough, he being at this
hard time of winter entrenched at Valley Forge, commanding five or
six thousand men at the most, almost without fire, blankets, food, or
ammunition, in the face of Sir William Howe's army, which was perfectly
appointed, and three times as numerous as his own; as if, I say, this
difficulty was not enough to try him, he had further to encounter
the cowardly distrust of Congress, and insubordination and conspiracy
amongst the officers in his own camp. During the awful winter of '77,
when one blow struck by the sluggard at the head of the British forces
might have ended the war, and all was doubt, confusion, despair in the
opposite camp (save in one indomitable breast alone), my brother had an
interview with the Chief, which he has subsequently described to me,
and of which Hal could never speak without giving way to the deepest
emotion. Mr. Washington had won no such triumph as that which the
dare-devil courage of Arnold and the elegant imbecility of Burgoyne
had procured for Gates and the northern army. Save in one or two minor
encounters, which proved how daring his bravery was, and how unceasing
his watchfulness, General Washington had met with defeat after defeat
from an enemy in all points his superior. The Congress mistrusted
him. Many an officer in his own camp hated him. Those who had been
disappointed in ambition, those who had been detected in peculation,
those whose selfishness or incapacity his honest eyes had spied
out,--were all more, or less in league against him. Gates was the chief
towards whom the malcontents turned. Mr. Gates was the only genius fit
to conduct the war; and with a vaingloriousness, which he afterwards
generously owned, he did not refuse the homage which was paid him.

To show how dreadful were the troubles and anxieties with which General
Washington had to contend, I may mention what at this time was called
the "Conway Cabal." A certain Irishman--a Chevalier of St. Louis, and an
officer in the French service--arrived in America early in the year '77
in quest of military employment. He was speedily appointed to the rank
of brigadier, and could not be contented, forsooth, without an immediate
promotion to be major-general.

Mr. C. had friends at Congress, who, as the General-in-Chief was
informed, had promised him his speedy promotion. General Washington
remonstrated, representing the injustice of promoting to the highest
rank the youngest brigadier in the service; and whilst the matter was
pending, was put in possession of a letter from Conway to General Gates,
whom he complimented, saying, that "Heaven had been determined to save
America, or a weak general and bad councillors would have ruined it."
The General enclosed the note to Mr. Conway, without a word of comment;
and Conway offered his resignation, which was refused by Congress,
who appointed him Inspector-General of the army, with the rank of
Major-General.

"And it was at this time," says Harry (with many passionate exclamations
indicating his rage with himself and his admiration of his leader),
"when, by heavens, the glorious Chief was oppressed by troubles enough
to drive ten thousand men mad--that I must interfere with my jealousies
about the Frenchman! I had not said much, only some nonsense to Greene
and Cadwalader about getting some frogs against the Frenchman came to
dine with us, and having a bagful of Marquises over from Paris, as we
were not able to command ourselves;--but I should have known the Chief's
troubles, and that he had a better head than mine, and might have had
the grace to hold my tongue.

"For a while the General said nothing, but I could remark, by the
coldness of his demeanour, that something had occurred to create a
schism between him and me. Mrs. Washington, who had come to camp, also
saw that something was wrong. Women have artful ways of soothing men and
finding their secrets out. I am not sure that I should have ever tried
to learn the cause of the General's displeasure, for I am as proud as
he is, and besides" (says Hal), "when the Chief is angry, it was not
pleasant coming near him, I can promise you." My brother was indeed
subjugated by his old friend, and obeyed him and bowed before him as a
boy before a schoolmaster.

"At last," Hal resumed, "Mrs. Washington found out the mystery.
'Speak to me after dinner, Colonel Hal,' says she. 'Come out to the
parade-ground, before the dining-house, and I will tell you all.' I
left a half-score of general officers and brigadiers drinking round the
General's table, and found Mrs. Washington waiting for me. She then told
me it was the speech I had made about the box of Marquises, with which
the General was offended. 'I should not have heeded it in another,'
he had said, 'but I never thought Harry Warrington would have joined
against me.'

"I had to wait on him for the word that night, and found him alone at
his table. 'Can your Excellency give me five minutes' time?' I said,
with my heart in my mouth. 'Yes, surely, sir,' says he, pointing to the
other chair. 'Will you please to be seated?'

"'It used not always to be Sir and Colonel Warrington, between me and
your Excellency,' I said.

"He said, calmly, 'The times are altered.'

"'Et nos mutamur in illis,' says I. 'Times and people are both changed.'

"'You had some business with me?' he asked.

"'Am I speaking to the Commander-in-Chief or to my old friend?' I asked.

"He looked at me gravely. 'Well,--to both, sir,' he said. 'Pray sit,
Harry.'

"'If to General Washington, I tell his Excellency that I, and many
officers of this army, are not well pleased to see a boy of twenty made
a major-general over us, because he is a Marquis, and because he can't
speak the English language. If I speak to my old friend, I have to say
that he has shown me very little of trust or friendship for the last
few weeks; and that I have no desire to sit at your table, and have
impertinent remarks made by others there, of the way in which his
Excellency turns his back on me.'

"'Which charge shall I take first, Harry?' he asked, turning his chair
away from the table, and crossing his legs as if ready for a talk. 'You
are jealous, as I gather, about the Marquis?'

"'Jealous, sir!' says I. 'An aide-de-camp of Mr. Wolfe is not jealous of
a Jack-a-dandy who, five years ago, was being whipped at school!'

"'You yourself declined higher rank than that which you hold,' says the
Chief, turning a little red.

"'But I never bargained to have a macaroni Marquis to command me!' I
cried. 'I will not, for one, carry the young gentleman's orders; and
since Congress and your Excellency chooses to take your generals out
of the nursery, I shall humbly ask leave to resign, and retire to my
plantation.'

"'Do, Harry; that is true friendship!' says the Chief, with a gentleness
that surprised me. 'Now that your old friend is in a difficulty, 'tis
surely the best time to leave him.'

"'Sir!' says I.

"'Do as so many of the rest are doing, Mr. Warrington. Et tu, Brute,
as the play says. Well, well, Harry! I did not think it of you; but, at
least, you are in the fashion.'

"'You asked which charge you should take first?' I said.

"'Ch, the promotion of the Marquis? I recommended the appointment to
Congress, no doubt; and you and other gentlemen disapprove it.'

"'I have spoken for myself, sir,' says I.

"'If you take me in that tone, Colonel Warrington, I have nothing to
answer!' says the Chief, rising up very fiercely; 'and presume that
I can recommend officers for promotion without asking your previous
sanction.'

"'Being on that tone, sir,' says I, 'let me respectfully offer my
resignation to your Excellency, founding my desire to resign upon the
fact, that Congress, at your Excellency's recommendation, offers its
highest commands to boys of twenty, who are scarcely even acquainted
with our language.' And I rise up and make his Excellency a bow.

"'Great heavens, Harry!' he cries--(about this Marquis's appointment he
was beaten, that was the fact, and he could not reply to me), 'can't you
believe that in this critical time of our affairs, there are reasons why
special favours should be shown to the first Frenchman of distinction
who comes amongst us?'

"'No doubt, sir. If your Excellency acknowledges that Monsieur de
Lafayette's merits have nothing to do with the question.'

"'I acknowledge or deny nothing, sir!' says the General, with a stamp of
his foot, and looking as though he could be terribly angry if he would.
'Am I here to be catechised by you? Stay. Hark, Harry! I speak to you as
a man of the world--nay, as an old friend. This appointment humiliates
you and others, you say? Be it so! Must we not bear humiliation, along
with the other burthens and griefs, for the sake of our country? It is
no more just perhaps that the Marquis should be set over you gentlemen,
than that your Prince Ferdinand or your Prince of Wales at home should
have a command over veterans. But if in appointing this young nobleman
we please a whole nation, and bring ourselves twenty millions of allies,
will you and other gentlemen sulk because we do him honour? 'Tis easy to
sneer at him (though, believe me, the Marquis has many more merits
than you allow him); to my mind it were more generous, as well as more
polite, of Harry Warrington to welcome this stranger for the sake of the
prodigious benefit our country may draw from him--not to laugh at his
peculiarities, but to aid him and help his ignorance by your experience
as an old soldier: that is what I would do--that is the part I expected
of thee--for it is the generous and manly one, Harry: but you choose
to join my enemies, and when I am in trouble you say you will leave me.
That is why I have been hurt: that is why I have been cold. I thought
I might count on your friendship--and--and you can tell whether I was
right or no. I relied on you as on a brother, and you come and tell me
you will resign. Be it so! Being embarked in this contest, by God's will
I will see it to an end. You are not the first, Mr. Warrington, has left
me on the way.'

"He spoke with so much tenderness, and as he spoke his face wore such a
look of unhappiness, that an extreme remorse and pity seized me, and I
called out I know not what incoherent expressions regarding old times,
and vowed that if he would say the word, I never would leave him. You
never loved him, George," says my brother, turning to me, "but I did
beyond all mortal men; and, though I am not clever like you, I think my
instinct was in the right. He has a greatness not approached by other
men"

"I don't say no, brother," said I, "now."

"Greatness, pooh!" says the parson, growling over his wine.

"We walked into Mrs. Washington's tea-room arm-in-arm," Hal resumed;
"she looked up quite kind, and saw we were friends. 'Is it all over,
Colonel Harry?' she whispered. 'I know he has applied ever so often
about your promotion----'

"'I never will take it,' says I. And that is how I came to do penance,"
says Harry, telling me the story, "with Lafayette the next winter." (Hal
could imitate the Frenchman very well.) "'I will go weez heem,' says I.
'I know the way to Quebec, and when we are not in action with Sir Guy, I
can hear his Excellency the Major-General say his lesson.' There was no
fight, you know we could get no army to act in Canada, and returned to
headquarters; and what do you think disturbed the Frenchman most? The
idea that people would laugh at him, because his command had come to
nothing. And so they did laugh at him, and almost to his face too, and
who could help it? If our Chief had any weak point it was this Marquis.

"After our little difference we became as great friends as before--if
a man may be said to be friends with a Sovereign Prince, for as such I
somehow could not help regarding the General: and one night, when we
had sate the company out, we talked of old times, and the jolly days of
sport we had together both before and after Braddock's; and that pretty
duel you were near having when we were boys. He laughed about it, and
said he never saw a man look more wicked and more bent on killing than
you did: 'And to do Sir George justice, I think he has hated me ever
since,' says the Chief. 'Ah!' he added, 'an open enemy I can face
readily enough. 'Tis the secret foe who causes the doubt and anguish! We
have sat with more than one at my table to-day, to whom I am obliged to
show a face of civility, whose hands I must take when they are offered,
though I know they are stabbing my reputation, and are eager to pull me
down from my place. You spoke but lately of being humiliated because a
junior was set over you in command. What humiliation is yours compared
to mine, who have to play the farce of welcome to these traitors; who
have to bear the neglect of Congress, and see men who have insulted me
promoted in my own army? If I consulted my own feelings as a man, would
I continue in this command? You know whether my temper is naturally warm
or not, and whether as a private gentleman I should be likely to
suffer such slights and outrages as are put upon me daily; but in the
advancement of the sacred cause in which we are engaged, we have to
endure not only hardship and danger, but calumny and wrong, and may God
give us strength to do our duty!' And then the General showed me
the papers regarding the affair of that fellow Conway, whom Congress
promoted in spite of the intrigue, and down whose black throat John
Cadwalader sent the best ball he ever fired in his life.

"And it was here," said Hal, concluding his story, "as I looked at the
Chief talking at night in the silence of the camp, and remembered how
lonely he was, what an awful responsibility he carried, how spies and
traitors were eating out of his dish, and an enemy lay in front of him
who might at any time overpower him, that I thought, 'Sure, this is the
greatest man now in the world; and what a wretch I am to think of my
jealousies and annoyances, whilst he is walking serenely under his
immense cares!'"

"We talked but now of Wolfe," said I. "Here, indeed, is a greater than
Wolfe. To endure is greater than to dare; to tire out hostile fortune;
to be daunted by no difficulty; to keep heart when all have lost it; to
go through intrigue spotless; and to forgo even ambition when the end is
gained--who can say this is not greatness, or show the other Englishman
who has achieved so much?"

"I wonder, Sir George, you did not take Mr. Washington's side, and wear
the blue and buff yourself," grumbles Parson Blake.

"You and I thought scarlet most becoming to our complexion, Joe Blake!"
says Sir George. "And my wife thinks there would not have been room for
two such great men on one side."

"Well, at any rate, you were better than that odious, swearing, crazy
General Lee, who was second in command!" cries Lady Warrington. "And I
am certain Mr. Washington never could write poetry and tragedies as you
can! What did the General say about George's tragedies, Harry?"

Harry burst into a roar of laughter (in which, of course, Mr. Miles must
join his uncle).

"Well!" says he, "it's a fact that Hagan read one at my house to the
General and Mrs. Washington and several more, and they all fell sound
asleep!"

"He never liked my husband, that is the truth!" says Theo, tossing up
her head, "and 'tis all the more magnanimous of Sir George to speak so
well of him."

And then Hal told how, his battles over, his country freed, his great
work of liberation complete, the General laid down his victorious sword,
and met his comrades of the army in a last adieu. The last
British soldier had quitted the shore of the Republic, and the
Commander-in-Chief proposed to leave New York for Annapolis, where
Congress was sitting, and there resign his commission. About noon, on
the 4th December, a barge was in waiting at Whitehall Ferry to convey
him across the Hudson. The chiefs of the army assembled at a tavern near
the ferry, and there the General joined them. Seldom as he showed his
emotion, outwardly, on this day he could not disguise it. He filled a
glass of wine, and said, 'I bid you farewell with a heart full of love
and gratitude, and wish your latter days may be as prosperous and happy
as those past have been glorious and honourable.' Then he drank to them.
'I cannot come to each of you to take my leave,' he said, 'but shall be
obliged if you will each come and shake me by the hand.'

General Knox, who was nearest, came forward, and the Chief, with tears
in his eyes, embraced him. The others came, one by one, to him, and
took their leave without a word. A line of infantry was formed from the
tavern to the ferry, and the General, with his officers following him,
walked silently to the water. He stood up in the barge, taking off his
hat, and waving a farewell. And his comrades remained bareheaded on the
shore till their leader's boat was out of view.

As Harry speaks very low, in the grey of evening, with sometimes a break
in his voice, we all sit touched and silent. Hetty goes up and kisses
her father.

"You tell us of others, General Harry," she says, passing a handkerchief
across her eyes, "of Marion and Sumpter, of Greene and Wayne, and Rawdon
and Cornwallis, too, but you never mention Colonel Warrington!"

"My dear, he will tell you his story in private!" whispers my wife,
clinging to her sister, "and you can write it for him."

But it was not to be. My Lady Theo, and her husband too, I own, catching
the infection from her, never would let Harry rest, until we had coaxed,
wheedled, and ordered him to ask Hetty in marriage. He obeyed, and it
was she who now declined. "She had always," she said, "the truest regard
for him from the dear old times when they had met as almost children
together. But she would never leave her father. When it pleased God to
take him, she hoped she would be too old to think of bearing any other
name but her own. Harry should have her love always as the best of
brothers; and as George and Theo have such a nurseryful of children,"
adds Hester, "we must show our love to them, by saving for the young
ones." She sent him her answer in writing, leaving home on a visit to
friends at a distance, as though she would have him to understand that
her decision was final. As such Hal received it. He did not break his
heart. Cupid's arrows, ladies, don't bite very deep into the tough skins
of gentlemen of our age; though, to be sure, at the time of which I
write, my brother was still a young man, being little more than fifty.
Aunt Het is now a staid little lady with a voice of which years have
touched the sweet chords, and a head which Time has powdered over with
silver. There are days when she looks surprisingly young and blooming.
Ah me, my dear, it seems but a little while since the hair was golden
brown, and the cheeks as fresh as roses! And then came the bitter blast
of love unrequited which withered them; and that long loneliness of
heart which, they say, follows. Why should Theo and I have been so
happy, and thou so lonely? Why should my meal be garnished with love,
and spread with plenty, while yon solitary outcast shivers at my gate? I
bow my head humbly before the Dispenser of pain and poverty, wealth and
health; I feel sometimes as if, for the prizes which have fallen to the
lot of me unworthy, I did not dare to be grateful. But I hear the voices
of my children in their garden, or look up at their mother from my book,
or perhaps my sick-bed, and my heart fills with instinctive gratitude
towards the bountiful Heaven that has so blest me.


Since my accession to my uncle's title and estate my intercourse with
my good cousin Lord Castlewood had been very rare. I had always supposed
him to be a follower of the winning side in politics, and was not a
little astonished to hear of his sudden appearance in opposition. A
disappointment in respect to a place at court, of which he pretended to
have had some promise, was partly the occasion of his rupture with the
Ministry. It is said that the most August Person in the realm had flatly
refused to receive into the R-y-l Household a nobleman whose character
was so notoriously bad, and whose example (so the August Objector was
pleased to say) would ruin and corrupt any respectable family. I heard
of the Castlewoods during our travels in Europe, and that the mania for
play had again seized upon his lordship. His impaired fortunes having
been retrieved by the prudence of his wife and father-in-law, he had
again begun to dissipate his income at hombre and lansquenet. There
were tales of malpractices in which he had been discovered, and even of
chastisement inflicted upon him by the victims of his unscrupulous
arts. His wife's beauty and freshness faded early; we met but once at
Aix-la-Chapelle, where Lady Castlewood besought my wife to go and
see her, and afflicted Lady Warrington's kind heart by stories of the
neglect and outrage of which her unfortunate husband was guilty. We were
willing to receive these as some excuse and palliation for the unhappy
lady's own conduct. A notorious adventurer, gambler, and spadassin,
calling himself the Chevalier de Barry, and said to be a relative of
the mistress of the French King, but afterwards turning out to be an
Irishman of low extraction, was in constant attendance upon the Earl and
Countess at this time, and conspicuous for the audacity of his lies, the
extravagance of his play, and somewhat mercenary gallantry towards the
other sex, and a ferocious bravo courage, which, however, failed him
on one or two awkward occasions, if common report said true. He
subsequently married, and rendered miserable a lady of title and fortune
in England. The poor little American lady's interested union with Lord
Castlewood was scarcely more happy.

I remember our little Miles's infantile envy being excited by learning
that Lord Castlewood's second son, a child a few months younger than
himself, was already an ensign on the Irish establishment, whose pay the
fond parents regularly drew. This piece of preferment my lord must have
got for his cadet whilst he was on good terms with the Minister, during
which period of favour Will Esmond was also shifted off to New York.
Whilst I was in America myself, we read in an English journal that
Captain Charles Esmond had resigned his commission in his Majesty's
service, as not wishing to take up arms against the countrymen of his
mother, the Countess of Castlewood. "It is the doing of the old fox, Van
den Bosch," Madam Esmond said; "he wishes to keep his Virginian property
safe, whatever side should win!" I may mention, with respect to this
old worthy, that he continued to reside in England for a while after the
Declaration of Independence, not at all denying his sympathy with the
American cause, but keeping a pretty quiet tongue, and alleging that
such a very old man as himself was past the age of action or mischief,
in which opinion the Government concurred, no doubt, as he was left
quite unmolested. But of a sudden a warrant was out after him, when it
was surprising with what agility he stirred himself, and skipped off to
France, whence he presently embarked upon his return to Virginia.

The old man bore the worst reputation amongst the Loyalists of our
colony; and was nicknamed "Jack the Painter" amongst them, much to
his indignation, after a certain miscreant who was hung in England
for burning naval stores in our ports there. He professed to have
lost prodigious sums at home by the persecution of the Government,
distinguished himself by the loudest patriotism and the most violent
religious outcries in Virginia; where, nevertheless, he was not much
more liked by the Whigs than by the party who still remained faithful
to the Crown. He wondered that such an old Tory as Madam Esmond of
Castlewood was suffered to go at large, and was for ever crying out
against her amongst the gentlemen of the new Assembly, the Governor, and
officers of the State. He and Fanny had high words in Richmond one
day, when she told him he was an old swindler and traitor, and that the
mother of Colonel Henry Warrington, the bosom friend of his Excellency
the Commander-in-Chief, was not to be insulted by such a little
smuggling slave-driver as him! I think it was in the year 1780 an
accident happened, when the old Register Office at Williamsburg was
burned down, in which there was a copy of the formal assignment of the
Virginia property from Francis Lord Castlewood to my grandfather Henry
Esmond, Esquire. "Oh," says Fanny, "of course this is the work of Jack
the Painter!" And Mr. Van den Bosch was for prosecuting her for libel,
but that Fanny took to her bed at this juncture, and died.

Van den Bosch made contracts with the new Government, and sold them
bargains, as the phrase is. He supplied horses, meat, forage, all of bad
quality; but when Arnold came into Virginia (in the King's service) and
burned right and left, Van den Bosch's stores and tobacco-houses somehow
were spared. Some secret Whigs now took their revenge on the old rascal.
A couple of his ships in James River, his stores, and a quantity of his
cattle in their stalls were roasted amidst a hideous bellowing; and
he got a note, as he was in Arnold's company, saying that friends
had served him as he served others; and containing "Tom the Glazier's
compliments to brother Jack the Painter." Nobody pitied the old man,
though he went well-nigh mad at his loss. In Arnold's suite came
the Honourable Captain William Esmond, of the New York Loyalists, as
aide-de-camp to the General. When Howe occupied Philadelphia, Will was
said to have made some money keeping a gambling-house with an officer
of the dragoons of Anspach. I know not how he lost it. He could not have
had much when he consented to become an aide-de-camp of Arnold.

Now, the King's officers having reappeared in the province, Madam Esmond
thought fit to open her house at Castlewood and invite them thither--and
actually received Mr. Arnold and his suite. "It is not for me," she
said, "to refuse my welcome to a man whom my Sovereign has admitted to
grace." And she threw her house open to him, and treated him with great
though frigid respect whilst he remained in the district. The General
gone, and, his precious aide-de-camp with him, some of the rascals who
followed in their suite remained behind in the house where they had
received so much hospitality, insulted the old lady in her hall,
insulted her people, and finally set fire to the old mansion in a frolic
of drunken fury. Our house at Richmond was not burned, luckily, though
Mr. Arnold had fired the town; and thither the undaunted old lady
proceeded, surrounded by her people, and never swerving in her loyalty,
in spite of her ill-usage. "The Esmonds," she said, "were accustomed to
Royal ingratitude."

And now Mr. Van den Bosch, in the name of his grandson and my Lord
Castlewood, in England, set up a claim to our property in Virginia.
He said it was not my lord's intention to disturb Madam Esmond in her
enjoyment of the estate during her life, but that his father, it had
always been understood, had given his kinsman a life-interest in the
place, and only continued it to his daughter out of generosity. Now my
lord proposed that his second son should inhabit Virginia, for which
the young gentleman had always shown the warmest sympathy. The outcry
against Van den Bosch was so great that he would have been tarred and
feathered, had he remained in Virginia. He betook himself to Congress,
represented himself as a martyr ruined in the cause of liberty, and
prayed for compensation for himself and justice for his grandson.

My mother lived long in dreadful apprehension, having in truth a secret,
which she did not like to disclose to any one. Her titles were burned!
the deed of assignment in her own house, the copy in the Registry at
Richmond, had alike been destroyed--by chance? by villainy? who could
say? She did not like to confide this trouble in writing to me.
She opened herself to Hal, after the surrender of York Town, and he
acquainted me with the fact in a letter by a British officer returning
home on his parole. Then I remembered the unlucky words I had let slip
before Will Esmond at the coffee-house at New York; and a part of this
iniquitous scheme broke upon me.

As for Mr. Will: there is a tablet in Castlewood Church, in Hampshire,
inscribed, Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori, and announcing that
"This marble is placed by a mourning brother, to the memory of the
Honourable William Esmond, Esquire, who died in North America, in the
service of his King." But how? When, towards the end of 1781, a revolt
took place in the Philadelphia Line of the Congress Army, and Sir Henry
Clinton sent out agents to the mutineers, what became of them? The men
took the spies prisoners, and proceeded to judge them, and my brother
(whom they knew and loved, and had often followed under fire), who had
been sent from camp to make terms with the troops, recognised one of the
spies, just as execution was about to be done upon him--and the wretch,
with horrid outcries, grovelling and kneeling at Colonel Warrington's
feet, besought him for mercy, and promised to confess all to him. To
confess what? Harry turned away sick at heart. Will's mother and sister
never knew the truth. They always fancied it was in action he was
killed.

As for my lord earl, whose noble son has been the intendant of an
illustrious Prince, and who has enriched himself at play with his R---l
master: I went to see his lordship when I heard of this astounding
design against our property, and remonstrated with him on the matter.
For myself, as I showed him, I was not concerned, as I had determined
to cede my right to my brother. He received me with perfect courtesy;
smiled when I spoke of my disinterestedness; said he was sure of my
affectionate feelings towards my brother, but what must be his towards
his son? He had always heard from his father: he would take his Bible
oath of that: that, at my mother's death, the property would return to
the head of the family. At the story of the title which Colonel Esmond
had ceded, he shrugged his shoulders, and treated it as a fable. "On
ne fait pas de ces folies la!" says he, offering me snuff, "and your
grandfather was a man of esprit! My little grandmother was eprise of
him: and my father, the most good-natured soul alive, lent them the
Virginian property to get them out of the way! C'etoit un scandale, mon
cher, un joli petit scandale!" Oh, if my mother had but heard him! I
might have been disposed to take a high tone: but he said, with the
utmost good-nature, "My dear Knight, are you going to fight about the
character of our grandmother? Allons donc! Come, I will be fair with
you! We will compromise, if you like, about this Virginian property!"
and his lordship named a sum greater than the actual value of the
estate.

Amazed at the coolness of this worthy, I walked away to my coffee-house,
where, as it happened, an old friend was to dine with me, for whom I
have a sincere regard. I had felt a pang at not being able to give this
gentleman my living of Warrington--on-Waveney, but I could not, as he
himself confessed honestly. His life had been too loose, and his example
in my village could never have been edifying: besides, he would have
died of ennui there, after being accustomed to a town life; and he had
a prospect finally, he told me, of settling himself most comfortably in
London and the church. [He was the second Incumbent of Lady Whittlesea's
Chapel, Mayfair, and married Elizabeth, relict of Hermann Voelcker,
Esq., the eminent brewer.] My guest, I need not say, was my old friend
Sampson, who never failed to dine with me when I came to town, and I
told him of my interview with his old patron.

I could not have lighted upon a better confidant. "Gracious powers!"
says Sampson, "the man's roguery beats all belief! When I was secretary
and factotum at Castlewood, I can take my oath I saw more than once a
copy of the deed of assignment by the late lord to your grandfather:
'In consideration of the love I bear to my kinsman Henry Esmond,
Esq., husband of my dear mother Rachel, Lady Viscountess Dowager of
Castlewood, I, etc.'--so it ran. I know the place where 'tis kept--let
us go thither as fast as horses will carry us to-morrow. There is
somebody there--never mind whom, Sir George--who has an old regard for
me. The papers may be there to this very day, and O Lord, O Lord, but I
shall be thankful if I can in any way show my gratitude to you and your
glorious brother!" His eyes filled with tears. He was an altered man.
At a certain period of the port wine Sampson always alluded with
compunction to his past life, and the change which had taken place in
his conduct since the awful death of his friend Doctor Dodd.

Quick as we were, we did not arrive at Castlewood too soon. I was
looking at the fountain in the court, and listening to that sweet sad
music of its plashing, which my grandfather tells of in his memoires,
and peopling the place with bygone figures, with Beatrix in her beauty;
with my Lord Francis in scarlet, calling to his dogs and mounting
his grey horse; with the young page of old who won the castle and the
heiress--when Sampson comes running down to me with an old volume in
rough calf-bound in his hand, containing drafts of letters, copies
of agreements, and various writings, some by a secretary of my Lord
Francis, some in the slim handwriting of his wife my grandmother, some
bearing the signature of the last lord; and here was a copy of the
assignment sure enough, as it had been sent to my grandfather in
Virginia. "Victoria, Victoria!" cries Sampson, shaking my hand,
embracing everybody. "Here is a guinea for thee, Betty. We'll have a
bowl of punch at the Three Castles to-night!" As we were talking, the
wheels of postchaises were heard, and a couple of carriages drove into
the court containing my lord and a friend, and their servants in the
next vehicle. His lordship looked only a little paler than usual at
seeing me.

"What procures me the honour of Sir George Warrington's visit, and
pray, Mr. Sampson, what do you do here?" says my lord. I think he had
forgotten the existence of this book, or had never seen it; and when he
offered to take his Bible oath of what he had heard from his father, had
simply volunteered a perjury.

I was shaking hands with his companion, a nobleman with whom I had had
the honour to serve in America. "I came," I said, "to convince myself of
a fact, about which you were mistaken yesterday; and I find the proof
in your lordship's own house. Your lordship was pleased to take your
lordship's Bible oath, that there was no agreement between your father
and his mother, relative to some property which I hold. When Mr. Sampson
was your lordship's secretary, he perfectly remembered having seen a
copy of such an assignment, and here it is."

"And do you mean, Sir George Warrington, that unknown to me you have
been visiting my papers?" cries my lord.

"I doubted the correctness of your statement, though backed by your
lordship's Bible oath," I said with a bow.

"This, sir, is robbery! Give the papers back!" bawled my lord.

"Robbery is a rough word, my lord. Shall I tell the whole story to Lord
Rawdon?"

"What, is it about the Marquisate? Connu, connu, my dear Sir George! We
always called you the Marquis in New York. I don't know who brought the
story from Virginia."

I never had heard this absurd nickname before, and did not care
to notice it. "My Lord Castlewood," I said, "not only doubted, but
yesterday laid a claim to my property, taking his Bible oath that----"

Castlewood gave a kind of gasp, and then said, "Great heaven! Do you
mean, Sir George, that there actually is an agreement extant? Yes. Here
it is--my father's handwriting, sure enough! Then the question is clear.
Upon my o----well, upon my honour as a gentleman! I never knew of such
an agreement, and must have been mistaken in what my father said. This
paper clearly shows the property is yours: and not being mine--why, I
wish you joy of it!" and he held out his hand with the blandest smile.

"And how thankful you will be to me, my lord, for having enabled him to
establish the right," says Sampson, with a leer on his face.

"Thankful? No, confound you. Not in the least!" says my lord. "I am a
plain man; I don't disguise from my cousin that I would rather have
had the property than he. Sir George, you will stay and dine with us.
A large party is coming down here shooting; we ought to have you one of
us!"

"My lord," said I, buttoning the book under my coat, "I will go and get
this document copied, and then return it to your lordship. As my mother
in Virginia has had her papers burned, she will be put out of much
anxiety by having this assignment safely lodged."

"What, have Madam Esmond's papers been burned? When the deuce was that?"
asks my lord.

"My lord, I wish you a very good afternoon. Come, Sampson, you and I
will go and dine at the Three Castles." And I turned on my heel, making
a bow to Lord R------, and from that day to this I have never set my
foot within the halls of my ancestors.

Shall I ever see the old mother again, I wonder? She lives in Richmond,
never having rebuilt her house in the country. When Hal was in England,
we sent her pictures of both her sons, painted by the admirable Sir
Joshua Reynolds. We sate to him, the last year Mr. Johnson was alive, I
remember. And the Doctor, peering about the studio, and seeing the image
of Hal in his uniform (the appearance of it caused no little excitement
in those days), asked who was this? and was informed that it was the
famous American General--General Warrington, Sir George's brother.
"General Who?" cries the Doctor, "General Where? Pooh! I don't know such
a service!" and he turned his back and walked out of the premises. My
worship is painted in scarlet, and we have replicas of both performances
at home. But the picture which Captain Miles and the girls declare to be
most like is a family sketch by my ingenious neighbour, Mr. Bunbury, who
has drawn me and my lady with Monsieur Gumbo following us, and written
under the piece, "SIR GEORGE, MY LADY, AND THEIR MASTER."

Here my master comes; he has poked out all the house-fires, has looked
to all the bolts, has ordered the whole male and female crew to their
chambers; and begins to blow my candles out, and says, "Time, Sir
George, to go to bed! Twelve o'clock!"

"Bless me! So indeed it is." And I close my book, and go to my rest,
with a blessing on those now around me asleep.


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Virginians, by William Makepeace Thackeray

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIRGINIANS ***

***** This file should be named 8123.txt or 8123.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/1/2/8123/

Produced by Tapio Riikonen

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

