had acquired a slight knowledge of the English language from the
fishermen who frequented the island of Monhiggon near that shore. He
had been for several months residing among the Wampanoges; and on the
return of the Chief and his followers to the wigwams, he had heard from
the Squaw-Sachem, that two strangers, who, from her account, he
concluded to be Englishmen, had visited the encampment, and proposed to
do so again in two days. He had, therefore, by desire of the Chief,
Mooanam, come over to the British settlement, to assure the emigrants
of a friendly reception, and to conduct the embassy to the presence of
the Sagamore. His kind offices were gratefully and joyfully accepted by
the Governor; and Samoset remained that day as his guest. Although the
Indian's knowledge of English was very limited, the Pilgrim Fathers
learnt from him the name, and something of the history, of their
inveterate foes, the Nausetts; and also, that the commencement of their
enmity to the settlers arose not merely from their being intruders on
their domains, but from the remembrance of an injury which they had
received, some years previously, from an English captain of the name of
Hunt, who, when cruising on these shores, had allured a number of
natives on board his ship, and had then treacherously carried them off,
and sold the greater part of them at Malaga, as slaves. Two he took
with him to England, and they at length got back to Cape Cod Bay, in a
vessel belonging to the Plymouth Company. This scandalous action had
filled the Nausetts and Pokanokits,[*] who were the injured tribes,
with bitter hatred against the white men; and five years afterwards,
they would have sacrificed the life of Captain Dermer, when he was
skirting these shores, had he not been saved by Squanto, one of the
kidnapped Pokanokits, whom he had brought back in his vessel, and who
had become attached to the English.

[Footnote: The Pokanokit, dwelt on the peninsula which forms the Bay of
Cape Cod, and on a small pert or Rhode Island; the rest being occupied
by the Wampanoge; of whom Masasoyt was Grand Sagamore.]

The feeling of animosity thus engendered had been aggravated by the
slaughter of Tisquantum's only son; and little hope could be
entertained of establishing a friendly intercourse with a tribe who
felt that they had so much to revenge against the white race.

In two days, according to the intimation of Rodolph to the Indian
women, a deputation of the settlers, headed by Captain Standish, and
accompanied by Maitland, repaired to the Indian village under the
guidance of Samoset. They were expected by the inhabitants; and, as
soon as they were perceived approaching round the margin of the lake,
two young men came forth to meet them, and accompany them to the tent
of the Chief. Mooanam was prepared for their reception, and attired in
his gala costume of furs and feathers, with his most elaborately worked
battle-axe hung to his side, and a long and slender spear, tipped with
bone, in his hand.  He rose from his seat on the ground at the entrance
of the strangers, and greeted them courteously; while his wife, the
Squaw-Sachem Apannow, and his lively little son Nepea, stood by his
side, and smiled a welcome to Rodolph, pointing at the same time
significantly to the beads which adorned their necks and arms.

Standish had now an interpreter, though a very imperfect one; and by
his means a sort of friendly compact was formed, and gifts were
exchanged as the pledges of its sincerity. An invitation was then given
to the young Chief and to his brother Quadequina--who was one of those
who had conducted the white men to their presence--to return the visit
of the settlers, by coming the following day to their town. The
invitation was accepted, and the deputation returned to their homes,
escorted a great part of the by many of their Indian allies.

Great preparations were made at New Plymouth for the reception of the
red Chief and his attendants, in such a manner as to impress them with
the wealth and power of emigrants.  The large wooden building which was
intended as a sort of council chamber and public hall, was hung inside
with cloth and linen of various colors, and ornamented with swords, and
muskets, and pistols that the colony could produce. An elevated seat
was placed for the Governor at the upper end of the apartment, and
tables composed of long planks were laid down on each side, on which
were arranged such viands as the settlers could produce. The repast was
humble; but Helen and her female friends arranged it with taste, and
the children gathered the bright wild flowers that so early enliven the
groves and meadows when an American winter has passed away, to deck the
tables, and form garlands along the walls. A strange contrast did these
buds and blossoms of spring form to the implements of war and death
with which they were mingled: but the effect of the whole was gay, and
appeared very imposing to the simple children of the wilderness, as
they entered the wide portal, and passed up the hall to meet the
Puritan Governor.

John Carver and his attendants were clad in the dark-colored and sober
garments which were usually adopted by their sect; and their long
beards and grave countenances struck a feeling of awe and reverence
into their savage guests.  But the red men betrayed no embarrassment or
timidity.  They advanced with a step at once bold and graceful, and
even controlled their natural feeling of curiosity so far as to cast no
wandering glances at the novelties that surrounded them.  They kept
their eyes steadily fixed on the Governor, and returned his salutation
with a courteous dignity that did credit to their native breeding; and
then the Chief and Quadequina seated themselves on the high-backed
chairs that were placed for them on each side of the seat of the
President. Such a mode of sitting was certainly altogether new to these
sons of the forest, and they found it both awkward and disagreeable;
yet they showed no discomposure or restraint, and not a smile betrayed
their surprise, either at this or any other of the strange customs of
their hosts.

After a few rather amusing efforts to carry on a communication with his
guests, through the intervention of Samoset, Carver invited them to
table, and again had occasion to admire the readiness and the natural
grace with which they accommodated themselves to customs so new and so
wonderful as those of the white men. When the repast was concluded, the
President led Mooanam and his party round the village, and showed them
everything that was worthy of attention; and so intelligent did he find
them, that he had no difficulty in making them comprehend the use of
many European implements, and many of the inventions and contrivances
of civilized life. With much satisfaction the good pastor, Brewster,
marked the sparkling eyes and speaking countenances of these gentle
savages; for he there hoped he saw encouragement to his ardent hope of
ere long bringing them to a knowledge of the simple and saving truths
of the gospel. With the Governor's permission, he led them to the plain
and unadorned edifice which was the emigrants' place of worship, and
easily made them understand that it was dedicated to the service of the
one Great Spirit who reigns over all; and from thence they were
conducted to the cemetery, and shown, by expressive signs, the insult
that had been offered to the dead by men of their own race. Some war-
like implements that had been picked up after one of the recent
skirmishes were shown to Mooanam and his brother, when they instantly
exclaimed, 'Nausett!' and knitting their brows, and putting themselves
into an attitude of defiance, they plainly intimated that the tribe was
one with which they were at enmity.

They pointed in the direction where the Nausetts dwelt, and seemed to
invite the settlers to join them in assaulting their encampment; but
ignorance of their language, and of their habits prevented the
President from assenting to what appeared to be their earnest wish.

As the sickness that had so long raged in the colony had now nearly
disappeared, and the advance of the season promised soon to open
sources of plentiful provision in the and the fields and streams,
Brewster felt that he could be spared for a time from the settlement;
and he proposed to Mr. Carver that he should return with Mooanam to his
village, and endeavor to acquire such a knowledge of the native
language, as should enable hint to act as an interpreter, and also give
him the means of imparting to the red men the spiritual knowledge that
he so ardently desired to bestow. The Governor willingly consented to
this proposal; and when it was explained to the Indian Chief, he gave
the most cordial and ready assent. The mild yet dignified countenance
of the elder had won his respect and confidence; and he hoped to gain
as great advantages from a more intimate connection with the white men,
as they expected from his alliance and support.

Henrich was now able to leave his couch, and again to join Edith and
his young companions out of doors; but he still looked delicate, and
his former strength and activity had not fully returned. He was,
however, able to walk with the assistance of a crutch that his father
had made for him; and he formed one of the group that followed the
Indians in their procession through the village, and also escorted them
as far as the confines of the wood in whose depths their village lay.
The Chief remarked the boy, and showed sympathy for his lameness, which
he was given to understand was owing to an aggression of the Nausetts;
and his eyes flashed, and his nostrils dilated, and his whole
countenance was changed from its habitual expression of gentle dignity,
to one of fierce hostility. It was evident that, in these Wampanoges,
the settlers had secured allies who would be zealous and persevering in
protecting them from the attacks of their harassing enemies, the
Nausetts; and who would, when the proper time should arrive, assist
them in fleeing the district of such troublesome inhabitants.

The Indians returned to their wigwams, and the elder accompanied them,
and became an inmate of Mooanam's lodge. He soon began to acquire some
knowledge of the language of his host, and also to instruct him and his
wife in many English words and phrases, in which their aptitude to
learn astonished him. A constant communication was kept up between the
Indian village and that of the settlers, and a real regard and esteem
sprang up between them. As the spring advanced, Henrich was able to
throw aside his crutch, and to accompany his father and mother in their
frequent visits to the wigwams, and much of his leisure time was passed
in the company of the young Indians of his own age, whose activity and
address in all their sports and games he admired and emulated. The
presence of his friend Brewster in the Wampanoge village, also gave it
increased attractions in the eyes of Henrich.  The good man was still
his friend and preceptor; and with his assistance, he made considerable
progress in the acquirement of the native language, as well as in every
other kind of knowledge that Brewster was able to impart. But all the
elder's instructions were made subservient to that best of all
knowledge--the knowledge of God, and of his revealed Word; and in this
his pupil advanced and grew in a manner that both surprised and
delighted him. The boy's naturally thoughtful character had become
matured during his long and painful illness; and he had learnt to feel
the value of heavenly things, and the comparative littleness of all
'those things which are seen, and are temporal.'  He entered warmly
into all the elder's benevolent desires and intentions for the
conversion of the dark heathen among whom their lot was cast; and he
already looked forward to being his assistant in the holy work.
Brewster regarded him as destined to become both a pastor and a zealous
and successful missionary, when he should arrive at a proper age; and
he frequently spoke of him as his own appointed successor in the
spiritual direction of the congregation.

This sacred office Henrich anticipated with pride and satisfaction; for
where could he find a more fitting exercise for his adventurous and
enterprising spirit, and also for his love of the truth, than in
seeking the wild men amid their forests and wildernesses, and winning
them to peace, and happiness, and civilization, by the knowledge of the
all-powerful doctrines of the gospel?

With the Indians he soon became a great favorite; and the readiness
with which he acquired the use of the bow, and learnt to cast the dart,
and wield the light tomahawks that were used by the Indian boys to
practice their young hands, excited their warmest admiration, and made
them prophesy that he would one day become a distinguished Brave. His
skill in hunting and fishing also became considerable; and he learnt
from his copper-colored friends many of their songs and dances, with
which he delighted Edith and Ludovico at home.  His new companions did
not draw away his affections from his sister. She was still the object
of his warmest love; and to give her pleasure was the strongest desire
of his heart. In his long rambles with his Indian play-fellows he never
forgot his Edith; and many a stream was crossed, and many a rock was
climbed, to procure flowering plants to deck her garden, and creepers
to clothe the bower which he had formed for her beneath a venerable
walnut-tree that stood within their father's little domain, and at no
great distance from their dwelling.

An attempt had been made, at first, by the colonists to follow the
example of the primitive church at Jerusalem; and to hold the land of
which they had taken possession in common, to be worked by the whole
community, and the produce to be equally divided amongst their families
in due proportion.  But this plan was soon abandoned, as quite unsuited
to the habits and manners of these men of Britain; and every family had
a small portion, consisting of an acre each, assigned to it for the
special use and maintenance of its members. The fields in every
allotment had been sown chiefly with grain procured from the friendly
Wampanoges; and for some time past the Nausetts had left them
unmolested.

The knowledge which Brewster soon acquired of the soft 	and musical
language of the natives enabled him, with the assistance of Samoset,
who still resided among them, to transact all business between them and
his countrymen; and also to become acquainted with the history and
circumstances of these useful allies.  He learnt that Mooanam was not
the great Sachem or Sagamore of the whole tribe, but that he was the
eldest son of Masasoyt, the king or chief of the Wampanoges, who
resided at Packanokick, their principal village, which was situated in
the state of Rhode Island, near a mountain called Montaup, at a
considerable distance from Patupet, the native name for New Plymouth.

The means of a still more extended intercourse was about this time
opened to the settlers, by the arrival at New Plymouth of another
Indian, who was already acquainted with the English, and who was also a
much greater proficient in their language than their friend Samoset.
This was no other than Squanto, the man who had been taken prisoner by
Captain Hunt some years previous, and conveyed to England. During his
residence there, he had learnt to make himself understood in the white
man's tongue, and he had also learnt to admire and respect the white
man's character.  When, therefore, he had found his way hack to his
native land in a fishing vessel, and was informed by the Wampanoge
Sagamore--whom he visited in his journey to rejoin his own tribe--that
an English settlement had been formed on the shores of Cape Cod Bay, he
determined to visit it. Masasoyt encouraged him in this intention, and
sent him to his son Mooanam, to be introduced to the strangers, and to
assist in forming a permanent alliance with them.

These overtures were joyfully received by the Governor, Mr. Carver, and
he determined to take immediate advantage of this opportunity of adding
to the strength and security of the infant colony. The intended
departure of Samoset also made it very desirable to secure the
friendship and the services of the newcomer Squanto; as,
notwithstanding the progress which Winslow and some others were making
in the Wampanoge language, a native interpreter must long be required,
in order to carry on a mutual intercourse.

An embassy to the great Sagamore was therefore resolved on, with a view
to confirm and strengthen the alliance that had been formed with his
sons: and again Rodolph was selected  to accompany Captain Standish as
his aide-de-camp, while Samoset and Squanto were to act as interpreters.
The journey was long, and Maitland was obliged reluctantly to
refuse Henrich's request to attend him.  He feared the fatigue of so
many days' travelling on foot would be too much for his son's strength,
and Helen strongly opposed his going.  He therefore gave up the much
desired expedition, and endeavored to chase away his feeling of
disappointment by renewed exertions in ornamenting the garden, and
putting the grounds into a state of perfect order, to please his father
on his return.

The expedition was accompanied by the Sagamore's younger son,
Quadequina, who was anxious to introduce the new allies of his tribe to
his father, and to ensure their friendly reception.  They reached
Packanokick after a pleasant journey of about forty miles, and were
kindly welcomed by Masasoyt, to whom a messenger had been sent
beforehand to prepare him for their arrival.

The Sagamore was a noble-looking old man, and was treated by his son,
and by all his subjects, with the most profound respect; nor did his
strange costume in any way destroy his kingly appearance. His limbs
were naked, and were curiously painted and oiled, and his neck and arms
were decorated with strings of large white beads composed of polished
bone; while a richly embroidered bag or pouch, containing tobacco, was
suspended at the back of his neck. His coronet of feathers was lofty,
and of the most brilliant colors, and the rest of his dress consisted
of a tunic and moccasins of dressed deer skin, exquisitely worked with
colored grass and porcupine's quills. He willingly and fully ratified
the treaty which had been made by his sons with the white strangers,
whose appearance and manners seemed to prepossess him much in their
favor; and after detaining them for some days in his lodge, and
entertaining him with the greatest hospitality and kindness, he
dismissed them with presents of native manufacture, in return for the
European arms and ornaments which they had offered to his acceptance.
Samoset here left the settlers, and Squanto became henceforth their
faithful friend and useful interpreter.



CHAPTER IV

'In your patience possess ye your souls.'     LUKE, xxi 19.

One evening, about the time that Helen began to expect the return of
the embassy from Packanokick, Henrich was unusually busy in the garden,
arranging the flower-beds, and beautifying Edith's bower, in which he
and his sister had planned a little fete to welcome their father home.
Their mother had learnt to feel, that while they were thus employed,
and within the precincts of their own domain, they were safe from every
danger. The Nausetts had not attempted any depredations for an unusual
length of time; and a feeling of security and peace had taken the place
of that constant watchfulness and anxiety, which had long proved so
harassing to the settlers. They began to flatter themselves that their
foes had retired from the neighborhood, and would no more return to
molest them, now that they knew the emigrants to be on such friendly
terms with their powerful rivals, the Wampanoges. But false was this
appearance of security; and vain was every hope that the Nausetts would
forego their designs of vengeance, or cease to devise schemes of
mischief against those by whom they thought themselves injured! They
did not, indeed, continue to attack the settlement openly, for they had
been taught to dread the British fire-arms and the British courage; but
they still continued to lurk in the neighboring forest, and to keep a
vigilant watch over all that took place at the settlement.  Often were
the keen eyes of Coubitant and his most trusty followers fixed, with a
malignant gaze, on the dwelling of Rodolph and often were his
movements, and those of his family, carefully noted by these sagacious
savages, when no suspicion of their presence existed in the minds of
the settlers. They would climb by night to the summit of some lofty
tree that overlooked the village, and there remain all day unseen, to
obtain a knowledge of the habits and proceedings of their hated
enemies, and to devise plans for turning this knowledge to account.

The departure of the embassy to Packanokick was, consequently, well
known to Coubitant, and he resolved to take advantage of the absence of
so considerable a part of the British force, to execute, if possible,
his schemes of vengeance. What they were, and how he attempted their
accomplishment, will be presently seen.

Edith's bower looked gay with its spring blossoms and luxuriant
creepers, but Henrich was not quite satisfied with its appearance, and
he wished to place at its entrance a graceful climbing plant which he
had observed during his last walk to the Wampanoge village, and had
neglected to secure it on his return. It had been the desire of his
parents that he should not go into the forest which bordered their
grounds, except in the company of his father or some of his friends;
but the apparent departure of the Nausetts had caused this injunction
to be neglected of late, and he, and even his younger brother and
sister, had frequently strayed, unmolested, a short distance into the
wood, in search of flowers and fruits; and even Helen had ceased to
feel alarm.

'Edith,' said Henrich, on the evening of which we are speaking; 'I
think my father will return tonight, or tomorrow at the farthest; and I
must complete my task before he arrives. Your bower still requires a
few plants to adorn the entrance, and the seats of moss are scarcely
finished. Let us go into the wood, and procure what we want before the
sun sets, and our mother comes out to see what progress we have made.'

'No, Henrich,' replied his sister; 'do not go this evening. I know not
why, but the wood looks dark and gloomy; there is no sunlight on the
path, and the shadows are so deep, that I could fancy every low bush
was a crouching Indian. I cannot go into the wood tonight.'

'You are timid, dear Edith. You never feared to go with me before; and
why should you fear this evening? See, the sun is still high in the
horizon, and the darkness is all in your own fancy. Come and see that
lovely creeper I told you of; and when you have admired it hanging from
the decayed trunk of the old tree that supports it, you shall help me
to remove it to your bower, where it will be the fairest flower that
grows, except the little fairy queen herself.'

Henrich caught his sister's hand, and kissing her playfully, attempted
to draw her from the bower. But she looked sad and anxious, and
replied--

'O, Henrich! do not ask me; my bower is fair enough, and I would not go
as far as that old tree tonight, for all the flowers that grow in the
forest. Stay with me, Henrich, dear. Our mother will join us soon, and
she will be alarmed if you are not here.'

The boy looked at his sister's pensive face with an affectionate smile:
but he was not to be diverted from his scheme.

'Stay here, then, Edith,' he replied; 'and tell my mother that I shall
return in little more than ten minutes. Come, Ludovico,' he added,
calling his little brother, who was always ready to follow where
Henrich led. 'Come, Ludovico, you are not afraid of the shadows.  Bring
your basket, and you shall gather moss while I dig up my creeper. When
Edith sees its drooping white flowers, she will forgive me for laughing
at her unusual fears.'

Edith said no more.  She was sure that Henrich knew best; and she
silently watched him leave the garden, and enter the shade of the thick
forest, accompanied by her joyous little brother.  Were her fears,
indeed, the mere creation of her own young fancy I or were they
occasioned by one of those strange and unaccountable presentiments
which have been felt so frequently as to justify the old proverb,

