"You could not get as far. It is a long way, and a very rough walk."

The child shook back her curling hair defiantly.

"I could do it! I know I could. I could go half the way on my palfrey,
and walk the rest. You would help me. You know how well I can climb. Oh,
do take me -- do take me! I should so love to see an eagle's nest."

But still Llewelyn shook his head.

"Wendot would not let you go; he would say it was too dangerous."

Again came the little defiant toss.

"I am not Wendot's slave; I can do as I choose."

"If he finds out he will stop you."

"But we need not tell him, need we?"

"I thought you always told him everything."

The child stamped her little foot.

"I tell him things generally, but I can keep a secret. If he would stop
us from going, we will not tell him, nor Griffeth either. We will get up
very early and go by ourselves. We could do that, could we not, and come
back with the young eaglets in our hands? O let us go! let us do it
soon, and take me with you, kind Llewelyn! Indeed I shall not be in your
way. I will be very good. And you know you have taught me to climb so
well. I know I can go where you can go. You said so yourself once."

Llewelyn turned his head away to conceal a smile half of triumph, half
of contempt. A strange flash was in his eyes as he looked up the valley
towards the crag upon which he had told the child the eyry of the eagles
hung. She thought he was hesitating still, and laid a soft little hand
upon his arm.

"Please say that I may go."

He turned quickly and looked at her. For a moment she shrank back from
the strange glow in his eyes; but her spirit rose again, and she said
rather haughtily: "You need not be angry with me. If you don't wish me
to come I will stay at home with Wendot. I do not choose to ask favours
of anybody if they will not give them readily."

"I should like to take you if it would be safe," answered Llewelyn,
speaking as if ashamed of his petulance or reluctance.

"Howel, could she climb to the crag where we can look down upon the eyry
if we helped her up the worst places?"

"I think she could."

The child's face flushed; she clasped her hands together and listened
eagerly whilst the brothers discussed the plan which in the end was
agreed to -- a very early start secretly from the castle before the day
dawned, the chief point to be observed beforehand being absolute
secrecy, so that the projected expedition should not reach the ears
either of Wendot, his mother, or Griffeth. It was to be carried out
entirely by the twins themselves, with Gertrude as their companion.



    CHAPTER III. THE EAGLE'S CRAG.


"Where is the maid, mother?"

"Nay, I know not, my son. I thought she was with thee."

"I have not seen her anywhere. I have been busy with the men."

"Where are the other boys?"

"That I know not either. I have seen none since I rose this morning. I
have been busy."

"The maid had risen and dressed herself, and had slipped out betimes,"
said the Lady of Dynevor, as she took her place at the board. "Methought
she would be with thee. She is a veritable sprite for flitting hither
and thither after thee. Doubtless she is with some of the others. Who
knows where the boys have gone this morning? They are not wont to be
absent at the breakfast hour."

This last question was addressed to the servants who were at the lower
end of the board, and one of them spoke up in reply. By what he said it
appeared that Griffeth had started off early to fly a new falcon of his,
and it seemed probable that his brothers and little Lady Gertrude had
accompanied him; for whilst he had been discussing with the falconer the
best place for making the proposed trial, Llewelyn had been to the
stables and had saddled and led out the palfrey upon which their little
guest habitually rode, and there seemed no reason to doubt that all the
party had gone somewhere up upon the highlands to watch the maiden essay
of the bird.

"She would be sure to long to see the trial," said Wendot, attacking the
viands before him with a hearty appetite. "She always loves to go with
us when there is anything to see or hear. I marvel that she spoke not of
it to me, but perchance it slipped her memory."

The early risers were late at the meal, but no one was anxious about
them. When anything so engrossing as the flying of a young falcon was in
the wind, it was natural that so sublunary a matter as breakfast should
be forgotten. The servants had finished their meal, and had left the
table before there was any sign of the return of the wanderers, and then
it was only Griffeth who came bounding in, his face flushed and his eyes
shining as he caressed the hooded bird upon his wrist.

"He is a beauty, Wendot. I would thou hadst been there to see. I took
him up to --"

"Ay, tell us all that when thou hast had something to eat," said Wendot.
"And where is Gertrude? she must be well-nigh famished by this time."

"Gertrude? Nay, I know not. I have not seen her. I would not have
wearied her with such a tramp through the heavy dews."

"But she had her palfrey; Llewelyn led it away ere it was well light.
Were you not all together?"

"Nay, I was all alone. Llewelyn and Howel were off and away before I was
ready; for when I sought them to ask if they would come, they were
nowhere to be found. As for the maid, I never thought of her. Where can
they have taken her so early?"

A sudden look of anxiety crossed Wendot's face; but he repressed any
exclamation of dismay, and glanced at his mother to see if by any chance
she shared his feeling. But her face was calm and placid, and she said
composedly:

"If she is with Llewelyn and Howel she will be safe. They have taken her
on some expedition in secret, but none will harm her with two such stout
protectors as they."

And then the lady moved away to commence her round of household duties,
which in those days was no sinecure; whilst Wendot stood in the midst of
the great hall with a strange shadow upon his face. Griffeth, who was
eagerly discussing his breakfast, looked wonderingly at him.

"Brother, what ails thee?" he said at length; "thou seemest ill at ease."

"I am ill at ease," answered Wendot, and with a quick glance round him
to assure himself that there was no one by to hear, he approached
Griffeth with hasty steps and sat down beside him, speaking in a low,
rapid way and in English, "Griffeth, tell me, didst thou hear aught last
night ere thou fell asleep?"

"Ay, I heard Wenwynwyn singing to his harp in his own chamber, but
nought beside."

"I heard that too," said Wendot, "and for his singing I could not sleep;
so when it ceased not, I rose and stole to his room to ask him to
forbear, yet so wild and strange was the song he sang that at the door I
paused to listen; and what thinkest thou was the burden that he sang?"

"Nay, I know not; tell me."

"He sang a strange song that I have never heard before, of how a dove
was borne from safe shelter -- a young dove in the absence of the father
bird; not the mother bird, but the father -- and carried away to the
eagle's nest by two fierce young eaglets untamed and untamable, there to
be left till the kites come down to carry off the prize.

"Ha! thou startest and changest colour! What is it thou fearest? Where
are Llewelyn and Howell and what have they done with the maid? What
kuowest thou, Griffeth?"

"I know nought," answered Griffeth, "save that Wenwynwyn has been up to
the commot of Llanymddyvri, and thou knowest what all they of that place
feel towards the English. Then Llewelyn and Howel have been talking of
late of the eagle's nest on the crag halfway thither, and if they had
named it to Gertrude she would have been wild to go and see it. We know
when Wenwynwyn sings his songs how he ever calls Maelgon ap Caradoc the
kite, and the lords of Dynevor the eagles. But, Wendot, it could not be
-- a child -- a maid -- and our father's guest. I cannot believe it of
our own brothers."

"I know not what to think, but my heart misgives me. Thou knowest what
Llewelyn ever was, and Howel is but his shadow. I have mistrusted this
strange friendship before now, remembering what chanced that first day,
and that Llewelyn never forgives or forgets; but I would not have
dreamed of such a thing as this. Yet, Griffeth, if the thing is so,
there is no time to lose. I am off for the crag this very minute. Thou
must quietly collect and arm a few of our stanchest men, together with
the English servants left here with their young mistress. Let all be
done secretly and quietly, and come after me with all speed. It may be
that we are on a fool's errand, and that our fears are groundless. But
truly it may be that our brothers are about to betray our guest into the
hands of one of England's most bitter foes.

"Oh, methinks were her father to return, and I had her not safe to
deliver back to him, I would not for very shame live to see the day when
I must avow to him what had befallen his child at the hands of my brethren!"

Griffeth was fully alive to the possible peril menacing the child, and
eagerly took his orders from his elder brother. It would not be
difficult to summon some dozen of the armed men on the place to
accompany him quietly and secretly. They would follow upon Wendot's
fleet steps with as little delay as might be, and would at least track
the fugitive and her guides, whether they succeeded in effecting a
rescue that day or not.

Wendot waited for nothing but to give a few directions to his brother.
Scarce ten minutes had elapsed from the moment when the first
illumination of mind had come to him respecting some plot against the
life of an innocent child, before he had armed himself, and unleashed
two of the fleetest, strongest, fiercest of the hounds, and was speeding
up across the moor and fell towards the lonely crag of the eagle's nest,
which lay halfway between the castle of Dynevor and the abode of Maelgon
ap Caradoc.

There was one advantage Wendot possessed over his brothers, and that was
that he could take the wild-deer tracks which led straight onward and
upward, whilst they with their charge would have to keep to the winding
mule track, which trebled the distance. The maiden's palfrey was none
too clever or surefooted upon these rough hillsides, and their progress
would be but slow.

Wendot moved as if he had wings to his feet, and although the hot summer
sun began to beat down upon his head, and his breath came in deep,
laboured gasps, he felt neither heat nor fatigue, but pressed as eagerly
onwards and upwards as the strong, fleet hounds at his side.

He knew he was on the right track; for ever and anon his path would
cross that which had been trodden by the feet of the boys and the horse
earlier in the day, and his own quick eyes and the deep baying of the
hounds told him at once whenever this was the case. Upwards and onwards,
onwards and upwards, sprang the brave lad with the untiring energy of a
strong and righteous purpose. He might be going to danger, he might be
going to his death; for if he came into open collision with the wild and
savage retainers of Maelgon, intent upon obtaining their prey, he knew
that they would think little of stabbing him to the heart rather than be
balked. There was no feud so far between Llanymddyvri and Dynevor, but
Wendot knew that his father was suspected of leaning towards the English
cause, and that it would take little to provoke some hostile
demonstration on the part of his wild and reckless neighbour. The whole
country was torn and rent by internecine strife, and there was a chronic
state of semi-warfare kept up between half the nobles of the country
against the other half.

But of personal danger Wendot thought nothing. His own honour and that
of his father were at stake. If the little child left in their care were
treacherously given up to the foes of the English, the boy felt that he
should never lift up his head again. He must save her -- he would. Far
rather would he die in her defence than face her father with the story
of the base treachery of his brothers.

The path grew wilder and steeper; the vegetation became more scant. The
heat of the sun was tempered by the cold of the upper air. It was easier
to climb, and the boy felt that his muscles were made of steel.

Suddenly a new sound struck upon his ear. It was like the whinny of a
horse, only that there was in it a note of distress. Glancing sharply
about him, Wendot saw Lady Gertrude's small white palfrey standing
precariously on a ledge of rock, and looking pitifully about him, unable
to move either up or down. The creature had plainly been turned loose
and abandoned, and in trying to find his way home had stranded upon this
ledge, and was frightened to move a step. Wendot was fond of all
animals, and could not leave the pretty creature in such a predicament.

"Besides, Gertrude may want him again for the descent," he said; and
although every moment was precious, he contrived to get the horse up the
steep bank and on to better ground, and then tethered him on a small
grassy plateau, where he could feed and take his ease in safety for an
hour or two to come.

That matter accomplished, the lad was up and off again. He had now to
trust to the hounds to direct him, for he did not know what track his
brothers would have taken, and the hard rocks gave no indications which
he could follow. But the dogs were well used to their work, and with
their noses to the ground followed the trail unceasingly, indicating
from time to time by a deep bay that they were absolutely certain of
their direction.

High overhead loomed the apex of the great crag. Wendot knew that he had
not much farther to go. He was able to distinguish the cairn of stones
which he and his brothers had once erected on the top in honour of their
having made the ascent in a marvellously short space of time. Wendot had
beaten that record today, he knew; but his eyes were full of anxiety
instead of triumph. He was scanning every track and every inch of
distance for traces of the foe he felt certain were somewhere at hand.
Had they been here already, and had they carried off the prey? Or were
they only on their way, and had he come in time to thwart their purpose yet?

Ha! what was that?

Wendot had reached the shoulder of the mountain; he could see across the
valley -- could see the narrow winding track which led to the stronghold
of Maelgon. The Eagle's Crag, as it was called, fell away precipitously
on the other side. No one could scale it on that face. The path from the
upper valley wound round circuitously towards it; and along this path,
in the brilliant sunshine, Wendot saw distinctly the approach of a small
band of armed men. Yes: they were approaching, they were not retreating.
Then they had not already taken their prey; they were coming to claim
it. The boy could have shouted aloud in his triumph and joy; but he held
his peace, for who could tell what peril might not lie in the way?

The next moment he had scaled the steep, slippery rock which led to the
precipitous edge of the crag. Not a sign could he see of his brothers or
the child, but the hounds led right on to the very verge of the
precipice, and for a moment the boy's heart stood still. What if they
had grown afraid of the consequences of their own act, and had resolved
to get rid of the child in a sure and safe fashion!

For a moment Wendot's blood ran cold. He recalled the traits of fierce
