peril, had retired to rest; but we, who knew the portentous state of
things around us, could not have slept had we retired. Ever and anon
we looked forth from doors and windows into the black darkness
without; but although it was near midnight, neither sight nor sound
told of aught amiss, and we were beginning to yield to fatigue, when I
ascended the tower in company with Father Adhelm, to survey the scene
for the last time. It was so windy that we could hardly stand upon the
leaded roof, and although we gazed around, nought met our eyes until
we were on the point of returning.

"Listen!" said Father Adhelm, the subprior.

It was unnecessary. Borne upon the wind, a loud noise, as of men who
shout for mastery, met our ears, followed or intermingled with cries
for help or mercy--so we fancied at least.

While we stood rooted by horror to the spot, a bright light arose,
which rapidly increased, as a conflagration well might in such a wind,
and soon the whole horizon was illuminated. I knew but one homestead
in that direction--the fortified house of Anlaf.

I thought of the poor boy, with thankfulness that we had restrained
him from returning home. He is saved, at least, thought I, as a brand
from the burning.

The other brethren joined us, and after a short consultation, we
determined to go to the scene in a body, to mitigate the rage of the
people, and save life where we could.

So, putting our cowls over our heads, we sallied forth into the black
night--black and dark save where the light of the fire illumined the
horizon, and even cast a faint ray upon our own path. We were not used
to journeys in such weather, and I am afraid we made very slow
progress, but it was not for want of good will. The fire grew brighter
and brighter as we proceeded, and the shouts louder and louder. We
knew that Anlaf had a party of his countrymen, all of them obnoxious
to the English, and could easily understand that they had collected
themselves together for their own destruction. Yet, when we looked
around, we perceived by the blood-red reflection in the skies at other
points, that the same ruthless task was being carried out in many a
distant spot, as well as close at hand.

Reaching the bank of the river, we directed our course along its banks
until the dark forest closed in upon us, and rapid progress became
difficult. The trees were all rocking wildly in the wind, and here and
there a severed branch fell down before us. Occasionally a gust of
rain and hail descended. The path was wet and slippery. Poor Father
Adhelm groaned aloud. He had the podagra, (or gout), and ought not to
have ventured forth; but zeal would not let him rest.

"Verily our path is hedged about with thorns. It is hard to kick
against the pricks," said the chamberlain.

"It is God's work," said I, "and we may not falter."

Yet I felt my own heart weak.

But for the red light, which shone even through the shade of the
forest, we could not have pursued our path. But plainer and plainer
the wind brought the fierce shouts of the assailants to our ears,
until, emerging from a dark belt of underwood, the whole horror of the
scene burst upon us.

Before us, at the distance of a few hundred yards, defended by a mound
and a ditch, rose the irregular and fortified dwelling of Anlaf. It
was wrapped in flames from top to basement, and even as we looked one
of the towers gave way, and fell upon the hall beneath, with hideous
din, in headlong ruin.

Around the blazing pile stood some two or three hundred men, who
completely encircled it, and who had doubtless prevented the escape of
the inmates. We were evidently too late; the passive attitude of the
assailants showed that their bloody work was done.

We learned afterwards that the domestics, who were English serfs, had
betrayed the place to the foe, while the Danish lords were revelling
in the great hall, and half drunk with wine. Surprised at the banquet,
they fell an easy prey, and were slaughtered almost without
resistance, after which the house was plundered of everything worth
carrying away, and then set on fire in every part. Further details we
could not gather. All was over when we arrived.

Full of indignation, I and my brethren advanced straight upon the
group surrounding the sheriff, the crafty and cruel Edric Streorn, and
in the name of God denounced the cruelty and sin of which they had
been guilty.

"Sir monk," was the reply, "are you traitor to your king that you thus
league yourself with his deadly enemies? All that is done this night
is done by his order."

"God will avenge the deed," said I. "Ye have not fought like men, but
crept on like serpents, and slain those who, trusting to the faith of
Christians, dwelt blindly in our midst. And now, what can we say? How
can we hope to win our foes to God and Christ when we set at naught
his precepts and despise his example?"

"Sir monk, I have not time to listen to a homily; keep it for next
Sunday, when I will try to attend. For the present--"

Here he was interrupted by a loud cry which arose near us.

"The wolf cub! the wolf cub! Slay him, and the work is complete."

The cry, "Slay him! slay him!" was taken up by a dozen voices, when I
recognised Alfgar, who by some means had learned the danger of his
kinsfolk, and had come to share their fate.

"Save him, sheriff!" I cried; "save him! He is a Christian. His mother
was English."

And I rushed forward myself, and saw that the poor lad had already
been brought on his knees by more than one fell stroke.

I held up the crucifix, which hung at my girdle, on high; I threw my
arm over his head, and abjured them under the name of Christ, and as
they feared the curse of the Church, to forbear. My brethren all aided
me.

Sullenly they dropped their weapons, and the sheriff, coming forward,
seconded me, although in a very contemptuous manner.

"Let him have the lad for his share of the night's work," he said.

And so God gave me the poor lad's life.

I had scarcely time to lay him on a sloping bank, where the light
which shone so luridly from his burning home might fall upon him, when
my brother Elfwyn appeared on the scene with a score of his men.

He recognised us by our habits, and came and looked with me at the
orphan as he lay on the bank. The boy had received no serious wound,
but was exhausted, as much I thought by the violence of his emotions
as by his injuries. He was wet through; his clothes were torn with
brambles, for he had followed a straight path through six miles of
tangled forest, from Aescendune.

They had unfortunately given him a bed in a chamber which looked
towards his home: he had chanced to wake, had looked from the window,
seen the flames, and had started thither at once, swimming the moat
when he could not cross the drawbridge--suspecting, doubtless, that he
was surrounded by treachery.

I had already poured a rich cordial down his throat, and he was coming
to himself, my brother aiding me, when the sheriff, grand in his robe
and chain of office, came up.

"Good day, or rather night, to you, Thane of Aescendune," said he to
Elfwyn; "we have had a fair night's work, and destroyed a big wasp's
nest; have you come for your share in the spoil?"

"I only ask permission to preserve life; your work has been of an
opposite nature."

"Yes, we have been obedient to our king, and avenged him this night of
his enemies, who are also, I should have thought, the enemies of the
Church."

"God will not bless midnight murder," said I.

"Murder! it is not murder to slay heathen Danes; had they been
Christians it would, of course, have been a different thing."

"He hath made of one blood all the nations of the earth," I replied.

"The good prior wishes me to talk theology. Unfortunately I have much
work to do; you will hear tidings soon of other Danish holds than
this. The land may rejoice, freed from her oppressors, and they who
blame our work will praise its results."

"That remains to be seen," we both replied.

We had, meanwhile, placed Alfgar, now partially recovered, on a
palfrey; and, supported by my brother and me, one on each side, we led
him homewards. Arrived at the castle, we gave him to the care of
Osred, the domestic physician. He looked at the patient, and
pronounced a favourable opinion, saying that with time and care all
would be well. But his left arm was broken, and he had received a
slight blow on the head. Fever was the leech's chief apprehension; if
he could keep that off, he said he doubted not all would be well.

St. Andrew's Day.--

Our patient has lain some time in a state of delirium, whereat no one
could wonder. In his ravings he was incessantly acting over the scenes
through which he had passed during the dreadful night which followed
St. Brice's Day. But, thanks to a good constitution, today he has
taken a favourable turn, and seems likely to recover from a blow which
would have hopelessly shattered a frailer frame.

I was seated by his couch when he seemed to awake out of sleep, and I
saw his bright dark eyes fixed inquiringly on me.

"Where am I?" he inquired.

"In the Hall of Aescendune; you have been very ill here."

"Indeed! I have had such dreadful dreams!--but were they all dreams?"

"Your mind has been wandering for days, my dear son. You must not talk
too much."

He was silent, but evidently pondered more.

December 25, Christmas Day, 1003. {iv}--

All the household has given itself up to joy and gladness; even poor
Alfgar, who has been released today from the confinement of his
chamber, has entered into the general joy, although ever and anon
relapsing into sadness.

He knows all now: a day or two agone, when all the household had gone
to hunt in the woods, I was alone with him in his chamber, and thought
that at last I must discharge the painful task of telling him the
truth.

"My boy," I said, "you have not lately inquired about your father."

He looked at me very sadly.

"I know all," he said, "that you would tell me. I have no father, no
mother, no kinsfolk."

"Some of our people have told you then?"

"No. At first the events of that fearful night seemed all like a
dream, and mingled themselves with the strange spectres which haunted
me in delirium; but afterwards the real separated itself from the
unreal, and I knew that my father and all his friends, my Danish
uncles amongst them, had perished with the whole household assembled
there that fatal day. I also remembered, but faintly, how I came here.
Did not you save me from the murderers?"

I briefly explained the whole circumstances to him, adding such words
of consolation as I could think of, and telling him that he must
always look upon Aescendune as his home. At length he rose. He had not
replied.

"Pardon me, my father," he said, "but may I retire to my chamber? I
wish to say much, but I am too weak now."

"Meanwhile, you will not leave us?"

"I have no other home."

And he retired to his little chamber, from which he emerged no more
today.

Feast of the Epiphany.--

This day my catechumen Alfgar was baptized in the priory church. It
seemed useless to delay longer, as he was fully prepared both
intellectually and spiritually, nay, has been so for some time, only
the tragic event which deprived him of his Danish kinsfolk had
distracted him for a time from spiritual things. Nay, had he not been
surrounded by real Christians and loving friends here at Aescendune, I
fear the Church would have lost him altogether. Such a commentary was
the massacre of St. Brice on the Christian doctrine of love and
forgiveness! He felt it grievously at first, but he was able at length
to distinguish between men that say they are of Christ, and are not,
and those who really set the example of that Lord and his Saints
before them. He is now one of ourselves; a sheep safe in the fold, and
the dying wish of his sainted mother is fulfilled. My brother intends
to adopt him as a son, and as his family is small, the proposal meets
my approbation. Bertric and Ethelgiva already love him as a brother.



CHAPTER IV. THE DANES IN WESSEX.


Up to this period we have availed ourselves of extracts from the Diary
of Father Cuthbert; but the events of the following four years, as
recorded in that record, although full of interest for the antiquarian
or the lover of monastic lore, would possess scant interest for the
general reader, and have also little connection with the course of our
tale; therefore we will convey the information they contain, which
properly pertains to our subject, in few words, and those our own,
returning occasionally to the Diary.

The melancholy history of the times may be compressed, from the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and other sources, in a few paragraphs.

Burning with revenge--for his own sister had fallen in the massacre on
St. Brice's night--Sweyn returned to England the following year
(1003). He landed in Devonshire, took Exeter by storm, and returned to
his ships laden with the spoil. Then he sailed eastward, landed again
and ravaged Dorset and Wiltshire. Here the ealdorman Elfric met him
with a large English army; but when he saw the foe he fell sick, or
feigned to be so; and then the old proverb came true, "When the
general fails, the army quails." So the English looked on with fear
and trembling, while Sweyn burnt Wilton and Salisbury, whence he
returned to the sea laden with wealth and stained with blood; yet was
not his revenge satisfied.

The following year East Anglia suffered as Wessex had suffered the
year before. Ulfketyl, the ealdorman, gave them much money, hoping to
buy peace from the merciless pagans. The result was as he might have
expected. They took the money, laughing at his simplicity, and three
weeks afterwards pillaged Thetford, and burnt it. Then Ulfketyl, who
was a brave man, got an East Anglian army together, and fought the
Danes, giving them the uncommon chastisement of a defeat, so that they
escaped with difficulty to their ships.

The following year a famine so severe visited England, that even the
Danes forebore to ravage so poor a land; but in 1006, the next year,
they overspread Wessex like locusts. Here the action of our tale is
resumed.

During this interval of four years in Aescendune there had been peace.
Alfgar had been domesticated as one of the family, and was reported
well of in all the neighbourhood. Diligent in the discharge of his
religious duties, he was equally conspicuous in all warlike sports and
exercises and in the chase, while he afforded much help to Elfwyn the
thane in the management of the estate. In short, he had won his way to
the hearts of all the family; and perhaps the report that he was the
accepted suitor of the fair daughter of Aescendune, Ethelgiva, was not
without foundation.

Ethelgiva was nearly his own age, and was a perfect type of that
beauty which has ever distinguished the women of the Anglo-Saxon race.
Her fair hair, untouched by artificial adornment, hung like a shower
of gold around her shoulders, while her eyes were of that delicate
blue which seemed to reflect the deep summer sky; but the sweet
pensive expression of her face was that which attracted nearly all who
knew her, and made her the object of general regard.

Bertric was now about sixteen--a handsome, attractive boy, full of
life and fire, yet still possessing that devotion which Father
Cuthbert had remarked in him as a boy of twelve. As the heir to the
