and round him the young maids on every side danced in countless numbers
in their joy till he passed through the gates. And then they came to the
shore in smooth-running wains, bearing with them many gifts, when now he
had related from beginning to end the speech which Hypsipyle had spoken
when she summoned them; and the maids readily led the men back to their
homes for entertainment. For Cypris stirred in them a sweet desire, for
the sake of Hephaestus of many counsels, in order that Lemnos might be
again inhabited by men and not be ruined.

Thereupon Aeson's son started to go to the royal home of Hypsipyle; and
the rest went each his way as chance took them, all but Heracles; for he
of his own will was left behind by the ship and a few chosen comrades
with him. And straightway the city rejoiced with dances and banquets,
being filled with the steam of sacrifice; and above all the immortals
they propitiated with songs and sacrifices the illustrious son of Hera
and Cypris herself. And the sailing was ever delayed from one day to
another; and long would they have lingered there, had not Heracles,
gathering together his comrades apart from the women, thus addressed
them with reproachful words:

"Wretched men, does the murder of kindred keep us from our native land?
Or is it in want of marriage that we have come hither from thence, in
scorn of our countrywomen? Does it please us to dwell here and plough
the rich soil of Lemnos? No fair renown shall we win by thus tarrying so
long with stranger women; nor will some god seize and give us at our
prayer a fleece that moves of itself. Let us then return each to his
own; but him leave ye to rest all day long in the embrace of Hypsipyle
until he has peopled Lemnos with men-children, and so there come to him
great glory."

Thus did he chide the band; but no one dared to meet his eye or to utter
a word in answer. But just as they were in the assembly they made ready
their departure in all haste, and the women came running towards them,
when they knew their intent. And as when bees hum round fair lilies
pouring forth from their hive in the rock, and all around the dewy
meadow rejoices, and they gather the sweet fruit, flitting from one to
another; even so the women eagerly poured forth, clustering round the
men with loud lament, and greeted each one with hands and voice, praying
the blessed gods to grant him a safe return. And so Hypsipyle too
prayed, seizing the hands of Aeson's son, and her tears flowed for the
loss of her lover:

"Go, and may heaven bring thee back again with thy comrades unharmed,
bearing to the king the golden fleece, even as thou wilt and thy heart
desireth; and this island and my father's sceptre will be awaiting thee,
if on thy return hereafter thou shouldst choose to come hither again;
and easily couldst thou gather a countless host of men from other
cities. But thou wilt not have this desire, nor do I myself forbode that
so it will be. Still remember Hypsipyle when thou art far away and when
thou hast returned; and leave me some word of bidding, which I will
gladly accomplish, if haply heaven shall grant me to be a mother."

And Aeson's son in admiration thus replied: "Hypsipyle, so may all these
things prove propitious by the favour of the blessed gods. But do thou
hold a nobler thought of me, since by the grace of Pelias it is enough
for me to dwell in my native land; may the gods only release me from my
toils. But if it is not my destiny to sail afar and return to the land
of Hellas, and if thou shouldst bear a male child, send him when grown
up to Pelasgian Iolcus, to heal the grief of my father and mother if so
be that he find them still living, in order that, far away from the
king, they may be cared for by their own hearth in their home."

He spake, and mounted the ship first of all; and so the rest of the
chiefs followed, and, sitting in order, seized the oars; and Argus
loosed for them the hawsers from under the sea-beaten rock. Whereupon
they mightily smote the water with their long oars, and in the evening
by the injunctions of Orpheus they touched at the island of Electra,[1]
daughter of Atlas, in order that by gentle initiation they might learn
the rites that may not be uttered, and so with greater safety sail over
the chilling sea. Of these I will make no further mention; but I bid
farewell to the island itself and the indwelling deities, to whom belong
those mysteries, which it is not lawful for me to sing.

[Footnote 1: Samothrace.]

Thence did they row with eagerness over the depths of the black Sea,
having on the one side the land of the Thracians, on the other Imbros on
the south; and as the sun was just setting they reached the foreland of
the Chersonesus. There a strong south wind blew for them; and raising
the sails to the breeze they entered the swift stream of the maiden
daughter of Athamas; and at dawn the sea to the north was left behind
and at night they were coasting inside the Rhoeteian shore, with the
land of Ida on their right. And leaving Dardania they directed their
course to Abydus, and after it they sailed past Percote and the sandy
beach of Abarnis and divine Pityeia. And in that night, as the ship sped
on by sail and oar, they passed right through the Hellespont
dark-gleaming with eddies.

There is a lofty island inside the Propontis, a short distance from the
Phrygian mainland with its rich cornfields, sloping to the sea, where an
isthmus in front of the mainland is flooded by the waves, so low does it
lie. And the isthmus has double shores, and they lie beyond the river
Aesepus, and the inhabitants round about call the island the Mount of
Bears. And insolent and fierce men dwell there, Earthborn, a great
marvel to the neighbours to behold; for each one has six mighty hands to
lift up, two from his sturdy shoulders, and four below, fitting close to
his terrible sides. And about the isthmus and the plain the Doliones had
their dwelling, and over them Cyzicus son of Aeneus was king, whom
Aenete the daughter of goodly Eusorus bare. But these men the Earthborn
monsters, fearful though they were, in nowise harried, owing to the
protection of Poseidon; for from him had the Doliones first sprung.
Thither Argo pressed on, driven by the winds of Thrace, and the Fair
haven received her as she sped. There they cast away their small
anchorstone by the advice of Tiphys and left it beneath a fountain, the
fountain of Artacie; and they took another meet for their purpose, a
heavy one; but the first, according to the oracle of the Far-Darter, the
Ionians, sons of Neleus, in after days laid to be a sacred stone, as was
right, in the temple of Jasonian Athena.

Now the Doliones and Cyzicus himself all came together to meet them with
friendliness, and when they knew of the quest and their lineage welcomed
them with hospitality, and persuaded them to row further and to fasten
their ship's hawsers at the city harbour. Here they built an altar to
Ecbasian[1] Apollo and set it up on the beach, and gave heed to
sacrifices. And the king of his own bounty gave them sweet wine and
sheep in their need; for he had heard a report that whenever a godlike
band of heroes should come, straightway he should meet it with gentle
words and should have no thought of war. As with Jason, the soft down
was just blooming on his chin, nor yet had it been his lot to rejoice in
children, but still in his palace his wife was untouched by the pangs of
child-birth, the daughter of Percosian Merops, fair-haired Cleite, whom
lately by priceless gifts he had brought from her father's home from the
mainland opposite. But even so he left his chamber and bridal bed and
prepared a banquet among the strangers, casting all fears from his
heart. And they questioned one another in turn. Of them would he learn
the end of their voyage and the injunctions of Pelias; while they
enquired about the cities of the people round and all the gulf of the
wide Propontis; but further he could not tell them for all their desire
to learn. In the morning they climbed mighty Dindymum that they might
themselves behold the various paths of that sea; and they brought their
ship from its former anchorage to the harbour, Chytus; and the path they
trod is named the path of Jason.

[Footnote 1: i.e. god of disembarcation.]

But the Earthborn men on the other side rushed down from the mountain
and with crags below blocked up the mouth of vast Chytus towards the
sea, like men lying in wait for a wild beast within. But there Heracles
had been left behind with the younger heroes and he quickly bent his
back-springing bow against the monsters and brought them to earth one
after another; and they in their turn raised huge ragged rocks and
hurled them. For these dread monsters too, I ween, the goddess Hera,
bride of Zeus, had nurtured to be a trial for Heracles. And therewithal
came the rest of the martial heroes returning to meet the foe before
they reached the height of outlook, and they fell to the slaughter of
the Earthborn, receiving them with arrows and spears until they slew
them all as they rushed fiercely to battle. And as when woodcutters cast
in rows upon the beach long trees just hewn down by their axes, in order
that, once sodden with brine, they may receive the strong bolts; so
these monsters at the entrance of the foam-fringed harbour lay stretched
one after another, some in heaps bending their heads and breasts into
the salt waves with their limbs spread out above on the land; others
again were resting their heads on the sand of the shore and their feet
in the deep water, both alike a prey to birds and fishes at once.

But the heroes, when the contest was ended without fear, loosed the
ship's hawsers to the breath of the wind and pressed on through the
sea-swell. And the ship sped on under sail all day; but when night came
the rushing wind did not hold steadfast, but contrary blasts caught them
and held them back till they again approached the hospitable Doliones.
And they stepped ashore that same night; and the rock is still called
the Sacred Rock round which they threw the ship's hawsers in their
haste. Nor did anyone note with care that it was the same island; nor in
the night did the Doliones clearly perceive that the heroes were
returning; but they deemed that Pelasgian war-men of the Macrians had
landed. Therefore they donned their armour and raised their hands
against them. And with clashing of ashen spears and shields they fell on
each other, like the swift rush of fire which falls on dry brushwood and
rears its crest; and the din of battle, terrible and furious, fell upon
the people of the Doliones. Nor was the king to escape his fate and
return home from battle to his bridal chamber and bed. But Aeson's son
leapt upon him as he turned to face him, and smote him in the middle of
the breast, and the bone was shattered round the spear; he rolled
forward in the sand and filled up the measure of his fate. For that no
mortal may escape; but on every side a wide snare encompasses us. And
so, when he thought that he had escaped bitter death from the chiefs,
fate entangled him that very night in her toils while battling with
them; and many champions withal were slain; Heracles killed Telecles and
Megabrontes, and Acastus slew Sphodris; and Peleus slew Zelus and
Gephyrus swift in war. Telamon of the strong spear slew Basileus. And
Idas slew Promeus, and Clytius Hyacinthus, and the two sons of Tyndareus
slew Megalossaces and Phlogius. And after them the son of Oeneus slew
bold Itomeneus, and Artaceus, leader of men; all of whom the inhabitants
still honour with the worship due to heroes. And the rest gave way and
fled in terror just as doves fly in terror before swift-winged hawks.
And with a din they rushed in a body to the gates; and quickly the city
was filled with loud cries at the turning of the dolorous fight. But at
dawn both sides perceived the fatal and cureless error; and bitter grief
seized the Minyan heroes when they saw before them Cyzicus son of Aeneus
fallen in the midst of dust and blood. And for three whole days they
lamented and rent their hair, they and the Doliones. Then three times
round his tomb they paced in armour of bronze and performed funeral
rites and celebrated games, as was meet, upon the meadow-plain, where
even now rises the mound of his grave to be seen by men of a later day.
No, nor was his bride Cleite left behind her dead husband, but to crown
the ill she wrought an ill yet more awful, when she clasped a noose
round her neck. Her death even the nymphs of the grove bewailed; and of
all the tears for her that they shed to earth from their eyes the
goddesses made a fountain, which they call Cleite,[1] the illustrious
name of the hapless maid. Most terrible came that day from Zeus upon the
Doliones, women and men; for no one of them dared even to taste food,
nor for a long time by reason of grief did they take thought for the
toil of the cornmill, but they dragged on their lives eating their food
as it was, untouched by fire. Here even now, when the Ionians that dwell
in Cyzicus pour their yearly libations for the dead, they ever grind the
meal for the sacrificial cakes at the common mill.[2]

[Footnote 1: Cleite means illustrious.]

[Footnote 2: i.e. to avoid grinding it at home.]

After this, fierce tempests arose for twelve days and nights together
and kept them there from sailing. But in the next night the rest of the
chieftains, overcome by sleep, were resting during the latest period of
the night, while Acastus and Mopsus the son of Ampycus kept guard over
their deep slumbers. And above the golden head of Aeson's son there
hovered a halcyon prophesying with shrill voice the ceasing of the
stormy winds; and Mopsus heard and understood the cry of the bird of the
shore, fraught with good omen. And some god made it turn aside, and
flying aloft it settled upon the stern-ornament of the ship. And the
seer touched Jason as he lay wrapped in soft sheepskins and woke him at
once, and thus spake:

"Son of Aeson, thou must climb to this temple on rugged Dindymum and
propitiate the mother[1] of all the blessed gods on her fair throne, and
the stormy blasts shall cease. For such was the voice I heard but now
from the halcyon, bird of the sea, which, as as it flew above thee in
thy slumber, told me all. For by her power the winds and the sea and all
the earth below and the snowy seat of Olympus are complete; and to her,
when from the mountains she ascends the mighty heaven, Zeus himself, the
son of Cronos, gives place. In like manner the rest of the immortal
blessed ones reverence the dread goddess."

[Footnote 1: Rhea.]

Thus he spake, and his words were welcome to Jason's ear. And he arose
from his bed with joy and woke all his comrades hurriedly and told them
the prophecy of Mopsus the son of Ampycus. And quickly the younger men
drove oxen from their stalls and began to lead them to the mountain's
lofty summit. And they loosed the hawsers from the sacred rock and rowed
to the Thracian harbour; and the heroes climbed the mountain, leaving a
few of their comrades in the ship. And to them the Macrian heights and
all the coast of Thrace opposite appeared to view close at hand. And
there appeared the misty mouth of Bosporus and the Mysian hills; and on
the other side the stream of the river Aesepus and the city and Nepeian
plain of Adrasteia. Now there was a sturdy stump of vine that grew in
the forest, a tree exceeding old; this they cut down, to be the sacred
image of the mountain goddess; and Argus smoothed it skilfully, and they
set it upon that rugged hill beneath a canopy of lofty oaks, which of
all trees have their roots deepest. And near it they heaped an altar of
small stones, and wreathed their brows with oak leaves and paid heed to
sacrifice, invoking the mother of Dindymum, most venerable, dweller in
Phrygia, and Titias and Cyllenus, who alone of many are called
dispensers of doom and assessors of the Idaean mother,--the Idaean
Dactyls of Crete, whom once the nymph Anchiale, as she grasped with both
hands the land of Oaxus, bare in the Dictaean cave. And with many
prayers did Aeson's son beseech the goddess to turn aside the stormy
blasts as he poured libations on the blazing sacrifice; and at the same
time by command of Orpheus the youths trod a measure dancing in full
armour, and clashed with their swords on their shields, so that the
ill-omened cry might be lost in the air--the wail which the people were
still sending up in grief for their king. Hence from that time forward
the Phrygians propitiate Rhea with the wheel and the drum. And the
gracious goddess, I ween, inclined her heart to pious sacrifices; and
favourable signs appeared. The trees shed abundant fruit, and round
their feet the earth of its own accord put forth flowers from the tender
grass. And the beasts of the wild wood left their lairs and thickets and
came up fawning on them with their tails. And she caused yet another
marvel; for hitherto there was no flow of water on Dindymum, but then
for them an unceasing stream gushed forth from the thirsty peak just as
it was, and the dwellers around in after times called that stream, the
spring of Jason. And then they made a feast in honour of the goddess on
the Mount of Bears, singing the praises of Rhea most venerable; but at
dawn the winds had ceased and they rowed away from the island.

Thereupon a spirit of contention stirred each chieftain, who should be
the last to leave his oar. For all around the windless air smoothed the
swirling waves and lulled the sea to rest. And they, trusting in the
calm, mightily drove the ship forward; and as she sped through the salt
sea, not even the storm-footed steeds of Poseidon would have overtaken
her. Nevertheless when the sea was stirred by violent blasts which were
just rising from the rivers about evening, forspent with toil, they
ceased. But Heracles by the might of his arms pulled the weary rowers
along all together, and made the strong-knit timbers of the ship to
quiver. But when, eager to reach the Mysian mainland, they passed along
in sight of the mouth of Rhyndacus and the great cairn of Aegaeon, a
little way from Phrygia, then Heracles, as he ploughed up the furrows of
the roughened surge, broke his oar in the middle. And one half he held
in both his hands as he fell sideways, the other the sea swept away with
its receding wave. And he sat up in silence glaring round; for his hands
were unaccustomed to lie idle.

Now at the hour when from the field some delver or ploughman goes gladly
home to his hut, longing for his evening meal, and there on the
threshold, all squalid with dust, bows his wearied knees, and, beholding
his hands worn with toil, with many a curse reviles his belly; at that
hour the heroes reached the homes of the Cianian land near the
Arganthonian mount and the outfall of Cius. Them as they came in
friendliness, the Mysians, inhabitants of that land, hospitably
welcomed, and gave them in their need provisions and sheep and abundant
wine. Hereupon some brought dried wood, others from the meadows leaves
for beds which they gathered in abundance for strewing, whilst others
were twirling sticks to get fire; others again were mixing wine in the
bowl and making ready the feast, after sacrificing at nightfall to
Apollo Ecbasius.

But the son of Zeus having duly enjoined on his comrades to prepare the
feast took his way into a wood, that he might first fashion for himself
an oar to fit his hand. Wandering about he found a pine not burdened
with many branches, nor too full of leaves, but like to the shaft of a
tall poplar; so great was it both in length and thickness to look at.
And quickly he laid on the ground his arrow-holding quiver together with
his bow, and took off his lion's skin. And he loosened the pine from the
ground with his bronze-tipped club and grasped the trunk with both hands
at the bottom, relying on his strength; and he pressed it against his
broad shoulder with legs wide apart; and clinging close he raised it
from the ground deep-rooted though it was, together with clods of earth.
And as when unexpectedly, just at the time of the stormy setting of
baleful Orion, a swift gust of wind strikes down from above, and
wrenches a ship's mast from its stays, wedges and all; so did Heracles
lift the pine. And at the same time he took up his bow and arrows, his
lion skin and club, and started on his return.

Meantime Hylas with pitcher of bronze in hand had gone apart from the
throng, seeking the sacred flow of a fountain, that he might be quick in
drawing water for the evening meal and actively make all things ready in
due order against his lord's return. For in such ways did Heracles
nurture him from his first childhood when he had carried him off from
the house of his father, goodly Theiodamas, whom the hero pitilessly
slew among the Dryopians because he withstood him about an ox for the
plough. Theiodamas was cleaving with his plough the soil of fallow land
when he was smitten with the curse; and Heracles bade him give up the
ploughing ox against his will. For he desired to find some pretext for
war against the Dryopians for their bane, since they dwelt there
reckless of right. But these tales would lead me far astray from my
song. And quickly Hylas came to the spring which the people who dwell
thereabouts call Pegae. And the dances of the nymphs were just now being
held there; for it was the care of all the nymphs that haunted that
lovely headland ever to hymn Artemis in songs by night. All who held the
mountain peaks or glens, all they were ranged far off guarding the
woods; but one, a water-nymph was just rising from the fair-flowing
spring; and the boy she perceived close at hand with the rosy flush of
his beauty and sweet grace. For the full moon beaming from the sky smote
him. And Cypris made her heart faint, and in her confusion she could
scarcely gather her spirit back to her. But as soon as he dipped the
pitcher in the stream, leaning to one side, and the brimming water rang
loud as it poured against the sounding bronze, straightway she laid her
left arm above upon his neck yearning to kiss his tender mouth; and with
her right hand she drew down his elbow, and plunged him into the midst
of the eddy.

Alone of his comrades the hero Polyphemus, son of Eilatus, as he went
forward on the path, heard the boy's cry, for he expected the return of
mighty Heracles. And he rushed after the cry, near Pegae, like some
beast of the wild wood whom the bleating of sheep has reached from afar,
and burning with hunger he follows, but does not fall in with the
flocks; for the shepherds beforehand have penned them in the fold, but
he groans and roars vehemently until he is weary. Thus vehemently at
that time did the son of Eilatus groan and wandered shouting round the
spot; and his voice rang piteous. Then quickly drawing his great sword
he started in pursuit, in fear lest the boy should be the prey of wild
beasts, or men should have lain in ambush for him faring all alone, and
be carrying him off, an easy prey. Hereupon as he brandished his bare
sword in his hand he met Heracles himself on the path, and well he knew
him as he hastened to the ship through the darkness. And straightway he
told the wretched calamity while his heart laboured with his panting
breath.

"My poor friend, I shall be the first to bring thee tidings of bitter
woe. Hylas has gone to the well and has not returned safe, but robbers
have attacked and are carrying him off, or beasts are tearing him to
pieces; I heard his cry."

Thus he spake; and when Heracles heard his words, sweat in abundance
poured down from his temples and the black blood boiled beneath his
heart. And in wrath he hurled the pine to the ground and hurried along
the path whither his feet bore on his impetuous soul. And as when a bull
stung by a gadfly tears along, leaving the meadows and the marsh land,
and recks not of herdsmen or herd, but presses on, now without check,
now standing still, and raising his broad neck he bellows loudly, stung
by the maddening fly; so he in his frenzy now would ply his swift knees
unresting, now again would cease from toil and shout afar with loud
pealing cry.

