charge of the ordering of the crew. And I chose a hundred good men
whom I knew well, so that indeed I had the best ship and following
in Norway, as I thought. At least there were none better, unless
Harald Fairhair might match me.

Now there was one thing that pleased me not at this time, and that
was that Kolgrim, my comrade, never called me aught but "master"
since I came from Sigurd's presence--which is not the wont of our
free Norsemen with any man. Nor would he change it, though I was
angry, until I grew used to it in time.

"Call me not 'master,' Kolgrim, my comrade," I said; "it is
unfittinq for you."

At last he answered me in such wise that I knew it was of no more
use to speak of it.

"Master of mine you are, Ranald the king, since the day when you
dared more than I thought man might, while I lay like a beaten
hound outside, and dared not go within that place to see what had
become of you. Little comradeship was mine to you on that day, and
I am minded to make amends if I can. I think I may dare aught
against living men for you, though I failed at that mound. I will
give life for you, if I may."

I told him that what he had done was well done, and indeed he had
had courage to go where none else had dared; for I had ties of
friendship that made me bold to meet Jarl Sigurd, and might go
therefore where he might not. It was well that he did not come into
the presence of the dead.

"Therefore we are comrades, not master and man," I said.

"Nay, but master and man--lord and thrall," he answered.

So I must let him have his way, but he could not make me think of
him as aught but a good and brave comrade whom I loved well.

They hailed me as king when I went on board my ship for the first
time with my own men, as I have said. Then our best weapon smith
asked for gold from the men, and they gave what they had--it was in
plenty with us of Einar's following--and made a golden circlet
round my helm, that they might see it and follow it in battle.

It was good to wear the crown thus given willingly, but in the end
it sent me from north to south, as will be seen. That, however, is
a matter with which I will not quarrel, for it sent me to Alfred
the king.

We had left the firth two days, cruising slowly northward, when one
ship came from the north and met us, not flying from our fleet, but
bearing up to join us. And when she was close, there came a hail to
tell Einar that she bore a messenger from Harald the king in peace,
and presently we hove to while this messenger went on board the
Jarl's ship.

Then it seemed that Einar had been right, and that Harald would lay
a fine on the islands for Halfdan's slaying, and so give them back
to Einar to hold for him. The messenger was Thiodolf, Harald's own
scald, and he put the matter very plainly before the jarl, so that
he thought well of the offer, but would nevertheless not trust
himself in the king's power before all was certain, and confirmed
by oath. Whereon Thiodolf said that one must see the king on the
Jarl's part, and so I seemed the right man to go, as the jarl's
foster son and next in command to him.

"Nevertheless," said Thiodolf, "I would not advise you to sail in
Halfdan's ship, for that might wake angry thoughts, and trouble
would come especially as Halfdan took her without leave when he was
outlawed."

So I took the Jarl's cutter, manning her with enough men of my own
crew; and Kolgrim came with me, and we sailed to Kirkwall in
company with Thiodolf the scald.

Then when Thiodolf took me into his presence, I saw Harald Fairhair
for the first time, as he sat to receive Einar's messenger in the
great hall that Sigurd had built and which we had dwelt in. Then I
thought that never before could have been one more like a king.
Hereafter, when sagamen will sing of a king in some fancied story,
they will surely make him like King Harald of Norway. I myself have
little skill to say what he was like beyond this--that never had I
seen a more handsome man, nor bigger, nor stronger. King-like he
was in all ways, and his face was bright and pleasant, though it
was plain that it would be terrible if he was angry, or with the
light of battle upon it.

The hair, whence he had his name, was golden bright and shining,
and beard and eyebrows were of the same colour. But his eyes were
neither grey nor blue altogether, most piercing, seeming to look
straight into a man's heart, so that none dared lie to him.

I think that it is saying much for King Harald that, though his
arms and dress were wonderfully rich and splendid, one cared only
to look on his face; and that though many men of worth were on the
high place with him, there seemed to be none but he present.

When the scald told the king who I was, and what was my errand,
with all ceremony, he looked fixedly at me, so that I was ashamed,
and grew red under his gaze. Then he smiled pleasantly, and spoke
to me. His voice was as I thought to hear it--clear and steady, and
yet deep.

"So, Ranald Vemundsson, you are worthy of your father. It may be
that you bear me ill will on his account, but I would have you
forget the deeds done that Norway might be one, and the happier
therefor."

"Had my father been slain in fair fight, lord king," I said, "no
ill will had been thought of. It has not been in my mind that you
bade Rognvald slay him as he did. And that Jarl is dead, and the
feud is done with therefore. Jarl Einar is my foster father,
moreover."

"That is well said," answered Harald. "But I thought Sigurd must
have fostered you; he was ever a close friend of Vemund's."

I did not know why the king thought this, though the reason was at
my side; so I only said that my mother had given me to Einar's
keeping, and the king said no more at that time about it.

After that I gave the Jarl's messages, and the king heard them well
enough, though it seemed to Einar that the weregild to be paid was
over heavy, and he had bidden me tell Harald that it was so.
Therefore the king said that he would give me an answer on the
morrow, and I went away into the town well pleased with his kindly
way with me.

There was a feast made for me that night, and after it I must sit
still and hear the scalds sing of the deeds of Harald the king,
which was well enough. But then Thiodolf rose up and sang a great
saga about the winning of Sigurd's sword, wherein it seemed that I
had fought the dead jarl, and bale fires, and I know not what. He
had heard strange tales from Einar's men, if they told him all that
he sang.

Some men may be pleased to hear their own deeds sung of, with more
added thus; but I was not used to it, and the turning of all eyes
to me made me uncomfortable. But Harald had paid no sort of heed to
what they sang of him, and so I tried to look at my ease, and gave
the scald a bracelet when he ended.

"Overmuch make you of that matter, scald," said I quietly.

He laughed a little, and answered:

"One has to fill in what a warrior will not tell of himself."

Now the men shouted when I gave Thiodolf the bracelet, and Harald
looked quickly at me. Then I thought that maybe I had overdone the
gift, though Einar had ever told me that a good scald deserved good
reward, and Thiodolf was well known as the best in Norway. It was a
heavy ring, silver gilt, and of good design, that I took from the
same viking whose sword I gave to Sigurd.

"Overpaid am I," the scald said, putting it on his arm.

"You are the first who has ever sung of me," I answered; "and the
voice and tune were wonderful, if the saga was too strong for me."

Then Harald smiled again, and praised Thiodolf also, and I thought
no more of the matter. The feast was pleasant enough in the hall,
full of Harald's best men and chiefs, though it seemed strange to
sit as a guest in Einar's house.

Now on the next morning I was to speak with the king about Einar's
business, and I went to him unarmed, as was right, save for helm
and Sigurd's sword. He was in the jarl's own chamber, and with him
were Thiodolf and a young scald named Harek, who sat with things
for writing before him, which was what I had never seen before.

We talked for some time, and all went well for peace; but one more
message was to go and come between the king and Einar, and so I
said I would sail at once.

"Not so much need for haste but that you can bide here for a day or
two," Harald said. "I will not have you complain of my hospitality
hereafter. And Thiodolf and Harek here want to learn more about
Sigurd's sword and its winning."

"If I tell them the truth, I shall spoil their saga, lord king!" I
said, laughing.

"Trust the scalds to mind you do not," he answered. "There are
times when I have to ask them which of my own doings they are
singing about now. But is there no wonder in the tale?"

So I told him just how the matter was. And when he heard of the
noise, and the stroke with which the ships were smitten, he said,
looking troubled, as I thought:

"Sigurd is stronger now that he is dead than when he lived. We felt
that stroke even here."

But when I told how I had seen the dead jarl, his face grew
thoughtful, and at last he said:

"So shall I lie some day in a grave mound. It is passing strange to
think on. I would that if one comes to my side he may step gently
as you, Ranald Vemundsson."

"Else will that comer fare ill," said Thiodolf.

The king glanced up at him, and his face changed, and he said,
smiling grimly:

"Maybe. I think none will win my sword from me."

Then he had Kolgrim sent for, and Thord, and they told him truly
what they had seen, and how they had fared in the matter.

"You are a truth teller, Kolgrim the Tall," Harald said. "Now if
you will leave Einar's service and come and be of my courtmen, I
will speak to the jarl and make matters right with him, and it
shall be worth your while."

Then my comrade answered plainly:

"I am no jarl's man now, King Harald; I belong to King Ranald here,
and I will not leave him."

"So," said Harald, knitting his brows suddenly, "we have two kings
in the room, as it seems; and you dare choose another instead of
me."

"Not so, King Harald," Kolgrim answered, with all respect; "I chose
between the jarl and my king. If there is peace between you and the
jarl, I suppose we are all your men."

Now Harald's face was growing black, and I could see that his anger
was rising. But he stayed what words he was about to speak, and
only said:

"Jarl Einar is well served when he has a king in his train."

Then he rose up and turned to Thiodolf, who was looking anxious.

"Bid King Ranald to the feast tonight. He knows my words to Einar
his foster father, and I have no more to say."

So I was dismissed, and was not sorry to be outside the hall.

"Let us get down to the ship," said Thord. "Here is trouble
brewing, as I think."

So we went on board, and I wished that we might go. Yet the king
had bidden me stay, and I had no reason for what would be
discourteous at least, if it did not look like flight. What the
trouble was we could hardly understand.

In an hour's time or so I saw Thiodolf and the young scald Harek
coming along the wharf and towards our ship, which lay clear of
Harald's vessels, and next the harbour mouth. They came over the
gang plank, and I welcomed them, but I saw that they had somewhat
special to say to me.

They sat down under the after awning with me, and at once Thiodolf
said:

"That was an unlucky speech of your comrade's just now. No man
dares name himself king in Harald's presence--not even his own
sons. It is the one thing that he will not bear."

"So it seemed," said I; "and, in truth, he had enough trouble with
under kings not long since. But he knows what a sea king is--no
king at all, so to speak. He need not grudge the old title."

"That is not all," Thiodolf said. "It is in his mind that he has to
guard yet against risings of men of the old families of the kings,
and thinks you are likely to give him trouble. Maybe the portent of
the blow that spread from Sigurd's tomb to us has seemed much to
him. 'Here,' he says, 'is one who will gather masterless men to him
in crowds because he wears Sigurd's sword and ring, and has gained
with them the name of a hero. Already he has two of Einar's best
men at his heels. Yet I like him well enough, and I have no fault
to find with him, save that he puts a gold circle round his helm
and is called king--as he would have been but for me. Go to him,
therefore, and tell him to keep out of my way. I will not have two
kings in Norway.'"

"Well," I said, "that is plain speaking. But I cannot help what the
men call me. The king makes overmuch of the business. I am not
foolish enough to try to overturn Harald Fairhair."

"Maybe," said Thiodolf, "but those are his words. I rede you get
away quickly on the next tide."

"Ay," said Harek. "Harald is mild of mood now, because you made no
secret of what men call you. Five years ago you would not have
escaped hence at all."

"Then," said I, "I will go. I think you are right. Vemund's son
troubles Harald;" and I laughed, and added, "I have to thank you
for kindly counsel, scalds, as I think. Farewell. Tide serves at
any time now, and I will get my men and be gone."

"That is wise," they answered. "Einar must find some other
messenger, if he comes not himself, after you return."

They went, and I called two or three men and sent them into the
town for their comrades who were at friends' houses and in the
guest house where we were lodged, while Kolgrim made ready for
instant sailing.

The next thing that I was ware of was that there was a fight on the
wharf end next the town, and men were running to it. Then I heard
my own name shouted on one part, and that of Eric, the king's young
son, on the other. So I was going to lead down twenty men to quiet
the scuffle, when my people had the best of the matter, and broke
through the throng, cheering, and came on to me. The rest did not
follow them, for they saw that I was coming, and the wharf was
clear behind them but for three of their foes who stayed where they
had fallen.

Then another man broke away from the crowd, and came running after
