equally with the workers, but Smith took care that there should be few
drones. There can be no doubt that his sheer will power kept the colony
together, but his credit with the company was undermined by enemies in
England, nor did his own blunt letter help matters. The company was
re-organized on a larger scale, a new governor appointed, new colonists
started on the way; and, finally, in 1609, Smith was so seriously
wounded by the explosion of a bag of gun-powder, that he gave up the
struggle and returned to England.

Instant disaster followed. When he left the colony, it numbered five
hundred souls; when the next supply ship reached it in May, 1610, it
consisted of sixty scarecrows, mere wrecks of human beings. The rest had
starved to death--or been eaten by their companions! There was a hasty
consultation, and it was decided that Virginia must be abandoned. On
Thursday, June 7, 1610, the cabins were stripped of such things as were
of value, and the whole company went on shipboard and started down the
river--only to meet, next day, in Hampton Roads, a new expedition headed
by the new governor, Lord Delaware, himself! By this slight thread of
coincidence was the fate of Virginia determined.

The ship put about at once, and on the following Sunday morning, Lord
Delaware stepped ashore at Jamestown, and, falling to his knees, thanked
God that he had been in time to save Virginia. He proceeded at once to
place the colony upon a new and sounder basis, and it was never again in
danger of extinction, though Jamestown itself was finally abandoned as
unsuited to a settlement on account of its malarious atmosphere. But
Virginia itself grew apace into one of the greatest of England's
colonies in America.

John Smith himself never returned to Virginia. In 1614, he explored the
coast south of the Penobscot, giving it the name it still bears, New
England. A year later, while on another expedition, he was captured by
the French and forced to serve against the Spaniards. Broken in health
and fortune, he spent his remaining years in London, dying there in
1631. There is a portrait of him, showing him as a handsome, bearded
man, with nose and mouth bespeaking will and spirit--just such a man as
one would imagine this gallant soldier of fortune to have been.

While the English, under the guiding hand of John Smith, were fighting
desperately to maintain themselves upon the James, the French were
struggling to the same purpose and no less desperately along the St.
Lawrence. We have seen how Jacques Cartier explored and named that
region, but civil and religious wars in France put an end to plans of
colonization for half a century, and it was not until 1603 that Samuel
Champlain, the founder of New France, and one of the noblest characters
in American history, embarked for the New World.

Samuel Champlain was born at Brouage about 1567, the son of a sea-faring
father, and his early years were spent upon the sea. He served in the
army of the Fourth Henry, and after the peace with Spain, made a voyage
to Mexico. Upon his return to France in 1603, he found a fleet preparing
to sail to Canada, and at once joined it. Some explorations were made of
the St. Lawrence, but the fleet returned to France within the year,
without accomplishing anything in the way of colonization. Another
expedition in the following year saw the founding of Port Royal, while
Champlain made a careful exploration of the New England coast, but he
found nothing that attracted him as did the mighty river to the north.
Thither, in 1608, he went, and sailing up the river to a point where a
mighty promontory rears its head, disembarked and erected the first rude
huts of the city which he called by the Indian name of Quebec, or "The
Narrows." A wooden wall was built, mounting a few small cannon and
loopholed for musketry, and the conquest of Canada had begun. A
magnificent cargo of furs was dispatched to France, and Champlain and
twenty-eight men were left to winter at Quebec. When spring came, only
nine were left alive, but reinforcements and supplies soon arrived, and
Champlain arranged to proceed into the interior and explore the country.

The resources at his disposal were small, he could not hope to assemble
a great expedition; so he determined to make the venture with only a few
men and little baggage, relying upon the friendship of the Indians,
instead of seeking to conquer them, as the Spaniards had always done.
Champlain had from the first treated the Indians well, and it was this
necessity of gaining their friendship that determined the policy which
France pursued--the policy of making friends of the Indians, entering
into an alliance with them, and helping them fight their battles.
Champlain opened operations by joining an Algonquin war-party against
the Iroquois, and assisting at their defeat--starting, at the same time,
a blood feud with that powerful tribe which endured as long as the
French held Canada. In the course of this expedition, he discovered the
beautiful lake which bears his name.

He went back to France for a time, after that, and on his next return to
Canada, in 1611, began building a town at the foot of a rock which had
been named Mont Royal, since corrupted to Montreal. Succeeding years
were spent in further explorations, which carried him across Lake
Ontario, and in plans for the conversion of the Indians, to which the
aid of the Jesuits was summoned. Missions were established, and the
intrepid priests pushed their way farther and farther into the
wilderness. To this work, Champlain gave more and more of his thought in
the last years of his life, which ended on Christmas day, 1635.

Among the young men whom Champlain set to work among the Indians was
Jean Nicolet. The year before his death, Champlain sent him on an
exploring expedition to the west, in the course of which he visited Lake
Michigan and perhaps Lake Superior. Following in his footsteps, the
Jesuits gradually established missions as far west as the Wisconsin
River, and, finally, in 1670, at Sault Ste. Marie, the French formally
took possession of the whole Northwest.

It was at about this time there appeared upon the scene another of those
picturesque and formidable figures, in which this period of American
history so abounds--Robert Cavalier La Salle. La Salle was at that time
only twenty years of age. He had reached Canada four years earlier and
had devoted himself for three years to the study of the Indian
languages, in order to fit himself for the career of western exploration
which he contemplated. One day he was visited by a party of Senecas, who
told him of a river, which they called the Ohio, so great that many
months were required to traverse it. From their description, La Salle
concluded that it must fall into the Gulf of California, and so form the
long-sought passage to China. He determined to explore it, and after
surmounting innumerable obstacles, actually did reach it, and descend it
as far as the spot where the city of Louisville now stands, afterwards
exploring the Illinois and the country south of the Great lakes, as well
as the lakes themselves.

Fired by La Salle's report of his discoveries, two other Frenchmen,
Louis Joliet, a native of Quebec, who had already led an expedition in
search of the copper mines of Lake Superior, and Jacques Marquette, a
Jesuit priest and accomplished linguist, started on a still greater
journey. With five companions and two birchbark canoes, they headed down
the Wisconsin river, and on June 17, 1673, glided out upon the blue
waters of the Mississippi. A fortnight later, they reached a little
village called Peoria, where the Indians received them well, and
continuing down the river, passed the Missouri, the Ohio, and finally,
having gone far enough to convince themselves that the river emptied
into the Gulf of Mexico and not into the Gulf of California, they turned
about and reached Green Bay again in September, having paddled more than
2,500 miles. Marquette, shattered in health, remained at Green Bay,
while Joliet pushed on to Montreal to tell of his discoveries. Marquette
rallied sufficiently at the end of a year to attempt a mission among the
Illinois Indians, where death found him in the spring of 1675. Joliet
spent his last years in a vain endeavor to persuade the government of
France to undertake on a grand scale the development of the rich lands
along the Mississippi.

But the story which Joliet took back with him to Quebec fired anew the
ambition of La Salle. He conceived New France as a great empire in the
wilderness, and he determined to descend the mighty river to its mouth
and establish a city there which would hold the river for France against
all comers. Such occupation would, according to French doctrine, give
France an indisputable right to the whole territory which the river and
its tributaries drained, and La Salle's plan was to establish a chain of
forts stretching from Lake Erie to the Gulf, to build up around these
great cities, and so to lay the foundations for the mightiest empire in
history. We may well stand amazed before a plan so ambitious, and before
the determination with which this great Frenchman set about its
accomplishment.

To most men, such a scheme seemed but the dream of an enthusiast; but La
Salle was in deadly earnest, and for eight years he labored to perfect
the details of the plan. At last, on April 9, 1682, he planted the flag
of France at the mouth of the Mississippi, naming the country Louisiana
in honor of his royal master, whose property it was solemnly declared to
be. That done, the intrepid explorer hastened back to France; a fleet
was fitted out and attempted to sail directly to the mouth of the great
river, but missed it; the ships were wrecked on the coast of Texas, and
La Salle was shot from ambush by two of his own followers while
searching on foot for the river.

So ended La Salle's part in the accomplishment of a plan which,
grandiose as it was, reached a sort of realization--for a great French
city near the mouth of the river _was_ built and a thin chain of forts
connecting it with Canada, where the French power remained unbroken for
three quarters of a century longer; while not until the beginning of the
nineteenth century, when the royal line of Louis had been succeeded by a
soldier of fortune from Corsica, did the great territory which La Salle
had named Louisiana pass from French possession.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the nineteenth day of November, 1620, fourteen years after the
settlement of Jamestown and twelve after the settlement of Quebec, a
storm-beaten vessel of 120 tons burthen crept into the lee of Cape Cod
and dropped anchor in that welcome refuge. The vessel was the Mayflower,
and she had just completed the most famous voyage in American history,
after that of Columbus. The colonists she carried, about a hundred in
number, Separatists from the Church of England, have come down through
history as the "Pilgrim Fathers." Among them was one destined to rule
the fortunes of the colony for more than a quarter of a century. His
name was William Bradford, and he was at that time thirty years of age.

Bradford was born in 1590 at Austerfield, in Yorkshire, England, and at
the age of sixteen, joined a company of Puritans or Separatists, which
met for a time at the little town of Scrooby, but, being threatened with
persecution, resolved to remove to Holland. Most of the congregation got
away without interference, but Bradford and a few others were arrested
and spent several months in prison. As soon as he was released, he
joined the colony in Amsterdam, and afterwards, in 1609, removed with it
to Leyden. But the newcomers found themselves out of sympathy with Dutch
customs and habits of thought, and after long debate, determined to
remove to America and found a colony of their own. A patent was
obtained, the Mayflower chartered, the congregation put aboard, and the
voyage begun on the fifth day of September, 1620.

The colonists expected to settle somewhere near the mouth of the Hudson,
but, whether by accident or design, their captain brought up off Cape
Cod, and it was decided to land there. After some days' search, a
suitable site for a settlement was found, work was begun on houses and
fortifications, and the place was named New Plymouth.

Jonathan Carver had been chosen the first governor and guided the colony
through the horrors of that first winter; the story of Jamestown was
repeated, and by the coming of spring, more than half the colonists were
dead. Among them was Carver himself, and William Bradford was at once
chosen to succeed him. There can be no doubt that it was to Bradford's
wise head and strong hand the colony owed its quick rally, and its
escape from the prolonged misery which makes horrible the early history
of Virginia. He seems to have possessed a temper resolute, but
magnanimous and patient to an unusual degree, together with a religion
sincere and devoted, yet neither intolerant nor austere. What results
can be accomplished by a combination of qualities at once so rare and so
admirable is shown by the work which William Bradford did at Plymouth,
over which he ruled almost continuously until his death, thirty-seven
years later.

Bradford's success lay first in his courage in doing away with the
pernicious system by which all the property was held in common. In doing
this, he violated the rules of his company, but he saw that utter
failure lay the other way. He divided the colony's land among the
several families, in proportion to their number, and compelled each
family to shift for itself. The communal system had nearly wrecked
Jamestown and would have wrecked Plymouth had not Bradford had the
courage to disregard all precedent and make each family its own
provider. Years afterwards, in commenting on the results of this
revolutionary change, he wrote, "Any general want or suffering hath not
been among them since to this day."

And, indeed, this was true. Under Bradford's guidance, the little colony
increased steadily in wealth and numbers, and became the sure forerunner
of the great Puritan migration of 1630, which founded the colony of
Massachusetts, into which the older colony of Plymouth was finally
absorbed. Of Bradford himself, little more remains to be told. The
establishment of Plymouth Plantation was his life work. He was a far
bigger man than most of his contemporaries, with a broader outlook upon
life and deeper resources within himself. One of these was a literary
culture which fairly sets him apart as the first American man of
letters. He wrote an entertaining history of his colony, as well as a
number of philosophical and theological works, all marked with a style
and finish noteworthy for their day.

       *       *       *       *       *

The government of the colony of Massachusetts presented, for over half a
century, the most perfect union of church and state ever witnessed in
America. The secular arm was ever ready to support the religious, and to
compel every resident of the colony to walk in the strait and narrow way
of Puritanism. This was a task easy enough at first, but growing more
and more difficult as the character of the settlers became more diverse,
until, finally, it had to be abandoned altogether.

One of the first and most formidable of all those who dared array
themselves against this bulwark of Puritanism was Roger Williams. He was
the son of a merchant tailor of London, had developed into a precocious
boy, had shown a leaning toward Puritan doctrines, and had ended by
out-Puritaning the Puritans. This was principally apparent in an
intolerance of compromise which led him to remarkable extremes. He
refused to conform to the use of the common prayer, and so cut himself
off from all chance of preferment; he renounced a property of some
thousands of pounds rather than take the oath required by law; and at
last was forced to flee the country, reaching Massachusetts in 1631.

He was, of course, soon at war with the constituted authorities over
questions of doctrine, and at last it was decided to get rid of him by
sending him back to England. He was at Salem at the time, and hearing
that a warrant had been despatched from Boston for him, he promptly took
to the woods, and, making his way with a few followers to Narragansett
Bay, broke ground for a settlement which he named Providence. It was the
beginning of the first state in the world which took no cognizance
whatever of religious belief, so long as it did not interfere with civil
peace. He was soon joined by more adherents, and a few years later, he
obtained from the king a charter for the colony of Rhode Island.

Almost from the moment of his landing in America, Williams had
interested himself greatly in the welfare of the Indians. The principal
cause of his expulsion from Massachusetts was his contention that the
land belonged to the Indians and not to the King of England, who
therefore had no right to give it away, so that the colony's charter was
invalid. His town of Providence was built on land which the Indians had
given him, and he soon acquired considerable influence among them. He
learned to speak their language with great facility, translated the
Bible into their tongue, and on more than one occasion saved New England
from the horrors of an Indian war. But, despite his lofty character, it
is impossible at this day, to regard Williams with any degree of
sympathy or liking, or to think of him except as a trouble-maker over
trifles. Intolerance, happily, is fading from the world, and with it
that useless scrupulosity of behavior, which accomplishes no good, but
whose principal result is to make uncomfortable all who come in contact
with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, just to the south of Rhode Island, a prosperous little
settlement had been established, which was soon to grow into the most
commercially important on the continent. We have seen how Henry Hudson,
in 1609, in a vessel chartered by the Dutch West India Company, entered
the Hudson river and explored it for some hundred and fifty miles. The
Dutch claimed the region as the result of that voyage, and during the
next few years, Dutch traders visited it regularly and did a lively
business in furs; but no attempt was made at colonization until 1624,
although small trading-posts had existed at various points along the
river for ten years previously.

All of this country was included in the patent granted the Virginia
Company, and it was for the mouth of the Hudson that the Pilgrims had
sailed in the Mayflower. The charge has since been made that their
captain had been bribed by the thrifty Dutch to land them somewhere
else, and at any cost, to keep them away from the neighborhood of the
Dutch trading-posts. From whatever cause, this was certainly done, and
many years were to elapse before there came another English invasion.

In 1626, Peter Minuit, director for the Dutch West India Company,
purchased Manhattan Island from the Indians, giving for it trinkets and
merchandise to the value of $24, and founding New Amsterdam as the
central trading depot. From the first, the settlement was a cosmopolitan
one, just as it is to-day, and in 1643, it was said that eighteen
languages were spoken there.

The most notable figure in this prosperous and growing colony was that
of Peter Stuyvesant, an altogether picturesque and gallant personality.
Born in Holland in 1602, he had entered the army at an early age, and,
as governor of Curacao, lost a leg in battle. In 1646, he was appointed
director-general of New Netherlands, and reached New Amsterdam in the
spring of the following year. So much powder was burned in firing
salutes to welcome him that there was scarcely any left. His speech of
greeting was brief and to the point.

"I shall govern you," he said, "as a father his children, for the
advantage of the chartered West India Company, and these burghers, and
this land."

And he proceeded to do it, having in mind the old adage that to spare
the rod is to spoil the child. There was never any doubt in Stuyvesant's
mind that the first business of a ruler is to rule, and popular
government seemed to him the merest idiocy. "A valiant, weather-beaten,
mettlesome, obstinate, leathern-sided, lion-hearted, generous-spirited
old governor"--the adjectives describe him well; a sufficiently imposing
figure, with his slashed hose and velvet jacket and tall cane and
silver-banded wooden leg, he ruled the colony for twenty years with a
rod of iron, fortifying it, enlarging it, settling its boundaries,
keeping the Indians over-awed, the veriest dictator this continent ever
saw, until, one August day in 1664, an English fleet sailed up the bay
and summoned the city to surrender.

Stuyvesant set his men to work repairing the fortifications, and was for
holding out, but the town was really defenseless against the frigates,
which had only to sail up the river and bombard it from either side; his
people were disaffected and to some extent not sorry to be delivered
from his rule; the terms offered by the English were favorable, and
though Stuyvesant swore he never would surrender, a white flag was
finally run up over the ramparts of Fort Amsterdam. The city was at once
renamed New York, in honor of the Duke of York, to whom it had been
