his increasing skill in his art, which led him to compare himself with
his teacher, there had grown up in the apprentice the habit of comparing
himself with Marzio from the intellectual point of view as well as from
the artistic. The comparison did not appear to him advantageous to the
elder man, as he discovered, in his way of thinking, a lack of logic on
the one hand, and a love of frantic exaggeration on the other, which
tended to throw a doubt upon the whole system of ideas which had
produced these defects. The result was that the young man's mental
position was unbalanced, and he was inclined to return to a more normal
condition of thought. Don Paolo did not know all this, but he saw that
Gianbattista had grown more quiet during the last year, and he hoped
that his marriage with Lucia would complete the change. To see her
thrown into the arms of a man like Gasparo Carnesecchi was more than the
priest's affection for his niece could bear. He hardly believed that
Marzio would seriously think again of the scheme, and he entertained a
hope that the subject would not even be broached for some time to come.

Marzio continued to draw in silence, and after a few minutes, Don Paolo
rose to take his leave. The chiseller did not look up from his pencil.

"Good-night, Marzio--let it be a good piece of work," said Paolo.

"Good-night," growled the artist, his eyes still fixed on the paper. His
brother saluted the rest and left the room to go home to his lonely
lodgings at the top of an old palace, in the first floor of which dwelt
the Cardinal, whom he served as secretary. When he was gone, Lucia rose
silently and went to her room, leaving her father and mother with
Gianbattista. The Signora Pandolfi hesitated as to whether she should
follow her daughter or stay with the two men. Her woman's nature feared
further trouble, and visions of drawn knives rose before her swollen
eyes, so that, after making as though she would rise twice, she finally
remained in her seat, her fat hands resting idly upon her knees, staring
at her husband and Gianbattista. The latter sat gloomily watching the
paper on which his master was drawing.

"Marzio, you do not mean it?" said Maria Luisa, after a long interval of
silence. The good woman did not possess the gift of tact.

"Do you not see that I have an idea?" asked her husband crossly, by way
of an answer, as he bent his head over his work.

"I beg your pardon," said the Signora Pandolfi, in a humble tone,
looking piteously at Gianbattista. The apprentice shook his head, as
though he meant that nothing could be done for the present. Then she
rose slowly, and with a word of good-night as she turned to the door,
she left the room. The two men were alone.

"Now that nobody hears us, Sor Marzio, what do you mean to do?" asked
Gianbattista in a low voice. Marzio shrugged his shoulders.

"What I told you," he answered, after a few seconds. "Do you suppose
that rascally priest of a brother has made me change my mind?"

"No, I did not expect that, but I am not a priest; nor am I a boy to be
turned round your fingers and put off in this way--sent to the wash like
dirty linen. You must answer to me for what you said this evening."

"Oh, I will answer as much as you please," replied the artist, with an
evil smile.

"Very well. Why do you want to turn me out, after promising for years
that I should marry Lucia with your full consent when she was old
enough?"

"Why? because you have turned yourself out, to begin with. Secondly,
because Carnesecchi is a better match for my daughter than a beggarly
chiseller. Thirdly, because I please; and fourthly, because I do not
care a fig whether you like it or not. Are those reasons sufficient or
not?"

"They may satisfy you," answered Gianbattista. "They leave something to
be desired in the way of logic, in my humble opinion."

"Since I have told you that I do not care for your opinion--"

"I will probably find means to make you care for it," retorted the young
man. "Don Paolo is quite right, in the first place, when he tells you
that the thing is simply impossible. Fathers do not compel their
daughters to marry in this century. Will you do me the favour to explain
your first remark a little more clearly? You said I had turned myself
out--how?"

"You have changed, Tista," said Marzio, leaning back to sharpen his
pencil, and staring at the wall. "You change every day. You are not at
all what you used to be, and you know it. You are going back to the
priests. You fawn on my brother like a dog."

"You are joking," answered the apprentice. "Of course I would not want
to make trouble in your house by quarrelling with Don Paolo, even if I
disliked him. I do not dislike him. This evening he showed that he is a
much better man than you."

"Dear Gianbattista," returned Marzio in sour tones, "every word you say
convinces me that I have done right. Besides, I am busy--you see--you
disturb my ideas. If you do not like my house, you can leave it. I will
not keep you. I daresay I can educate another artist before I die. You
are really only fit to swing a censer behind Paolo, or at the heels of
some such animal."

"Perhaps it would be better to do that than to serve the mass you sing
over your work-bench every day," said Gianbattista. "You are going too
far, Sor Marzio. One may trifle with women and their feelings. You had
better not attempt it with men."

"Such as you and Paolo? There was once a mule in the Pescheria Vecchia;
when he got half-way through he did not like the smell of the fish, and
he said to his leader, 'I will turn back.' The driver pulled him along.
Then said the mule, 'Do not trifle with me. I will turn round and kick
you.' But there is not room for a mule to turn round in the Pescheria
Vecchia. The mule found it out, and followed the man through the fish
market after all. I hope that is clear? It means that you are a fool."

"What is the use of bandying words?" cried the apprentice angrily. "I
will offer you a bargain, Sor Marzio. I will give you your choice.
Either I will leave the house, and in that case I will carry off Lucia
and marry her in spite of you. Or else I will stay here--but if Lucia
marries any one else, I will cut your throat. Is that a fair bargain?"

"Perfectly fair, though I cannot see wherein the bargain consists,"
answered Marzio, with a rough laugh. "I prefer that you should stay
here. I will run the risk of being murdered by you, any day, and you may
ran the risk of being sent to the galleys for life, if you choose. You
will be well cared for there, and you can try your chisel on
paving-stones for a change from silver chalices."

"Never mind what becomes of me afterwards, in that case," said the young
man. "If Lucia is married to some one else, I do not care what happens.
So you have got your warning!"

"Thank you. If you had remained what you used to be, you might have
married her without further difficulty. But to have you and Lucia and
Maria Luisa and Paolo all conspiring against me from morning till night
is more than I can bear. Good-night, and the devil be with you, you
fool!"

"_Et cum spiritu tuo_," answered Gianbattista as he left the room.

When Marzio was alone he returned to the head he was drawing--a head of
wonderful beauty, inclined downwards and towards one side, bearing a
crown of thorns, the eyelids drooped and shaded in death. He glanced at
it with a bitter smile and threw aside the pencil without making another
stroke upon the paper.

He leaned back, lighted another pipe, and began to reflect upon the
events of the evening. He was glad it was over, for a strange weakness
in his violent nature made it hard for him to face such scenes unless he
were thoroughly roused. Now, however, he was satisfied. For a long time
he had seen with growing distrust the change in Gianbattista's manner,
and in the last words he had spoken to the apprentice he had uttered
what was really in his heart. He was afraid of being altogether
overwhelmed by the majority against him in his own house. He hated Paolo
with his whole soul, and he had hated him all his life. This calm,
obliging brother of his stood between him and all peace of mind. It was
not the least of his grievances that he received most of his commissions
through the priest who was constantly in relation with the cardinal and
rich prelates who were the patrons of his art. The sense of obligation
which he felt was often almost unbearable, and he longed to throw it
off. The man whom he hated for his own sake and despised for his
connection with the church, was daily in his house; at every turn he met
with Paolo's tacit disapprobation or outspoken resistance. For a long
time Paolo had doubted whether the marriage between the two young people
would turn out well, and while he expressed his doubts Marzio had
remained stubborn in his determination. Latterly, and doubtless owing to
the change in Gianbattista's character, Paolo had always spoken of the
marriage with favour. This sufficed at first to rouse Marzio's
suspicions, and ultimately led to his opposing with all his might what
he had so long and so vigorously defended; he resolved to be done with
what he considered a sort of slavery, and at one stroke to free himself
from his brother's influence, and to assure Lucia's future. During
several weeks he had planned the scene which had taken place that
evening, waiting for his opportunity, trying to make sure of being
strong enough to make it effective, and revolving the probable answers
he might expect from the different persons concerned. It had come, and
he was satisfied with the result.

Marzio Pandolfi's intelligence lacked logic. In its place he possessed
furious enthusiasm, an exaggerated estimate of the value of his social
doctrines, and a whole vocabulary of terms by which to describe the
ideal state after which he hankered. But though he did not possess a
logic of his own, his life was itself the logical result of the
circumstances he had created. As, in the diagram called the
parallelogram of forces, various conflicting powers are seen to act at a
point, producing an inevitable resultant in a fixed line, so in the plan
of Marzio's life, a number of different tendencies all acted at a
centre, in his overstrained intelligence, and continued to push him in a
direction he had not expected to follow, and of which even now he was
far from suspecting the ultimate termination.

He had never loved his brother, but he had loved his wife with all his
heart. He had begun to love Lucia when she was a child. He had felt a
sort of admiring fondness for Gianbattista Bordogni, and a decided pride
in the progress and the talent of the apprentice. By degrees, as the
prime mover, his hatred for Paolo, gained force, it had absorbed his
affection for Maria Luisa, who, after eighteen years of irreproachable
wifehood, seemed to Marzio to be nothing better than an accomplice and a
spy of his brother's in the domestic warfare. Next, the lingering love
for his child had been eaten up in the same way, and Marzio said to
himself that the girl had joined the enemy, and was no longer worthy of
his confidence. Lastly, the change in Gianbattista's character and ideas
seemed to destroy the last link which bound the chiseller to his family.
Henceforth, his hand was against each one of his household, and he
fancied that they were all banded together against himself.

Every step had followed as the inevitable consequence of what had gone
before. The brooding and suspicious nature of the artist had persisted
in seeing in each change in himself the blackest treachery in those who
surrounded him. His wife was an implacable enemy, his daughter a spy,
his apprentice a traitor, and as for Paolo himself, Marzio considered
him the blackest of villains. For all this chain of hatreds led
backwards, and was concentrated with tenfold virulence in his great
hatred for his brother. Paolo, in his estimation, was the author of all
the evil, the sole ultimate cause of domestic discord, the arch enemy of
the future, the representative, in Marzio's sweeping condemnation, not
only of the church and of religion, but of that whole fabric of existing
society which the chiseller longed to tear down.

Marzio's socialism, for so he called it, had one good feature. It was
sincere of its kind, and disinterested. He was not of the common herd, a
lazy vagabond, incapable of continuous work, or of perseverance in any
productive occupation, desiring only to be enriched by impoverishing
others, one of the endless rank and file of Italian republicans, to whom
the word "republic" means nothing but bread without work, and the
liberty which consists in howling blasphemies by day and night in the
public streets. His position was as different from that of a private in
the blackguard battalion as his artistic gifts and his industry were
superior to those of the throng. He had money, he had talent, and he had
been very successful in his occupation. He had nothing to gain by the
revolutions he dreamed of, and he might lose much by any upsetting of
the existing laws of property. He was, therefore, perfectly sincere, so
far as his convictions went, and disinterested to a remarkable degree.
These conditions are often found in the social position of the true
fanatic, who is the more ready to run to the greatest length, because he
entertains no desire to better his own state. Marzio's real weakness lay
in the limited scope of his views, and in a certain timid prudence which
destroyed his power of initiative. He was an economical man, who
distrusted the future; and though such a disposition produces a good
effect in causing a man to save money against the day of misfortune, it
is incompatible with the career of the true enthusiast, who must be
ready to risk everything at any moment. The man who would move other
men, and begin great changes, must have an enormous belief in himself,
an unbounded confidence in his cause, and a large faith in the future,
amounting to the absolute scorn of consequence.

These greater qualities Marzio did not possess, and through lack of them
the stupendous results of which he was fond of talking had diminished to
a series of domestic quarrels, in which he was not always victorious.
His hatred of the church was practically reduced to the detestation of
his brother, and to an unreasoning jealousy of his brother's influence
in his home. His horror of social distinctions, which speculated freely
upon the destruction of the monarchy, amounted in practice to nothing
more offensive than a somewhat studious rudeness towards the few
strangers of high position who from time to time visited the workshop in
the Via dei Falegnami. In the back room of his inn, Marzio could find
loud and cutting words in which to denounce the Government, the
monarchy, the church, and the superiority of the aristocracy. In real
fact, Marzio took off his hat when he met the king in the street, paid
his taxes with a laudable regularity, and increased the small fortune he
had saved by selling sacred vessels to the priests against whom he
inveighed. Instead of burning the Vatican and hanging the College of
Cardinals to the pillars of the Colonnade, Marzio Pandolfi felt a very
unpleasant sense of constraint in the presence of the only priest with
whom he ever conversed, his brother Paolo. When, on very rare occasions,
he broke out into angry invective, and ventured to heap abuse upon the
calm individual who excited his wrath, he soon experienced the
counter-shock in the shape of a strong conviction that he had injured
his position rather than bettered it, and the melancholy conclusion
forced itself upon him that by abusing Paolo he himself lost influence
in his own house, and not unfrequently called forth the contempt of
those he had sought to terrify.

The position was galling in the extreme; for, like many artists who are
really remarkable in their profession, Marzio was very vain of his
intellectual superiority in other branches. It may be a question whether
vanity is not essential to any one who is forced to compete in
excellence with other gifted men. Vanity means emptiness, and in the
case of the artist it means that emptiness which craves to be filled
with praise. The artist may doubt his own work, but he is bitterly
disappointed if other people doubt it also. Marzio had his full share of
this kind of vanity, which, as in most cases, extended beyond the sphere
of his art. How often does one hear two or three painters or sculptors
who are gathered together in a studio, laying down the law concerning
Government, society, and the distribution of wealth. And yet, though
they make excellent statues and paint wonderful pictures, there are very
few instances on record of artists having borne any important part in
the political history of their times. Not from any want of a desire to
do so, in many cases, but from the real want of the power; and yet many
of them believe themselves far more able to solve political and social
questions than the men who represent them in the Parliament of their
country, or the persons who by innate superiority of tact have made
themselves the arbiters of society.

Marzio's vanity suffered terribly, for he realised the wide difference
that existed between his aims and the result actually produced. For this
reason he had determined to bring matters to a point of contention in
his household, in order to assert once and for all the despotic
authority which he believed to be his right. He knew well enough that in
proposing the marriage of Lucia with Carnesecchi, he had hit upon a plan
which Paolo would oppose with all his might. It seemed as though he
could not have selected a question more certain to produce a hot
contention. He had brought forward his proposal boldly, and had not
hesitated to make a most virulent personal attack on his brother when
the latter had shown signs of opposition. And yet, as he sat over his
drawing board, staring at the clouds of smoke that rose from his pipe,
he was unpleasantly conscious that he had not been altogether
victorious, that he had not played the part of the despot to the end, as
he had intended to do, that he had suddenly felt his inferiority to
Paolo's calmness, and that upon hearing of the proposition concerning
the crucifix he had acted as though he had received a bribe to be quiet.
He bit his thin lips as he reflected that all the family must have
supposed his silence from that moment to have been the effect of the
important commission which Paolo had communicated to him; for it seemed
impossible that they should understand the current of his thoughts.

As he glanced at the head he had drawn he understood himself better than
others had understood him, for he saw on the corner of the paper the
masterly sketch of an ideal Christ he had sought after for years without
ever reaching it. He knew that that ideal had presented itself to his
mind at the very moment when Paolo had proposed the work to him--the
result perhaps, of the excitement under which he laboured at the moment.
From that instant he had been able to think of nothing. He had been
impelled to draw, and the expression of his thought had driven
everything else out of his mind. Paolo had gained a fancied victory by
means of a fancied bribe. Marzio determined to revenge himself for the
unfair advantage his brother had then taken, by showing himself
inflexible in his resolution concerning the marriage. It was but a small
satisfaction to have braved Gianbattista's boyish threats, after having
seemed to accept the bribe of a priest.




CHAPTER IV


On the following morning, Marzio left the house earlier than usual
Gianbattista had not finished his black coffee, and was not in a humour
to make advances to his master, after the scene of the previous evening.
So he did not move from the table when the chiseller left the room, nor
did he make any remark upon the hour. The door that led to the stairs
had hardly closed after Marzio, when Lucia put her head into the room
where Gianbattista was seated.

"He is gone," said the young man; "come in, we can talk a few minutes."

"Tista," began, Lucia, coming forward and laying her fingers on his
curly hair, "what did all that mean last night? Have you understood?"

"Who understands that lunatic!" exclaimed Gianbattista, passing his arm
round the girl's waist, and drawing her to him. "I only understand one
thing, we must be married as soon as possible and be done with it. Is it
not true, Lucia?"

"I hope so," answered his companion, with a blush and a sigh. "But I am
so much afraid."

"Do not be afraid, leave it all to me, I will protect you, my darling,"
replied the young man, tapping his breast with the ready gesture of an
Italian, as though to prove his courage.

"Oh, I am sure of that! But how can it be managed? Of course he cannot
force me to marry Carnesecchi, as Uncle Paolo explained to him. But he
will try, and he is so bad!"

"Let him try, let him try," repeated Gianbattista. "I made a bargain
with him last night after you had gone to bed. Do you know what I told
him? I told him that I would stay with him, but that if you married any
one but me, I would cut his throat--Sor Marzio's throat, do you
understand?"

"Oh, Tista!" cried Lucia. "How did you ever have the courage to tell him
such a thing? Besides, you know, you would not do it, would you?"

"Do not trouble yourself, he saw I was in earnest, and he will think
twice about it. Besides, he said yesterday that I might have you if I
would take you away."

"A nice thing for a father to say of his daughter!" exclaimed the girl
angrily. "And what did you answer him then, my love?"

"Oh! I said that I had not the slightest objection to the proceeding.
And then he tried to prove to me that we should starve without him, and
then he swore at me like a Turk. What did it matter? He said I was
changed. By Diana! Any man would change, just for the sake of not being
like him!"

"How do you mean that you are changed, dear?" asked Lucia anxiously.

"Who knows? He said I fawned on Don Paolo like a dog, instead of hating
the priests as I used to do. What do you think, love?"

"I think Uncle Paolo would laugh at the idea," answered the girl,
smiling herself, but rather sadly. "I am afraid you are as bad as ever,
in that way."

"I am not bad, Lucia. I begin to think I like Don Paolo. He was splendid
last night. Did you see how he stared your father out of countenance,
and then turned him into a lamb with the order for the crucifix? Don
Paolo has a much stronger will than Sor Marzio, and a great deal more
sense. He will make your father change his mind."

"Of course it would be for the better if we could be married without any
objection, and I am very glad you are growing fond of Uncle Paolo. But I
have seen it for some time. He is so good!"

"Yes. That is the truth," answered Gianbattista in meditative tone. "He
is too good. It is not natural. And then he has a way of making me feel
it. Now, I would have strangled Sor Marzio last night if your uncle had
not been there, but he prevented me. Of course he was right. Those
people always are. But one hates to be set right by a priest. It is
humiliating!"

"Well, it is better than not to be set right at all," said Lucia. "You
see, if you had strangled poor papa, it would have been dreadful! Oh,
Tista, promise me that you will not do anything violent! Of course he is
very unkind, I know. But it would be terrible if you were to be angry
and hurt him. You will not, Tista? Tell me you will not?"

"We shall see; we shall see, my love!"

"You do not love me if you will not promise."

"Oh, if that is all, my love, I will promise never to lay a finger on
him until you are actually married to some one else. But then--"
Gianbattista made the gesture which means driving the knife into an
enemy.

"Then you may do anything you please," answered Lucia, with a laugh. "He
will never make me marry any one but you. You know that, my heart!"

"In that case we ought to be married very soon," argued the young man.
"We need not live here, you know. Indeed, it would be out of the
question. We will take one of those pretty little places in the new
quarter--"

"That is so far away," interrupted the girl.

"Yes, but there is the tramway, and there are omnibuses. It only takes a
quarter of an hour."

"But you would be so far from me all day, my love. I could not run into
the studio at all hours, and you would not come home for dinner. Oh! I
could not bear it!"

"Very well, we will try and find something near here," said
Gianbattista, yielding the point. "We will get a little apartment near
the Minerva, where there is sun."

"And we will have a terrace on the top of the house, with pots of
carnations."

"And red curtains on rings, that we can draw; it is such a pretty light
when the sun shines through them."

"And green wall paper with blue furniture," suggested Lucia. "It is so
gay."

"Or perhaps the furniture of the same colour as the paper--you know they
have it so in all fashionable houses."

"Well, if it is really the fashion, I suppose we must," assented the
girl rather regretfully.

"Yes, it is the fashion, my heart, and you must have everything in the
fashion. But I must be going," added the young man, rising from his seat.

"Already? It is early, Tista--" she hesitated, "Dear Tista," she began
again, her dark eyes resting anxiously on his face, "what will you say
to him in the workshop? You will tell him that I would rather die than
marry Carnesecchi, that we are solemnly promised, that nothing shall
part us! You will make him see reason, Tista, will you not? I cannot go
to him, or I would; and mamma, poor mamma, is so afraid of him when he
is in his humours. There are only you and Uncle Paolo to manage him; and
after the way he insulted Uncle Paolo last night, it will be all the
harder. Think of it, Tista, while you are at work, and bring me word
when you come to dinner."

"Never fear, love," replied Gianbattista confidently; "what else should
