to fire a steady gun than to fire a gun on a ship that is riding up
and down on the waves.

[Illustration: Battle of Manila Bay.]

The battle began a little after five o'clock, Sunday morning, May 1st,
1898. The Spaniards fired the first shot. All the vessels of our fleet
were out in the bay, but, as soon as the Spaniards began to fire, our
fighting ships started forward. They did not answer the Spanish fire
at first, but steamed up the bay, in a wide circle, toward the city of
Manila, then turned and came back toward Cavite. The Olympia led the
way. After her came the Baltimore, Raleigh, Concord, Petrel, and
Boston. All had their battle-flags flying.

[Illustration: Admiral Montojo.]

Uninjured by the enemy's shots, the Olympia and her train drew near
the Spanish forts and ships. At a distance of a little more than four
thousand yards, the Olympia fired, and the roar of her first gun was
the signal to her companions to open fire. Then the firing from both
sides became fast and furious. Our ships moved rapidly about, up and
down, past Cavite five times. Admiral Montojo came out in his
flagship, the Reina Christina, to attack the Olympia. The Olympia
poured such a storm of shot at her that she was compelled to turn back
toward the harbor. But the Reina Christina had met her doom. As she
turned, a huge shell from the Olympia struck her, set her on fire, and
killed her captain and many of her men. Admiral Montojo changed his
flag to another ship and came forward again, but soon had to turn
back. But a moment of great peril came to the Olympia. Two fierce
little torpedo-boats came toward her, ready to hurl her to
destruction. The gunners of the Olympia instantly opened such a shower
of shells from the smaller guns that the surface of the water was
covered with foam. The little boats, without having had time to send
forth a torpedo, were overcome. One of them blew up, then sank, with
her crew, beneath the waves. The other, pierced with shots, turned
toward the shore and ran upon the beach, a wreck.

[Illustration: The "Olympia" Leading the Way.]

After more than two hours of fierce fighting, Commodore Dewey led his
ships out into the center of the bay, and the battle ceased for a
time. The true reason for this movement was known only to some of the
officers. The men were told that they were to haul off to get a little
rest and some breakfast. The men believed that they had done great
damage to the Spaniards, and were eager to finish the battle at once.
In fact, no one really knew then how much damage had been done to the
Spanish fleet. The results were not known till afterward. Though the
men were hopeful and in good spirits, Commodore Dewey and his staff
thought the situation serious. Three of the Spanish ships were on
fire, and the Boston had also broken out in flames. The Olympia had
not enough ammunition to continue the fight two hours longer. Our
ships were far from home, and could not get a supply of ammunition in
less than a month's time. There was good reason to think that the
Spanish forts were well supplied.

The Spaniards thought, when our ships drew away from the shore, that
the Americans had been overcome and were leaving in order to bury
their dead. They found themselves sadly mistaken.

Our men, strengthened by the rest and a breakfast of bread and cold
meat, started again to battle a little before eleven o'clock. Soon
several of the Spanish ships were on fire, and some of them sank.
After the Spanish fleet had been destroyed, some of our ships attacked
the forts on the shore and made them surrender. At five minutes after
one o'clock the Spaniards hauled down their flag.

The Spaniards did many brave things that day, and fought desperately,
but they were not good marksmen. They did not aim their guns well.
They lost eleven ships, and had many men killed and wounded. Our ships
were not much injured, only seven of our men were wounded, and none
were killed.

When our ships drew together after the battle, and our men found that
they had suffered so little, and that no one had been killed, they
knew not how to control their feelings. Some of them cried like little
children. But such tears are not childish. It is said that when the
Spanish forts gave the signal of surrender, Commodore Dewey turned
to his officers near him, and said: "I've the prettiest lot of men
that ever stepped on shipboard, and their hearts are as stout as the
ships."

[Illustration: The Destroyed Spanish Fleet.]

You must notice that the city of Manila had not been taken in this
battle. We shall see later about its surrender. But the battle of
Manila Bay was one of the most remarkable naval battles ever fought.

When Commodore Dewey received his orders to "capture or destroy" the
Spanish fleet, that was known to be somewhere about the Philippine
Islands, the Asiatic squadron, as his ships were called, was lying in
the harbor of Hong Kong, which is an English port. After the blowing
up of the Maine, which occurred in February, you will remember, he
began to put his ships in the very best possible condition for a war
with Spain, which he and his officers now thought inevitable. Every
emergency was provided for; all the vessels were in complete fighting
trim.

Because of the neutrality laws, of which I have told you, after war
was declared Dewey's ships could not stay at Hong Kong more than
twenty-four hours, so he moved them to Mirs Bay, a Chinese port, and
from there set out to find the Spanish fleet.

A naval officer, now retired from the service, told me not long ago,
the words "capture or destroy" have been used in instructions to naval
officers for three hundred years. He also spoke of his acquaintance
with Dewey during the Civil War, and upon long cruises when they were
shipmates; and particularly dwelt upon the ability and good judgment
that characterized him as a naval officer.

When Dewey received his orders to "capture or destroy" the Spanish
fleet, he is said to have remarked: "Thank the Lord! at last I've got
the chance, and I'll wipe them off the Pacific Ocean." He did not know
what he was to meet in the way of resistance, but there was not a man
in the fleet that doubted the outcome of the encounter. He found the
Spanish fleet, fought it until not a ship was left to fly the flag of
Spain, and then sent word to the Spanish Governor-general that if
another shot was fired at his ships he would lay the city of Manila in
ashes.

[Illustration: Admiral George Dewey.]

The Island of Corregidor guards the entrance to Manila Bay, but it
seemed to be asleep as Dewey's gray ships stole silently by. Once a
shell screamed over the Raleigh, followed by another; but the Raleigh,
the Concord and the Boston answered the challenge and soon all was
silent. At daybreak the fleet was about five miles from Manila, the
American flag flying from each ship.

[Illustration: Church of the Friars, Manila.]

Day breaks quickly in the tropics, and as the sun flashed his beams
above the horizon, a beautiful picture revealed itself to the men of
Dewey's fleet. Before them lay the metropolis of the Philippines,
walled in part like a mediaeval town; the jangle of church bells came
from lofty towers. To the right, and below the city, lay the Spanish
fleet for which they had been searching.

[Illustration: Dewey on the Bridge.]

The Spaniards fired the first gun from a powerful battery in front of
the city, and the Concord sent two shells in reply, as the American
fleet swept grandly past. Before them were the Spanish ships-of-war
and the fortifications at Cavite; between, were shallow waters where
they dared not go. Still they swept on, preserving their distances as
though performing evolutions in time of peace, the Olympia in the van,
drawing nearer and nearer to the ships that flew the red and yellow
flag of Spain. The shore batteries again roared defiance to the
invaders, but Dewey stood quietly on the bridge of the Olympia,
surrounded by the members of his staff. He wore the usual white
uniform of the service, and a gray cap such as travelers and bicyclers
wear. A huge jet of water now sprang from the peaceful sea, showing
that the Spaniards had fired a submarine mine, but no harm was done.
Then Dewey gave the quiet order to Captain Gridley, who was in the
conning tower:

"Gridley, you may fire when you are ready."

Then the guns of the Olympia spoke, and those of the other ships
followed her example. During the five times they passed and repassed
the Spanish ships and forts, their courses resembled a gigantic figure
8.

Between the entrance to the bay and the city of Manila is an arm of
land or promontory, pointing upwards and towards the city. It is on
the right hand side of the bay and is called Cavite. The word means a
fishhook, and the promontory looks something like one. Behind Cavite
and in the bay of the same name, the Spanish ships were stationed, and
at the little town of Cavite was an arsenal and quite a respectable
navy-yard.

[Illustration: Landing the Marines at Cavite.]

When Dewey withdrew his ships to ascertain what damage the Spaniards
had inflicted upon them, the Spaniards thought they had driven them
off, and so they sent a dispatch from Manila to Spain saying that they
had won a great victory over the Americans; but when Dewey made the
second attack, after breakfast, there was not much more for him to do,
for the Spaniards were well whipped. Dewey had met a foreign foe in
its own waters, and added another victory to the glorious record of
the navy of the United States.

[Illustration: Signaling.]

After the battle, one of the signal boys on the flagship wrote a very
interesting letter to his friends at home:

"... We are all nearly wild with the effects of victory. The pride of
Spain is here under our feet. No doubt before this letter reaches you,
you will read full accounts of the battle--a battle that was hard
fought and bloodless for the victorious. Not a man in our fleet was
killed. Six men were slightly wounded on the Baltimore.

"Say, it was grand! We left Mirs Bay, in China, at two a.m.,
Wednesday, April 27th. Saturday afternoon we sighted Subig Bay. The
Boston and the Concord were sent ahead of the fleet as scouts. We
expected to find the Spanish fleet and have our first engagement. We
could not find them there, so the Commodore and Captains held a
council of war and decided to run past the forts at night.

"It was nine-thirty that night when we sighted the entrance. We went
quietly to quarters, loaded our guns, shook hands with each other and
trusted to luck. I was on signal watch on the aft bridge and could see
everything. Not a sound was heard. At twelve o'clock we were under the
guns of the first fort. It was an island called Corregidor. I tell you
I felt uneasy. The moon was well up, but not a light could be seen.

"There were two signal officers and three other boys with me. We were
laughing and joking with one another to steady our nerves. When we
were well under the guns a rocket was fired, and every man braced
himself. Then you could hear the breech blocks closing and the
officers telling the men to aim steady and to kill.

"Well, all the ships passed that fort, but there were twenty-six miles
to go yet, and God and the Spaniards alone knew how many batteries,
mines and torpedoes were ready to send us all to eternity.

"The Olympia passed two more forts The Baltimore was next to us. She
passed all right, but when the Raleigh came under the guns of the
second fort, there was a flash and I heard the shriek of the first
shell. Then almost before the shell struck, there was a spout of
flame from the Raleigh, and her shell killed forty men, as we learned
yesterday. Two more shells were fired at us, but we were well past
them. Then the men were told to lie down.

[Illustration: Rapid-fire Gun.]

"Now, commenced the signal corps work. Soon our signal lights were
flashing the order to close up. At four o'clock I was told by the
signal officer to lie down and catch a nap.

"At four, coffee was given to all the men and at fifteen minutes to
five, the shore batteries had shells dropping all around, but we did
not fire until sixteen minutes past five. The Spanish fleet was in
sight off the navy yard. Then the fight started in earnest. For a
while I thought my time had come. After we made the signal 'commence
firing,' we had nothing to do but watch the fight. The shells flew
over our heads so quick I paid no attention to them.

[Illustration: The Olympiads Military Mast.]

"After an hour and fifteen minutes, the Spanish admiral had two ships
sunk under turn. We withdrew for a short time, not knowing we had them
whipped. As we were leaving, three ships were burning. At
nine-twenty-five, we started again. In a short time the arsenal went
up and the Government buildings were in flames.

"The battle lasted altogether three hours and some minutes. At
eleven-fifteen the white flag was shown, and you might hear us cheer.
The ship was hit about six times. The Spaniards lost terribly. The
rebels attacked the enemy. It is something wonderful when you consider
the advantage they had over us. They had eleven ships to our six.
Their ships could run behind a neck of land near the navy yard. The
shore batteries were firing on us from three points. But our
marksmanship was too much for them; our fire was so rapid they could
not stand it. They lost about two thousand men, so the rumor says. We
sank four ships and burned seven. It was a grand, beautiful sight to
see those ships burn.

"I was ashore yesterday, and we destroyed all the guns. I managed to
get a few souvenirs. Two torpedo boats attempted to blow us up, but
one was sunk and one was beached. I saw her. She was full of holes and
blood was all over her bow ...

"I hope the ships at home have as good luck as us. I wrote this on
captured paper with a Spanish officer's pen."

Like many other vessels in the navy, the Olympia has a complete
printing outfit on board, and issues, at intervals, a very creditable
sheet called the "Bounding Billow." This is its account of a Spanish
shot:

"One shot struck the Baltimore in the starboard waist, just abaft one
of the six-inch guns. It passed through the hammock nettings, exploded
a couple of three-pounder shells, wounding six men, then across the
deck, striking the cylinder of a gun, making it temporarily useless,
then running around the shield it spent itself between two
ventilators, just forward of the engine-room hatch. The shell is in
possession of the captain."

[Illustration: Strange course of a Spanish Shell.]

When the news of the glorious victory in Manila Bay reached the United
States, the people went wild with joy. Commodore Dewey was thanked by
Congress, and afterwards was made a rear-admiral. In December,
Congress revived the grade and rank of admiral and conferred it upon
Rear-Admiral Dewey, and he and all of his men were presented with
medals of honor made expressly for the purpose. The raising of Admiral
Dewey's new flag on the Olympia was an interesting ceremony. As the
blue bunting with its four white stars fluttered to the peak of the
flagship, the crews of all the vessels in the fleet were at quarters;
the officers in full dress for the occasion. The marines paraded; the
drums gave four "ruffles" as the Admiral stepped upon the deck; the
Olympiads band struck up "Hail to the Chief," and an admiral's salute
of seventeen guns echoed across Manila Bay from every American ship;
followed by salutes of the same number of guns from each foreign war
vessel in the harbor.

[Illustration: The Dewey Medal of Honor.]




CHAPTER V.

THE MERRIMAC.


While Admiral Sampson had been fixing the blockade he had also been
forming plans to close the channel, and so keep any large ship from
stealing out of the bay. For, although our men watched closely, there
was always a chance that in a fog or storm the Spanish ships might
slip out without being seen. Admiral Sampson knew that the Spaniards
could remove anything that might be sunk to close the channel, but the
work would take time, and meanwhile our Army might arrive on the land
back of Santiago, and then our Army and Navy could help each other.
Time was what was needed in order to have all things ready for
forcing the Spaniards out of Santiago and taking possession of the
city.

[Illustration: Lieut. Richmond P. Hobson.]

So, plans were made for sinking a coal steamer across the narrowest
part of the channel, and thus blocking the way. Now you shall hear of
one of the bravest deeds ever done in war.

The work of closing the channel was put into the hands of Lieutenant
Hobson. The collier Merrimac was chosen as the vessel to be sunk. You
have no idea how much had to be done before the Merrimac was ready.
There were hours and hours of work. The crew had to take off all the
things that were not to be sunk, the machinery had to be fixed in
certain ways, the heavy anchors had to be placed in the right parts,
and the torpedoes, which Lieutenant Hobson made for blowing holes in
the vessel at the right moment, had to be fitted into their places.
More than two thousand tons of coal had to be shoveled away from
certain places in the hold to make room for the torpedoes and to leave
spaces for the water to rush in and sink the vessel. So, much hard
work was done before the good collier was ready to be forced under the
waves.

There was only a small chance that the men who took the Merrimac into
the channel would ever see their friends again. Death in the waves, or
death in the hands of the Spaniards, was the prospect. Lieutenant
Hobson said that he would not take one man more than was needed. A
signal was put up on all the ships, to find out the men who were
willing to go in the Merrimac. Hundreds of brave fellows sent in their
names, begged to go, gave good reasons why they thought they ought to
go, and were grieved to be refused. Lieutenant Hobson chose only six,
but at the last minute a seventh man got his chance; so, counting
Lieutenant Hobson, there were eight men going to almost certain death.

After the passing away of the old wooden ships of the navy, and before
our war with Spain, it was often said that opportunities for
individual bravery and daring had departed from the navy; but this was
disproved in the case of Lieutenant Hobson and his men, and in many
other instances. Every man in the fleet was ready to go on the
Merrimac and do what he was told to do; and so long as such men man
our ships our navy can never be conquered. They will fight to the
uttermost and go down with their colors rather than strike them.

Thursday evening, the second of June, arrives, and the Merrimac is all
ready for her last voyage. The men are on board, waiting for the time
to start. Quietly and fearlessly they pass the night, but they do not
sleep, they cannot sleep. Behind the Merrimac, farther out at sea,
stand the faithful vessels of our fleet, huge, pale shadows in the
night. The full moon lights up the channel that the Merrimac will
enter after awhile when the moon is low. On both sides of the channel
rise the high cliffs with their forts. Morro Castle frowns upon the
scene. Beyond--far beyond, are the mountain tops.

A basket of food and a kettle of coffee had been sent on board by the
flagship, and after midnight the men sit down on deck to eat their
last meal on board the Merrimac.

A little before two o'clock, Friday morning, June 3d, the Merrimac
starts for the channel. Each man is at his post; each knows his duty
and intends to do it. The men are not wearing their naval uniforms,
but are clad only in woolen underclothes, woolen stockings, with no
shoes. Each man wears a life-preserver, and a belt with a revolver
fastened to it.

On, on goes the vessel, swiftly, surely, heading for the channel.
Suddenly shots begin to pour upon the Merrimac; the Spaniards in the
forts have seen her approach. Still she plunges on, not heeding the
fire from the forts. Lieutenant Hobson gives the signal to stop the
engine, to turn the vessel in the right way across the channel, to
fire the torpedoes, to drop the anchors. Shells from the forts are
exploding all around, and the noise is terrible. But hard luck meets
the Merrimac. A shot has broken her rudder, so she cannot be steered;
a shot has broken the chain of one of her anchors, so the anchor is
gone; some of the torpedoes will not go off, so not enough holes can
be made to sink the Merrimac quickly; the tide is sweeping her into
the channel farther than she ought to go.
