three hunters.  By the middle of August, the rind of the birch is in
perfect condition for peeling.  The first thing the hunters did was to
slit off the bark of a thick-girthed birch and with cedar linings make
themselves a skiff.  Then they prepared to lay up a store of meat for
the winter's war-raids.  Before ice forms a skim across the still
pools, nibbled chips betray where a beaver colony is at work; so the
hunters began setting beaver traps.  One night as they were returning
to their wigwam, there came through the leafy darkness the weird sound
of a man singing.  It was a solitary Algonquin captive, who called out
that he had been on the track of a bear since daybreak.  He probably
belonged to some well-known Iroquois, for he was welcomed to the
camp-fire.  The sight of a face from Three Rivers roused the
Algonquin's memories of his northern home.  In the noise of the
crackling fire, he succeeded in telling Radisson, without being
overheard by the Iroquois, that he had been a captive for two years and
longed to escape.

"Do you love the French?" the Algonquin asked Radisson.

"Do you love the Algonquin?" returned Radisson, knowing they were
watched.

"As I do my own nation."  Then leaning across to Radisson,
"Brother--white man!--Let us escape!  The Three Rivers--it is not far
off!  Will you live like a Huron in bondage, or have your liberty with
the French?"  Then, lowering his voice, "Let us kill all three this
night when they are asleep!"

From such a way of escape, the French youth held back.  The Algonquin
continued to urge him.  By this time, Radisson must have heard from
returning Iroquois warriors that they had slain the governor of Three
Rivers, Duplessis-Kerbodot, and eleven other Frenchmen, among whom was
the husband of Radisson's eldest sister, Marguerite.[9]

While Radisson was still hesitating, the suspicious Iroquois demanded
what so much whispering was about; but the alert Algonquin promptly
quieted their fears by trumping up some hunting story.  Wearied from
their day's hunt, the three Mohawks slept heavily round the camp-fire.
They had not the least suspicion of danger, for they had stacked their
arms carelessly against the trees of the forest.  Terrified lest the
Algonquin should attempt to carry out his threat, Radisson pretended to
be asleep.  Rising noiselessly, the Algonquin sat down by the fire.
The Mohawks slept on.  The Algonquin gave Radisson a push.  The French
boy looked up to see the Algonquin studying the postures of the
sleeping forms.  The dying fire glimmered like a blotch of blood under
the trees.  Stepping stealthy as a cat over the sleeping men, the
Indian took possession of their firearms.  Drawn by a kind of horror,
Radisson had risen.  The Algonquin thrust one of the tomahawks into the
French lad's hands and pointed without a word at the three sleeping
Mohawks.  Then the Indian began the black work.  The Mohawk nearest the
fire never knew that he had been struck, and died without a sound.
Radisson tried to imitate the relentless Algonquin, but, unnerved with
horror, he bungled the blow and lost hold of the hatchet just as it
struck the Mohawk's head.  The Iroquois sprang up with a shout that
awakened the third man, but the Algonquin was ready.  Radisson's blow
proved fatal.  The victim reeled back dead, and the third man was
already despatched by the Algonquin.

Radisson was free.  It was a black deed that freed him, but not half so
black as the deeds perpetrated in civilized wars for less cause; and
for that deed Radisson was to pay swift retribution.

Taking the scalps as trophies to attest his word, the Algonquin threw
the bodies into the river.  He seized all the belongings of the dead
men but one gun and then launched out with Radisson on the river.  The
French youth was conscience-stricken.  "I was sorry to have been in
such an encounter," he writes, "but it was too late to repent."  Under
cover of the night mist and shore foliage, they slipped away with the
current.  At first dawn streak, while the mist still hid them, they
landed, carried their canoe to a sequestered spot in the dense forest,
and lay hidden under the upturned skiff all that day, tormented by
swarms of mosquitoes and flies, but not daring to move from
concealment.  At nightfall, they again launched down-stream, keeping
always in the shadows of the shore till mist and darkness shrouded
them, then sheering off for mid-current, where they paddled for dear
life.  Where camp-fires glimmered on the banks, they glided past with
motionless paddles.  Across Lake Champlain, across the Richelieu, over
long _portages_ where every shadow took the shape of an ambushed
Iroquois, for fourteen nights they travelled, when at last with many
windings and false alarms they swept out on the wide surface of Lake
St. Peter in the St. Lawrence.

Within a day's journey of Three Rivers, they were really in greater
danger than they had been in the forests of Lake Champlain.  Iroquois
had infested that part of the St. Lawrence for more than a year.  The
forest of the south shore, the rush-grown marshes, the wooded islands,
all afforded impenetrable hiding.  It was four in the morning when they
reached Lake St. Peter.  Concealing their canoe, they withdrew to the
woods, cooked their breakfast, covered the fire, and lay down to sleep.
In a couple of hours the Algonquin impatiently wakened Radisson and
urged him to cross the lake to the north shore on the Three Rivers
side.  Radisson warned the Indian that the Iroquois were ever lurking
about Three Rivers.  The Indian would not wait till sunset.  "Let us
go," he said.  "We are past fear.  Let us shake off the yoke of these
whelps that have killed so many French and black robes (priests). . . .
If you come not now that we are so near, I leave you, and will tell the
governor you were afraid to come."

Radisson's judgment was overruled by the impatient Indian.  They pushed
their skiff out from the rushes.  The water lay calm as a sea of
silver.  They paddled directly across to get into hiding on the north
shore.  Halfway across Radisson, who was at the bow, called out that he
saw shadows on the water ahead.  The Indian stood up and declared that
the shadow was the reflection of a flying bird.  Barely had they gone a
boat length when the shadows multiplied.  They were the reflections of
Iroquois ambushed among the rushes.  Heading the canoe back for the
south shore, they raced for their lives.  The Iroquois pursued in their
own boats.  About a mile from the shore, the strength of the fugitives
fagged.  Knowing that the Iroquois were gaining fast, Radisson threw
out the loathsome scalps that the Algonquin had persisted in carrying.
By that strange fatality which seems to follow crime, instead of
sinking, the hairy scalps floated on the surface of the water back to
the pursuing Iroquois.  Shouts of rage broke from the warriors.
Radisson's skiff was so near the south shore that he could see the
pebbled bottom of the lake; but the water was too deep to wade and too
clear for a dive, and there was no driftwood to afford hiding.  Then a
crash of musketry from the Iroquois knocked the bottom out of the
canoe.  The Algonquin fell dead with two bullet wounds in his head and
the canoe gradually filled, settled, and sank, with the young Frenchman
clinging to the cross-bar mute as stone.  Just as it disappeared under
water, Radisson was seized, and the dead Algonquin was thrown into the
Mohawk boats.

Radisson alone remained to pay the penalty of a double crime; and he
might well have prayed for the boat to sink.  The victors shouted their
triumph.  Hurrying ashore, they kindled a great fire.  They tore the
heart from the dead Algonquin, transfixed the head on a pike, and cast
the mutilated body into the flames for those cannibal rites in which
savages thought they gained courage by eating the flesh of their
enemies.  Radisson was rifled of clothes and arms, trussed at the
elbows, roped round the waist, and driven with blows back to the
canoes.  There were other captives among the Mohawks.  As the canoes
emerged from the islands, Radisson counted one hundred and fifty
Iroquois warriors, with two French captives, one white woman, and
seventeen Hurons.  Flaunting from the canoe prows were the scalps of
eleven Algonquins.  The victors fired off their muskets and shouted
defiance until the valley rang.  As the seventy-five canoes turned up
the Richelieu River for the country of the Iroquois, hope died in the
captive Hurons and there mingled with the chant of the Mohawks'
war-songs, the low monotonous dirge of the prisoners:--

  "If I die, I die valiant!
  I go without fear
  To that land where brave men
  Have gone long before me--
  If I die, I die valiant."

Twelve miles up the Richelieu, the Iroquois landed to camp.  The
prisoners were pegged out on the sand, elbows trussed to knees, each
captive tied to a post.  In this fashion they lay every night of
encampment, tortured by sand-flies that they were powerless to drive
off.  At the entrance to the Mohawk village, a yoke was fastened to the
captives' necks by placing pairs of saplings one on each side down the
line of prisoners.  By the rope round the waist of the foremost
prisoner, they were led slowly between the lines of tormentors.  The
captives were ordered to sing.  If one refused or showed fear, a Mohawk
struck off a finger with a hatchet, or tore the prisoners' nails out,
or thrust red-hot irons into the muscles of the bound arms.[10]  As
Radisson appeared, he was recognized with shouts of rage by the friends
of the murdered Mohawks.  Men, women, and children armed with rods and
skull-crackers--leather bags loaded with stones--rushed on the slowly
moving file of prisoners.

"They began to cry from both sides," says Radisson; "we marching one
after another, environed with people to witness that hideous sight,
which seriously may be called the image of Hell in this world."

The prisoners moved mournfully on.  The Hurons chanted their death
dirge.  The Mohawk women uttered screams of mockery.  Suddenly there
broke from the throng of onlookers the Iroquois family that had adopted
Radisson.  Pushing through the crew of torturers, the mother caught
Radisson by the hair, calling him by the name of her dead son, "Orimha!
Orimha!"  She cut the thongs that bound him to the poles, and wresting
him free shoved him to her husband, who led Radisson to their own lodge.

"Thou fool," cried the old chief, "thou wast my son!  Thou makest
thyself an enemy!  Thou lovest us not, though we saved thy life!
Wouldst kill me, too?"  Then, with a rough push to a mat on the ground,
"Chagon--now, be merry!  It's a merry business you've got into!  Give
him something to eat!"

Trembling with fear, young Radisson put as bold a face on as he could
and made a show of eating what the squaw placed before him.  He was
still relating his adventures when there came a roar of anger from the
Mohawks outside, who had discovered his absence from the line.  A
moment later the rabble broke into the lodge.  Jostling the friendly
chief aside, the Mohawk warriors carried Radisson back to the orgies of
the torture.  The prisoners had been taken out of the stocks and placed
on several scaffoldings.  One poor Frenchman fell to the ground bruised
and unable to rise.  The Iroquois tore the scalp from his head and
threw him into the fire.  That was Radisson's first glimpse of what was
in store for him.  Then he, too, stood on the scaffolding among the
other prisoners, who never ceased singing their death song.  In the
midst of these horrors--_diableries_, the Jesuits called them--as if
the very elements had been moved with pity, there burst over the
darkened forest a terrific hurricane of hail and rain.  This put out
the fires and drove all the tormentors away but a few impish children,
who stayed to pluck nails from the hands and feet of the captives and
shoot arrows with barbed points at the naked bodies.  Every iniquity
that cruelty could invent, these children practised on the captives.
Red-hot spears were brought from the lodge fires and thrust into the
prisoners.  The mutilated finger ends were ground between stones.
Thongs were twisted round wrists and ankles, by sticks put through a
loop, till flesh was cut to the bone.  As the rain ceased falling, a
woman, who was probably the wife of one of the murdered Mohawks,
brought her little boy to cut one of Radisson's fingers with a flint
stone.  The child was too young and ran away from the gruesome task.

Gathering darkness fell over the horrible spectacle.  The exhausted
captives, some in a delirium from pain, others unconscious, were led to
separate lodges, or dragged over the ground, and left tied for the
night.  The next morning all were returned to the scaffolds, but the
first day had glutted the Iroquois appetite for tortures.  The friendly
family was permitted to approach Radisson.  The mother brought him food
and told him that the Council Lodge had decided not to kill him for
that day--they wanted the young white warrior for their own ranks; but
even as the cheering hope was uttered, came a brave with a pipe of live
coals, in which he thrust and held Radisson's thumb.  No sooner had the
tormentor left than the woman bound up the burn and oiled Radisson's
wounds.  He suffered no abuse that day till night, when the soles of
both feet were burned.  The majority of the captives were flung into a
great bonfire.  On the third day of torture he almost lost his life.
First came a child to gnaw at his fingers.  Then a man appeared armed
for the ghastly work of mutilation.  Both these the Iroquois father of
Radisson sent away.  Once, when none of the friendly family happened to
be near, Radisson was seized and bound for burning, but by chance the
lighted faggot scorched his executioner.  A friendly hand slashed the
thongs that bound him, and he was drawn back to the scaffold.

Past caring whether he lived or died, and in too great agony from the
burns of his feet to realize where he was going, Radisson was conducted
to the Great Council.  Sixty old men sat on a circle of mats, smoking,
round the central fire.  Before them stood seven other captives.
Radisson only was still bound.  A gust of wind from the opening lodge
door cleared the smoke for an instant and there entered Radisson's
Indian father, clad in the regalia of a mighty chief.  Tomahawk and
calumet and medicine-bag were in his hands.  He took his place in the
circle of councillors.  Judgment was to be given on the remaining
prisoners.

After passing the Council Pipe from hand to hand in solemn silence, the
sachems prepared to give their views.  One arose, and offering the
smoke of incense to the four winds of heaven to invoke witness to the
justice of the trial, gave his opinion on the matter of life or death.
Each of the chiefs in succession spoke.  Without any warning whatever,
one chief rose and summarily tomahawked three of the captives.  That
had been the sentence.  The rest were driven, like sheep for the
shambles, to life-long slavery.

Radisson was left last.  His case was important.  He had sanctioned the
murder of three Mohawks.  Not for a moment since he was recaptured had
they dared to untie the hands of so dangerous a prisoner.  Amid deathly
silence, the Iroquois father stood up.  Flinging down medicine-bag, fur
robe, wampum belts, and tomahawk, he pointed to the nineteen scars upon
his side, each of which signified an enemy slain by his own hand.  Then
the old Mohawk broke into one of those impassioned rhapsodies of
eloquence which delighted the savage nature, calling back to each of
the warriors recollection of victories for the Iroquois.  His eyes took
fire from memory of heroic battle.  The councillors shook off their
imperturbable gravity and shouted "Ho, ho!"  Each man of them had a
memory of his part in those past glories.  And as they applauded, there
glided into the wigwam the mother, singing some battle-song of valor,
dancing and gesticulating round and round the lodge in dizzy,
serpentine circlings, that illustrated in pantomime those battles of
long ago.  Gliding ghostily from the camp-fire to the outer dark, she
suddenly stopped, stood erect, advanced a step, and with all her might
threw one belt of priceless wampum at the councillors' feet, one
necklace over the prisoner's head.

Before the applause could cease or the councillors' ardor cool, the
adopted brother sprang up, hatchet in hand, and sang of other
victories.  Then, with a delicacy of etiquette which white pleaders do
not always observe, father and son withdrew from the Council Lodge to
let the jury deliberate.  The old sachems were disturbed.  They had
been moved more than their wont.  Twenty withdrew to confer.  Dusk
gathered deeper and deeper over the forests of the Mohawk Valley.
Tawny faces came peering at the doors, waiting for the decision.
Outsiders tore the skins from the walls of the lodge that they, too,
might witness the memorable trial of the boy prisoner.  Sachem after
sachem rose and spoke.  Tobacco was sacrificed to the fire-god.  Would
the relatives of the dead Mohawks consider the wampum belts full
compensation?  Could the Iroquois suffer a youth to live who had joined
the murderers of the Mohawks?  Could the Mohawks afford to offend the
great Iroquois chief who was the French youth's friend?  As they
deliberated, the other councillors returned, accompanied by all the
members of Radisson's friendly family.  Again the father sang and
spoke.  This time when he finished, instead of sitting down, he caught
the necklace of wampum from Radisson's neck, threw it at the feet of
the oldest sachem, cut the captive's bonds, and, amid shouts of
applause, set the white youth free.


One of the incomprehensible things to civilization is how a white man
_can_ degenerate to savagery.  Young Radisson's life is an
illustration.  In the first transports of his freedom, with the Mohawk
women dancing and singing around him, the men shouting, he leaped up,
oblivious of pain; but when the flush of ecstasy had passed, he sank to
the mat of the Iroquois lodge, and he was unable to use his burned feet
for more than a month.  During this time the Iroquois dressed his
wounds, brought him the choice portions of the hunt, gave him clean
clothing purchased at Orange (Albany), and attended to his wants as if
he had been a prince.  No doubt the bright eyes of the swarthy young
French boy moved to pity the hearts of the Mohawk mothers, and his
courage had won him favor among the warriors.  He was treated like a
king.  The women waited upon him like slaves, and the men gave him
presents of firearms and ammunition--the Indian's most precious
possessions.  Between flattered vanity and indolence, other white men,
similarly treated, have lost their self-respect.  Beckworth, of the
Missouri, became to all intents and purposes a savage; and Bird, of the
Blackfeet, degenerated lower than the Indians.  Other Frenchmen
captured from the St. Lawrence, and white women taken from the New
England colonies, became so enamored of savage life that they refused
to leave the Indian lodges when peace had liberated them.  Not so
Radisson.  Though only seventeen, flattered vanity never caused him to
forget the gratitude he owed the Mohawk family.  Though he relates his
life with a frankness that leaves nothing untold, he never at any time
returned treachery for kindness.  The very chivalry of the French
nature endangered him all the more.  Would he forget his manhood, his
birthright of a superior race, his inheritance of nobility from a
family that stood foremost among the _noblesse_ of New France?

[Illustration: Albany, from an Old Print.]


The spring of 1653 came with unloosening of the rivers and stirring of
the forest sap and fret of the warrior blood.  Radisson's Iroquois
father held great feasts in which he heaved up the hatchet to break the
kettle of sagamite against all enemies.  Would Radisson go on the
war-path with the braves, or stay at home with the women and so lose
the respect of the tribe?  In the hope of coming again within reach of
Three Rivers, he offered to join the Iroquois in their wars.  The
Mohawks were delighted with his spirit, but they feared to lose their
young warrior.  Accepting his offer, they refused to let him accompany
them to Quebec, but assigned him to a band of young braves, who were to
raid the border-lands between the Huron country of the Upper Lakes and
the St. Lawrence.  This was not what Radisson wanted, but he could not
draw back.  There followed months of wild wanderings round the regions
of Niagara.  The band of young braves passed dangerous places with
great precipices and a waterfall, where the river was a mile wide and
unfrozen.  Radisson was constrained to witness many acts against the
Eries, which must have one of two effects on white blood,--either turn
the white man into a complete savage, or disgust him utterly with
savage life.  Leaving the Mohawk village amid a blare of guns and
shouts, the young braves on their maiden venture passed successively
through the lodges of Oneidas, Onondagas, Senecas, and Cayugas, where
they were feasted almost to death by the Iroquois Confederacy.[11]
Then they marched to the vast wilderness of snow-padded forests and
