in the following year, it occurred to our government that perhaps
there was a more direct as well as a more manly way of dealing with the
Barbary pirates than by feebly paying them tribute, and in 1801 a small
squadron, under Commodore Dale, proceeded to the Mediterranean.

At the same time events occurred which showed strikingly the absurdity
as well as the weakness of this policy of paying blackmail to pirates.
The Bashaw of Tripoli, complaining that we had given more money to
some of the Algerian ministers than we had to him, and also that we had
presented Algiers with a frigate, declared war upon us, and cut down the
flag-staff in front of the residence of the American consul. At the same
time, and for the same reason, Morocco and Tunis began to grumble at the
treatment which they had received. The fact was that, with nations as
with individuals, when the payment of blackmail is once begun there is
no end to it. The appearance, however, of our little squadron in the
Mediterranean showed at once the superiority of a policy of force over
one of cowardly submission. Morocco and Tunis immediately stopped their
grumbling and came to terms with the United States, and this left us
free to deal with Tripoli.

Commodore Dale had sailed before the declaration of war by Tripoli was
known, and he was therefore hampered by his orders, which permitted
him only to protect our commerce, and which forbade actual hostilities.
Nevertheless, even under these limited orders, the Enterprise, of
twelve guns, commanded by Lieutenant Sterrett, fought an action with the
Tripolitan ship Tripoli, of fourteen guns. The engagement lasted three
hours, when the Tripoli struck, having lost her mizzenmast, and with
twenty of her crew killed and thirty wounded. Sterrett, having no orders
to make captures, threw all the guns and ammunition of the Tripoli
overboard, cut away her remaining masts, and left her with only one spar
and a single sail to drift back to Tripoli, as a hint to the Bashaw of
the new American policy.

In 1803 the command of our fleet in the Mediterranean was taken by
Commodore Preble, who had just succeeded in forcing satisfaction
from Morocco for an attack made upon our merchantmen by a vessel from
Tangier. He also proclaimed a blockade of Tripoli and was preparing
to enforce it when the news reached him that the frigate Philadelphia,
forty-four guns, commanded by Captain Bainbridge, and one of the best
ships in our navy, had gone upon a reef in the harbor of Tripoli, while
pursuing a vessel there, and had been surrounded and captured, with all
her crew, by the Tripolitan gunboats, when she was entirely helpless
either to fight or sail. This was a very serious blow to our navy and to
our operations against Tripoli. It not only weakened our forces, but it
was also a great help to the enemy. The Tripolitans got the Philadelphia
off the rocks, towed her into the harbor, and anchored her close under
the guns of their forts. They also replaced her batteries, and prepared
to make her ready for sea, where she would have been a most formidable
danger to our shipping.

Under these circumstances Stephen Decatur, a young lieutenant in command
of the Enterprise, offered to Commodore Preble to go into the harbor and
destroy the Philadelphia. Some delay ensued, as our squadron was driven
by severe gales from the Tripolitan coast; but at last, in January,
1804, Preble gave orders to Decatur to undertake the work for which
he had volunteered. A small vessel known as a ketch had been recently
captured from the Tripolitans by Decatur, and this prize was now named
the Intrepid, and assigned to him for the work he had in hand. He took
seventy men from his own ship, the Enterprise, and put them on the
Intrepid, and then, accompanied by Lieutenant Stewart in the Siren, who
was to support him, he set sail for Tripoli. He and his crew were very
much cramped as well as badly fed on the little vessel which had been
given to them, but they succeeded, nevertheless, in reaching Tripoli in
safety, accompanied by the Siren.

For nearly a week they were unable to approach the harbor, owing to
severe gales which threatened the loss of their vessel; but on February
16 the weather moderated and Decatur determined to go in. It is well to
recall, briefly, the extreme peril of the attack which he was about to
make. The Philadelphia, with forty guns mounted, double-shotted, and
ready for firing, and manned by a full complement of men, was moored
within half a gunshot of the Bashaw's castle, the mole and crown
batteries, and within range of ten other batteries, mounting,
altogether, one hundred and fifteen guns. Some Tripolitan cruisers, two
galleys, and nineteen gunboats also lay between the Philadelphia and the
shore. Into the midst of this powerful armament Decatur had to go with
his little vessel of sixty tons, carrying four small guns and having a
crew of seventy-five men.

The Americans, however, were entirely undismayed by the odds against
them, and at seven o'clock Decatur went into the harbor between the
reef and shoal which formed its mouth. He steered on steadily toward the
Philadelphia, the breeze getting constantly lighter, and by half-past
nine was within two hundred yards of the frigate. As they approached
Decatur stood at the helm with the pilot, only two or three men showing
on deck and the rest of the crew lying hidden under the bulwarks. In
this way he drifted to within nearly twenty yards of the Philadelphia.
The suspicions of the Tripolitans, however, were not aroused, and when
they hailed the Intrepid, the pilot answered that they had lost their
anchors in a gale, and asked that they might run a warp to the frigate
and ride by her. While the talk went on the Intrepid's boat shoved off
with the rope, and pulling to the fore-chains of the Philadelphia, made
the line fast. A few of the crew then began to haul on the lines, and
thus the Intrepid was drawn gradually toward the frigate.

The suspicions of the Tripolitans were now at last awakened. They raised
the cry of "Americanos!" and ordered off the Intrepid, but it was too
late. As the vessels came in contact, Decatur sprang up the main chains
of the Philadelphia, calling out the order to board. He was rapidly
followed by his officers and men, and as they swarmed over the rails and
came upon the deck, the Tripolitan crew gathered, panic-stricken, in a
confused mass on the forecastle. Decatur waited a moment until his men
were behind him, and then, placing himself at their head, drew his sword
and rushed upon the Tripolitans. There was a very short struggle, and
the Tripolitans, crowded together, terrified and surprised, were cut
down or driven overboard. In five minutes the ship was cleared of the
enemy.

Decatur would have liked to have taken the Philadelphia out of the
harbor, but that was impossible. He therefore gave orders to burn the
ship, and his men, who had been thoroughly instructed in what they were
to do, dispersed into all parts of the frigate with the combustibles
which had been prepared, and in a few minutes, so well and quickly was
the work done, the flames broke out in all parts of the Philadelphia. As
soon as this was effected the order was given to return to the Intrepid.
Without confusion the men obeyed. It was a moment of great danger, for
fire was breaking out on all sides, and the Intrepid herself, filled
as she was with powder and combustibles, was in great peril of sudden
destruction. The rapidity of Decatur's movements, however, saved
everything. The cables were cut, the sweeps got out, and the Intrepid
drew rapidly away from the burning frigate. It was a magnificent
sight as the flames burst out over the Philadephia and ran rapidly and
fiercely up the masts and rigging. As her guns became heated they were
discharged, one battery pouring its shots into the town. Finally the
cables parted, and then the Philadelphia, a mass of flames, drifted
across the harbor, and blew up. Meantime the batteries of the shipping
and the castle had been turned upon the Intrepid, but although the
shot struck all around her, she escaped successfully with only one shot
through her mainsail, and, joining the Siren, bore away.

This successful attack was carried through by the cool courage of
Decatur and the admirable discipline of his men. The hazard was very
great, the odds were very heavy, and everything depended on the nerve
with which the attack was made and the completeness of the surprise.
Nothing miscarried, and no success could have been more complete.
Nelson, at that time in the Mediterranean, and the best judge of a naval
exploit as well as the greatest naval commander who has ever lived,
pronounced it "the most bold and daring act of the age." We meet no
single feat exactly like it in our own naval history, brilliant as that
has been, until we come to Cushing's destruction of the Albemarle in
the war of the rebellion. In the years that have elapsed, and among the
great events that have occurred since that time, Decatur's burning of
the Philadephia has been well-nigh forgotten; but it is one of those
feats of arms which illustrate the high courage of American seamen, and
which ought always to be remembered.




THE CRUISE OF THE "WASP"

     A crash as when some swollen cloud
      Cracks o'er the tangled trees!
     With side to side, and spar to spar,
      Whose smoking decks are these?
     I know St. George's blood-red cross,
      Thou mistress of the seas,
     But what is she whose streaming bars
      Roll out before the breeze?

     Ah, well her iron ribs are knit,
      Whose thunders strive to quell
     The bellowing throats, the blazing lips,
      That pealed the Armada's knell!
     The mist was cleared,--a wreath of stars
      Rose o'er the crimsoned swell,
     And, wavering from its haughty peak,
      The cross of England fell!
                           --Holmes.


In the war of 1812 the little American navy, including only a dozen
frigates and sloops of war, won a series of victories against the
English, the hitherto undoubted masters of the sea, that attracted an
attention altogether out of proportion to the force of the combatants
or the actual damage done. For one hundred and fifty years the English
ships of war had failed to find fit rivals in those of any other
European power, although they had been matched against each in turn; and
when the unknown navy of the new nation growing up across the Atlantic
did what no European navy had ever been able to do, not only the English
and Americans, but the people of Continental Europe as well, regarded
the feat as important out of all proportion to the material aspects of
the case. The Americans first proved that the English could be beaten
at their own game on the sea. They did what the huge fleets of France,
Spain, and Holland had failed to do, and the great modern writers
on naval warfare in Continental Europe--men like Jurien de la
Graviere--have paid the same attention to these contests of frigates and
sloops that they give to whole fleet actions of other wars.

Among the famous ships of the Americans in this war were two named the
Wasp. The first was an eighteen-gun ship-sloop, which at the very
outset of the war captured a British brig-sloop of twenty guns, after
an engagement in which the British fought with great gallantry, but were
knocked to Pieces, while the Americans escaped comparatively unscathed.
Immediately afterward a British seventy-four captured the victor. In
memory of her the Americans gave the same name to one of the new sloops
they were building. These sloops were stoutly made, speedy vessels which
in strength and swiftness compared favorably with any ships of their
class in any other navy of the day, for the American shipwrights were
already as famous as the American gunners and seamen. The new Wasp, like
her sister ships, carried twenty-two guns and a crew of one hundred
and seventy men, and was ship-rigged. Twenty of her guns were 32-pound
carronades, while for bow-chasers she had two "long Toms." It was in
the year 1814 that the Wasp sailed from the United States to prey on the
navy and commerce of Great Britain. Her commander was a gallant South
Carolinian named Captain Johnson Blakeley. Her crew were nearly all
native Americans, and were an exceptionally fine set of men. Instead of
staying near the American coasts or of sailing the high seas, the Wasp
at once headed boldly for the English Channel, to carry the war to the
very doors of the enemy.

At that time the English fleets had destroyed the navies of every other
power of Europe, and had obtained such complete supremacy over the
French that the French fleets were kept in port. Off these ports lay the
great squadrons of the English ships of the line, never, in gale or
in calm, relaxing their watch upon the rival war-ships of the French
emperor. So close was the blockade of the French ports, and so hopeless
were the French of making headway in battle with their antagonists,
that not only the great French three-deckers and two-deckers, but their
frigates and sloops as well, lay harmless in their harbors, and the
English ships patroled the seas unchecked in every direction. A few
French privateers still slipped out now and then, and the far bolder and
more formidable American privateersmen drove hither and thither across
the ocean in their swift schooners and brigantines, and harried the
English commerce without mercy.

The Wasp proceeded at once to cruise in the English Channel and off
the coasts of England, France, and Spain. Here the water was traversed
continually by English fleets and squadrons and single ships of war,
which were sometimes covoying detachments of troops for Wellington's
Peninsular army, sometimes guarding fleets of merchant vessels bound
homeward, and sometimes merely cruising for foes. It was this spot,
right in the teeth of the British naval power, that the Wasp chose for
her cruising ground. Hither and thither she sailed through the narrow
seas, capturing and destroying the merchantmen, and by the seamanship
of her crew and the skill and vigilance of her commander, escaping the
pursuit of frigate and ship of the line. Before she had been long on the
ground, one June morning, while in chase of a couple of merchant ships,
she spied a sloop of war, the British brig Reindeer, of eighteen guns
and a hundred and twenty men. The Reindeer was a weaker ship than the
Wasp, her guns were lighter, and her men fewer; but her commander,
Captain Manners, was one of the most gallant men in the splendid British
navy, and he promptly took up the gage of battle which the Wasp threw
down.

The day was calm and nearly still; only a light wind stirred across the
sea. At one o'clock the Wasp's drum beat to quarters, and the sailors
and marines gathered at their appointed posts. The drum of the Reindeer
responded to the challenge, and with her sails reduced to fighting trim,
her guns run out, and every man ready, she came down upon the Yankee
ship. On her forecastle she had rigged a light carronade, and coming up
from behind, she five times discharged this pointblank into the American
sloop; then in the light air the latter luffed round, firing her guns
as they bore, and the two ships engaged yard-arm to yard-arm. The guns
leaped and thundered as the grimy gunners hurled them out to fire and
back again to load, working like demons. For a few minutes the cannonade
was tremendous, and the men in the tops could hardly see the decks for
the wreck of flying splinters. Then the vessels ground together, and
through the open ports the rival gunners hewed, hacked, and thrust at
one another, while the black smoke curled up from between the hulls. The
English were suffering terribly. Captain Manners himself was wounded,
and realizing that he was doomed to defeat unless by some desperate
effort he could avert it, he gave the signal to board. At the call the
boarders gathered, naked to the waist, black with powder and spattered
with blood, cutlas and pistol in hand. But the Americans were ready.
Their marines were drawn up on deck, the pikemen stood behind the
bulwarks, and the officers watched, cool and alert, every movement of
the foe. Then the British sea-dogs tumbled aboard, only to perish by
shot or steel. The combatants slashed and stabbed with savage fury, and
the assailants were driven back. Manners sprang to their head to lead
them again himself, when a ball fired by one of the sailors in the
American tops crashed through his skull, and he fell, sword in hand,
with his face to the foe, dying as honorable a death as ever a brave man
died in fighting against odds for the flag of his country. As he fell
the American officers passed the word to board. With wild cheers the
fighting sailormen sprang forward, sweeping the wreck of the British
force before them, and in a minute the Reindeer was in their possession.
All of her officers, and nearly two thirds of the crew, were killed or
wounded; but they had proved themselves as skilful as they were brave,
and twenty-six of the Americans had been killed or wounded.

The Wasp set fire to her prize, and after retiring to a French port to
refit, came out again to cruise. For some time she met no antagonist
of her own size with which to wage war, and she had to exercise the
sharpest vigilance to escape capture. Late one September afternoon, when
she could see ships of war all around her, she selected one which was
isolated from the others, and decided to run alongside her and try to
sink her after nightfall. Accordingly she set her sails in pursuit, and
drew steadily toward her antagonist, a big eighteen-gun brig, the Avon,
a ship more powerful than the Reindeer. The Avon kept signaling to two
other British war vessels which were in sight--one an eighteen-gun brig
and the other a twenty-gun ship; they were so close that the Wasp
was afraid they would interfere before the combat could be ended.
Nevertheless, Blakeley persevered, and made his attack with equal skill
and daring. It was after dark when he ran alongside his opponent,
and they began forthwith to exchange furious broadsides. As the ships
plunged and wallowed in the seas, the Americans could see the clusters
of topmen in the rigging of their opponent, but they knew nothing of
the vessel's name or of her force, save only so far as they felt it. The
firing was fast and furious, but the British shot with bad aim, while
the skilled American gunners hulled their opponent at almost every
discharge. In a very few minutes the Avon was in a sinking condition,
and she struck her flag and cried for quarter, having lost forty or
fifty men, while but three of the Americans had fallen. Before the Wasp
could take possession of her opponent, however, the two war vessels
to which the Avon had been signaling came up. One of them fired at the
Wasp, and as the latter could not fight two new foes, she ran off easily
before the wind. Neither of her new antagonists followed her, devoting
themselves to picking up the crew of the sinking Avon.

 It would be hard to find a braver feat more skilfully performed
than this; for Captain Blakeley, with hostile foes all round him, had
closed with and sunk one antagonist not greatly his inferior in force,
suffering hardly any loss himself, while two of her friends were coming
to her help.

Both before and after this the Wasp cruised hither and thither making
prizes. Once she came across a convoy of ships bearing arms and
munitions to Wellington's army, under the care of a great two-decker.
Hovering about, the swift sloop evaded the two-decker's movements, and
actually cut out and captured one of the transports she was guarding,
making her escape unharmed. Then she sailed for the high seas. She made
several other prizes, and on October 9 spoke a Swedish brig.

This was the last that was ever heard of the gallant Wasp. She never
again appeared, and no trace of any of those aboard her was ever found.
Whether she was wrecked on some desert coast, whether she foundered
in some furious gale, or what befell her none ever knew. All that is
certain is that she perished, and that all on board her met death in
some one of the myriad forms in which it must always be faced by those
who go down to the sea in ships; and when she sank there sank one of the
most gallant ships of the American navy, with as brave a captain and
crew as ever sailed from any port of the New World.




THE "GENERAL ARMSTRONG" PRIVATEER

   We have fought such a fight for a day and a night
   As may never be fought again!
   We have won great glory, my men!
   And a day less or more
   At sea or ashore,
   We die--does it matter when?
                    --Tennyson.


In the revolution, and again in the war of 1812, the seas were covered
by swift-sailing American privateers, which preyed on the British
trade. The hardy seamen of the New England coast, and of New York,
Philadelphia, and Baltimore, turned readily from their adventurous
careers in the whalers that followed the giants of the ocean in every
sea and every clime, and from trading voyages to the uttermost parts
of the earth, to go into the business of privateering, which was more
remunerative, and not so very much more dangerous, than their ordinary
pursuits. By the end of the war of 1812, in particular, the American
privateers had won for themselves a formidable position on the ocean.
The schooners, brigs, and brigantines in which the privateersmen sailed
were beautifully modeled, and were among the fastest craft afloat. They
were usually armed with one heavy gun, the "long Tom," as it was called,
arranged on a pivot forward or amidships, and with a few lighter pieces
of cannon. They carried strong crews of well-armed men, and their
commanders were veteran seamen, used to brave every danger from the
elements or from man. So boldly did they prey on the British commerce,
that they infested even the Irish Sea and the British Channel, and
increased many times the rate of insurance on vessels passing across
those waters. They also often did battle with the regular men-of-war of
the British, being favorite objects for attack by cutting-out parties
from the British frigates and ships of the line, and also frequently
encountering in fight the smaller sloops-of-war. Usually, in these
contests, the privateersmen were worsted, for they had not the training
which is obtained only in a regular service, and they were in no way to
be compared to the little fleet of regular vessels which in this same
war so gloriously upheld the honor of the American flag. Nevertheless,
here and there a privateer commanded by an exceptionally brave and able
captain, and manned by an unusually well-trained crew, performed some
feat of arms which deserves to rank with anything ever performed by the
regular navy. Such a feat was the defense of the brig General Armstrong,
in the Portuguese port of Fayal, of the Azores, against an overwhelming
British force.

The General Armstrong hailed from New York, and her captain was named
Reid. She had a crew of ninety men, and was armed with one heavy 32
pounder and six lighter guns. In December, 1814, she was lying in Fayal,
a neutral port, when four British war-vessels, a ship of the line, a
frigate and two brigs, hove into sight, and anchored off the mouth of
the harbor. The port was neutral, but Portugal was friendly to England,
and Reid knew well that the British would pay no respect to the
neutrality laws if they thought that at the cost of their violation they
could destroy the privateer. He immediately made every preparation to
resist an attack, The privateer was anchored close to the shore. The
boarding-nettings were got ready, and were stretched to booms thrust
outward from the brig's side, so as to check the boarders as they tried
to climb over the bulwarks. The guns were loaded and cast loose, and the
men went to quarters armed with muskets, boarding-pikes, and cutlases.

On their side the British made ready to carry the privateer by boarding.
The shoals rendered it impossible for the heavy ships to approach,
and the lack of wind and the baffling currents also interfered for the
moment with the movements of the sloops-of-war. Accordingly recourse was
had to a cutting-out party, always a favorite device with the British
seamen of that age, who were accustomed to carry French frigates by
boarding, and to capture in their boats the heavy privateers and armed
merchantmen, as well as the lighter war-vessels of France and Spain.

The British first attempted to get possession of the brig by surprise,
sending out but four boats. These worked down near to the brig, under
pretense of sounding, trying to get close enough to make a rush and
board her. The privateersmen were on their guard, and warned the boats
off, and after the warning had been repeated once or twice unheeded,
they fired into them, killing and wounding several men. Upon this the
boats promptly returned to the ships.

This first check greatly irritated the British captains, and they
decided to repeat the experiment that night with a force which would
render resistance vain. Accordingly, after it became dark, a dozen
boats were sent from the liner and the frigate, manned by four hundred
stalwart British seamen, and commanded by the captain of one of the
brigs of war. Through the night they rowed straight toward the little
privateer lying dark and motionless in the gloom. As before, the
privateersmen were ready for their foe, and when they came within range
opened fire upon them, first with the long gun and then with the lighter
cannon; but the British rowed on with steady strokes, for they were
seamen accustomed to victory over every European foe, and danger had no
terrors for them. With fierce hurrahs they dashed through the shot-riven
smoke and grappled the brig; and the boarders rose, cutlas in hand,
ready to spring over the bulwarks. A terrible struggle followed. The
British hacked at the boarding-nets and strove to force their way
through to the decks of the privateer, while the Americans stabbed
the assailants with their long pikes and slashed at them with their
cutlases. The darkness was lit by the flashes of flame from the muskets
and the cannon, and the air was rent by the oaths and shouts of the
combatants, the heavy trampling on the decks, the groans of the wounded,
the din of weapon meeting weapon, and all the savage tumult of
a hand-to-hand fight. At the bow the British burst through the
boarding-netting, and forced their way to the deck, killing or wounding
all three of the lieutenants of the privateer; but when this had
happened the boats had elsewhere been beaten back, and Reid, rallying
his grim sea-dogs, led them forward with a rush, and the boarding party
were all killed or tumbled into the sea. This put an end to the fight.
In some of the boats none but killed and wounded men were left. The
others drew slowly off, like crippled wild-fowl, and disappeared in the
darkness toward the British squadron. Half of the attacking force had
been killed or wounded, while of the Americans but nine had fallen.

The British commodore and all his officers were maddened with anger and
shame over the repulse, and were bent upon destroying the privateer
at all costs. Next day, after much exertion, one of the war-brigs was
warped into position to attack the American, but she first took her
station at long range, so that her carronades were not as effective as
the pivot gun of the privateer; and so well was the latter handled, that
the British brig was repeatedly hulled, and finally was actually driven
off. A second attempt was made, however, and this time the sloop-of-war
got so close that she could use her heavy carronades, which put the
privateer completely at her mercy. Then Captain Reid abandoned his brig
and sank her, first carrying ashore the guns, and marched inland with
his men. They were not further molested; and, if they had lost their
brig, they had at least made their foes pay dear for her destruction,
for the British had lost twice as many men as there were in the whole
hard-fighting crew of the American privateer.




THE BATTLE OF NEW ORLEANS

     The heavy fog of morning
      Still hid the plain from sight,
     When came a thread of scarlet
      Marked faintly in the white.
     We fired a single cannon,
      And as its thunders rolled,
     The mist before us lifted
      In many a heavy fold.
     The mist before us lifted,
      And in their bravery fine
     Came rushing to their ruin
      The fearless British line.
                 --Thomas Dunn English.


When, in 1814, Napoleon was overthrown and forced to retire to Elba, the
British troops that had followed Wellington into southern France
were left free for use against the Americans. A great expedition was
organized to attack and capture New Orleans, and at its head was placed
General Pakenham, the brilliant commander of the column that delivered
the fatal blow at Salamanca. In December a fleet of British war-ships
and transports, carrying thousands of victorious veterans from the
Peninsula, and manned by sailors who had grown old in a quarter of a
century's triumphant ocean warfare, anchored off the broad lagoons of
the Mississippi delta. The few American gunboats were carried after a
desperate hand-to-hand struggle, the troops were landed, and on December
23 the advance-guard of two thousand men reached the banks of the
Mississippi, but ten miles below New Orleans, and there camped for the
night. It seemed as if nothing could save the Creole City from foes who
had shown, in the storming of many a Spanish walled town, that they were
as ruthless in victory as they were terrible in battle. There were
no forts to protect the place, and the militia were ill armed and ill
trained. But the hour found the man. On the afternoon of the very day
when the British reached the banks of the river the vanguard of Andrew
Jackson's Tennesseeans marched into New Orleans. Clad in hunting-shirts
of buckskin or homespun, wearing wolfskin and coonskin caps, and
carrying their long rifles on their shoulders, the wild soldiery of the
backwoods tramped into the little French town. They were tall men, with
sinewy frames and piercing eyes. Under "Old Hickory's" lead they had
won the bloody battle of the Horseshoe Bend against the Creeks; they
had driven the Spaniards from Pensacola; and now they were eager to pit
themselves against the most renowned troops of all Europe.

Jackson acted with his usual fiery, hasty decision. It was absolutely
necessary to get time in which to throw up some kind of breastworks or
defenses for the city, and he at once resolved on a night attack against
the British. As for the British, they had no thought of being molested.
They did not dream of an assault from inferior numbers of undisciplined
and ill-armed militia, who did not possess so much as bayonets to their
guns. They kindled fires along the levees, ate their supper, and then,
as the evening fell, noticed a big schooner drop down the river in
ghostly silence and bring up opposite to them. The soldiers flocked to
the shore, challenging the stranger, and finally fired one or two shots
at her. Then suddenly a rough voice was heard, "Now give it to them,
for the honor of America!" and a shower of shell and grape fell on
the British, driving them off the levee. The stranger was an American
man-of-war schooner. The British brought up artillery to drive her off,
but before they succeeded Jackson's land troops burst upon them, and
a fierce, indecisive struggle followed. In the night all order was
speedily lost, and the two sides fought singly or in groups in the
utmost confusion. Finally a fog came up and the combatants separated.
Jackson drew off four or five miles and camped.

The British had been so roughly handled that they were unable to advance
for three or four days, until the entire army came up. When they did
advance, it was only to find that Jackson had made good use of the time
he had gained by his daring assault. He had thrown up breastworks of
mud and logs from the swamp to the river. At first the British tried to
batter down these breastworks with their cannon, for they had many more
guns than the Americans. A terrible artillery duel followed. For an
hour or two the result seemed in doubt; but the American gunners showed
themselves to be far more skilful than their antagonists, and gradually
getting the upper hand, they finally silenced every piece of British
artillery. The Americans had used cotton bales in the embrasures, and
the British hogsheads of sugar; but neither worked well, for the cotton
caught fire and the sugar hogsheads were ripped and splintered by the
roundshot, so that both were abandoned. By the use of red-hot shot the
British succeeded in setting on fire the American schooner which had
caused them such annoyance on the evening of the night attack; but she
had served her purpose, and her destruction caused little anxiety to
Jackson.

Having failed in his effort to batter down the American breastworks,
and the British artillery having been fairly worsted by the American,
Pakenham decided to try open assault. He had ten thousand regular
troops, while Jackson had under him but little over five thousand men,
who were trained only as he had himself trained them in his Indian
