besides, you will have the counsels of Sufder to aid you. I should
be out of place and, for the present, I am happy here with my good
brother and sister-in-law, the latter of whom would miss me sorely.
Moreover, Poona is but two days' ride from here, and you will no
doubt be able sometimes to come over and see us.

"I have done what little I could for you. You are now old enough to
make your own way. The bird that has taught its nestling to fly
does not try to keep it in the nest, when it is once able to take
care of itself."

"I can never be sufficiently grateful, for all that you have done
for me," Harry said earnestly. "You have been more than a mother to
me and, wherever I go, I shall not be happy unless you are with me,
though I see it is best, this time, that I should go alone; but
assuredly, when I join my people, and have a home of my own, it
would not seem like a home to me if you did not share it."

Two days later, Harry mounted a horse that Ramdass had given him,
and started with Sufder for Poona. On arriving there they rode to
the little camp, half a mile out of the town, where Sufder's troop
was stationed.

"You don't carry your tents with you, when you are on service in
the field?"

"Not when on an expedition where haste is needed; for we should
make but poor progress, if we were hampered by luggage. When on a
distant expedition, we take tents.

"This is a standing camp, and there are a score like it round the
town. They always remain in the same position; sometimes one troop
occupies them, sometimes another. When we go on an expedition, we
leave them; when we come back, if they are still unoccupied, we
again take possession. If they have been allotted to another troop,
a vacant one is found for us.

"Only one regiment of horse and two of foot are in the city, where
they have lines of huts. We differ from the rest of the army, being
always on service; the others are only called out when there is
occasion for them, each under its own chief and, in case of
necessity, the Peishwa can put thirty thousand horsemen in the
field, besides those of the rajahs in alliance with him."

The next morning Sufder, in his best attire, went with Harry into
the city; the latter for the first time carrying a sword, dagger
and pistols in his cummerbund, or sash. Without being questioned,
they entered the chamber were Nana was giving audience to all who
waited upon him on business.

Sufder took his place at the lower end of the chamber, moving
forward as one after another applicant was disposed of until, at
length, his turn arrived. The minister, who knew that he was a
brave soldier, who had enjoyed the confidence of the late Scindia,
acknowledged his deep salutation with a friendly nod.

"What can I do for you, Sufder?"

"I desire nothing, your excellency, save that I may be permitted to
present to you one of my family: the son of a relation of mine who,
although still young, I may venture to recommend to you as one
possessing great courage and intelligence. I have myself given him
lessons in the use of his arms; and he has had other instructors,
and done credit to them. For the past year he has been working with
a famous shikaree, and has killed many tigers that were a scourge
to the villages near the Ghauts, together with many bears and
leopards; and his master reported that his fearlessness was great,
and that as a marksman his skill was equal to his own. He was most
unwilling that he should leave him, but I considered it was time
for him to enter the army; in which, I believe, he will soon
distinguish himself."

"How old is he?" the minister asked.

"He is as yet but sixteen but, as your highness may see, he is as
strong as most men, having devoted himself to exercises of all
sorts, since he was a child."

"He is indeed cast in a strong mould, and his face pleases me.

"And so, you would enter the service of His Highness, the Peishwa?"

"That is my desire, your excellency."

"You are young to serve as an officer and, for the present, you had
best remain with Sufder's troop. In the meantime, I will see what
suitable post can be found for you."

With an expression of thanks, Sufder and Harry left the audience
hall.

"It is a good beginning, Puntojee," the soldier said, as they left
the minister's palace. "Nana Furnuwees was evidently pleased with
you, and I think he will give you special employment. At the same
time, serving one master here is not without its danger--Nana
especially, powerful as he is, has enemies as powerful; for he has
always stood in the way of the ambition of Scindia."

That evening an officer brought, from Nana, an order conferring
upon Harry the appointment of an assistant officer in Sufder's
troop, with the usual pay and allowances and, three days later, an
order came for him to attend the audience of the minister. On
arrival, he was told by the officer of the chamber that he was not
to present himself at public audience, but that Nana would speak to
him privately. He was therefore taken to an inner chamber where, an
hour later, Nana joined him.

"I think by your face, Puntojee, that you can be trusted; and I
have decided to place you in the service of His Highness, the
Peishwa. What position you will hold there must depend upon
yourself, and him. I shall simply recommend you as one of whom I
have heard much good. It would be as well for you not to mention
your age; but let him suppose that, as you look, you are about the
same age as himself. He is amiable and kindly, and your position
will be a pleasant one.

"I am anxious to prevent evil advisers from obtaining influence
over him. He is young and unsuspicious, and much harm might thus
come to the state. It is, then, for the general interest that he
should be surrounded by those whom I can trust; so that, if any
plotters are endeavouring to poison his mind, their plans may be
thwarted. I have of course, officers about his person who are
thoroughly trustworthy; but these are much older than himself, and
he chafes somewhat at what he wrongly considers his tutelage. But
indeed, as he is but twenty-one, and wholly unversed in matters of
state, it is needful that the management of affairs should rest in
the hands of those who have long controlled it.

"Scindia would be the first to take advantage of any imprudence. He
is already, by far, the most powerful of the Mahratta princes. His
possessions are of immense extent; he holds the emperor at Delhi in
the palm of his hand; he can put one hundred thousand horse into
the field, and has large numbers of infantry, including sixteen
battalions drilled by French officers, and commanded by de Boigne;
and although Doulut Rao is but twenty, and as yet we know but
little of his disposition, he is of course surrounded by the
advisers of his uncle, and may be expected to pursue the same
policy. His uncle gained great ascendency over the Peishwa, and his
death was a fortunate circumstance. Still, it is certain that the
prince, until his powers are matured, will yield to the advice of
those to whom the conduct of affairs is entrusted.

"Now, I am going to the palace, and have requested a private
audience with Mahdoo Rao, and I will take you with me."

Followed by a train of officers, with whom Harry fell in, the
minister proceeded to the palace. His train remained in the public
hall, and Nana went into the Peishwa's private apartment. In a few
minutes, an official came in and called Puntojee; and Harry at once
followed him to an inner room, where the Peishwa and his minister
were alone. Harry bowed to the ground.

"This, Prince, is the young man of whom I have spoken to you. He
bears an excellent character for his skill in arms, and has killed
many tigers and other beasts. It was but the other day that you
complained that you had no one of your own age to whom you could
talk freely; and I have selected this young officer as one who, I
thought, would be agreeable to you."

"I thank you heartily, Nana. In truth, I sometimes need a
companion; and I think, by his face, that this officer will be an
agreeable one. To what post, think you, had I best appoint him?"

"As he is a famous shikaree, I should say that it would be suitable
were you to make him director of the chase."

"But I never go hunting."

"That is true; but in time, when your occupations of state lessen,
you might do so," Nana said. "And indeed, even at present, there is
nothing to prevent your hunting sometimes in the royal preserves,
where there must be an abundance of game of all sorts."

"So let it be, then," the Peishwa said. "In truth, I care not for
the killing of beasts, unless they do harm to the villagers. But it
is right that there should be someone to direct the men who have
charge of the preserves and, as an official, you will have the
right of entry here at all times, and will be frequently about my
person; and I will confer with you about other things, as well as
the chase. You will, of course, have an apartment assigned to you.

"You will arrange about the emoluments, Nana."

"You had better go to my house, and wait for me there," Nana said;
and Harry, bowing deeply to the prince and his minister, left the
palace.

He did not deceive himself as to the reason for which Nana had thus
placed him in a position in which he was likely to be frequently in
the company of the young prince. He intended him to act as a spy.
This he was firmly determined not to do, in any matter save in
thwarting any designs Scindia might have. That was a public duty.

By this time, he had learnt much of the events that were passing.
Ramdass and the other ryots of his acquaintance regarded Nana
Furnuwees as the guardian of the country. For many years, it was
his wisdom and firmness alone that had thwarted the designs of
Scindia, whose advent to supreme authority would have been regarded
as a grave misfortune, by all the cultivators of the Deccan.
Scindia's expenses in keeping up so great an army were enormous,
and the exactions of his tax gatherers ground to the dust the
cultivators and peasantry of his own wide dominions; and Harry was
therefore ready to give Nana a faithful support in all public
matters. He knew that the minister had many enemies, even among the
rajahs in the Peishwa's dominion, and in those round it; for they
regarded him, with reason, as a curb upon their private ambitions
and, for years, intrigues had been going on for his overthrow.

On the other hand, Harry was much pleased with Mahdoo Rao, who was
a most amiable and kindly young man. While determined, then, to do
all that he could in support of Nana; he decided that he would, on
no account, give him any report that would be unfavourable to the
Peishwa. His interview with the minister, on the return of the
latter, was a short one.

"Here," the latter said, "is a purse of five hundred rupees, with
which to obtain garments suitable for one in attendance on the
Peishwa. Your emolument will be two hundred rupees a month. I shall
issue orders to the men employed in the forests and preserves to
report to you; and have requested the chamberlain to allot an
apartment to you in the palace, and to tell off two servants to be
in attendance on you.

"You understand that your mission, as far as I am concerned, is to
give me early warning, if any of those favourable to Scindia--you
shall be furnished with a list of their names--are endeavouring to
obtain an undue influence over the prince; who is of an altogether
unsuspicious character, and would be likely to fall an easy victim
to bad counsels."

"You can depend upon my doing so," Harry said. "I have been taught
to regard Scindia as an enemy to the public peace, and shall use
all diligence in carrying out your excellency's orders."

And, leaving the minister, Harry went to Sufder and told him what
had happened.

"In truth, Puntojee, you were born under a lucky star. I never
dreamt that Nana Furnuwees would have thus introduced you to the
Peishwa. Now, lad, you have a fine career opened to you. It will
need caution but, as Scindia's ancestor was but a slipper bearer,
and rose to the highest rank and honour; so it is open to you to
win a great position, if you steer clear of the dangers that attend
all who play a part in public affairs. I foresee that you will
become a favourite with the prince, but remember to put your trust
in Nana. He is, at present, the greatest power in the land, and has
been so for many years but, unlike most who have attained such
authority, he is liked by the people, for he uses his power well,
and for the good of the state.

"You see, even now the young Peishwa is by no means secure on the
musnud. The adherents of Rugoba, who was undoubtedly the lawful
ruler of the Deccan, still live; and may one day raise the flag of
revolt, in favour of his sons Bajee Rao and Chimnajee Appa who,
with Amrud Rao, his adopted son, are all in close custody in the
hill fort of Sewneree, under two of Nana's officers.

"There is a general feeling of pity for these young men, even among
those who regard their imprisonment as necessary--for, were they
free, a civil war would assuredly break out again--and the feeling
is increased by the fact that Bajee Rao is a youth of extraordinary
accomplishments. He is graceful in person, with a handsome
countenance and a charming manner and, although but nineteen, he is
an excellent horseman, skilled in the use of the bow, and
considered to be the finest swordsman in the country. He is deeply
read in all our religious books and, in all the country, there is
no one of his age so learned.

"All these things, however, only add to the necessity for his being
kept in prison. A youth so gifted and, as many people consider, the
lawful heir to the throne, would speedily be joined by all the
enemies of Nana; and might not only drive the minister into exile,
but dethrone Mahdoo Rao. Such being the case, no one can blame Nana
for keeping them in confinement--at any rate, until Mahdoo Rao has
been master for some years, and has proved that he is able to
maintain his position.

"Now, lad, I will go into the town with you, and purchase dresses
fit for an official of the palace."

"I quite see that I have been most fortunate in obtaining such a
position, Sufder; but I own I should have preferred to remain with
you, and learn to do service as a soldier."

"That you may learn later on," Sufder said. "Having the confidence
of the Peishwa, you may soon obtain military rank, as well as civil
and, if war breaks out, may hold a position vastly better than you
could hope to attain to as the mere chief of a troop."

"It seems very ridiculous, Sufder, that I should be thus put
forward, without any merit of my own; while you, who have fought in
many battles, are still only commander of your troop."

"I have no desire for more," Sufder replied. "I am a soldier, and
can do my duty as ordered, but I have no head for intrigues; and I
consider the risks of a battle are quite sufficient, without those
of being put out of the way for mixing myself up in plots.

"Again, your rise is not altogether undeserved. You have, by your
exercises, attained the strength of manhood early; and your
experience as a tiger hunter has fitted you for the post for which
you are appointed, just as your diligence in exercise in arms will
be of good service to you, if you come to hold military command.
But you must be circumspect and, above all things, do not forget to
use the dye with which Soyera has furnished you. Hitherto your
white skin has done you no harm but, were it discovered here that
you are English, it would at once be imagined that you were a spy,
and little time would be given you to explain how matters stand."

"I will certainly be careful as to that and, now that I am to have
a private apartment, I shall be able to apply the dye without the
fear of being interrupted, as might have been the case in camp."

On the following day, Harry, having obtained clothes suitable to
his position, betook himself to the palace, where one of the
officers of the chamberlain conducted him to his apartment, and
assigned to him two men appointed to his service.



Chapter 3: A Change In Affairs.


Harry Lindsay's duties were little more than nominal. The reports
sent in to him, by those in charge of the royal preserves, could
scarcely be considered as satisfactory; as they stated that, owing
to the fact that for years there had been no hunting there, the
tigers had greatly increased in number, and had thinned down the
stags and, indeed, in some cases had so destroyed other game that
they were driven to escape from the enclosures, and to ravage the
villages. But beyond receiving these reports, and riding over
occasionally to the preserves, Harry had little to do save to take
part in any court ceremonies and, when called upon to do so, to
accompany the Peishwa in his walks in the palace garden. He
therefore determined to learn to read and write in Mahratta and,
for two or three hours a day, a man of the weynsh, or mercantile
class, came in to teach him. So careful was Nana Furnuwees, in
preventing Scindia's adherents from approaching the prince, that
Harry had nothing whatever to report on this head.

One day, when Mahdoo Rao, who had taken a great liking to him, was
walking in the garden, chatting familiarly to him of his life in
the country, and his adventures with tigers and other wild beasts,
he said:

"Have you seen my cousin, Bajee Rao?"

"No, Your Highness, I have never seen him."

"You have heard of him, of course, and nothing but good."

"That is so, Prince. It seems that, both in sports and learning, he
is wonderfully well instructed."

"I should like to see him," the prince said. "I admire what I have
heard of him, greatly, and it is hard that he should be shut up in
prison; and yet he is scarcely more a prisoner than I am."

Harry was struck with dismay.

"But Your Highness is in no way a prisoner!"

"I am not shut up in a fortress," the young prince said, "but I am
no more my own master than Bajee Rao is. Nana Furnuwees treats me
as if I were a child. He is, I know, devoted to me; but that makes
it no more pleasant. I can go where I like, but it is always with
my retinue. I cannot choose my own friends."

"Your Highness will forgive me, if I say that it is for your own
safety, and for the peace of the country that your minister watches
over you so jealously; and doubtless he thinks that, having been
the chief adviser to your family, for so many years, having guarded
it so successfully from those who would have lessened your
authority, for the present it is of the greatest importance that he
should continue to guide the state."

"I am, at least, very glad that he allows me a companion of my own
age, to whom I can talk freely."

"On all subjects, Your Highness, excepting state matters. Nana
presented me because I was ignorant of the court, and knew nothing
whatever of intrigues, and was not likely to take any part in them.
Therefore, Your Highness, I pray you but to speak upon ordinary
matters; be assured I am your devoted servant, but the courtiers
would grow suspicious, were you to talk of state matters with me.
These things speedily become known, and I should fall under Nana's
displeasure."

"Perhaps you are right," the Peishwa admitted, in a tone of
melancholy. "No doubt, whatever passes in this house is known to my
minister; and indeed, it is his duty to make himself so acquainted.
Still, I feel it hard that I should not have one friend to whom I
can speak."

"The time will come, Prince, when you will be able to do so and,
doubtless, there will be at hand those who will dare to have your
confidence."

The prince was silent but, after this, he abstained from any
remarks to Harry concerning the state. He had, indeed, for some
time been in correspondence with Bajee Rao, who had gained the
confidence of one of those appointed to look after him and, though
there was nothing save expressions of friendship on the part of
both princes, Nana was furious when he found out, from his spies,
what was going on.

The news came as a shock to the minister. Nana had been the
greatest enemy of the house of Rugoba; and the discovery of this
correspondence, and the friendship between the two young men, so
threatened his authority that, after ordering that Bajee Rao and
his brothers should be more strictly confined than before, he
visited the Peishwa and upbraided him bitterly for having entered
upon a friendship with the head of a party which had harassed his
family, and had brought innumerable troubles on the state. Then he
sent a message to Harry, bidding him to come, at once.

"How is it, Puntojee," he said sternly, "that you have altogether
failed to justify the faith I put in you, and have already assisted
Mahdoo Rao to enter into relations with my enemy, Bajee Rao?"

Harry was thunderstruck at this sudden attack.

"My lord, you must have been misinformed. I know nothing of any
such correspondence and, if it really went on, I think the Peishwa
would have taken me into his confidence."

"Do you mean to say that Mahdoo has not spoken to you about his
cousin?"

"No, sir, I do not say so for, some four months ago, he spoke in
terms of admiration for Bajee Rao; but he did not pursue the
subject, and never afterwards alluded to it."

The minister looked at him fixedly.

"I believe you," he said. "You do not look like a double-faced man,
but as one who would tell the truth, whatever were the consequences.
Moreover, I felt that if you had known of Mahdoo Rao's intentions,
and had not reported them to me, you would, on receiving my message,
have endeavoured to make your escape. I have of course enquired, and
found that you spent your afternoon, as usual, with your scribe; and
that you afterwards rode out to Sufder's camp, and there talked for
half an hour, sitting outside the tent and conversing on ordinary
matters; and then you returned here to the palace. These proceedings
go far to assure me that you were ignorant of the discovery that had
been made, that a correspondence had been going on between Mahdoo and
Bajee. Still, I thought you might have known of the correspondence,
though not of the discovery; but now I am quite convinced that you
were altogether ignorant of what was going on."

The scene with Nana, and the knowledge that he had brought upon his
cousins even stricter confinement than before, acted most painfully
upon the mind of the young Peishwa, already embittered by the
restraint in which he was being held. He now shut himself up in his
room, and absolutely refused to leave it. His absence from the
durbars was put down to illness. Nana paid no great attention to
him, believing that the young prince would speedily recover
himself.

This, however, was not the case, for settled melancholy took
possession of him. On the 22nd of October he appeared at the
Duddera, a high ceremonial, went among his troops and, in the
evening, received his chiefs and the representatives from the great
rajahs but, three days later, he threw himself from a terrace in
front of his palace, broke two of his limbs, and so seriously
injured himself that he died, two days afterwards; having, almost
in his last breath, expressed to Nana his strong desire that Bajee
Rao should succeed him on the musnud.

The consternation of the minister was unbounded. It seemed that, by
this sudden and unexpected blow, the whole of his plans were
overthrown; and that not only his position, but his very life, was
in danger.

He sent for Harry, two hours after the Peishwa's death.

"Answer me frankly," he said. "Can I depend upon you, absolutely?
And have you had no communication of any kind from my enemies?"

"You can depend upon me, my lord. Everyone knows that you have
saved the state, a score of times; and will, I doubt not, do the
same again."

"I have the will," the minister said, gravely, "but whether I have
the power is another thing. I sent off a messenger to the general,
Purseram Bhow, bidding him gather as many troops as possible and
march hither; and I shall send letters to the Rajah of Nagpore, and
Scindia. Holkar, being in Poona, I have already seen and, as he has
always supported me against Rugoba, he is as anxious as I am as to
the succession.

"I shall now send you with a duplicate letter to Purseram Bhow for,
since the terrible accident to Mahdoo Rao, whom I loved dearly for
his amiable character, it is probable that the adherents of Bajee
Rao have been active; and that my every movement is watched, and
attempts may be made to stop any messengers that I may send out.
Take Sufder's troop with you. If you are stopped, fight your way
through, whatever their force. It is a matter of supreme importance
that this letter should reach the general."

"It shall reach him, my lord," Harry said, as he took it; "in five
minutes I shall be on my way."

Going to his room he changed his attire, mounted his horse, and
rode to Sufder's camp. The men were all ready, as Nana had sent an
order to Sufder to prepare instantly for a journey.

"So it is you, Puntojee!" the captain said, as he rode up; "the
orderly did not tell me whom I was to escort, nor our destination.
In which direction do we ride?"

"I am bearer of a letter to Purseram Bhow."

"Then I know the direction;" and, giving orders to his men, he rode
off at once by the side of Harry.

"This is a terrible business, Puntojee."

