plastered inside smoothly with clay, like a cup, to hold four beautiful
blue eggs, finely-spotted at the ends.

"Sitting, and nearly hatched," said the lad.  "Might wait for them, and
bring them up.  I dunno, though.  Sing best in the trees.  Wouldn't hop
about the courtyard and cliffs like the young ravens.  Wonder where they
build?"

He went on, to stop and watch the trout and grayling, which kept darting
away, as he approached the riverside, gleaming through the sunlit water,
and hiding in the depths, or beneath some mass of rock or tree-root on
the other side.

"Rather stupid for me, getting to be a man, to think so much about
birds' nests; but I don't know: perhaps it isn't childish.  Old Rayburn
is always watching for them, and picking flowers, and chipping bits of
stone.  Why, he has books full of pressed grasses and plants; and boxes
full of bits of ore and spar, and stony shells out of the caves and
mines.--Well now, isn't that strange?"

He stopped short, laughing to himself, as he suddenly caught sight of a
droll-looking figure, standing knee-deep in the river, busy with rod and
line, gently throwing a worm-baited hook into the deep black water,
under the projecting rocks at the foot of the cliff.

The figure, cut off, as it were, at the knees, looked particularly short
and stout, humped like a camel, by the creel swung behind to be out of
the way.  His dress was a rusty brown doublet, with puffed-out breeches
beneath, descending half-way down the thigh, and then all was bare.  A
steeple-crowned, broad-brimmed hat, from beneath which hung an abundance
of slightly-curling silvery hair, completed the figure at which Mark
Eden gazed, unseen; for the old man was intent upon his fishing, and
just then he struck, and after a little playing, drew in and unhooked a
finely-spotted trout, which he was about to transfer to his basket, when
he was checked by a greeting from the back.

"Morning, Master Rayburn.  That's a fine one."

"Ah, Mark, boy, how are you?" said the old man, smiling.  "Yes: I've got
his brother in the basket, and I want two more.  Better come and help me
to eat them."

"Can't to-day.--Quite well?"

"Yes, thank God, boy.  Well for an old man.  I heard you were back from
school.  How's that?"

"Bad fever there.  All sent home."

"That's sad.  Ought to be at work, boy.  Better come and read with me."

"Well, I will sometimes, sir."

"Come often, my boy; keep you out of mischief."

"Oh, I shan't get into mischief, sir."

"Of course not; idle boys never do.  Not likely to get fighting, either.
I see young Ralph Darley's at home.  Fine chance for you," said the old
man, with a sarcastic ring in his voice, as he slipped his trout into
the basket.

"Is he?" cried the lad excitedly.

"Oh yes; he's up at the Cliff.  Now then, why don't you fill your
pockets with big stones to throw at him, or cut a big club?  Oh, I see,
though.  You've mounted a skewer.  Pull it out, and try if the point's
sharp.  I suppose you're going down the river to lay wait for him and
kill him."

"There, you're as bad as ever, Master Rayburn," cried the lad, flushing,
and looking mortified.  "Last time I saw you it was just the same:
laughing at, and bantering, and sneering at me.  No wonder my father
gets angry with you, and doesn't ask you to the Tor."

"Yes, no wonder.  Quarrels with me, boy, instead of with himself for
keeping up such a mad quarrel."

"It isn't father's fault, sir," cried the lad quickly.  "It's the old
feud that has been going on for generations."

"Old feud!  Old disgrace!" cried the fisherman, throwing away the worm
he was about to impale on his hook, to see it snapped up at once by a
good fish; and standing his rod in the water, like a staff to lean on,
as he went on talking, with the cold water swirling about over his
knees, and threatening to wet his feather-stuffed breeches.  "I'm
ashamed of your father and Ralph's father.  Call themselves Christian
gentlemen, and because a pair of old idiots of ancestors in the dark
ages quarrelled, and tried to cut one another's throats, they go on as
their fathers did before them, trying to seize each other's properties,
and to make an end of one another, and encouraging their sons to grow up
in the same vile way."

"My father is a gentleman and a knight, sir," cried Mark Eden hotly;
"and I'm sure that he would never turn cut-throat or robber if he was
left alone."

"Of course; and that's what Sir Morton Darley would say, or his son
either; and still the old feud is kept up.  Look here, boy; suppose you
were to run against young Ralph now, what would happen?"

"There'd be a fight," cried the lad, flushing up; and he drew in his
breath with a hiss.

"Of course!" sneered the old man.

"Well, he never sees me without insulting me."

"And you never see him without doing the same."

"But--"

"But!  Bah!  I haven't patience with you all.  Six of one; half a dozen
of the other.  Both your families well off in this world's goods, and
yet miserable, Fathers, two Ahabs, longing for the other's land to make
a garden of herbs; and if they got it, a nice garden of herbs it would
be!  Why, Mark Eden, as I'm a scholar and a gentleman, my income is
fifty pounds a year.  My cottage is my own, and I'm a happier man than
either of your fathers.  Look about you, boy--here, at the great God's
handiwork; wherever your eyes rest, you see beauty.  Look at this
silvery flashing river, the lovely great trees, the beautiful cliffs,
and up yonder in the distance at the soft blues of the mountains,
melting into the bluer skies.  Did you ever see anything more glorious
than this dale?"

"Never," cried the lad enthusiastically.

"Good, boy!  That came from the heart.  That heart's young and soft, and
true, as I know.  Don't let it get crusted over with the hard shell of a
feud.  Life's too great and grand to be wasted over a miserable quarrel,
and in efforts to make others wretched.  And it's so idiotic, Mark, for
you can't hurt other people without hurting yourself more.  Look here,
next time you, spring boy, meet the other spring boy, act at once; don't
wait till you are summer men, or autumn men.  When you get to be a
winter man as I am, it will be too late.  Begin now, while it is early
with you.  Hold out your hand and shake his, and become fast friends.
Teach your fathers what they ought to have done when they were young.
Come, promise me that."

"I can't, sir," said the boy, frowning.  "And if I could, Ralph Darley
would laugh in my face."

"Bah!" ejaculated the old man, stamping the butt of his rod in the
water.  "There, I've done with you both.  You are a pair of young
ravens, sons of the old ravens, who have their nests up on the stony
cliffs, and you'll both grow up to be as bad and bitter as your fathers,
and take to punching out the young lambs' eyes with your beaks.  I've
done with you both."

"No, you haven't, Master Rayburn," said the lad softly.  "I was coming
to see you this evening, to ask you to go with me for a day, hunting for
minerals and those stones you showed me in the old cavern, where the hot
spring is."

"Done with you, quite," said the old man fiercely, as he began to bait
his hook with another worm.

"And I say, Master Rayburn, I want to come and read with you."

"An untoward generation," said the old man.  "There, be off!  I'm
wasting time, and I want my trout, and _thymallus_, my grayling, for man
must eat, and it's very nice to eat trout and grayling, boy.  Be off!
I've quite done with you."  And the old man turned his back, and waded a
few steps upstream.

"I say, Master Rayburn," continued the lad, "when you said `Bah!' in
that sharp way, it was just like the bark of one of the great black
birds."

"What, sir!" snapped the old man; "compare me to a raven?"

"You compared me and my father, and the Darleys, all to ravens, sir."

"Humph!  Yes, so I did," muttered the old fisherman.

"I didn't mean to be rude.  But you reminded me: I saw one of them fly
over just before I met you, sir.  Do you know where they are nesting
this year?"

"Eh?" cried the fisherman, turning sharply, with a look of interest in
his handsome old face.  "Well, not for certain, Mark, but I've seen them
several times lately--mischievous, murderous wretches.  They kill a
great many lambs.  They're somewhere below, near the High Cliffs.  I
shouldn't at all wonder, if you got below there and hid among the
bushes, you'd see where they came.  It's sure to be in the rock face."

"I should like to get the young ones," said the lad.

"Yes, do, my boy; and if you find an addled egg or two, save them for
me.  Bring then on, and we'll blow them."

"I will," said the lad, smiling.--"Don't be hard on me, Master Rayburn."

"Eh?  No, no, my boy; but I can't help being a bit put out sometimes.
Coming down this evening, were you?  Do.  I'll save you a couple of
grayling for supper--if I catch any," he added, with a smile.

"May I come?"

"Of course.  Come early, my boy.  I've a lot of things to show you that
I've found since you were at home, and we'll plan out some reading, eh?
Mustn't go back and get rusty, because you are at home.  We'll read a
great deal, and then you won't have time to think about knocking Ralph
Darley's brains out--if he has any.  You haven't much, or you wouldn't
help to keep up this feud."

"Oh, please don't say any more about that, Master Rayburn."

"Not a word, boy.  Must go on--a beautiful worm morning."

The old man turned his back again.

"Don't be late," he cried; and he waded onward, stooping, and looking
more humped and comical than ever, as he bent forward to throw his bait
into likely places, while Mark Eden went onward down-stream.

"I like old Master Rayburn," he said to himself; "but I wish he wouldn't
be so bitter about the old trouble.  It isn't our fault.  Father would
be only too glad to shake hands and be friends, if the Darleys were only
nice, instead of being such savage beasts."

He went on, forcing his way among the bushes, and clambering over the
great blocks of stone which strewed the sides of the river, and then
stopped suddenly, as he sent up a moor-hen, which flew across the river,
dribbling its long thin toes in the water as it went.

"I wonder," he said thoughtfully, "whether the Darleys think we are
beasts too?"



CHAPTER FIVE.

HOW MARK EDEN FOUND THE RAVEN'S NEST.

"Ah, there he goes," said Mark, beneath his breath, as he stood
motionless, and watched a large raven flapping along, high overhead, in
the direction he was taking.  "Perhaps that's the cock bird.  Looks big.
The nest may be where old Master Rayburn says, or up this way, and the
bird's going for food."

He waited till the raven disappeared, and then went on down-stream,
taking to a path higher up, which led him by a pretty cottage, standing
in a niche at a bend of the river, so that the place had a good view up
and down-stream, and with its pleasant garden, looked the sort of home
which might well make its owner content.

But Mark Eden's mind was too full of ravens' nests, to leave room for
any contemplation of the old scholar's cottage; and he hurried on by the
path, which cut off two or three bends of the river, taking him right
away for quite a couple of miles, and bringing him to the water's-edge
again, just in front of a mighty cliff, which towered up out of a dense
grove of beeches on the other side of the river.

The place was solitary and still in the extreme; and going close down to
the water's-edge, Mark Eden seated himself upon a mossy stone, between
two great hawthorns, which hid him from anything coming up or
down-stream, while brambles, ferns, and clustering hemlock-plants, hid
his back and front.

It was a pleasant resting-place, to sit and watch the rapidly running
river, which was very shallow here; and from his hiding-place, he could
see the shadows of the ripples, and the stony bottom, and also those
cast by trout, as they glided here and there, waiting for the
unfortunate flies and caterpillars which had fallen from overhanging
boughs, to be washed down the stream.

But Mark had but a glance for the fish: his attention was taken up by
the mass of precipitous stone before him, so steep, that it was only
here and there, in cracks or on ledges, that herb or stunted bush could
find a place to root; and as he scanned the precipice, from its foot
among the beeches, to its brow, five hundred feet above where he sat, he
wondered whether the ravens nested there.

No more likely place could be found for the great birds to rear their
young; the cliff looked inaccessible, and days would pass, sometimes
weeks, and not a soul come near.

"Old Master Rayburn must be right," thought the lad.  "What eyes he has
for everything of this kind.  There are no rooks in the beeches; there
isn't a jackdaw about; and I haven't seen a rock-dove; all proof that
the ravens are here, for the others would not dare to nest near them.
Only be to hatch young ones for food.  But I don't see my gentleman nor
his lady."

A hoarse, distant bark was heard, just as the lad's neck began to ache
with staring up in vain, in the search for the nest, and he sat
perfectly motionless, crouched amongst the hemlock and heracleum, to be
rewarded by seeing a shadow thrown on the white limestone far on high,
and directly after one of the great glossy black birds alight, right on
the edge of the cliff, from whence it hopped into the air, and seemed to
let itself fall some forty feet, down behind a stunted patch of broom,
which had rooted in a cleft.  There it disappeared for a few moments, to
reappear, diving down toward the stream, but only to circle upward
again, rise higher and higher, and finally disappear over the cliff,
half a quarter of a mile away.

"Found it!" panted Mark; "a nest with young ones.  Chance if there are
any eggs for Master Rayburn."

He leaned back to examine the place.

"Can't get up there," he muttered at last; "but it would be easy to get
down from the top.  I could do it, but--"

He took off his cap, and gave his brown hair a vicious scratch, for
there were other obstacles in the way.

It would be easy to wade across the river; easy to make his way along
the other side to where the cliff sloped, five hundred yards lower down
the stream.  From there he could reach the high down, which was broken
off short to form the cliff, and walk along the edge till he was exactly
over the nest, and then descend.  Those were not obstacles, but trifles.
The great difficulty was moral.  That great mass of limestone was on
the Darley estate, and for a few minutes, the lad felt as if he must
give it up.

But obstacles only spurred him on to action, and he cried to himself,
petulantly:

"Is it theirs?  Who are they, to claim an open wild place like that?
They'll be saying next that all Darbyshire belongs to them.  It's as
much ours as theirs, and, if we had our rights, it would be ours.  I
shall go, in spite of all the Darleys in the county.  Who are they?
Piece of rock and moor like that, and they claim it.  Let them.  I shall
not stop away for them."

The boy flushed, and ignoring the fact that he was about to commit a
trespass, he slipped off shoes and hose, waded straight across the
shallow river, and sat down on the other side to dry his feet, and put
on hose and shoes again.

And all the time he felt a strong desire to glance up and down the
river, to see if he had been observed by any one; but in his pride of
heart he would not, for fear that he would be seen watching, and some
one connected with his family's enemies take it for a sign of fear.

This done, he rose, gave his feet a stamp, glanced up at the face of the
cliff, to see one of the parent ravens fly off, uttering an angry croak;
and then he began to bear off to the right, so as to ascend the low part
of the cliff, reaching the top quite five hundred yards away, and
turning at once to continue his ascent by walking along the edge, which
rose steeply, till it reached the point above the raven's nest, and then
sloped down into a hollow, to rise once more into the wooded eminence
which was crowned by Cliff Castle, the Darleys' home.

"They've a deal better place than we," said Mark to himself, as he
strode on, in full defiance of the possibility of being seen, though it
was hardly likely, a great patch of mighty beech-trees, mingled with
firs, lying between the top of the big cliff and the Darleys' dwelling.
"More trees, and facing toward the west and south, with the river below
them, while our home is treeless and bare, and looks to the north and
east, and is often covered with snow when their side's sunny and bright.
My word! warm work, climbing up here, and the grass is as slippery as
if it had been polished.  Mustn't go over.  Father wouldn't like it if I
were to be killed; but I shouldn't be, for I should come down in the
tree-tops, and then fall from bough to bough into the river, and it's
deep just under the raven's nest."

Thinking this, he went on, up and up, cautiously, clear of head as one
who had from childhood played about the cliffs, and reaching the summit
breathless, to stand on the extreme verge, watching one of the ravens,
which came sailing up, saw him at a distance, rose above his head, and
then began to circle round, uttering hoarse cries.

"Ah, thief!" cried the lad; "I see what you have in your beak.  A
chicken; but your tricks are at an end.  No more feeding young ravens
here."

"Better get to the nest, first, though," said the boy laughingly; and he
leaned forward, quite out of the perpendicular, to look down below the
bush which sheltered the nest.  "Easy enough: I can do it.  If Ralph
Darley had been half a fellow, he would have taken it himself.  Better
take off my sword, though.  No; mustn't leave that in the enemy's
country.  I'll take it down with me.  Be nice to come up again, and find
that one of those ragged Jacks had got hold of it!  I wonder whether Sir
Morton engaged them the other day.  Very likely.  He's bad enough to do
such an ungentlemanly thing.  What did that fellow call himself.  Pearl
nose?  Ought to have been Ruby nose.  No, no; I remember now; it was
Pearl Rose.  My word, how high and mighty he was!  Quite threatening.
He'd go straight to Sir Morton Darley, if father did not enlist him and
his men in our service.  That upset father, just as he was thinking
whether he should have them.  He never could bear being threatened.  How
soon he sent them about their business, and threatened to summon the
miners as well as our men.  It will be awkward, though, if Sir Morton
has engaged them, and strengthened his followers like that.  May mean an
attack.  I wonder whether he did take their offer.  If he has, father
will wish he had agreed to the fellow's terms.  I don't know, though.
As he said to me, they would have been falling out with the mine men,
and they seemed a ragged, drunken-looking set.  Glad he sent them about
their business."

All this, suggested by the possibility of losing his sword, just when he
was upon an enemy's land; but he had not stopped on the top to think,
