    Coevals of Telemachus, with whom
    They have embark'd for friendship's sake alone.                  460
    I therefore will repose myself on board
    This night, and to the Caucons bold in arms
    Will sail to-morrow, to demand arrears
    Long time unpaid, and of no small amount.
    But, since he is become thy guest, afford
    My friend a chariot, and a son of thine
    Who shall direct his way, nor let him want
    Of all thy steeds the swiftest and the best.
      So saying, the blue-eyed Goddess as upborne
    On eagle's wings, vanish'd; amazement seized                     470
    The whole assembly, and the antient King
    O'erwhelmed with wonder at that sight, the hand
    Grasp'd of Telemachus, whom he thus bespake.
      My friend! I prophesy that thou shalt prove
    Nor base nor dastard, whom, so young, the Gods
    Already take in charge; for of the Pow'rs
    Inhabitants of heav'n, none else was this
    Than Jove's own daughter Pallas, who among
    The Greecians honour'd most thy gen'rous Sire.
      But thou, O Queen! compassionate us all,                       480
    Myself, my sons, my comfort; give to each
    A glorious name, and I to thee will give
    For sacrifice an heifer of the year,
    Broad-fronted, one that never yet hath borne
    The yoke, and will incase her horns with gold.
      So Nestor pray'd, whom Pallas gracious heard.
    Then the Gerenian warrior old, before
    His sons and sons in law, to his abode
    Magnificent proceeded: they (arrived
    Within the splendid palace of the King)                          490
    On thrones and couches sat in order ranged,
    Whom Nestor welcom'd, charging high the cup
    With wine of richest sort, which she who kept
    That treasure, now in the eleventh year
    First broach'd, unsealing the delicious juice.
    With this the hoary Senior fill'd a cup,
    And to the daughter of Jove AEgis-arm'd
    Pouring libation, offer'd fervent pray'r.
      When all had made libation, and no wish
    Remain'd of more, then each to rest retired,                     500
    And Nestor the Gerenian warrior old
    Led thence Telemachus to a carved couch
    Beneath the sounding portico prepared.
    Beside him he bade sleep the spearman bold,
    Pisistratus, a gallant youth, the sole
    Unwedded in his house of all his sons.
    Himself in the interior palace lay,
    Where couch and cov'ring for her antient spouse
    The consort Queen had diligent prepar'd.
      But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,                         510
    Had tinged the East, arising from his bed,
    Gerenian Nestor issued forth, and sat
    Before his palace-gate on the white stones
    Resplendent as with oil, on which of old
    His father Neleus had been wont to sit,
    In council like a God; but he had sought,
    By destiny dismiss'd long since, the shades.
    On those stones therefore now, Nestor himself,
    Achaia's guardian, sat, sceptre in hand,
    Where soon his num'rous sons, leaving betimes                    520
    The place of their repose, also appeared,
    Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Thrasymedes,
    Aretus and Pisistratus. They placed
    Godlike Telemachus at Nestor's side,
    And the Gerenian Hero thus began.
      Sons be ye quick--execute with dispatch
    My purpose, that I may propitiate first
    Of all the Gods Minerva, who herself
    Hath honour'd manifest our hallow'd feast.
    Haste, one, into the field, to order thence                      530
    An ox, and let the herdsman drive it home.
    Another, hasting to the sable bark
    Of brave Telemachus, bring hither all
    His friends, save two, and let a third command
    Laerceus, that he come to enwrap with gold
    The victim's horns. Abide ye here, the rest,
    And bid my female train (for I intend
    A banquet) with all diligence provide
    Seats, stores of wood, and water from the rock.
      He said, whom instant all obey'd. The ox                       540
    Came from the field, and from the gallant ship
    The ship-mates of the brave Telemachus;
    Next, charged with all his implements of art,
    His mallet, anvil, pincers, came the smith
    To give the horns their gilding; also came
    Pallas herself to her own sacred rites.
    Then Nestor, hoary warrior, furnish'd gold,
    Which, hammer'd thin, the artist wrapp'd around
    The victim's horns, that seeing him attired
    So costly, Pallas might the more be pleased.                     550
    Stratius and brave Echephron introduced
    The victim by his horns; Aretus brought
    A laver in one hand, with flow'rs emboss'd,
    And in his other hand a basket stored
    With cakes, while warlike Thrasymedes, arm'd
    With his long-hafted ax, prepared to smite
    The ox, and Perseus to receive the blood.
    The hoary Nestor consecrated first
    Both cakes and water, and with earnest pray'r
    To Pallas, gave the forelock to the flames.                      560
      When all had worshipp'd, and the broken cakes
    Sprinkled, then godlike Thrasymedes drew
    Close to the ox, and smote him. Deep the edge
    Enter'd, and senseless on the floor he fell.
    Then Nestor's daughters, and the consorts all
    Of Nestor's sons, with his own consort, chaste
    Eurydice, the daughter eldest-born
    Of Clymenus, in one shrill orison
    Vocif'rous join'd, while they, lifting the ox,
    Held him supported firmly, and the prince                        570
    Of men, Pisistratus, his gullet pierced.
    Soon as the sable blood had ceased, and life
    Had left the victim, spreading him abroad,
    With nice address they parted at the joint
    His thighs, and wrapp'd them in the double cawl,
    Which with crude slices thin they overspread.
    Nestor burn'd incense, and libation pour'd
    Large on the hissing brands, while him beside,
    Busy with spit and prong, stood many a youth
    Train'd to the task. The thighs consumed, each took
    His portion of the maw, then, slashing well                      581
    The remnant, they transpierced it with the spits
    Neatly, and held it reeking at the fire.
    Meantime the youngest of the daughters fair
    Of Nestor, beauteous Polycaste, laved,
    Anointed, and in vest and tunic cloathed
    Telemachus, who, so refresh'd, stepp'd forth
    From the bright laver graceful as a God,
    And took his seat at antient Nestor's side.
    The viands dress'd, and from the spits withdrawn,                590
    They sat to share the feast, and princely youths
    Arising, gave them wine in cups of gold.
    When neither hunger now nor thirst remain'd
    Unsated, thus Gerenian Nestor spake.
      My sons, arise, lead forth the sprightly steeds,
    And yoke them, that Telemachus may go.
      So spake the Chief, to whose commands his sons,
    Obedient, yoked in haste the rapid steeds,
    And the intendant matron of the stores
    Disposed meantime within the chariot, bread                      600
    And wine, and dainties, such as princes eat.
    Telemachus into the chariot first
    Ascended, and beside him, next, his place
    Pisistratus the son of Nestor took,
    Then seiz'd the reins, and lash'd the coursers on.
    They, nothing loth, into the open plain
    Flew, leaving lofty Pylus soon afar.
    Thus, journeying, they shook on either side
    The yoke all day, and now the setting sun
    To dusky evening had resign'd the roads,                         610
    When they to Pherae came, and the abode
    Reach'd of Diocles, whose illustrious Sire
    Orsilochus from Alpheus drew his birth,
    And there, with kindness entertain'd, they slept.
      But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Look'd rosy from the East, yoking the steeds,
    They in their sumptuous chariot sat again.
    The son of Nestor plied the lash, and forth
    Through vestibule and sounding portico
    The royal coursers, not unwilling, flew.                         620
    A corn-invested land receiv'd them next,
    And there they brought their journey to a close,
    So rapidly they moved; and now the sun
    Went down, and even-tide dimm'd all the ways.


FOOTNOTES:

[7] +Erkos odonton+. Prior, alluding to this expression, ludicrously
renders it--

    "When words like these in vocal breath
    Burst from his twofold hedge of teeth."

[8] It is said to have been customary in the days of Homer, when the
Greeks retired from a banquet to their beds, to cut out the tongues of
the victims, and offer them to the Gods in particular who presided over
conversation.




BOOK IV

ARGUMENT

Telemachus, with Pisistratus, arrives at the palace of Menelaus, from
whom he receives some fresh information concerning the return of the
Greecians, and is in particular told on the authority of Proteus, that
his father is detained by Calypso. The suitors, plotting against the life
of Telemachus, lie in wait to intercept him in his return to Ithaca.
Penelope being informed of his departure, and of their designs to slay
him, becomes inconsolable, but is relieved by a dream sent to her from
Minerva.


    In hollow Lacedaemon's spacious vale
    Arriving, to the house they drove direct
    Of royal Menelaus; him they found
    In his own palace, all his num'rous friends
    Regaling at a nuptial banquet giv'n
    Both for his daughter and the prince his son.
    His daughter to renown'd Achilles' heir
    He sent, to whom he had at Troy engaged
    To give her, and the Gods now made her his.
    With chariots and with steeds he sent her forth                   10
    To the illustrious city where the prince,
    Achilles' offspring, ruled the Myrmidons.
    But to his son he gave a Spartan fair,
    Alector's daughter; from an handmaid sprang
    That son to Menelaus in his age,
    Brave Megapenthes; for the Gods no child
    To Helen gave, made mother, once, of her
    Who vied in perfect loveliness of form
    With golden Venus' self, Hermione.
      Thus all the neighbour princes and the friends                  20
    Of noble Menelaus, feasting sat
    Within his spacious palace, among whom
    A sacred bard sang sweetly to his harp,
    While, in the midst, two dancers smote the ground
    With measur'd steps responsive to his song.
      And now the Heroes, Nestor's noble son
    And young Telemachus arrived within
    The vestibule, whom, issuing from the hall,
    The noble Eteoneus of the train
    Of Menelaus, saw; at once he ran                                  30
    Across the palace to report the news
    To his Lord's ear, and, standing at his side,
    In accents wing'd with haste thus greeted him.
      Oh Menelaus! Heav'n descended Chief!
    Two guests arrive, both strangers, but the race
    Of Jove supreme resembling each in form.
    Say, shall we loose, ourselves, their rapid steeds,
    Or hence dismiss them to some other host?
      But Menelaus, Hero golden-hair'd,
    Indignant answer'd him. Boethe's son!                             40
    Thou wast not, Eteoneus, heretofore,
    A babbler, who now pratest as a child.
    We have ourselves arrived indebted much
    To hospitality of other men,
    If Jove shall, even here, some pause at last
    Of woe afford us. Therefore loose, at once,
    Their steeds, and introduce them to the feast.
      He said, and, issuing, Eteoneus call'd
    The brisk attendants to his aid, with whom
    He loos'd their foaming coursers from the yoke.                   50
    Them first they bound to mangers, which with oats
    And mingled barley they supplied, then thrust
    The chariot sidelong to the splendid wall.[9]
    Themselves he, next, into the royal house
    Conducted, who survey'd, wond'ring, the abode
    Of the heav'n-favour'd King; for on all sides
    As with the splendour of the sun or moon
    The lofty dome of Menelaus blazed.
    Satiate, at length, with wonder at that sight,
    They enter'd each a bath, and by the hands                        60
    Of maidens laved, and oil'd, and cloath'd again
    With shaggy mantles and resplendent vests,
    Sat both enthroned at Menelaus' side.
    And now a maiden charged with golden ew'r,
    And with an argent laver, pouring first
    Pure water on their hands, supplied them next
    With a bright table, which the maiden, chief
    In office, furnish'd plenteously with bread
    And dainties, remnants of the last regale.
    Then came the sew'r, who with delicious meats                     70
    Dish after dish, served them, and placed beside
    The chargers cups magnificent of gold,
    When Menelaus grasp'd their hands, and said.
      Eat and rejoice, and when ye shall have shared
    Our nuptial banquet, we will then inquire
    Who are ye both, for, certain, not from those
    Whose generation perishes are ye,
    But rather of some race of sceptred Chiefs
    Heav'n-born; the base have never sons like you.
      So saying, he from the board lifted his own                     80
    Distinguish'd portion, and the fatted chine
    Gave to his guests; the sav'ry viands they
    With outstretch'd hands assail'd, and when the force
    No longer now of appetite they felt,
    Telemachus, inclining close his head
    To Nestor's son, lest others should his speech
    Witness, in whisper'd words him thus address'd.
      Dearest Pisistratus, observe, my friend!
    How all the echoing palace with the light
    Of beaming brass, of gold and amber shines                        90
    Silver and ivory! for radiance such
    Th' interior mansion of Olympian Jove
    I deem. What wealth, how various, how immense
    Is here! astonish'd I survey the sight!
      But Menelaus, golden-hair'd, his speech
    O'erhearing, thus in accents wing'd replied
      My children! let no mortal man pretend
    Comparison with Jove; for Jove's abode
    And all his stores are incorruptible.
    But whether mortal man with me may vie                           100
    In the display of wealth, or whether not,
    This know, that after many toils endured,
    And perilous wand'rings wide, in the eighth year
    I brought my treasures home. Remote I roved
    To Cyprus, to Phoenice, to the shores
    Of AEgypt; AEthiopia's land I reach'd,
    Th' Erembi, the Sidonians, and the coasts
    Of Lybia, where the lambs their foreheads shew
    At once with horns defended, soon as yean'd.
    There, thrice within the year the flocks produce,                110
    Nor master, there, nor shepherd ever feels
    A dearth of cheese, of flesh, or of sweet milk
    Delicious, drawn from udders never dry.
    While, thus, commodities on various coasts
    Gath'ring I roam'd, another, by the arts
    Of his pernicious spouse aided, of life
    Bereav'd my brother privily, and when least
    He fear'd to lose it. Therefore little joy
    To me results from all that I possess.
    Your fathers (be those fathers who they may)                     120
    These things have doubtless told you; for immense
    Have been my suff'rings, and I have destroy'd
    A palace well inhabited and stored
    With precious furniture in ev'ry kind;
    Such, that I would to heav'n! I own'd at home
    Though but the third of it, and that the Greeks
    Who perish'd then, beneath the walls of Troy
    Far from steed-pastured Argos, still survived.
    Yet while, sequester'd here, I frequent mourn
    My slaughter'd friends, by turns I sooth my soul                 130
    With tears shed for them, and by turns again
    I cease; for grief soon satiates free indulged.
    But of them all, although I all bewail,
    None mourn I so as one, whom calling back
    To memory, I both sleep and food abhor.
    For, of Achaia's sons none ever toiled
    Strenuous as Ulysses; but his lot
    Was woe, and unremitting sorrow mine
    For his long absence, who, if still he live,
    We know not aught, or be already dead.                           140
    Him doubtless, old Laertes mourns, and him
    Discrete Penelope, nor less his son
    Telemachus, born newly when he sail'd.
      So saying, he kindled in him strong desire
    To mourn his father; at his father's name
    Fast fell his tears to ground, and with both hands
    He spread his purple cloak before his eyes;
    Which Menelaus marking, doubtful sat
    If he should leave him leisure for his tears,
    Or question him, and tell him all at large.                      150
      While thus he doubted, Helen (as it chanced)
    Leaving her fragrant chamber, came, august
    As Dian, goddess of the golden bow.
    Adrasta, for her use, set forth a throne,
    Alcippe with soft arras cover'd it,
    And Philo brought her silver basket, gift
    Of fair Alcandra, wife of Polybus,
    Whose mansion in AEgyptian Thebes is rich
    In untold treasure, and who gave, himself,
    Ten golden talents, and two silver baths                         160
    To Menelaus, with two splendid tripods
    Beside the noble gifts which, at the hand
    Of his illustrious spouse, Helen receiv'd;
    A golden spindle, and a basket wheel'd,
    Itself of silver, and its lip of gold.
    That basket Philo, her own handmaid, placed
    At beauteous Helen's side, charged to the brim
    With slender threads, on which the spindle lay
    With wool of purple lustre wrapp'd around.
    Approaching, on her foot-stool'd throne she sat,                 170
    And, instant, of her royal spouse enquired.
      Know we, my Menelaus, dear to Jove!
    These guests of ours, and whence they have arrived?
    Erroneous I may speak, yet speak I must;
    In man or woman never have I seen
    Such likeness to another (wonder-fixt
    I gaze) as in this stranger to the son
    Of brave Ulysses, whom that Hero left
    New-born at home, when (shameless as I was)
    For my unworthy sake the Greecians sailed                        180
    To Ilium, with fierce rage of battle fir'd.
      Then Menelaus, thus, the golden-hair'd.
    I also such resemblance find in him
    As thou; such feet, such hands, the cast of eye[10]
    Similar, and the head and flowing locks.
    And even now, when I Ulysses named,
    And his great sufferings mention'd, in my cause,
    The bitter tear dropp'd from his lids, while broad
    Before his eyes his purple cloak he spread.
      To whom the son of Nestor thus replied.                        190
    Atrides! Menelaus! Chief renown'd!
    He is in truth his son, as thou hast said,
    But he is modest, and would much himself
    Condemn, if, at his first arrival here,
    He should loquacious seem and bold to thee,
    To whom we listen, captived by thy voice,
    As if some God had spoken. As for me,
    Nestor, my father, the Gerenian Chief
    Bade me conduct him hither, for he wish'd
    To see thee, promising himself from thee                         200
    The benefit of some kind word or deed.
    For, destitute of other aid, he much
    His father's tedious absence mourns at home.
    So fares Telemachus; his father strays
    Remote, and, in his stead, no friend hath he
    Who might avert the mischiefs that he feels.
      To whom the Hero amber-hair'd replied.
    Ye Gods! the offspring of indeed a friend
    Hath reach'd my house, of one who hath endured
    Arduous conflicts num'rous for my sake;                          210
    And much I purpos'd, had Olympian Jove
    Vouchsaf'd us prosp'rous passage o'er the Deep,
    To have receiv'd him with such friendship here
    As none beside. In Argos I had then
    Founded a city for him, and had rais'd
    A palace for himself; I would have brought
    The Hero hither, and his son, with all
    His people, and with all his wealth, some town
    Evacuating for his sake, of those
    Ruled by myself, and neighb'ring close my own.                   220
    Thus situate, we had often interchanged
    Sweet converse, nor had other cause at last
    Our friendship terminated or our joys,
    Than death's black cloud o'ershadowing him or me.
    But such delights could only envy move
    Ev'n in the Gods, who have, of all the Greeks,
    Amerc'd _him_ only of his wish'd return.
      So saying, he kindled the desire to weep
    In ev'ry bosom. Argive Helen wept
    Abundant, Jove's own daughter; wept as fast                      230
    Telemachus and Menelaus both;
    Nor Nestor's son with tearless eyes remain'd,
    Calling to mind Antilochus[11] by the son[12]
    Illustrious of the bright Aurora slain,
    Rememb'ring whom, in accents wing'd he said.
      Atrides! antient Nestor, when of late
    Conversing with him, we remember'd thee,
    Pronounced thee wise beyond all human-kind.
    Now therefore, let not even my advice
    Displease thee. It affords me no delight                         240
    To intermingle tears with my repast,
    And soon, Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Will tinge the orient. Not that I account
    Due lamentation of a friend deceased
    Blameworthy, since, to sheer the locks and weep,
    Is all we can for the unhappy dead.
    I also have my grief, call'd to lament
    One, not the meanest of Achaia's sons,
    My brother; him I cannot but suppose
    To thee well-known, although unknown to me                       250
    Who saw him never;[13] but report proclaims
    Antilochus superior to the most,
    In speed superior, and in feats of arms.
      To whom, the Hero of the yellow locks.
    O friend belov'd! since nought which thou hast said
    Or recommended now, would have disgraced
    A man of years maturer far than thine,
    (For wise thy father is, and such art thou,
    And easy is it to discern the son
    Of such a father, whom Saturnian Jove                            260
    In marriage both and at his birth ordain'd
    To great felicity; for he hath giv'n
    To Nestor gradually to sink at home
    Into old age, and, while he lives, to see
    His sons past others wise, and skill'd in arms)
    The sorrow into which we sudden fell
    Shall pause. Come--now remember we the feast;
    Pour water on our hands, for we shall find,
    (Telemachus and I) no dearth of themes
    For mutual converse when the day shall dawn.                     270
      He ended; then, Asphalion, at his word,
    Servant of glorious Menelaus, poured
    Pure water on their hands, and they the feast
    Before them with keen appetite assail'd.
    But Jove-born Helen otherwise, meantime,
    Employ'd, into the wine of which they drank
    A drug infused, antidote to the pains
    Of grief and anger, a most potent charm
    For ills of ev'ry name. Whoe'er his wine
    So medicated drinks, he shall not pour                           280
    All day the tears down his wan cheek, although
    His father and his mother both were dead,
    Nor even though his brother or his son
    Had fall'n in battle, and before his eyes.
    Such drugs Jove's daughter own'd, with skill prepar'd,
    And of prime virtue, by the wife of Thone,
    AEgyptian Polydamna, giv'n her.
    For AEgypt teems with drugs, yielding no few
    Which, mingled with the drink, are good, and many
    Of baneful juice, and enemies to life.                           290
    There ev'ry man in skill medicinal
    Excels, for they are sons of Paeon all.
    That drug infused, she bade her servant pour
    The bev'rage forth, and thus her speech resumed.
      Atrides! Menelaus! dear to Jove!
    These also are the sons of Chiefs renown'd,
    (For Jove, as pleases him, to each assigns
    Or good or evil, whom all things obey)
    Now therefore, feasting at your ease reclin'd,
    Listen with pleasure, for myself, the while,                     300
    Will matter seasonable interpose.
    I cannot all rehearse, nor even name,
    (Omitting none) the conflicts and exploits
    Of brave Ulysses; but with what address
    Successful, one atchievement he perform'd
    At Ilium, where Achaia's sons endured
    Such hardship, will I speak. Inflicting wounds
    Dishonourable on himself, he took
    A tatter'd garb, and like a serving-man
    Enter'd the spacious city of your foes.                          310
    So veil'd, some mendicant he seem'd, although
    No Greecian less deserved that name than he.
    In such disguise he enter'd; all alike
    Misdeem'd him; me alone he not deceived
    Who challeng'd him, but, shrewd, he turn'd away.
    At length, however, when I had myself
    Bathed him, anointed, cloath'd him, and had sworn
    Not to declare him openly in Troy
    Till he should reach again the camp and fleet,
    He told me the whole purpose of the Greeks.                      320
    Then, (many a Trojan slaughter'd,) he regain'd
    The camp, and much intelligence he bore
    To the Achaians. Oh what wailing then
    Was heard of Trojan women! but my heart
    Exulted, alter'd now, and wishing home;
    For now my crime committed under force
    Of Venus' influence I deplored, what time
    She led me to a country far remote,
    A wand'rer from the matrimonial bed,
    From my own child, and from my rightful Lord                     330
    Alike unblemish'd both in form and mind.
      Her answer'd then the Hero golden-hair'd.
    Helen! thou hast well spoken. All is true.
    I have the talents fathom'd and the minds
    Of num'rous Heroes, and have travell'd far
    Yet never saw I with these eyes in man
    Such firmness as the calm Ulysses own'd;
    None such as in the wooden horse he proved,
    Where all our bravest sat, designing woe
    And bloody havoc for the sons of Troy.                           340
    Thou thither cam'st, impell'd, as it should seem,
    By some divinity inclin'd to give
    Victory to our foes, and with thee came
    Godlike Deiphobus. Thrice round about
    The hollow ambush, striking with thy hand
    Its sides thou went'st, and by his name didst call
    Each prince of Greece feigning his consort's voice.
    Myself with Diomede, and with divine
    Ulysses, seated in the midst, the call
    Heard plain and loud; we (Diomede and I)                         350
    With ardour burn'd either to quit the horse
    So summon'd, or to answer from within.
    But, all impatient as we were, Ulysses
    Controul'd the rash design; so there the sons
    Of the Achaians silent sat and mute,
    And of us all Anticlus would alone
    Have answer'd; but Ulysses with both hands
    Compressing close his lips, saved us, nor ceased
    Till Pallas thence conducted thee again.
      Then thus, discrete, Telemachus replied.                       360
    Atrides! Menelaus! prince renown'd!
    Hard was his lot whom these rare qualities
    Preserved not, neither had his dauntless heart
    Been iron, had he scaped his cruel doom.
    But haste, dismiss us hence, that on our beds
    Reposed, we may enjoy sleep, needful now.
      He ceas'd; then Argive Helen gave command
    To her attendant maidens to prepare
    Beds in the portico with purple rugs
    Resplendent, and with arras, overspread,                         370
    And cover'd warm with cloaks of shaggy pile.
    Forth went the maidens, bearing each a torch,
    And spread the couches; next, the herald them
    Led forth, and in the vestibule the son
    Of Nestor and the youthful Hero slept,
    Telemachus; but in the interior house
    Atrides, with the loveliest of her sex
    Beside him, Helen of the sweeping stole.
