gratitude from his tutor. When, then, Holt was gone, and told Harry not
to see him, it was as if he had never been. And he had this answer pat
when he came to be questioned a few days after.

The Prince of Orange was then at Salisbury, as young Esmond learned from
seeing Doctor Tusher in his best cassock (though the roads were
muddy, and he never was known to wear his silk, only his stuff one,
a-horseback), with a great orange cockade in his broad-leafed hat, and
Nahum, his clerk, ornamented with a like decoration. The Doctor was
walking up and down in front of his parsonage, when little Esmond saw
him, and heard him say he was going to pay his duty to his Highness
the Prince, as he mounted his pad and rode away with Nahum behind. The
village people had orange cockades too, and his friend the blacksmith's
laughing daughter pinned one into Harry's old hat, which he tore out
indignantly when they bade him to cry "God save the Prince of Orange and
the Protestant religion!" but the people only laughed, for they liked
the boy in the village, where his solitary condition moved the general
pity, and where he found friendly welcomes and faces in many houses.
Father Holt had many friends there too, for he not only would fight the
blacksmith at theology, never losing his temper, but laughing the whole
time in his pleasant way; but he cured him of an ague with quinquina,
and was always ready with a kind word for any man that asked it, so that
they said in the village 'twas a pity the two were Papists.

The Director and the Vicar of Castlewood agreed very well; indeed, the
former was a perfectly-bred gentleman, and it was the latter's business
to agree with everybody. Doctor Tusher and the lady's-maid, his spouse,
had a boy who was about the age of little Esmond; and there was such a
friendship between the lads, as propinquity and tolerable kindness and
good-humor on either side would be pretty sure to occasion. Tom Tusher
was sent off early, however, to a school in London, whither his father
took him and a volume of sermons, in the first year of the reign of King
James; and Tom returned but once, a year afterwards, to Castlewood for
many years of his scholastic and collegiate life. Thus there was less
danger to Tom of a perversion of his faith by the Director, who scarce
ever saw him, than there was to Harry, who constantly was in the Vicar's
company; but as long as Harry's religion was his Majesty's, and my
lord's, and my lady's, the Doctor said gravely, it should not be for
him to disturb or disquiet him: it was far from him to say that his
Majesty's Church was not a branch of the Catholic Church; upon which
Father Holt used, according to his custom, to laugh, and say that the
Holy Church throughout all the world, and the noble Army of Martyrs,
were very much obliged to the Doctor.

It was while Dr. Tusher was away at Salisbury that there came a troop
of dragoons with orange scarfs, and quartered in Castlewood, and some
of them came up to the Hall, where they took possession, robbing nothing
however beyond the hen-house and the beer-cellar: and only insisting
upon going through the house and looking for papers. The first room they
asked to look at was Father Holt's room, of which Harry Esmond brought
the key, and they opened the drawers and the cupboards, and tossed over
the papers and clothes--but found nothing except his books and clothes,
and the vestments in a box by themselves, with which the dragoons
made merry, to Harry Esmond's horror. And to the questions which the
gentleman put to Harry, he replied that Father Holt was a very kind man
to him, and a very learned man, and Harry supposed would tell him none
of his secrets if he had any. He was about eleven years old at this
time, and looked as innocent as boys of his age.

The family were away more than six months, and when they returned
they were in the deepest state of dejection, for King James had been
banished, the Prince of Orange was on the throne, and the direst
persecutions of those of the Catholic faith were apprehended by my
lady, who said she did not believe that there was a word of truth in the
promises of toleration that Dutch monster made, or in a single word the
perjured wretch said. My lord and lady were in a manner prisoners in
their own house; so her ladyship gave the little page to know, who was
by this time growing of an age to understand what was passing about him,
and something of the characters of the people he lived with.

"We are prisoners," says she; "in everything but chains, we are
prisoners. Let them come, let them consign me to dungeons, or strike off
my head from this poor little throat" (and she clasped it in her long
fingers). "The blood of the Esmonds will always flow freely for their
kings. We are not like the Churchills--the Judases, who kiss their
master and betray him. We know how to suffer, how even to forgive in the
royal cause" (no doubt it was to that fatal business of losing the place
of Groom of the Posset to which her ladyship alluded, as she did half
a dozen times in the day). "Let the tyrant of Orange bring his rack and
his odious Dutch tortures--the beast! the wretch! I spit upon him and
defy him. Cheerfully will I lay this head upon the block; cheerfully
will I accompany my lord to the scaffold: we will cry 'God save
King James!' with our dying breath, and smile in the face of the
executioner." And she told her page, a hundred times at least, of the
particulars of the last interview which she had with his Majesty.

"I flung myself before my liege's feet," she said, "at Salisbury.
I devoted myself--my husband--my house, to his cause. Perhaps he
remembered old times, when Isabella Esmond was young and fair; perhaps
he recalled the day when 'twas not I that knelt--at least he spoke to me
with a voice that reminded ME of days gone by. 'Egad!' said his Majesty,
'you should go to the Prince of Orange; if you want anything.' 'No,
sire,' I replied, 'I would not kneel to a Usurper; the Esmond that would
have served your Majesty will never be groom to a traitor's posset.' The
royal exile smiled, even in the midst of his misfortune; he deigned to
raise me with words of consolation. The Viscount, my husband, himself,
could not be angry at the august salute with which he honored me!"

The public misfortune had the effect of making my lord and his lady
better friends than they ever had been since their courtship. My
lord Viscount had shown both loyalty and spirit, when these were rare
qualities in the dispirited party about the King; and the praise he got
elevated him not a little in his wife's good opinion, and perhaps in his
own. He wakened up from the listless and supine life which he had been
leading; was always riding to and fro in consultation with this friend
or that of the King's; the page of course knowing little of his doings,
but remarking only his greater cheerfulness and altered demeanor.

Father Holt came to the Hall constantly, but officiated no longer openly
as chaplain; he was always fetching and carrying: strangers, military
and ecclesiastic (Harry knew the latter, though they came in all sorts
of disguises), were continually arriving and departing. My lord made
long absences and sudden reappearances, using sometimes the means of
exit which Father Holt had employed, though how often the little window
in the Chaplain's room let in or let out my lord and his friends, Harry
could not tell. He stoutly kept his promise to the Father of not prying,
and if at midnight from his little room he heard noises of persons
stirring in the next chamber, he turned round to the wall, and hid his
curiosity under his pillow until it fell asleep. Of course he could
not help remarking that the priest's journeys were constant, and
understanding by a hundred signs that some active though secret business
employed him: what this was may pretty well be guessed by what soon
happened to my lord.

No garrison or watch was put into Castlewood when my lord came back, but
a Guard was in the village; and one or other of them was always on the
Green keeping a look-out on our great gate, and those who went out and
in. Lockwood said that at night especially every person who came in or
went out was watched by the outlying sentries. 'Twas lucky that we had
a gate which their Worships knew nothing about. My lord and Father Holt
must have made constant journeys at night: once or twice little Harry
acted as their messenger and discreet little aide-de-camp. He remembers
he was bidden to go into the village with his fishing-rod, enter certain
houses, ask for a drink of water, and tell the good man, "There would be
a horse-market at Newbury next Thursday," and so carry the same message
on to the next house on his list.

He did not know what the message meant at the time, nor what was
happening: which may as well, however, for clearness' sake, be explained
here. The Prince of Orange being gone to Ireland, where the King was
ready to meet him with a great army, it was determined that a great
rising of his Majesty's party should take place in this country; and my
lord was to head the force in our county. Of late he had taken a greater
lead in affairs than before, having the indefatigable Mr. Holt at his
elbow, and my Lady Viscountess strongly urging him on; and my Lord
Sark being in the Tower a prisoner, and Sir Wilmot Crawley, of Queen's
Crawley, having gone over to the Prince of Orange's side--my lord became
the most considerable person in our part of the county for the affairs
of the King.

It was arranged that the regiment of Scots Grays and Dragoons, then
quartered at Newbury, should declare for the King on a certain day, when
likewise the gentry affected to his Majesty's cause were to come in with
their tenants and adherents to Newbury, march upon the Dutch troops
at Reading under Ginckel; and, these overthrown, and their indomitable
little master away in Ireland, 'twas thought that our side might move on
London itself, and a confident victory was predicted for the King.

As these great matters were in agitation, my lord lost his listless
manner and seemed to gain health; my lady did not scold him, Mr. Holt
came to and fro, busy always; and little Harry longed to have been a few
inches taller, that he might draw a sword in this good cause.

One day, it must have been about the month of July, 1690, my lord, in
a great horseman's coat, under which Harry could see the shining of a
steel breastplate he had on, called little Harry to him, put the hair
off the child's forehead, and kissed him, and bade God bless him in such
an affectionate way as he never had used before. Father Holt blessed him
too, and then they took leave of my Lady Viscountess, who came from her
apartment with a pocket-handkerchief to her eyes, and her gentlewoman
and Mrs. Tusher supporting her. "You are going to--to ride," says she.
"Oh, that I might come too--but in my situation I am forbidden horse
exercise."

"We kiss my Lady Marchioness's hand," says Mr. Holt.

"My lord, God speed you!" she said, stepping up and embracing my lord in
a grand manner. "Mr. Holt, I ask your blessing:" and she knelt down for
that, whilst Mrs. Tusher tossed her head up.

Mr. Holt gave the same benediction to the little page, who went down
and held my lord's stirrups for him to mount; there were two servants
waiting there too--and they rode out of Castlewood gate.

As they crossed the bridge, Harry could see an officer in scarlet ride
up touching his hat, and address my lord.

The party stopped, and came to some parley or discussion, which
presently ended, my lord putting his horse into a canter after taking
off his hat and making a bow to the officer, who rode alongside him step
for step: the trooper accompanying him falling back, and riding with my
lord's two men. They cantered over the Green, and behind the elms (my
lord waving his hand, Harry thought), and so they disappeared. That
evening we had a great panic, the cow-boy coming at milking-time riding
one of our horses, which he had found grazing at the outer park-wall.

All night my Lady Viscountess was in a very quiet and subdued mood.
She scarce found fault with anybody; she played at cards for six hours;
little page Esmond went to sleep. He prayed for my lord and the good
cause before closing his eyes.

It was quite in the gray of the morning when the porter's bell rang, and
old Lockwood, waking up, let in one of my lord's servants, who had gone
with him in the morning, and who returned with a melancholy story. The
officer who rode up to my lord had, it appeared, said to him, that it
was his duty to inform his lordship that he was not under arrest, but
under surveillance, and to request him not to ride abroad that day.

My lord replied that riding was good for his health, that if the Captain
chose to accompany him he was welcome; and it was then that he made a
bow, and they cantered away together.

When he came on to Wansey Down, my lord all of a sudden pulled up, and
the party came to a halt at the cross-way.

"Sir," says he to the officer, "we are four to two; will you be so kind
as to take that road, and leave me go mine?"

"Your road is mine, my lord," says the officer.

"Then--" says my lord; but he had no time to say more, for the officer,
drawing a pistol, snapped it at his lordship; as at the same moment
Father Holt, drawing a pistol, shot the officer through the head. It was
done, and the man dead in an instant of time. The orderly, gazing at the
officer, looked seared for a moment, and galloped away for his life.

"Fire! fire!" cries out Father Holt, sending another shot after the
trooper, but the two servants were too much surprised to use their
pieces, and my lord calling to them to hold their hands, the fellow got
away.

"Mr. Holt, qui pensait a tout," says Blaise, "gets off his horse,
examines the pockets of the dead officer for papers, gives his money to
us two, and says, 'The wine is drawn, M. le Marquis,'--why did he say
Marquis to M. le Vicomte?--'we must drink it.'

"The poor gentleman's horse was a better one than that I rode,"
Blaise continues; "Mr. Holt bids me get on him, and so I gave a cut to
Whitefoot, and she trotted home. We rode on towards Newbury; we heard
firing towards midday: at two o'clock a horseman comes up to us as we
were giving our cattle water at an inn--and says, 'All is done! The
Ecossais declared an hour too soon--General Ginckel was down upon them.'
The whole thing was at an end.

"'And we've shot an officer on duty, and let his orderly escape,' says
my lord.

"'Blaise,' says Mr. Holt, writing two lines on his table-book, one for
my lady and one for you, Master Harry; 'you must go back to Castlewood,
and deliver these,' and behold me."

And he gave Harry the two papers. He read that to himself, which only
said, "Burn the papers in the cupboard, burn this. You know nothing
about anything." Harry read this, ran up stairs to his mistress's
apartment, where her gentlewoman slept near to the door, made her bring
a light and wake my lady, into whose hands he gave the paper. She was a
wonderful object to look at in her night attire, nor had Harry ever seen
the like.

As soon as she had the paper in her hand, Harry stepped back to the
Chaplain's room, opened the secret cupboard over the fireplace, burned
all the papers in it, and, as he had seen the priest do before, took
down one of his reverence's manuscript sermons, and half burnt that
in the brazier. By the time the papers were quite destroyed it was
daylight. Harry ran back to his mistress again. Her gentlewoman ushered
him again into her ladyship's chamber; she told him (from behind her
nuptial curtains) to bid the coach be got ready, and that she would ride
away anon.

But the mysteries of her ladyship's toilet were as awfully long on this
day as on any other, and, long after the coach was ready, my lady was
still attiring herself. And just as the Viscountess stepped forth from
her room, ready for departure, young John Lockwood comes running up
from the village with news that a lawyer, three officers, and twenty or
four-and-twenty soldiers, were marching thence upon the house. John had
but two minutes the start of them, and, ere he had well told his story,
the troop rode into our court-yard.




CHAPTER VI.

THE ISSUE OF THE PLOTS.--THE DEATH OF THOMAS, THIRD VISCOUNT OF
CASTLEWOOD; AND THE IMPRISONMENT OF HIS VISCOUNTESS.


At first my lady was for dying like Mary, Queen of Scots (to whom she
fancied she bore a resemblance in beauty), and, stroking her scraggy
neck, said, "They will find Isabel of Castlewood is equal to her fate."
Her gentlewoman, Victoire, persuaded her that her prudent course was,
as she could not fly, to receive the troops as though she suspected
nothing, and that her chamber was the best place wherein to await them.
So her black Japan casket, which Harry was to carry to the coach, was
taken back to her ladyship's chamber, whither the maid and mistress
retired. Victoire came out presently, bidding the page to say her
ladyship was ill, confined to her bed with the rheumatism.

By this time the soldiers had reached Castlewood. Harry Esmond saw
them from the window of the tapestry parlor; a couple of sentinels were
posted at the gate--a half-dozen more walked towards the stable; and
some others, preceded by their commander, and a man in black, a lawyer
probably, were conducted by one of the servants to the stair leading up
to the part of the house which my lord and lady inhabited.

So the Captain, a handsome kind man, and the lawyer, came through the
ante-room to the tapestry parlor, and where now was nobody but young
Harry Esmond, the page.

"Tell your mistress, little man," says the Captain, kindly, "that we
must speak to her."

"My mistress is ill a-bed," said the page.

"What complaint has she?" asked the Captain.

The boy said, "The rheumatism!"

"Rheumatism! that's a sad complaint," continues the good-natured
Captain; "and the coach is in the yard to fetch the Doctor, I suppose?"

"I don't know," says the boy.

"And how long has her ladyship been ill?"

"I don't know," says the boy.

"When did my lord go away?"

"Yesterday night."

"With Father Holt?"

"With Mr. Holt."

"And which way did they travel?" asks the lawyer.

"They travelled without me," says the page.

"We must see Lady Castlewood."

"I have orders that nobody goes in to her ladyship--she is sick," says
the page; but at this moment Victoire came out. "Hush!" says she; and,
as if not knowing that any one was near, "What's this noise?" says she.
"Is this gentleman the Doctor?"

"Stuff! we must see Lady Castlewood," says the lawyer, pushing by.

The curtains of her ladyship's room were down, and the chamber dark,
and she was in bed with a nightcap on her head, and propped up by her
pillows, looking none the less ghastly because of the red which was
still on her cheeks, and which she could not afford to forego.

"Is that the Doctor?" she said.

"There is no use with this deception, madam," Captain Westbury said (for
so he was named). "My duty is to arrest the person of Thomas, Viscount
Castlewood, a nonjuring peer--of Robert Tusher, Vicar of Castlewood--and
Henry Holt, known under various other names and designations, a Jesuit
priest, who officiated as chaplain here in the late king's time, and is
now at the head of the conspiracy which was about to break out in this
country against the authority of their Majesties King William and Queen
Mary--and my orders are to search the house for such papers or traces of
the conspiracy as may be found here. Your ladyship will please give me
your keys, and it will be as well for yourself that you should help us,
in every way, in our search."

"You see, sir, that I have the rheumatism, and cannot move," said
the lady, looking uncommonly ghastly as she sat up in her bed, where,
however, she had had her cheeks painted, and a new cap put on, so that
she might at least look her best when the officers came.

"I shall take leave to place a sentinel in the chamber, so that your
ladyship, in case you should wish to rise, may have an arm to lean on,"
Captain Westbury said. "Your woman will show me where I am to look;" and
Madame Victoire, chattering in her half French and half English jargon,
opened while the Captain examined one drawer after another; but, as
Harry Esmond thought, rather carelessly, with a smile on his face, as if
he was only conducting the examination for form's sake.

Before one of the cupboards Victoire flung herself down, stretching out
her arms, and, with a piercing shriek, cried, "Non, jamais, monsieur
l'officier! Jamais! I will rather die than let you see this wardrobe."

But Captain Westbury would open it, still with a smile on his face,
which, when the box was opened, turned into a fair burst of laughter.
It contained--not papers regarding the conspiracy--but my lady's wigs,
washes, and rouge-pots, and Victoire said men were monsters, as the
Captain went on with his perquisition. He tapped the back to see whether
or no it was hollow, and as he thrust his hands into the cupboard, my
lady from her bed called out, with a voice that did not sound like that
of a very sick woman, "Is it your commission to insult ladies as well as
to arrest gentlemen, Captain?"

"These articles are only dangerous when worn by your ladyship," the
Captain said, with a low bow, and a mock grin of politeness. "I have
found nothing which concerns the Government as yet--only the weapons
with which beauty is authorized to kill," says he, pointing to a wig
with his sword-tip. "We must now proceed to search the rest of the
house."

"You are not going to leave that wretch in the room with me," cried my
lady, pointing to the soldier.

"What can I do, madam? Somebody you must have to smooth your pillow and
bring your medicine--permit me--"

"Sir!" screamed out my lady.

"Madam, if you are too ill to leave the bed," the Captain then said,
rather sternly, "I must have in four of my men to lift you off in the
sheet. I must examine this bed, in a word; papers may be hidden in a bed
as elsewhere; we know that very well and * * *."

Here it was her ladyship's turn to shriek, for the Captain, with his
fist shaking the pillows and bolsters, at last came to "burn" as they
say in the play of forfeits, and wrenching away one of the pillows,
said, "Look! did not I tell you so? Here is a pillow stuffed with
paper."

"Some villain has betrayed us," cried out my lady, sitting up in the
bed, showing herself full dressed under her night-rail.

"And now your ladyship can move, I am sure; permit me to give you my
hand to rise. You will have to travel for some distance, as far as
Hexton Castle to-night. Will you have your coach? Your woman shall
attend you if you like--and the japan-box?"

"Sir! you don't strike a MAN when he is down," said my lady, with some
dignity: "can you not spare a woman?"

"Your ladyship must please to rise, and let me search the bed," said the
Captain; "there is no more time to lose in bandying talk."

And, without more ado, the gaunt old woman got up. Harry Esmond
recollected to the end of his life that figure, with the brocade dress
and the white night-rail, and the gold-clocked red stockings, and white
red-heeled shoes, sitting up in the bed, and stepping down from it. The
trunks were ready packed for departure in her ante-room, and the horses
ready harnessed in the stable: about all which the Captain seemed to
know, by information got from some quarter or other; and whence Esmond
could make a pretty shrewd guess in after-times, when Dr. Tusher
complained that King William's government had basely treated him for
services done in that cause.

And here he may relate, though he was then too young to know all that
was happening, what the papers contained, of which Captain Westbury had
made a seizure, and which papers had been transferred from the japan-box
to the bed when the officers arrived.

There was a list of gentlemen of the county in Father Holt's hand
writing--Mr. Freeman's (King James's) friends--a similar paper being
found among those of Sir John Fenwick and Mr. Coplestone, who suffered
death for this conspiracy.

There was a patent conferring the title of Marquis of Esmond on my
Lord Castlewood and the heirs-male of his body; his appointment as
Lord-Lieutenant of the County, and Major-General.*

     * To have this rank of Marquis restored in the family had
     always been my Lady Viscountess's ambition; and her old
     maiden aunt, Barbara Topham, the goldsmith's daughter, dying
     about this time, and leaving all her property to Lady
     Castlewood, I have heard that her ladyship sent almost the
     whole of the money to King James, a proceeding which so
     irritated my Lord Castlewood that he actually went to the
     parish church, and was only appeased by the Marquis's title
     which his exiled Majesty sent to him in return for the
     15,000L. his faithful subject lent him.

There were various letters from the nobility and gentry, some ardent
and some doubtful, in the King's service; and (very luckily for him) two
letters concerning Colonel Francis Esmond: one from Father Holt, which
said, "I have been to see this Colonel at his house at Walcote, near to
Wells, where he resides since the King's departure, and pressed him very
eagerly in Mr. Freeman's cause, showing him the great advantage he would
have by trading with that merchant, offering him large premiums there as
agreed between us. But he says no: he considers Mr. Freeman the head of
the firm, will never trade against him or embark with any other trading
company, but considers his duty was done when Mr. Freeman left England.
This Colonel seems to care more for his wife and his beagles than for
affairs. He asked me much about young H. E., 'that bastard,' as he
called him; doubting my lord's intentions respecting him. I reassured
him on this head, stating what I knew of the lad, and our intentions
respecting him, but with regard to Freeman he was inflexible."

And another letter was from Colonel Esmond to his kinsman, to say that
one Captain Holton had been with him offering him large bribes to join,
YOU KNOW WHO, and saying that the head of the house of Castlewood was
deeply engaged in that quarter. But for his part he had broke his
sword when the K. left the country, and would never again fight in that
quarrel. The P. of O. was a man, at least, of a noble courage, and his
duty, and, as he thought, every Englishman's, was to keep the country
quiet, and the French out of it: and, in fine, that he would have
nothing to do with the scheme.

Of the existence of these two letters and the contents of the pillow,
Colonel Frank Esmond, who became Viscount Castlewood, told Henry
Esmond afterwards, when the letters were shown to his lordship, who
congratulated himself, as he had good reason, that he had not joined
in the scheme which proved so fatal to many concerned in it. But,
naturally, the lad knew little about these circumstances when they
happened under his eyes: only being aware that his patron and his
mistress were in some trouble, which had caused the flight of the one
and the apprehension of the other by the officers of King William.

The seizure of the papers effected, the gentlemen did not pursue their
further search through Castlewood House very rigorously. They examined
Mr. Holt's room, being led thither by his pupil, who showed, as the
Father had bidden him, the place where the key of his chamber lay,
opened the door for the gentlemen, and conducted them into the room.

When the gentlemen came to the half-burned papers in the brazier, they
examined them eagerly enough, and their young guide was a little amused
at their perplexity.

"What are these?" says one.

"They're written in a foreign language," says the lawyer. "What are you
laughing at, little whelp?" adds he, turning round as he saw the boy
smile.

"Mr. Holt said they were sermons," Harry said, "and bade me to burn
them;" which indeed was true of those papers.

"Sermons indeed--it's treason, I would lay a wager," cries the lawyer.

"Egad! it's Greek to me," says Captain Westbury. "Can you read it,
little boy?"

"Yes, sir, a little," Harry said.

"Then read, and read in English, sir, on your peril," said the lawyer.
And Harry began to translate:--

"Hath not one of your own writers said, 'The children of Adam are now
laboring as much as he himself ever did, about the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, shaking the boughs thereof, and seeking the fruit,
being for the most part unmindful of the tree of life.' Oh blind
generation! 'tis this tree of knowledge to which the serpent has led
you"--and here the boy was obliged to stop, the rest of the page being
charred by the fire: and asked of the lawyer--"Shall I go on, sir?"

The lawyer said--"This boy is deeper than he seems: who knows that he is
not laughing at us?"

"Let's have in Dick the Scholar," cried Captain Westbury, laughing: and
he called to a trooper out of the window--"Ho, Dick, come in here and
construe."

A thick-set soldier, with a square good-humored face, came in at the
summons, saluting his officer.

"Tell us what is this, Dick," says the lawyer.

"My name is Steele, sir," says the soldier. "I may be Dick for my
friends, but I don't name gentlemen of your cloth amongst them."

"Well then, Steele."

"Mr. Steele, sir, if you please. When you address a gentleman of his
Majesty's Horse Guards, be pleased not to be so familiar."

"I didn't know, sir," said the lawyer.

"How should you? I take it you are not accustomed to meet with
gentlemen," says the trooper.

"Hold thy prate, and read that bit of paper," says Westbury.

"'Tis Latin," says Dick, glancing at it, and again saluting his officer,
"and from a sermon of Mr. Cudworth's," and he translated the words
pretty much as Henry Esmond had rendered them.

"What a young scholar you are," says the Captain to the boy.

"Depend on't, he knows more than he tells," says the lawyer. "I think we
will pack him off in the coach with old Jezebel."

"For construing a bit of Latin?" said the Captain, very good-naturedly.

"I would as lief go there as anywhere," Harry Esmond said, simply, "for
there is nobody to care for me."

There must have been something touching in the child's voice, or in
this description of his solitude--for the Captain looked at him very
good-naturedly, and the trooper, called Steele, put his hand kindly on
the lad's head, and said some words in the Latin tongue.

"What does he say?" says the lawyer.

"Faith, ask Dick himself," cried Captain Westbury.

"I said I was not ignorant of misfortune myself, and had learned to
succor the miserable, and that's not YOUR trade, Mr. Sheepskin," said
the trooper.

"You had better leave Dick the Scholar alone, Mr. Corbet," the Captain
said. And Harry Esmond, always touched by a kind face and kind word,
felt very grateful to this good-natured champion.

The horses were by this time harnessed to the coach; and the Countess
and Victoire came down and were put into the vehicle. This woman, who
quarrelled with Harry Esmond all day, was melted at parting with him,
and called him "dear angel," and "poor infant," and a hundred other
names.

The Viscountess, giving him her lean hand to kiss, bade him always be
faithful to the house of Esmond. "If evil should happen to my lord,"
says she, "his SUCCESSOR, I trust, will be found, and give you
protection. Situated as I am, they will not dare wreak their vengeance
on me NOW." And she kissed a medal she wore with great fervor, and
Henry Esmond knew not in the least what her meaning was; but hath since
