caught if I remember rightly, with a single glance of a single matchless
eye, which, when the fair owner withdrew her veil, proved to be single
in the literal sense of the word. And, besides, were you not another
time enamoured of a voice--a mere voice, that mingled in the psalmody at
the Old Greyfriars' Church--until you discovered the proprietor of that
dulcet organ to be Miss Dolly MacIzzard, who is both 'back and breast',
as our saying goes?

All these things considered, and contrasted with thy artful silence on
the subject of this grace-saying Nereid of thine, I must beg thee to be
more explicit upon that subject in thy next, unless thou wouldst have me
form the conclusion that thou thinkest more of her than thou carest to
talk of.

You will not expect much news from this quarter, as you know the
monotony of my life, and are aware it must at present be devoted to
uninterrupted study. You have said a thousand times that I am only
qualified to make my way by dint of plodding, and therefore plod I must.

My father seems to be more impatient of your absence than he was after
your first departure. He is sensible, I believe, that our solitary meals
want the light which your gay humour was wont to throw over them, and
feels melancholy as men do when the light of the sun is no longer upon
the landscape. If it is thus with him, thou mayst imagine it is much
more so with me, and canst conceive how heartily I wish that thy frolic
were ended, and thou once more our inmate.----

I resume my pen, after a few hours' interval, to say that an incident
has occurred on which you will yourself be building a hundred castles
in the air, and which even I, jealous as I am of such baseless fabrics,
cannot but own affords ground for singular conjecture.

My father has of late taken me frequently along with him when he
attends the courts, in his anxiety to see me properly initiated into the
practical forms of business. I own I feel something on his account
and my own from this over-anxiety, which, I dare say, renders us both
ridiculous. But what signifies my repugnance? my father drags me up to
his counsel learned in the law,--'Are you quite ready to come on to-day,
Mr. Crossbite?--This is my son, designed for the bar--I take the liberty
to bring him with me to-day to the consultation, merely that he may see
how these things are managed.'

Mr. Crossbite smiles and bows; as a lawyer smiles on the solicitor who
employs him, and I dare say, thrusts his tongue into his cheek, and
whispers into the first great wig that passes him, 'What the d--l does
old Fairford mean by letting loose his whelp on me?'

As I stood beside them, too much vexed at the childish part I was made
to play to derive much information from the valuable arguments of Mr.
Crossbite, I observed a rather elderly man, who stood with his eyes
firmly bent on my father, as if he only waited an end of the business in
which he was engaged, to address him. There was something, I thought, in
the gentleman's appearance which commanded attention. Yet his dress was
not in the present taste, and though it had once been magnificent, was
now antiquated and unfashionable. His coat was of branched velvet, with
a satin lining, a waistcoat of violet-coloured silk, much embroidered;
his breeches the same stuff as the coat. He wore square-toed shoes, with
foretops, as they are called; and his silk stockings were rolled up over
his knee, as you may have seen in pictures, and here and there on some
of those originals who seem to pique themselves on dressing after the
mode of Methuselah. A CHAPEAU BRAS and sword necessarily completed his
equipment, which, though out of date, showed that it belonged to a man
of distinction.

The instant Mr. Crossbite had ended what he had to say, this gentleman
walked up to my father, with, 'Your servant, Mr. Fairford--it is long
since you and I met.'

My father, whose politeness, you know, is exact and formal, bowed, and
hemmed, and was confused, and at length professed that the distance
since they had met was so great, that though he remembered the face
perfectly, the name, he was sorry to any, had--really--somehow--escaped
his memory.

'Have you forgot Herries of Birrenswork?' said the gentleman, and
my father bowed even more profoundly than before; though I think his
reception of his old friend seemed to lose some of the respectful
civility which he bestowed on him while his name was yet unknown. It now
seemed to be something like the lip-courtesy which the heart would have
denied had ceremony permitted.

My father, however, again bowed low, and hoped he saw him well.

'So well, my good Mr. Fairford, that I come hither determined to renew
my acquaintance with one or two old friends, and with you in the first
place. I halt at my old resting place--you must dine with me to-day,
at Paterson's, at the head of the Horse Wynd--it is near your new
fashionable dwelling, and I have business with you.'

My father excused himself respectfully, and not without
embarrassment--'he was particularly engaged at home.'

'Then I will dine with you, man,' said Mr. Herries of Birrenswork; 'the
few minutes you can spare me after dinner will suffice for my business;
and I will not prevent you a moment from minding your own--I am no
bottle-man.'

You have often remarked that my father, though a scrupulous ohserver of
the rites of hospitality, seems to exercise them rather as a duty than
as a pleasure; indeed, but for a conscientious wish to feed the hungry
and receive the stranger, his doors would open to guests much seldomer
than is the case. I never saw so strong an example of this peculiarity
(which I should otherwise have said is caricatured in your description)
as in his mode of homologating the self-given invitation of Mr. Herries.
The embarsassed brow, and the attempt at a smile which accompanied
his 'We will expect the honour of seeing you in Brown Square at three
o'clock,' could not deceive any one, and did not impose upon the old
laird. It was with a look of scorn that he replied, 'I will relieve you
then till that hour, Mr. Fairford;' and his whole manner seemed to say,
'It is my pleasure to dine with you, and I care not whether I am welcome
or no.'

When he turned away, I asked my father who he was.

'An unfortunate gentleman,' was the reply.

'He looks pretty well on his misfortunes,' replied I. 'I should not have
suspected that so gay an outside was lacking a dinner.'

'Who told you that he does?' replied my father; 'he is OMNI SUSPICIONE
MAJOR, so far as worldly circumstances are concerned. It is to be hoped
he makes a good use of them; though, if he does, it will be for the
first time in his life.'

'He has then been an irregular liver?' insinuated I.

My father replied by that famous brocard with which he silences all
unacceptable queries turning in the slightest degree upon the failings
of our neighbours,--'If we mend our own faults, Alan, we shall all of us
have enough to do, without sitting in judgement upon other folks.'

Here I was again at fault; but rallying once more, I observed, he had
the air of a man of high rank and family.

'He is well entitled,' said my father, 'representing Herries of
Birrenswork; a branch of that great and once powerful family of Herries,
the elder branch whereof merged in the house of Nithesdale at the
death of Lord Robin the Philosopher, Anno Domini sixteen hundred and
sixty-seven.'

'Has he still,' said I, 'his patrimonial estate of Birrenswork?'

'No,' replied my father; 'so far back as his father's time, it was
a mere designation--the property being forfeited by Herbert Herries
following his kinsman the Earl of Derwentwater to the Preston affair in
1715. But they keep up the designation, thinking, doubtless, that their
claims may be revived in more favourable times for Jacobites and for
popery; and folks who in no way partake of their fantastic capriccios
do yet allow it to pass unchallenged, EX COMITATE, if not EX
MISERICORDIA.--But were he the Pope and the Pretender both, we must get
some dinner ready for him, since he has thought fit to offer himself. So
hasten home, my lad, and tell Hannah, Cook Epps, and James Wilkinson, to
do their best; and do thou look out a pint or two of Maxwell's best--it
is in the fifth bin--there are the keys of the wine-cellar. Do not leave
them in the lock--you know poor James's failing, though he is an honest
creature under all other temptations--and I have but two bottles of the
old brandy left--we must keep it for medicine, Alan.'

Away went I--made my preparations--the hour of dinner came, and so did
Mr. Herries of Birrenswork.

If I had thy power of imagination and description, Darsie, I could make
out a fine, dark, mysterious, Rembrandt-looking portrait of this same
stranger, which should be as far superior to thy fisherman as a shirt
of chain-mail is to a herring-net. I can assure you there is some matter
for description about him; but knowing my own imperfections, I can only
say, I thought him eminently disagreeable and ill-bred.--No, ILL-BRED
is not the proper word on the contrary, he appeared to know the rules of
good-breeding perfectly, and only to think that the rank of the company
did not require that he should attend to them--a view of the matter
infinitely more offensive than if his behaviour had been that of
uneducated and proper rudeness. While my father said grace, the laird
did all but whistle aloud; and when I, at my father's desire, returned
thanks, he used his toothpick, as if he had waited that moment for its
exercise.

So much for Kirk--with King, matters went even worse. My father, thou
knowest, is particularly full of deference to his guests; and in the
present care, he seemed more than usually desirous to escape every cause
of dispute. He so far compromised his loyalty as to announce merely 'The
King' as his first toast after dinner, instead of the emphatic 'King
George', which is his usual formula. Our guest made a motion with his
glass, so as to pass it over the water-decanter which stood beside him,
and added, 'Over the water.'

My father coloured, but would not seem to hear this. Much more there
was of careless and disrespectful in the stranger's manner and tone of
conversation; so that, though I know my father's prejudices in favour
of rank and birth, and though I am aware his otherwise masculine
understanding has never entirely shaken off the slavish awe of the great
which in his earlier days they had so many modes of commanding, still I
could hardly excuse him for enduring so much insolence--such it seemed
to be as this self-invited guest was disposed to offer to him at his own
table.

One can endure a traveller in the same carriage, if he treads upon your
toes by accident, or even through negligence; but it is very different
when, knowing that they are rather of a tender description, he continues
to pound away at them with his hoofs. In my poor opinion--and I am a man
of peace--you can, in that case, hardly avoid a declaration of war.

I believe my father read my thoughts in my eye; for, pulling out his
watch, he said; 'Half-past four, Alan--you should be in your own room by
this time--Birrenswork will excuse you.'

Our visitor nodded carelessly, and I had no longer any pretence to
remain. But as I left the room, I heard this magnate of Nithesdale
distinctly mention the name of Latimer. I lingered; but at length a
direct hint from my father obliged me to withdraw; and when, an hour
afterwards, I was summoned to partake of a cup of tea, our guest had
departed. He had business that evening in the High Street, and could not
spare time even to drink tea. I could not help saying, I considered his
departure as a relief from incivility. 'What business has he to upbraid
us,' I said, 'with the change of our dwelling from a more inconvenient
to a better quarter of the town? What was it to him if we chose
to imitate some of the conveniences or luxuries of an English
dwelling-house, instead of living piled up above each other in flats?
Have his patrician birth and aristocratic fortunes given him any right
to censure those who dispose of the fruits of their own industry,
according to their own pleasure?'

My father took a long pinch of snuff, and replied, 'Very well, Alan;
very well indeed. I wish Mr. Crossbite or Counsellor Pest had heard
you; they must have acknowledged that you have a talent for forensic
elocution; and it may not be amiss to try a little declamation at
home now and then, to gather audacity and keep yourself in breath. But
touching the subject of this paraffle of words, it's not worth a pinch
of tobacco. D'ye think that I care for Mr. Herries of Birrenswork more
than any other gentleman who comes here about business, although I do
not care to go tilting at his throat, because he speaks like a grey
goose, as he is? But to say no more about him, I want to have Darsie
Latimer's present direction; for it is possible I may have to write the
lad a line with my own hand--and yet I do not well know--but give me the
direction at all events.'

I did so, and if you have heard from my father accordingly, you know
more, probably, about the subject of this letter than I who write it.
But if you have not, then shall I have discharged a friend's duty, in
letting you know that there certainly is something afloat between
this disagreeable laird and my father, in which you are considerably
interested.

Adieu! and although I have given thee a subject for waking dreams,
beware of building a castle too heavy for the foundation; which, in the
present instance, is barely the word Latimer occurring in a conversation
betwixt a gentleman of Dumfriesshire and a W.S. of Edinburgh--CAETERA
PRORSUS IGNORO.




LETTER VI

DARSIE LATIMER TO ALAN FAIRFORD

(In continuation of Letters III and IV.)

I told thee I walked out into the open air with my grave and stern
landlord. I could now see more perfectly than on the preceding night the
secluded glen in which stood the two or three cottages which appeared to
be the abode of him and his family.

It was so narrow, in proportion to its depth, that no ray of the morning
sun was likely to reach it till it should rise high in the horizon.
Looking up the dell, you saw a brawling brook issuing in foamy haste
from a covert of underwood, like a race-horse impatient to arrive at the
goal; and, if you gazed yet; more earnestly, you might observe part of
a high waterfall glimmering through the foliage, and giving occasion,
doubtless, to the precipitate speed of the brook. Lower down, the
stream became more placid, and opened into a quiet piece of water which
afforded a rude haven to two or three fishermen's boats, then lying high
and dry on the sand, the tide being out. Two or three miserable huts
could be seen beside this little haven, inhabited probably by the owners
of the boats, but inferior in every respect to the establishment of mine
host, though that was miserable enough.

I had but a minute or two to make these observations, yet during that
space my companion showed symptoms of impatience, and more than once
shouted, 'Cristal--Cristal Nixon,' until the old man of the preceding
evening appeared at the door of one of the neighbouring cottages or
outhouses, leading the strong black horse which I before commemorated,
ready bridled and saddled. My conductor made Cristal a sign with his
finger, and, turning from the cottage door, led the way up the steep
path or ravine which connected the sequestered dell with the open
country.

Had I been perfectly aware of the character of the road down which I
had been hurried with so much impetuosity on the preceding evening, I
greatly question if I should have ventured the descent; for it deserved
no better name than the channel of a torrent, now in a good measure
filled with water, that dashed in foam and fury into the dell, being
swelled with the rains of the preceding night. I ascended this ugly path
with some difficulty although on foot, and felt dizzy when I observed,
from such traces as the rains had not obliterated, that the horse seemed
almost to have slid down it upon his haunches the evening before.

My host threw himself on his horse's back, without placing a foot in the
stirrup--passed me in the perilous ascent, against which he pressed his
steed as if the animal had had the footing of a wild cat. The water and
mud splashed from his heels in his reckless course, and a few bounds
placed him on the top of the bank, where I presently joined him, and
found the horse and rider standing still as a statue; the former
panting and expanding his broad nostrils to the morning wind, the latter
motionless, with his eye fixed on the first beams of the rising sun,
which already began to peer above the eastern horizon and gild the
distant mountains of Cumberland and Liddesdale.

He seemed in a reverie, from which he started at my approach, and,
putting his horse in motion, led the way at a leisurely pace through a
broken and sandy road, which traversed a waste, level, and uncultivated
tract of downs, intermixed with morass, much like that in the
neighbourhood of my quarters at Shepherd's Bush. Indeed, the whole open
ground of this district, where it approaches the sea, has, except in a
few favoured spots, the same uniform and dreary character.

Advancing about a hundred yards from the brink of the glen, we gained
a still more extensive command of this desolate prospect, which seemed
even more dreary, as contrasted with the opposite shores of Cumberland,
crossed and intersected by ten thousand lines of trees growing in
hedgerows, shaded with groves and woods of considerable extent, animated
by hamlets and villas, from which thin clouds of smoke already gave sign
of human life and human industry.

My conductor had extended his arm, and was pointing the road to
Shepherd's Bush, when the step of a horse was heard approaching us. He
looked sharply round, and having observed who was approaching, proceeded
in his instructions to me, planting himself at the same time in the very
middle of the path, which, at the place where we halted, had a slough on
the one side and a sandbank on the other.

I observed that the rider who approached us slackened his horse's pace
from a slow trot to a walk, as if desirous to suffer us to proceed, or
at least to avoid passing us at a spot where the difficulty of doing so
must have brought us very close to each other. You know my old failing,
Alan, and that I am always willing to attend to anything in preference
to the individual who has for the time possession of the conversation.

Agreeably to this amiable propensity, I was internally speculating
concerning the cause of the rider keeping aloof from us, when my
companion, elevating his deep voice so suddenly and so sternly as at
once to recall my wandering thoughts, exclaimed, 'In the name of the
devil, young man, do you think that others have no better use for their
time than you have, that you oblige me to repeat the same thing to you
three times over? Do you see, I say, yonder thing at a mile's distance,
that looks like a finger-post, or rather like a gallows? I would it
had a dreaming fool hanging upon it, as an example to all meditative
moon-calves!--Yon gibbet-looking pole will guide you to the bridge,
where you must pass the large brook; then proceed straight forwards,
till several roads divide at a cairn. Plague on thee, thou art wandering
again!

It is indeed quite true that at this moment the horseman approached us,
and my attention was again called to him as I made way to let him pass.
His whole exterior at once showed that he belonged to the Society of
Friends, or, as the world and the world's law calls them, Quakers.
A strong and useful iron-grey galloway showed, by its sleek and
good condition, that the merciful man was merciful to his beast. His
accoutrements were in the usual unostentatious but clean and servicable
order which characterizes these sectaries. His long surtout of dark-grey
superfine cloth descended down to the middle of his leg, and was
buttoned up to his chin, to defend him against the morning air. As
usual, his ample beaver hung down without button or loop, and shaded a
comely and placid countenance, the gravity of which appeared to contain
some seasoning of humour, and had nothing in common with the pinched
puritanical air affected by devotees in general. The brow was open and
free from wrinkles, whether of age or hypocrisy. The eye was clear,
calm, and considerate, yet appeared to be disturbed by apprehension,
not to say fear, as, pronouncing the usual salutation of, 'I wish thee a
good morrow, friend,' he indicated, by turning his palfrey close to
one side of the path, a wish to glide past us with as little trouble as
possible--just as a traveller would choose to pass a mastiff of whose
peaceable intentions he is by no means confident.

But my friend, not meaning, perhaps, that he should get off so easily,
put his horse quite across the path, so that, without plunging into the
slough, or scrambling up the bank, the Quaker could not have passed
him. Neither of these was an experiment without hazard greater than the
passenger seemed willing to incur. He halted, therefore, as if waiting
till my companion should make way for him; and, as they sat fronting
each other, I could not help thinking that they might have formed no bad
emblem of Peace and War; for although my conductor was unarmed, yet the
whole of his manner, his stern look, and his upright seat on horseback,
were entirely those of a soldier in undress, He accosted the Quaker
in these words, 'So ho! friend Joshua, thou art early to the road this
morning. Has the spirit moved thee and thy righteous brethren to act
with some honesty, and pull down yonder tide-nets that keep the fish
from coming up the river?'

'Surely, friend, not so,' answered Joshua, firmly, but good-humouredly
at the same time; 'thou canst not expect that our own hands should pull
down what our purses established. Thou killest the fish with spear,
line, and coble-net; and we, with snares and with nets, which work by
the ebb and the flow of the tide. Each doth what seems best in his eyes
to secure a share of the blessing which Providence hath bestowed on the
river, and that within his own bounds. I prithee seek no quarrel against
us, for thou shalt have no wrong at our hand.'

'Be assured I will take none at the hand of any man, whether his hat be
cocked or broad-brimmed,' answered the fisherman. 'I tell you in fair
terms, Joshua Geddes, that you and your partners are using unlawful
craft to destroy the fish in the Solway by stake-nets and wears; and
that we, who fish fairly, and like men, as our fathers did, have daily
and yearly less sport and less profit. Do not think gravity or hypocrisy
can carry it off as you have done. The world knows you, and we know you.
You will destroy the salmon which makes the livelihood of fifty poor
families, and then wipe your mouth, and go to make a speech at meeting.
But do not hope it will last thus. I give you fair warning, we will be
upon you one morning soon, when we will not leave a stake standing in
the pools of the Solway; and down the tide they shall every one go, and
well if we do not send a lessee along with them.'

'Friend,' replied Joshua, with a constrained smile, 'but that I know
thou dost not mean as thou sayst, I would tell thee we are under the
protection of this country's laws; nor do we the less trust to obtain
their protection, that our principles permit us not, by any act of
violent resistance, to protect ourselves.'

'All villainous cant and cowardice,' exclaimed the fisherman, 'and
assumed merely as a cloak to your hypocritical avarice.'

'Nay, say not cowardice, my friend,' answered the Quaker, 'since thou
knowest there may be as much courage in enduring as in acting; and I
will be judged by this youth, or by any one else, whether there is not
more cowardice--even in the opinion of that world whose thoughts are the
breath in thy nostrils--in the armed oppressor who doth injury, than in
the defenceless and patient sufferer who endureth it with constancy.'

'I will change no more words with you on the subject,' said the
fisherman, who, as if something moved at the last argument which Mr.
Geddes had used, now made room for him to pass forward on his journey.
'Do not forget, however,' he added, 'that you have had fair warning,
nor suppose that we will accept of fair words in apology for foul play.
These nets of yours are unlawful--they spoil our fishings--we will
have them down at all risks and hazards. I am a man of my word, friend
Joshua.'

'I trust thou art,' said the Quaker; 'but thou art the rather bound to
be cautious in rashly affirming what thou wilt never execute. For I tell
thee, friend, that though there is as great a difference between thee
and one of our people as there is between a lion and a sheep, yet I know
and believe thou hast so much of the lion in thee, that thou wouldst
scarce employ thy strength and thy rage upon that which professeth no
means of resistance. Report says so much good of thee, at least, if it
says little more.'

'Time will try,' answered the fisherman; 'and hark thee, Joshua, before
we part I will put thee in the way of doing one good deed, which, credit
me, is better than twenty moral speeches. Here is a stranger youth, whom
Heaven has so scantily gifted with brains, that he will bewilder himself
in the Sands, as he did last night, unless thou wilt kindly show him the
way to Shepherd's Bush; for I have been in vain endeavouring to make
him comprehend the road thither. Hast thou so much charity under thy
simplicity, Quaker, as to do this good turn?'

'Nay, it is thou, friend,' answered Joshua, 'that dost lack charity, to
suppose any one unwilling to do so simple a kindness.'

'Thou art right--I should have remembered it can cost thee nothing.
Young gentlemen, this pious pattern of primitive simplicity will teach
thee the right way to the Shepherd's Bush--aye, and will himself shear
thee like a sheep, if you come to buying and selling with him.'

He then abruptly asked me, how long I intended to remain at Shepherd's
Bush.

I replied, I was at present uncertain--as long probably, as I could
amuse myself in the neighbourhood.

'You are fond of sport?' he added, in the same tone of brief inquiry.

I answered in the affirmative, but added, I was totally inexperienced.

'Perhaps if you reside here for some days,' he said, 'we may meet again,
and I may have the chance of giving you a lesson.'

Ere I could express either thanks or assent, he turned short round with
a wave of his hand by way of adieu, and rode back to the verge of the
dell from which we had emerged together; and as he remained standing
upon the banks, I could long hear his voice while he shouted down to
those within its recesses.

Meanwhile the Quaker and I proceeded on our journey for some time in
silence; he restraining his sober-minded steed to a pace which might
have suited a much less active walker than myself, and looking on
me from time to time with an expression of curiosity, mingled with
benignity. For my part, I cared not to speak first. It happened I had
never before been in company with one of this particular sect, and,
afraid that in addressing him I might unwittingly infringe upon some
of their prejudices or peculiarities, I patiently remained silent. At
length he asked me, whether I had been long in the service of the laird,
as men called him.

I repeated the words 'in his service?' with such an accent of surprise,
as induced him to say, 'Nay, but, friend, I mean no offence; perhaps I
should have said in his society--an inmate, I mean, in his house?'

'I am totally unknown to the person from whom we have just parted,' said
I, 'and our connexion is only temporary. He had the charity to give me
his guidance from the Sands, and a night's harbourage from the tempest.
So our acquaintance began, and there it is likely to end; for you may
observe that our friend is by no means apt to encourage familiarity.'

'So little so,' answered my companion, 'that thy case is, I think, the
first in which I ever heard of his receiving any one into his house;
that is, if thou hast really spent the night there.'

'Why should you doubt it?' replied I; 'there is no motive I can have to
deceive you, nor is the object worth it.'

'Be not angry with me,' said the Quaker; 'but thou knowest that thine
own people do not, as we humbly endeavour to do, confine themselves
within the simplicity of truth, but employ the language of falsehood,
not only for profit, but for compliment, and sometimes for mere
diversion. I have heard various stories of my neighbour; of most of
which I only believe a small part, and even then they are difficult to
reconcile with each other. But this being the first time I ever beard
of his receiving a stranger within his dwelling, made me express some
doubts. I pray thee let them not offend thee.'

'He does not,' said I, 'appear to possess in much abundance the means
of exercising hospitality, and so may be excused from offering it in
ordinary cases.'

'That is to say, friend,' replied Joshua, 'thou hast supped ill, and
perhaps breakfasted worse. Now my small tenement, called Mount Sharon,
is nearer to us by two miles than thine inn; and although going
thither may prolong thy walk, as taking thee of the straighter road to
Shepherd's Bush, yet methinks exercise will suit thy youthful limbs,
as well as a good plain meal thy youthful appetite. What sayst thou, my
young acquaintance?'

'If it puts you not to inconvenience,' I replied; for the invitation was
cordially given, and my bread and milk had been hastily swallowed, and
in small quantity.

'Nay,' said Joshua, 'use not the language of compliment with those who
renounce it. Had this poor courtesy been very inconvenient, perhaps I
had not offered it.'

'I accept the invitation, then,' said I, 'in the same good spirit in
which you give it.'

The Quaker smiled, reached me his hand, I shook it, and we travelled on
in great cordiality with each other. The fact is, I was much entertained
by contrasting in my own mind, the open manner of the kind-hearted
Joshua Geddes, with the abrupt, dark, and lofty demeanour of my
entertainer on the preceding evening. Both were blunt and unceremonious;
but the plainness of the Quaker had the character of devotional
simplicity, and was mingled with the more real kindness, as if honest
Joshua was desirous of atoning, by his sincerity, for the lack of
external courtesy. On the contrary, the manners of the fisherman were
those of one to whom the rules of good behaviour might be familiar, but
who, either from pride or misanthropy, scorned to observe them. Still
I thought of him with interest and curiosity, notwithstanding so much
about him that was repulsive; and I promised myself, in the course of my
conversation with the Quaker, to learn all that he knew on the subject.
He turned the conversation, however, into a different channel, and
inquired into my own condition of life, and views in visiting this
remote frontier.

I only thought it necessary to mention my name, and add, that I had been
educated to the law, but finding myself possessed of some independence,
I had of late permitted myself some relaxation, and was residing at
Shepherd's Bush to enjoy the pleasure of angling.

'I do thee no harm, young man,' said my new friend, 'in wishing thee a
better employment for thy grave hours, and a more humane amusement (if
amusement thou must have) for those of a lighter character.'

'You are severe, sir,' I replied. 'I heard you but a moment since refer
yourself to the protection of the laws of the country--if there be laws,
there must be lawyers to explain, and judges to administer them.'

Joshua smiled, and pointed to the sheep which were grazing on the downs
over which we were travelling. 'Were a wolf,' he said, 'to come even now
upon yonder flocks, they would crowd for protection, doubtless, around
the shepherd and his dogs; yet they are bitten and harassed daily by
the one, shorn, and finally killed and eaten by the other. But I say not
this to shock you; for, though laws and lawyers are evils, yet they are
necessary evils in this probationary state of society, till man shall
learn to render unto his fellows that which is their due, according
to the light of his own conscience, and through no other compulsion.
Meanwhile, I have known many righteous men who have followed thy
intended profession in honesty and uprightness of walk. The greater
their merit, who walk erect in a path which so many find slippery.

'And angling,' said I:--'you object to that also as an amusement,
you who, if I understood rightly what passed between you and my late
landlord, are yourself a proprietor of fisheries.'

'Not a proprietor,' he replied, 'I am only, in copartnery with others,
a tacksman or lessee of some valuable salmon-fisheries a little down the
coast. But mistake me not. The evil of angling, with which I class all
sports, as they are called, which have the sufferings of animals for
their end and object, does not consist in the mere catching and killing
those animals with which the bounty of Providence hath stocked the earth
for the good of man, but in making their protracted agony a principle of
delight and enjoyment. I do indeed cause these fisheries to be conducted
for the necessary taking, killing, and selling the fish; and, in the
same way, were I a farmer, I should send my lambs to market. But I
should as soon think of contriving myself a sport and amusement out of
the trade of the butcher as out of that of the fisher.'

We argued the point no further; for though I thought his arguments a
little too high-strained, yet as my mind acquitted me of having taken
delight in aught but the theory of field-sports, I did not think myself
called upon stubbornly to advocate a practice which had afforded me so
little pleasure.

We had by this time arrived at the remains of an old finger-post, which
my host had formerly pointed out as a landmark. Here, a ruinous wooden
bridge, supported by long posts resembling crutches, served me to get
across the water, while my new friend sought a ford a good way higher
up, for the stream was considerably swelled.

As I paused for his rejoining me, I observed an angler at a little
distance pouching trout after trout, as fast almost as he could cast his
line; and I own, in spite of Joshua's lecture on humanity, I could not
but envy his adroitness and success, so natural is the love of sport
to our minds, or so easily are we taught to assimilate success in
field-sports with ideas of pleasure, and with the praise due to address
and agility. I soon recognized in the successful angler little Benjie,
who had been my guide and tutor in that gentle art, as you have learned
from my former letters. I called--I whistled--the rascal recognized me,
and, starting like a guilty thing, seemed hesitating whether to approach
or to run away; and when he determined on the former, it was to assail
me with a loud, clamorous, and exaggerated report of the anxiety of all
at the Shepherd's Bush for my personal safety; how my landlady had wept,
how Sam and the ostler had not the heart to go to bed, but sat up all
night drinking--and how he himself had been up long before daybreak to
go in quest of me.

'And you were switching the water, I suppose,' said I, 'to discover my
dead body?'

This observation produced a long 'Na--a--a' of acknowledged detection;
but, with his natural impudence, and confidence in my good nature, he
immediately added, 'that he thought I would like a fresh trout or twa
for breakfast, and the water being in such a rare trim for the saumon
raun, [The bait made of salmon-roe salted and preserved. In a swollen
river, and about the month of October, it is a most deadly bait.] he
couldna help taking a cast.'

While we were engaged in this discussion, the honest Quaker returned to
the farther end of the wooden bridge to tell me he could not venture to
cross the brook in its present state: but would be under the necessity
to ride round by the stone bridge, which was a mile and a half higher
up than his own house. He was about to give me directions how to proceed
without him, and inquire for his sister, when I suggested to him that,
if he pleased to trust his horse to little Benjie, the boy might carry
him round by the bridge, while we walked the shorter and more pleasant
road.

Joshua shook his head, for he was well acquainted with Benjie, who,
he said, was the naughtiest varlet in the whole neighbourhood.
Nevertheless, rather than part company, he agreed to put the pony under
his charge for a short season, with many injunctions that he should not
attempt to mount, but lead the pony (even Solomon) by the bridle, under
the assurances of sixpence in case of proper demeanour, and penalty that
