     that, when I know of what sort it is, I may now, after
     this, apply to you new engines.

     Strep. What? By the gods, do you purpose to besiege me?

     Soc. No; I wish to briefly learn from you if you are
     possessed of a good memory.

     Strep. In two ways, by Jove! If anything be owing to me,
     I have a very good memory; but if I owe unhappy man, I
     am very forgetful.

     Soc. Is the power of speaking, pray, implanted in your
     nature?

     Strep. Speaking is not in me, but cheating is.

     Soc. How, then, will you be able to learn?

     Strep. Excellently, of course.

     Soc. Come, then, take care that, whenever I propound any
     clever dogma about abstruse matters, you catch it up
     immediately.

     Strep. What then? Am I to feed upon wisdom like a dog?

     Soc. This man is ignorant and brutish--I fear, old man,
     lest you will need blows. Come, let me see; what do you
     do if any one beat you?

     Strep. I take the beating; and then, when I have waited
     a little while, I call witnesses to prove it; then
     again, after a short interval, I go to law.

     Soc. Come, then, lay down your cloak.

     Strep. Have I done any wrong?

     Soc. No; but it is the rule to enter naked.

     Strep. But I do not enter to search for stolen goods.

     Soc. Lay it down. Why do you talk nonsense?

     Strep. Now tell me this, pray. If I be diligent and
     learn zealously, to which of your disciples shall I
     become like?

     Soc. You will no way differ from Chaerephon in
     intellect.

     Strep. Ah me, unhappy! I shall become half-dead.

     Soc. Don't chatter; but quickly follow me hither with
     smartness.

     Strep. Then give me first into my hands a honeyed cake;
     for I am afraid of descending within, as if into the
     cave of Trophonius.

     Soc. Proceed; why do you keep poking about the door?

     [Exeunt Socrates and Strepsiades]

     Cho. Well, go in peace, for the sake of this your
     valour. May prosperity attend the man, because, being
     advanced into the vale of years, he imbues his intellect
     with modern subjects, and cultivates wisdom!

     [Turning to the audience.]

     Spectators, I will freely declare to you the truth, by
     Bacchus, who nurtured me! So may I conquer, and be
     accounted skillful, as that, deeming you to be clever
     spectators, and this to be the cleverest of my comedies,
     I thought proper to let you first taste that comedy,
     which gave me the greatest labour. And then I retired
     from the contest defeated by vulgar fellows, though I
     did not deserve it. These things, therefore, I object to
     you, a learned audience, for whose sake I was expending
     this labour. But not even thus will I ever willingly
     desert the discerning portion of you. For since what
     time my Modest Man and my Rake  were very highly praised
     here by an audience, with whom it is a pleasure even to
     hold converse, and I (for I was still a virgin, and it
     was not lawful for me as yet to have children) exposed
     my offspring, and another girl took it up, and owned it,
     and you generously reared and educated it, from this
     time I have had sure pledges of your good will toward
     me. Now, therefore, like that well-known Electra, has
     this comedy come seeking, if haply it meet with an
     audience so clever, for it will recognize, if it should
     see, the lock of its brother.  But see how modest she is
     by nature, who, in the first place, has come, having
     stitched to her no leathern phallus hanging down, red at
     the top, and thick, to set the boys a laughing;  nor yet
     jeered the bald-headed, nor danced the cordax;  nor does
     the old man who speaks the verses beat the person near
     him with his staff, keeping out of sight wretched
     ribaldry; nor has she rushed in with torches, nor does
     she shout iou, iou;  but has come relying on herself and
     her verses. And I, although so excellent a poet, do not
     give myself airs, nor do I seek to deceive you by twice
     and thrice bringing forward the same pieces; but I am
     always clever at introducing new fashions, not at all
     resembling each other, and all of them clever; who
     struck Cleon  in the belly when at the height of his
     power, and could not bear to attack him afterward when
     he was down. But these scribblers, when once Hyperbolus
     has given them a handle, keep ever trampling on this
     wretched man and his mother. Eupolis,  indeed, first of
     all craftily introduced his Maricas, having basely, base
     fellow, spoiled by altering my play of the Knights,
     having added to it, for the sake of the cordax, a
     drunken old woman, whom Phrynichus long ago poetized,
     whom the whale was for devouring. Then again Hermippus
     made verses on Hyperbolus; and now all others press hard
     upon Hyperbolus, imitating my simile of the eels.
     Whoever, therefore, laughs at these, let him not take
     pleasure in my attempts; but if you are delighted with
     me and my inventions, in times to come you will seem to
     be wise.



      I first invoke, to join our choral band, the mighty
     Jupiter, ruling on high, the monarch of gods; and the
     potent master of the trident, the fierce upheaver of
     earth and briny sea; and our father of great renown,
     most august Aether, life-supporter of all; and the
     horse-guider, who fills the plain of the earth with
     exceeding bright beams, a mighty deity among gods and
     mortals.



      Most clever spectators, come, give us your attention;
     for having been injured, we blame you to your faces. For
     though we benefit the state most of all the gods, to us
     alone of the deities you do not offer sacrifice nor yet
     pour libations, who watch over you. For if there should
     be any expedition without prudence, then we either
     thunder or drizzle small rain.  And then, when you were
     for choosing as your general the Paphlagonian tanner,
     hateful to the gods, we contracted our brows and were
     enraged; and thunder burst through the lightning; and
     the Moon forsook her usual paths; and the Sun
     immediately drew in his wick to himself, and declared he
     would not give you light, if Cleon should be your
     general. Nevertheless you chose him. For they say that
     ill counsel is in this city; that the gods, however,
     turn all these your mismanagements to a prosperous
     issue. And how this also shall be advantageous, we will
     easily teach you. If you should convict the cormorant
     Cleon of bribery and embezzlement, and then make fast
     his neck in the stocks, the affair will turn out for the
     state to the ancient form again, if you have mismanaged
     in any way, and to a prosperous issue.


     Hear me again, King Phoebus, Delian Apollo, who
     inhabitest the high-peaked Cynthian rock!  And thou,
     blessed goddess, who inhabitest the all-golden house of
     Ephesus,  in which Lydian damsels greatly reverence
     thee;  and thou, our national goddess, swayer of the
     aegis, Minerva,  guardian of the city! And thou, reveler
     Bacchus, who, inhabiting the Parnassian rock, sparklest
     with torches, conspicuous among the Delphic Bacchanals!


     When we had got ready to set out hither, the Moon met
     us, and commanded us first to greet the Athenians and
     their allies;  and then declared that she was angry, for
     that she had suffered dreadful things, though she
     benefits you all, not in words, but openly. In the first
     place, not less than a drachma every month for torches;
     so that also all, when they went out of an evening, were
     wont to say, "Boy, don't buy a torch, for the moonlight
     is beautiful." And she says she confers other benefits
     on you, but that you do not observe the days at all
     correctly, but confuse them up and down; so that she
     says the gods are constantly threatening her, when they
     are defrauded of their dinner, and depart home, not
     having met with the regular feast according to the
     number of the days. And then, when you ought to be
     sacrificing, you are inflicting tortures and litigating.
     And often, while we gods are observing a fast, when we
     mourn for Memnon or Sarpedon,  you are pouring libations
     and laughing. For which reason Hyperbolus, having
     obtained the lot this year to be Hieromnemon,  was
     afterward deprived by us gods of his crown; for thus he
     will know better that he ought to spend the days of his
     life according to the Moon.

     [Enter Socrates]

     Soc. By Respiration, and Chaos, and Air, I have not seen
     any man so boorish, nor so impracticable, nor so stupid,
     nor so forgetful; who, while learning some little petty
     quibbles, forgets them before he has learned them.
     Nevertheless I will certainly call him out here to the
     light. Where is Strepsiades? Come forth with your couch.

     Strep. (from within). The bugs do not permit me to bring
     it forth.

     Soc. Make haste and lay it down; and give me your
     attention.

     [Enter Strepsiades]

     Strep. Very well.

     Soc. Come now; what do you now wish to learn first of
     those things in none of which you have ever been
     instructed? Tell me. About measures, or rhythms, or
     verses?

     Strep. I should prefer to learn about measures; for it
     is but lately I was cheated out of two choenices  by a
     meal-huckster.

     Soc. I do not ask you this, but which you account the
     most beautiful measure; the trimetre or the tetrameter?

     Strep. Make a wager then with me, if the semisextarius
     be not a tetrameter.

     Soc. Go to the devil! How boorish you are and dull of
     learning. Perhaps you may be able to learn about
     rhythms.

     Strep. But what good will rhythms do me for a living?

     Soc. In the first place, to be clever at an
     entertainment, understanding what rhythm is for the
     war-dance, and what, again, according to the dactyle.

     Strep. According to the dactyle? By Jove, but I know it!

     Soc. Tell me, pray.

     Strep. What else but this finger? Formerly, indeed, when
     I was yet a boy, this here!

     Soc. You are boorish and stupid.

     Strep. For I do not desire, you wretch, to learn any of
     these things.

     Soc. What then?

     Strep. That, that, the most unjust cause.

     Soc. But you must learn other things before these;
     namely, what quadrupeds are properly masculine.

     Strep. I know the males, if I am not mad-krios, tragos,
     tauros, kuon, alektryon.

     Soc. Do you see what you are doing? You are calling both
     the female and the male alektryon in the same way.

     Strep. How, pray? Come, tell me.

     Soc. How? The one with you is alektryon, and the other
     is alektryon also.

     Strep. Yea, by Neptune! How now ought I to call them?

     Soc. The one alektryaina and the other alektor.

     Strep. Alektryaina? Capital, by the Air! So that, in
     return for this lesson alone, I will fill your kardopos
     full of barley-meal on all sides.

     Soc. See! See! There again is another blunder! You make
     kardopos, which is feminine, to be masculine.

     Strep. In what way do I make kardopos masculine?

     Soc. Most assuredly; just as if you were to say
     Cleonymos.

     Strep. Good sir, Cleonymus had no kneading-trough, but
     kneaded his bread in a round mortar. How ought I to call
     it henceforth?

     Soc. How? Call it kardope, as you call Sostrate.

     Strep. Kardope in the feminine?

     Soc. For so you speak it rightly.

     Strep. But that would make it kardope, Kleonyme.

     Soc. You must learn one thing more about names, what are
     masculine and what of them are feminine.
