afterwards, defending itself before a Committee of Parliament, the
Company through its Treasurer declared "the necessity of such laws, in
some cases ad terrorem, and in some to be truly executed."

Seventeenth-century English law herself was terrible enough in all
conscience, but "Dale's Laws" went beyond. Offences ranged from failure
to attend church and idleness to lese majeste. The penalties were
gross--cruel whippings, imprisonments, barbarous puttings to death. The
High Marshal held the unruly down with a high hand.

But other factors than this Draconian code worked at last toward order
in this English West. Dale was no small statesman, and he played ferment
against ferment. Into Virginia now first came private ownership of land.
So much was given to each colonist, and care of this booty became
to each a preoccupation. The Company at home sent out more and more
settlers, and more and more of the industrious, peace-loving sort. By
1612 the English in America numbered about eight hundred. Dale projected
another town, and chose for its site the great horseshoe bend in the
river a few miles below the Falls of the Far West, at a spot we now call
Dutch Gap. Here Dale laid out a town which he named Henricus after the
Prince of Wales, and for its citizens he drafted from Jamestown three
hundred persons. To him also are due Bermuda and Shirley Hundreds and
Dale's Gift over on the Eastern Shore. As the Company sent over more
colonists, there began to show, up and down the James though at far
intervals, cabins and clearings made by white men, set about with a
stockade, and at the river edge a rude landing and a fastened boat. The
restless search for mines of gold and silver now slackened. Instead eyes
turned for wealth to the kingdom of the plant and tree, and to fur trade
and fisheries.

     * Hitherto there had been no trading or landholding by
     individuals. All the colonists contributed the products of
     their toil to the common store and received their supplies
     from the Company. The adventurers (stockholders) contributed
     money to the enterprise; the colonists, themselves and their
     labor.

Those ships that brought colonists were in every instance expected
to return to England laden with the commodities of Virginia. At first
cargoes of precious ores were looked for. These failing, the Company
must take from Virginia what lay at hand and what might be suited to
English needs. In 1610 the Company issued a paper of instructions upon
this subject of Virginia commodities. The daughter was expected to
send to the mother country sassafras root, bay berries, puccoon,
sarsaparilla, walnut, chestnut, and chinquapin oil, wine, silk grass,
beaver cod, beaver and otter skins, clapboard of oak and walnut, tar,
pitch, turpentine, and powdered sturgeon.

It might seem that Virginia was headed to become a land of fishers, of
foresters, and vine dressers, perhaps even, when the gold should be
at last discovered, of miners. At home, the colonizing merchants and
statesmen looked for some such thing. In return for what she laded into
ships, Virginia was to receive English-made goods, and to an especial
degree woolen goods, "a very liberall utterance of our English cloths
into a maine country described to be bigger than all Europe." There was
to be direct trade, country kind for country kind, and no specie to be
taken out of England. The promoters at home doubtless conceived a hardy
and simple trans-Atlantic folk of their own kindred, planters for their
own needs, steady consumers of the plainer sort of English wares, steady
gatherers, in return, of necessaries for which England otherwise must
trade after a costly fashion with lands which were not always friendly.
A simple, sturdy, laborious Virginia, white men and Indians. If this was
their dream, reality was soon to modify it.


A new commodity of unsuspected commercial value began now to be grown in
garden-plots along the James--the "weed" par excellence, tobacco. That
John Rolfe who had been shipwrecked on the Sea Adventure was now a
planter in Virginia. His child Bermuda had died in infancy, and his wife
soon after their coming to Jamestown. Rolfe remained, a young man, a
good citizen, and a Christian. And he loved tobacco. On that trivial
fact hinges an important chapter in the economic history of America.
In 1612 Rolfe planted tobacco in his own garden, experimented with its
culture, and prophesied that the Virginian weed would rank with the
best Spanish. It was now a shorter plant, smaller-leafed and
smaller-flowered, but time and skilful gardening would improve it.

England had known tobacco for thirty years, owing its introduction to
Raleigh. At first merely amused by the New World rarity, England was
now by general use turning a luxury into a necessity. More and more she
received through Dutch and Spanish ships tobacco from the Indies. Among
the English adventurers to Virginia some already knew the uses of the
weed; others soon learned from the Indians. Tobacco was perhaps not
indigenous to Virginia, but had probably come through southern tribes
who in turn had gained it from those who knew it in its tropic habitat.
Now, however, tobacco was grown by all Virginia Indians, and
was regarded as the Great Spirit's best gift. In the final happy
hunting-ground, kings, werowances, and priests enjoyed it forever. When,
in the time after the first landing, the Indians brought gifts to the
adventurers as to beings from a superior sphere, they offered tobacco as
well as comestibles like deer-meat and mulberries. Later, in England and
in Virginia, there was some suggestion that it might be cultivated among
other commodities. But the Company, not to be diverted from the path
to profits, demanded from Virginia necessities and not new-fangled
luxuries. Nevertheless, a little tobacco was sent over to England, and
then a little more, and then a larger quantity. In less than five years
it had become a main export; and from that time to this profoundly has
it affected the life of Virginia and, indeed, of the United States.

This then is the wide and general event with which John Rolfe is
connected. But there is also a narrower, personal happening that has
pleased all these centuries. Indian difficulties yet abounded, but Dale,
administrator as well as man of Mars, wound his way skilfully through
them all. Powhatan brooded to one side, over there at Werowocomoco.
Captain Samuel Argall was again in Virginia, having brought over
sixty-two colonists in his ship, the Treasurer. A bold and restless man,
explorer no less than mariner, he again went trading up the Potomac,
and visited upon its banks the village of Japazaws, kinsman of Powhatan.
Here he found no less a personage than Powhatan's daughter Pocahontas.
An idea came into Argall's active and somewhat unscrupulous brain.
He bribed Japazaws with a mighty gleaming copper kettle, and by that
chief's connivance took Pocahontas from the village above the Potomac.
He brought her captive in his boat down the Chesapeake to the mouth of
the James and so up the river to Jamestown, here to be held hostage for
an Indian peace. This was in 1613.

Pocahontas stayed by the James, in the rude settlers' town, which may
have seemed to the Indian girl stately and wonderful enough. Here Rolfe
made her acquaintance, here they talked together, and here, after some
scruples on his part as to "heathennesse," they were married. He writes
of "her desire to be taught and instructed in the knowledge of God; her
capableness of understanding; her aptnesse and willingnesse to
recieve anie good impression, and also the spiritual, besides her owne
incitements stirring me up hereunto." First she was baptized, receiving
the name Rebecca, and then she was married to Rolfe in the flower-decked
church at Jamestown. Powhatan was not there, but he sent young chiefs,
her brothers, in his place. Rolfe had lands and cabins thereupon up
the river near Henricus. He called this place Varina, the best Spanish
tobacco being Varinas. Here he and Pocahontas dwelled together "civilly
and lovingly." When two years had passed the couple went with their
infant son upon a visit to England. There court and town and country
flocked to see the Indian "princess." After a time she and Rolfe would
go back to Virginia. But at Gravesend, before their ship sailed, she was
stricken with smallpox and died, making "a religious and godly end," and
there at Gravesend she is buried. Her son, Thomas Rolfe, who was brought
up in England, returned at last to Virginia and lived out his life there
with his wife and children. Today no small host of Americans have for
ancestress the daughter of Powhatan. In England-in-America the immediate
effect of the marriage was really to procure an Indian peace outlasting
Pocahontas's brief life.

In Dale's years there rises above the English horizon the cloud of New
France. The old, disaster-haunted Huguenot colony in Florida was a thing
of the past, to be mourned for when the Spaniard wiped it out--for
at that time England herself was not in America. But now that she
was established there, with some hundreds of men in a Virginia that
stretched from Spanish Florida to Nova Scotia, the French shadow seemed
ominous. And just in this farther region, amid fir-trees and snow, upon
the desolate Bay of Fundy, the French for some years had been keeping
the breath of life in a huddle of cabins named Port Royal. More than
this, and later than the Port Royal building, Frenchmen--Jesuits
that!--were trying a settlement on an island now called Mount Desert,
off a coast now named Maine. The Virginia Company-doubtless with some
reference back to the King and Privy Council--De La Warr, Gates, the
deputy governor, and Dale, the High Marshal, appear to have been of
one mind as to these French settlements. Up north there was still
Virginia--in effect, England! Hands off, therefore, all European peoples
speaking with an un-English tongue!

Now it happened about this time that Captain Samuel Argall received a
commission "to go fishing," and that he fished off that coast that is
now the coast of Maine, and brought his ship to anchor by Mount Desert.
Argall, a swift and high-handed person, fished on dry land. He swept
into his net the Jesuits on Mount Desert, set half of them in an open
boat to meet with what ship they might, and brought the other half
captive to Jamestown. Later, he appeared before Port Royal, where
he burned the cabins, slew the cattle, and drove into the forest the
settler Frenchmen. But Port Royal and the land about it called Acadia,
though much hurt, survived Argall's fishing.*

     * Argall, on his fishing trip, has been credited with
     attacking not only the French in Acadia but the Dutch
     traders on Manhattan. But there are grounds for doubt if he
     did the latter.

There was also on Virginia in these days the shadow of Spain. In 1611
the English had found upon the beach near Point Comfort three Spaniards
from a Spanish caravel which, as the Englishmen had learned with alarm,
"was fitted with a shallop necessarie and propper to discover freshetts,
rivers, and creekes." They took the three prisoner and applied for
instructions to Dale, who held them to be spies and clapped them into
prison at Point Comfort.

That Dale's suspicions were correct, is proved by a letter which the
King of Spain wrote in cipher to the Spanish Ambassador in London
ordering him to confer with the King as to the liberty of three
prisoners whom Englishmen in Virginia have captured. The three are "the
Alcayde Don Diego de Molino, Ensign Marco Antonio Perez, and Francisco
Lembri an English pilot, who by my orders went to reconnoitre those
ports." Small wonder that Dale was apprehensive. "What may be the
daunger of this unto us," he wrote home, "who are here so few, so weake,
and unfortified,... I refer me to your owne honorable knowledg."

Months pass, and the English Ambassador to Spain writes from Madrid that
he "is not hasty to advertise anything upon bare rumours, which hath
made me hitherto forbeare to write what I had generally heard of their
intents against Virginia, but now I have been... advertised that without
question they will speedily attempt against our plantation there. And
that it is a thing resolved of, that ye King of Spain must run
any hazard with England rather than permit ye English to settle
there....Whatsoever is attempted, I conceive will be from ye Havana."

Rumors fly back and forth. The next year 1613--the Ambassador writes
from Madrid: "They have latelie had severall Consultations about our
Plantation in Virginia. The resolution is--That it must be removed, but
they thinke it fitt to suspend the execution of it,... for that they are
in hope that it will fall of itselfe."

The Spanish hope seemed, at this time, not at all without foundation.
Members of the Virginia Company had formed the Somers Islands Company
named for Somers the Admiral--and had planted a small colony in Bermuda
where the Sea Adventure had been wrecked. Here were fair, fertile
islands without Indians, and without the diseases that seemed to rise,
no man knew how, from the marshes along those lower reaches of the
great river James in Virginia. Young though it was, the new plantation
"prospereth better than that of Virginia, and giveth greater
incouragement to prosecute yt." In England there arose, from some
concerned, the cry to Give up Virginia that has proved a project awry!
As Gates was once about to remove thence every living man, so truly
they might "now removed to these more hopeful islands!" The Spanish
Ambassador is found writing to the Spanish King: "Thus they are here
discouraged... on account of the heavy expenses they have incurred, and
the disappointment, that there is no passage from there to the South
Sea... nor mines of gold or silver." This, be it noted, was before
tobacco was discovered to be an economic treasure.

The Elizabeth from London reached Virginia in May, 1613. It brought to
the colony news of Bermuda, and incidentally of that new notion brewing
in the mind of some of the Company. When the Elizabeth, after a month in
Virginia, turned homeward, she carried a vigorous letter from Dale, the
High Marshal, to Sir Thomas Smith, Treasurer of the Company.

"Let me tell you all at home [writes Dale] this one thing, and I pray
remember it; if you give over this country and loose it, you, with your
wisdoms, will leap such a gudgeon as our state hath not done the like
since they lost the Kingdom of France; be not gulled with the clamorous
report of base people; believe Caleb and Joshua; if the glory of God
have no power with them and the conversion of these poor infidels, yet
let the rich mammons' desire egge them on to inhabit these countries.
I protest to you, by the faith of an honest man, the more I range the
country the more I admire it. I have seen the best countries in Europe;
I protest to you, before the Living God, put them all together, this
country will be equivalent unto them if it be inhabited with good
people."

If ever Mother England seriously thought of moving Virginia into
Bermuda, the idea was now given over. Spain, suspending the sword until
Virginia "will fall of itselfe," saw that sword rust away.

Five years in all Dale ruled Virginia. Then, personal and family matters
calling, he sailed away home to England, to return no more. Soon his
star "having shined in the Westerne, was set in the Easterne India." At
the helm in Virginia he left George Yeardley, an honest, able man. But
in England, what was known as the "court party" in the Company managed
to have chosen instead for De La Warr's deputy governor, Captain Samuel
Argall. It proved an unfortunate choice. Argall, a capable and daring
buccaneer, fastened on Virginia as on a Spanish galleon. For a year
he ruled in his own interest, plundering and terrorizing. At last the
outcry against him grew so loud that it had to be listened to across the
Atlantic. Lord De La Warr was sent out in person to deal with matters
but died on the way; and Captain Yeardley, now knighted and appointed
Governor, was instructed to proceed against the incorrigible Argall. But
Argall had already departed to face his accusers in England.



CHAPTER VII. YOUNG VIRGINIA

The choice of Sir Edwyn Sandys as Treasurer of the Virginia Company in
1619 marks a turning-point in the history of both Company and colony. At
a moment when James I was aiming at absolute monarchy and was menacing
Parliament, Sandys and his party--the Liberals of the day--turned the
sessions of the Company into a parliament where momentous questions of
state and colonial policy were freely debated. The liberal spirit of
Sandys cast a beam of light, too, across the Atlantic. When Governor
Yeardley stepped ashore at Jamestown in mid-April, he brought with him,
as the first fruits of the new regime, no less a boon than the grant of
a representative assembly.

There were to be in Virginia, subject to the Company, subject in its
turn to the Crown, two "Supreme Councils," one of which was to consist
of the Governor and his councilors chosen by the Company in England.
The other was to be elected by the colonists, two representatives or
burgesses from each distinct settlement. Council and House of Burgesses
were to constitute the upper and lower houses of the General Assembly.
The whole had power to legislate upon Virginian affairs within the
bounds of the colony, but the Governor in Virginia and the Company in
England must approve its acts.

A mighty hope in small was here! Hedged about with provisions, curtailed
and limited, here nevertheless was an acorn out of which, by natural
growth and some mutation, was to come popular government wide and deep.
The planting of this small seed of freedom here, in 1619, upon the banks
of the James in Virginia, is an event of prime importance.

On the 30th of July, 1619, there was convened in the log church in
Jamestown the first true Parliament or Legislative Assembly in America.
Twenty-two burgesses sat, hat on head, in the body of the church, with
the Governor and the Council in the best seats. Master John Pory, the
speaker, faced the Assembly; clerk and sergeant-at-arms were at hand;
Master Buck, the Jamestown minister, made the solemn opening prayer.
The political divisions of this Virginia were Cities, Plantations,
and Hundreds, the English population numbering now at least a thousand
souls. Boroughs sending burgesses were James City, Charles City, the
City of Henricus, Kecoughtan, Smith's Hundred, Flowerdieu Hundred,
Martin's Hundred, Martin Brandon, Ward's Plantation, Lawne's Plantation,
and Argall's Gift. This first Assembly attended to Indian questions,
agriculture, and religion.

Most notable is this year 1619, a year wrought of gold and iron. John
Rolfe, back in Virginia, though without his Indian princess, who now
lies in English earth, jots down and makes no comment upon what he has
written: "About the last of August came in a Dutch man of warre that
sold us twenty Negars."

No European state of that day, few individuals, disapproved of the
African slave trade. That dark continent made a general hunting-ground.
England, Spain, France, the Netherlands, captured, bought, and sold
slaves. Englishmen in Virginia bought without qualm, as Englishmen
in England bought without qualm. The cargo of the Dutch ship was a
commonplace. The only novelty was that it was the first shipload of
Africans brought to English-America. Here, by the same waters, were the
beginnings of popular government and the young upas-tree of slavery. A
contradiction in terms was set to resolve itself, a riddle for unborn
generations of Americans.

Presently there happened another importation. Virginia, under the new
management, had strongly revived. Ships bringing colonists were coming
in; hamlets were building; fields were being planted; up and down were
to be found churches; a college at Henricus was projected so that Indian
children might be taught and converted from "heathennesse." Yet was the
population almost wholly a doublet--and--breeches--wearing population.
The children for whom the school was building were Indian children.
The men sailing to Virginia dreamed of a few years there and gathered
wealth, and then return to England.

Apparently it was the new Treasurer, Sir Edwyn Sandys, who first grasped
the essential principle of successful colonization: Virginia must be
HOME to those we send! Wife and children made home. Sandys gathered
ninety women, poor maidens and widows, "young, handsome, and chaste,"
who were willing to emigrate and in Virginia become wives of settlers.
They sailed; their passage money was paid by the men of their choice;
they married--and home life began in Virginia. In due course of time
appeared fair-haired children, blue or gray of eye, with all England
behind them, yet native-born, Virginians from the cradle.

Colonists in number sailed now from England. Most ranks of society
and most professions were represented. Many brought education, means,
independent position. Other honest men, chiefly young men with little
in the purse, came over under indentures, bound for a specified term of
years to settlers of larger means. These indentured men are numerous;
and when they have worked out their indebtedness they will take up land
of their own.

An old suggestion of Dale's now for the first time bore fruit. Over the
protest of the "country party" in the Company, there began to be sent
each year out of the King's gaols a number, though not at any time a
large number, of men under conviction for various crimes. This practice
continued, or at intervals was resumed, for years, but its consequences
were not so dire, perhaps, as we might imagine. The penal laws were
execrably brutal, and in the drag-net of the law might be found many
merely unfortunate, many perhaps finer than the law.

Virginia thus was founded and established. An English people moved
through her forests, crossed in boats her shining waters, trod the
lanes of hamlets builded of wood but after English fashions.
Climate, surrounding nature, differed from old England, and these and
circumstance would work for variation. But the stock was Middlesex,
Surrey, Devon, and all the other shires of England. Scotchmen came also,
Welshmen, and, perhaps as early as this, a few Irish. And there were De
La Warr's handful of Poles and Germans, and several French vinedressers.

Political and economic life was taking form. That huge, luxurious,
thick-leafed, yellow-flowered crop, alike comforting and extravagant,
that tobacco that was in much to mould manners and customs and ways
of looking at things, was beginning to grow abundantly. In 1620, forty
thousand pounds of tobacco went from Virginia to England; two years
later went sixty thousand pounds. The best sold at two shillings the
pound, the inferior for eighteen pence. The Virginians dropped all
thought of sassafras and clapboard. Tobacco only had any flavor of
Golconda.

At this time the rich soil, composed of layer on layer of the decay of
forests that had lived from old time, was incredibly fertile. As fast as
trees could be felled and dragged away, in went the tobacco. Fields must
have laborers, nor did these need to be especially intelligent. Bring in
indentured men to work. Presently dream that ships, English as well as
Dutch, might oftener load in Africa and sell in Virginia, to furnish the
dark fields with dark workers! In Dale's time had begun the making over
of land in fee simple; in Yeardley's time every "ancient" colonist--that
is every man who had come to Virginia before 1616--was given a goodly
number of acres subject to a quit-rent. Men of means and influence
obtained great holdings; ownership, rental, sale, and purchase of the
land began in Virginia much as in older times it had begun in England.
Only here, in America, where it seemed that the land could never be
exhausted, individual holdings were often of great acreage. Thus arose
the Virginia Planter.

In Yeardley's time John Berkeley established at Falling Creek the first
iron works ever set up in English-America. There were by this time in
Virginia, glass works, a windmill, iron works. To till the soil remained
the chief industry, but the tobacco culture grew until it overshadowed
the maize and wheat, the pease and beans. There were cattle and swine,
not a few horses, poultry, pigeons, and peacocks.

In 1621 Yeardley, desiring to be relieved, was succeeded by Sir Francis
Wyatt. In October the new Governor came from England in the George, and
with him a goodly company. Among others is found George Sandys, brother
of Sir Edwyn. This gentleman and scholar, beneath Virginia skies
and with Virginia trees and blossoms about him, translated the
"Metamorphoses" of Ovid and the First Book of the "Aeneid", both of
which were published in London in 1626. He stands as the first purely
literary man of the English New World. But vigorous enough literature,
though the writers thereof regarded it as information only, had, from
the first years, emanated from Virginia. Smith's "True Relation",
George Percy's "Discourse", Strachey's "True Repertory of the Wracke
and Redemption of Sir Thomas Gates", and his "Historie of Travaile
into Virginia Brittannia", Hamor's "True Discourse", Whitaker's "Good
News"--other letters and reports--had already flowered, all with
something of the strength and fragrance of Elizabethan and early
Jacobean work.

For some years there had seemed peace with the Indians. Doubtless
members of the one race may have marauded, and members of the other
showed themselves highhanded, impatient, and unjust, but the majority
on each side appeared to have settled into a kind of amity. Indians came
singly or in parties from their villages to the white men's settlements,
where they traded corn and venison and what not for the magic things
the white man owned. A number had obtained the white man's firearms,
unwisely sold or given. The red seemed reconciled to the white's
presence in the land; the Indian village and the Indian tribal economy
rested beside the English settlement, church, and laws. Doubtless a
fragment of the population of England and a fragment of the English in
Virginia saw in a pearly dream the red man baptized, clothed, become
Christian and English. At the least, it seemed that friendliness and
peace might continue.

In the spring of 1622 a concerted Indian attack and massacre fell like
a bolt from the blue. Up and down the James and upon the Chesapeake,
everywhere on the same day, Indians, bursting from the dark forest that
was so close behind every cluster of log houses, attacked the colonists.
Three hundred and forty-seven English men, women, and children were
slain. But Jamestown and the plantations in its neighborhood were warned
in time. The English rallied, gathered force, turned upon and beat back
to the forest the Indian, who was now and for a long time to come their
open foe.

There followed upon this horror not a day or a month but years of
organized retaliation and systematic harrying. In the end the great
majority of the Indians either fell or were pushed back toward the upper
Pamunkey, the Rappahannock, the Potomac, and westward upon the great
shelf or terrace of the earth that climbed to the fabled mountains. And
with this westward move there passed away that old vision of wholesale
Christianizing.



CHAPTER VIII. ROYAL GOVERNMENT

In November, 1620, there sailed into a quiet harbor on the coast of what
is now Massachusetts a ship named the Mayflower, having on board one
hundred and two English Non-conformists, men and women and with them
a few children. These latest colonists held a patent from the Virginia
Company and have left in writing a statement of their object: "We...
having undertaken, for the glory of God and advancement of the Christian
faith, and honor of our King and Country, a voyage to plant the first
colony in the northern parts of Virginia--". The mental reservation is,
of course, "where perchance we may serve God as we will!" In England
there obtained in some quarters a suspicion that "they meant to make a
free, popular State there." Free--Popular--Public Good! These are words
that began, in the second quarter of the seventeenth century, to shine
and ring. King and people had reached the verge of a great struggle. The
Virginia Company was divided, as were other groups, into factions. The
court party and the country party found themselves distinctly opposed.
The great, crowded meetings of the Company Sessions rang with
their divisions upon policies small and large. Words and phrases,
comprehensive, sonorous, heavy with the future, rose and rolled beneath
the roof of their great hall. There were heard amid warm discussion:
Kingdom and Colony--Spain--Netherlands--France--Church and
State--Papists and Schismatics--Duties, Tithes, Excise Petitions of
Grievances--Representation--Right of Assembly. Several years earlier
the King had cried, "Choose the Devil, but not Sir Edwyn Sandys!" Now
he declared the Company "just a seminary to a seditious parliament!" All
London resounded with the clash of parties and opinions.* "Last week
the Earl of Warwick and the Lord Cavendish fell so foul at a Virginia...
court that the lie passed and repassed.... The factions... are grown so
violent that Guelfs and Ghibellines were not more animated one against
another!"

     * In his work on "Joint-stock Companion", vol.II, pp. 266
     ff., W. R. Scott traces the history of these acute
     dissensions in the Virginia Company and draws conclusions
     distinctly unfavorable to the management of Sandys and his
     party.--Editor.

Believing that the Company's sessions foreshadowed a "seditious
parliament," James Stuart set himself with obstinacy and some cunning
to the Company's undoing. The court party gave the King aid, and
circumstances favored the attempt. Captain Nathaniel Butler, who had
once been Governor of the Somers Islands and had now returned to England
by way of Virginia, published in London "The Unmasked Face of Our Colony
in Virginia", containing a savage attack upon every item of Virginian
administration.

The King's Privy Council summoned the Company, or rather the "country"
party, to answer these and other allegations. Southampton, Sandys, and
Ferrar answered with strength and cogency. But the tide was running
against them. James appointed commissioners to search out what was wrong
with Virginia. Certain men were shipped to Virginia to get evidence
there, as well as support from the Virginia Assembly. In this attempt
they signally failed. Then to England came a Virginia member of the
Virginia Council, with long letters to King and Privy Council: the
Sandys-Southampton administration had done more than well for Virginia.
The letters were letters of appeal. The colony hoped that "the Governors
sent over might not have absolute authority, but might be restrained
to the consent of the Council.... But above all they made it their most
humble request that they might still retain the liberty of their
General Assemblies; than which nothing could more conduce to the publick
Satisfaction and publick Liberty."

In London another paper, drawn by Cavendish, was given to King and Privy
Council. It answered many accusations, and among others the statement
that "the Government of the companies as it then stood was democratical
and tumultuous, and ought therefore to be altered, and reduced into the
Hands of a few." It is of interest to hear these men speak, in the year
1623, in an England that was close to absolute monarchy, to a King who
with all his house stood out for personal rule. "However, they owned
that, according to his Majesty's Institution, their Government had some
Show of a democratical Form; which was nevertheless, in that Case, the
most just and profitable, and most conducive to the Ends and Effects
aimed at thereby.... Lastly, they observed that the opposite Faction
cried out loudly against Democracy, and yet called for Oligarchy; which
