
Meanwhile, my comrade had undeceived our fellow-lodger, and informed
him of his reason for disturbing him; upon which, getting up softly, he
peeped through the hole, and was so terrified with what he saw, that,
falling down on his bare knees, he put up a long petition to Heaven
to deliver him from the hands of that ruffian, and promised never
to defraud a customer for the future of the value of a pin's point,
provided he might be rescued from the present danger. Whether or not his
disburthening his conscience afforded him any ease I knew not, but he
slipped into bed again, and lay very quiet until the robber and his
mistress were asleep, and snored in concert; then, rising softly, he
untied a rope that was round his pack, which making fast to one end of
it, he opened the window with as little noise as possible, and lowered
his goods into the yard with great dexterity: then he moved gently to
our bedside and bade us farewell, telling us that, as we ran no risk we
might take our rest with great confidence, and in the morning assure the
landlord that we knew nothing of his escape, and, lastly, shaking us
by the hands, and wishing us all manner of success, he let himself drop
from the window without any danger, for the ground was not above a yard
from his feet as he hung on the outside.

Although I did not think proper to accompany him in his flight, I was
not at all free from apprehension when I reflected on what might be the
effect of the highwayman's disappointment; as he certainly intended to
make free with the pedlar's ware. Neither was my companion at more ease
in his mind, but on the contrary, so possessed with the dreadful idea of
Rifle, that he solicited me strongly to follow our countryman's example,
and so elude the fatal resentment of that terrible adventurer, who
would certainly wreak his vengeance on us as accomplices of the pedlar's
elopement. But I represented to him the danger of giving Rifle cause to
think we know his profession, and suggested that, if ever he should meet
us again on the road, he would look upon us as dangerous acquaintance,
and find it his interest to put us out of the way. I told him, withal,
my confidence in Betty's good nature, in which he acquiesced; and
during the remaining part of the night we concerted a proper method of
behaviour, to render us unsuspected in the morning.

It was no sooner day than Betty, entering our chamber, and perceiving
our window open, cried out, "Odds-bobs! sure you Scotchmen must have
hot constitutions to lie all night with the window open in such cold
weather." I feigned to start out of sleep, and, withdrawing the curtain,
called, "What's the matter?" When she showed me, I affected surprise,
and said, "Bless me! the window was shut when we went to bed." "I'll be
hanged," said she, "if Sawney Waddle, the pedlar, has not got up in a
dream and done it, for I heard him very obstropulous in his sleep, Sure
I put a chamberpot under his bed!"

With these words she advanced to the bed, in which he lay, and, finding
the sheets cold, exclaimed, "Good lackadaisy! The rogue is fled."
"Fled," cried I, with feigned amazement, "God forbid! Sure he has not
robbed us!" Then, springing up, I laid hold of my breeches, and emptied
all my loose money into my hand; which having reckoned, I said, "Heaven
be praised, our money is all safe! Strap, look to the knapsack." He did
so, and found all was right. Upon which we asked, with seeming concern,
if he had stolen nothing belonging to the house. "No, no," replied she,
"he has stole nothing but his reckoning;" which, it seems, this pious
pedlar had forgot to discharge in the midst of his devotion.

Betty, after a moment's pause withdrew, and immediately we could hear
her waken Rifle, who no sooner heard of Waddle's flight than he jumped
out of bed and dressed, venting a thousand execrations, and vowing to
murder the pedlar if ever he should set eyes on him again: "For," said
he "the scoundrel has by this time raised the hue and cry against me."

Having dressed himself in a hurry, he mounted his horse, and for
that time rid us of his company and a thousand fears that were the
consequence of it.

While we were at breakfast, Betty endeavoured, by all the cunning she
was mistress of, to learn whether or no we suspected our fellow-lodger,
whom we saw take horse; but, as we were on our guard, we answered her
sly questions with a simplicity she could not distrust; when, all of a
sudden, we heard the trampling of a horse's feet at the door. This noise
alarmed Strap so much, whose imagination was wholly engrossed by the
image of Rifle, that, with a countenance as pale as milk, he cried, "O
Lord! there is the highwayman returned!"

Our landlady, staring at these words, said, "What highwayman, young man?
Do you think any highwaymen harbour here?"

Though I was very much disconcerted at this piece of indiscretion in
Strap, I had presence of mind enough to tell her we had met a horseman
the day before, whom Strap had foolishly supposed to be a highwayman,
because he rode with pistols; and that he had been terrified at the
sound of a horse's feet ever since.

She forced a smile at the ignorance and timidity of my comrade; but I
could perceive, not without great concern, that this account was not at
all satisfactory to her.






CHAPTER IX

We proceed on our Journey--are overtaken by a Highwayman who fires at
Strap--is prevented from shooting me by a Company of Horsemen, who ride
in pursuit of him--Strap is put to Bed at an Inn--Adventures at that Inn

After having paid our score and taken leave of our hostess, who embraced
me tenderly at parting, we proceeded on our journey, blessing ourselves
that we had come off so well. We had not walked above five miles, when
we observed a man on horseback galloping after us, whom we in a short
time recognised to be no other than this formidable hero who had already
given us so much vexation. He stopped hard by me, and asked if I knew
who he was? My astonishment had disconcerted me so much that I did not
hear his question, which he repeated with a volley of oaths and threats;
but I remained as mute as before.

Strap, seeing my discomposure, fell upon his knees in the mud, uttering,
with a lamentable voice, these words: "For Christ's sake, have mercy
upon us, Mr. Rifle! we know you very well." "Oho!" cried the thief, "you
do! But you never shall be evidence against me in this world, you dog!"
So saying, he drew a pistol, and fired it at the unfortunate shaver, who
fell flat upon the ground without speaking one word.

My comrade's fate and my own situation riveted me to the place where I
stood, deprived of all sense and reflection; so that I did not make
the least attempt either to run away or deprecate the wrath of this
barbarian, who snapped a second pistol at me; but, before he had time
to prime again, perceiving a company of horsemen coming up, he rode
off, and left me standing motionless as a statue, in which posture I
was found by those whose appearance had saved my life. This company
consisted of three men in livery, well armed, with an officer, who (as I
afterwards learned,) was the person from whom Rifle had taken the
pocket pistols the day before; and who, making known his misfortune to
a nobleman he met on the road, and assuring him his non-resistance
was altogether owing to his consideration for the ladies in the coach,
procured the assistance of his lordship's servants to go in quest of the
plunderer. This holiday captain scampered up to me with great address,
and asked who fired the pistol which he had heard.

As I had not yet recovered my reason, he, before I could answer,
observed a body lying on the ground, at which sight his colour changed,
and he pronounced, with a faltering tongue, "Gentlemen, here's murder
committed! Let us alight." "No, no," said one of his followers, "let us
rather pursue the murderer. Which way went he, young man?"

By this time I had recollected myself so far as to tell them that he
could not be a quarter of a mile before; and to beg one of them to
assist me in conveying the corpse of my friend to the next house, in
order to it being interred. The captain, foreseeing that, in case he
should pursue, he must soon come to action, began to curb his horse, and
gave him the spur at the same time, which treatment making the creature
rear up and snort, he called out, his horse was frightened, and would
not proceed; at the same time wheeling him round and round, stroking his
neck, whistling and wheedling him with "Sirrah, sirrah--gently, gently."
etc. "Z--ds!", cried one of the servants, "sure my lord's Sorrel is not
resty!"

With these words he bestowed a lash on his buttocks, and Sorrel,
disdaining the rein sprang forward with the captain at a pace that would
have soon brought him up with the robber, had not the girtle (happily
for him) given way, by which means he landed in the dirt; and two of
his attendants continued their pursuit, without minding his situation.
Meanwhile one of the three who remained at my desire, turning the body
of Strap, in order to see the wound which had killed him, found him
still warm and breathing: upon which, I immediately let him blood, and
saw him, with inexpressible joy, recover; he having received no other
wound than what his fear had inflicted. Having raised him upon his legs,
we walked together to an inn, about half a mile from the place, where
Strap, who was not quite recovered, went to bed; and in a little time
the third servant returned with the captain's horse and furniture,
leaving him to crawl after as well as he could.

This gentleman of the sword, upon his arrival, complained grievously
of the bruise occasioned by his fall; and, on the recommendation of
the servant, who warranted my ability, I was employed to bleed him, for
which service he rewarded me with half-a-crown.

The time between this event and dinner I passed in observing a game at
cards between two farmers, an exciseman, and a young fellow in a rusty
gown and cassock, who, as I afterwards understood, was curate of a
neighbouring parish. It was easy to perceive that the match was not
equal; and that the two farmers, who were partners, had to do with a
couple of sharpers, who stripped them of all their cash in a very short
time. But what surprised me very mach, was to hear this clergyman reply
to one of the countrymen, who seemed to suspect foul play, in these
words: "D--n me, friend, d'ye question my honour?"

I did not at all wonder to find a cheat in canonicals, this being a
character frequent in my own country; but I was scandalised at the
indecency of his behaviour, which appeared in the oaths he swore, and
the bawdy songs which he sung. At last, to make amends in some sort, for
the damage he had done to the unwary boors, he pulled out a fiddle from
the lining of his gown, and, promising to treat them at dinner, began
to play most melodiously, singing in concert all the while. This good
humour of this parson inspired the company with so much glee that the
farmers soon forgot their losses, and all present went to dancing in the
yard.

While we were agreeably amused in this manner, our musician, spying a
horseman a riding towards the inn, stopped all of a sudden, crying
out, "Gad so! gentlemen, I beg your pardon, there's our dog of a doctor
coming into the inn." He immediately commended his instrument, and ran
towards the gate, where he took hold of the vicar's bridle, and helped
him off, inquiring very cordially into the state of his health.

This rosy son of the church, who might be about the age of fifty, having
alighted and entrusted the curate with his horse, stalked with great
solemnity, into the kitchen, where sitting down by the fire, he called
for a bottle of ale and a pipe; scarce deigning an answer to the
submissive questions of those who inquired about the welfare of his
family. While he indulged himself in this state, amidst a profound
silence, the curate, approaching him with great reverence, asked him
if he would not be pleased to honour him with his company at dinner? To
which interrogation he answered in the negative, saying, he had been
to visit Squire Bumpkin, who had drank himself into a high fever at the
last assizes; and that he had, on leaving his own house, told Betty he
should dine at home. Accordingly when he had made an end of his bottle
and pipe, he rose, and moved with prelatical dignity to the door, where
his journeyman stood ready with his nag. He had no sooner mounted
than the facetious curate, coming into the kitchen, held forth in this
manner: "There the old rascal goes, and the d--l go with him. You see
how the world wags, gentlemen. By gad, this rogue of a vicar does not
deserve to live; and yet he has two livings worth four hundred pounds
per annum, while poor I am fain to do all his drudgery, and ride twenty
miles every Sunday to preach--for what? why, truly, for twenty pounds
a year. I scorn to boast of my own qualifications but--comparisons are
odious. I should be glad to know how this wag-bellied doctor deserves to
be more at ease than me. He can loll in his elbow chair at home, indulge
himself in the best of victuals and wine and enjoy the conversation
of Betty, his housekeeper. You understand me, gentlemen. Betty is the
doctor's poor kinswoman, and a pretty girl she is; but no matter for
that; ay, and dutiful girl to her parents, whom she visits regularly
every year, though I must own I could never learn in what county they
live, My service t'ye, gentlemen."

By this time dinner being ready, I waked my companion, and we ate
altogether with great cheerfulness. When our meal was ended, and every
man's share of the reckoning adjusted, the curate went out on pretence
of some necessary occasion, and, mounting his house, left the two
farmers to satisfy the host in the best manner they could. We were no
sooner informed of this piece of finesse, than the exciseman, who had
been silent hitherto, began to open with a malicious grin: "Ay, ay this
is an old trick of Shuffle; I could not help smiling when he talked of
treating. You must know this is a very curious fellow. He picked up some
scraps of learning while he served young Lord Trifte at the university.
But what he most excels in is pimping. No one knows his talents
better than I, for I was valet-de-chambre to Squire Tattle an intimate
companion of Shuffle's lord. He got him self into a scrape by pawning
some of his lordship's clothes on which account he was turned away; but,
as he was acquainted with some particular circumstances of my lord's
conduct, he did not care to exasperate him too much, and so made
interest for his receiving orders, and afterwards recommended him to
the curacy which he now enjoys. However, the fellow cannot be too much
admired for his dexterity in making a comfortable livelihood, in spite
of such a small allowance. You hear he plays a good stick, and is really
diverting company; these qualifications make him agreeable wherever
he goes; and, as for playing at cards there is not a man within three
counties for him. The truth is, he is a d--able cheat, and can shift a
card with such address that it is impossible to discover him."

Here he was interrupted by one of the farmers, who asked, why he had
not justice enough to acquaint them with these particulars before they
engaged in play. The exciseman replied, without any hesitation, that it
was none of his business to intermeddle between man and man; besides,
he did not know they were ignorant of Shuffle's character, which was
notorious to the whole country. This did not satisfy the other, who
taxed him with abetting and assisting the curate's knavery, and insisted
on having his share of the winnings returned; this demand the exciseman
as positively refused affirming that, whatever sleights Shuffle might
practise on other occasions, he was very certain that he had played
on the square with them, and would answer it before any bench in
Christendom; so saying, he got up and, having paid his reckoning,
sneaked off.

The Landlord, thrusting his neck into the passage to see if he was gone,
shook his head, saying, "Ah! Lord help us! if every sinner was to have
his deserts. Well, we victuallers must not disoblige the excisemen. But
I know what; if parson Shuffle and he were weighed together, a straw
thrown into either scale would make the balance kick the beam. But,
masters, this is under the rose," continued Boniface with a whisper.






CHAPTER X

The Highwayman is taken--we are detained as Evidence against
him--proceed to the next village--he escapes--we arrive at another
inn, where we go to Bed--in the Night we are awaked by a dreadful
Adventure--next night we lodge at the house of a Schoolmaster--our
Treatment there

Strap and I were about to depart on our journey, when we perceived a
crowd on the road coming towards us, shouting and hallooing all the way.
As it approached, we could discern a man on horseback in the middle,
with his hands tied behind him, whom we soon knew to be Rifle. The
highwayman, not being so well mounted as the two servants who went in
pursuit of him, was soon overtaken, and, after having discharged
his pistols, made prisoner without any further opposition. They were
carrying him in triumph, amidst the acclamations of the country people,
to a justice of peace in a neighbouring village, but stopped at our inn
to join their companions and take refreshment.

When Rifle was dismounted and placed in the yard, within a circle of
peasants, armed with pitchforks, I was amazed to see what a pitiful
dejected fellow he now appeared, who had but a few hours before filled
me with such terror and confusion. My companion was so much encouraged
by this alteration in his appearance that, going up to the thief, he
presented his clenched fists to his nose, and declared he would either
cudgel or box with the prisoner for a guinea, which he immediately
produced, and began to strip, but was dissuaded from this adventure by
me, who represented to him the folly of the undertaking, as Rifle
was now in the hands of justice, which would, no doubt, give us all
satisfaction enough.

But what made me repent of our impertinent curiosity was our being
detained by the captors, as evidence against him, when we were just
going to set forward. However, there was no remedy; we were obliged to
comply, and accordingly joined in the cavalcade, which luckily took the
same road that we had proposed to follow. Abort the twilight we arrived
at the place of our destination, but as the justice was gone to visit
a gentleman in the country, with whom (we understood) he would probably
stay all night, the robber was confined in an empty garret, three
stories high, from which it seemed impossible for him to escape; this,
nevertheless, was the case; for next morning when they went up stairs to
bring him before the justice, the bird was flown, having got out at the
window upon the roof from whence he continued his route along the tops
of the adjoining houses, and entered another garret where he skulked
until the family were asleep; at which time he ventured down stairs, and
let himself out by the street-door, which was open.

This event was a great disappointment to those that apprehended him, who
were flushed with the hopes of the reward; but gave me great joy, as
I was permitted now to continue my journey, without any further
molestation. Resolving to make up for the small progress we had hitherto
made, we this day travelled with great vigour and before night reached
a market town twenty miles from the place from whence we set out in the
morning, without meeting any adventure worth notice. Here having taken
up our lodging at an an inn, I found myself so fatigued that I began to
despair of performing our journey on foot, and desired Strap to inquire
if there were any waggon, return horses, or any cheap carriage in this
place, to depart for London next day. He was informed that the waggon
from Newcastle to London had halted there two nights ago, and that
it would be an easy matter to overtake it, if not the next day, at
farthest, the day after the next. This piece of news gave us some
satisfaction; and, after having made a hearty supper on hashed mutton,
we were shown to our room, which contained two beds, the one allotted
for us, and the other for a very honest gentleman, who, we were told,
was then drinking below. Though we could have very well dispensed with
his company, we were glad to submit to this disposition, as there was
not another bed empty in the house; and accordingly went to rest, after
having secured our baggage under the bolster. About two or three o'clock
in the morning I was awaked out of a very profound sleep by a dreadful
noise in the chamber, which did not fail to throw me into an agony
of consternation, when I heard these words pronounced with a terrible
voice: "Blood and wounds! run the halbert into the guts of him that's
next you, and I'll blow the other's brains out presently."

This dreadful salutation had no sooner reached the ears of Strap than,
starting out of bed, he ran against somebody in the dark, and overturned
him in an instant; at the same time bawling out, "Fire! murder! fire!"
a cry which in a moment alarmed the whole house, and filled our chamber
with a crowd of naked people. When lights were brought, the occasion
of all this disturbance soon appeared; which was no other than a fellow
lodger, whom we found lying on the floor, scratching his head, with a
look testifying the utmost astonishment at the concourse of apparitions
that surrounded him.

This honest gentleman was, it seems, a recruiting sergeant, who, having
listed two country fellows over night, dreaded they had mutinied, and
threatened to murder him and the drummer who was along with him. This
made such an impression on his imagination, that he got up in his
sleep and expressed himself as above. When our apprehension of danger
vanished, the company beheld one another with great surprise and mirth;
but what attracted the notice of everyone was our landlady, with nothing
on her but her shift and a large pair of buckskin breeches, with the
backside before, which she had slipped on in the hurry, and her husband
with her petticoat about his shoulders; one had wrapped himself in a
blanket, another was covered with a sheet, and the drummer, who had
given his only shirt to be washed, appeared in cuerpo with a bolster
rolled about his middle.

When this affair was discussed, everybody retired to his own apartment,
the sergeant slipped into bed, and my companion and I slept without any
further disturbance till morning, when we got up, went to breakfast,
paid our reckoning, and set forward in expectation of overtaking the
waggon; in which hope, however, we were disappointed for that day. As
we exerted ourselves more than usual, I found myself quite spent with
fatigue, when we entered a small village in the twilight. We inquired
for a public-house, and were directed to one of a very sorry appearance.
At our entrance the landlord, who seemed to be a venerable old man, with
long gray hair, rose from a table placed by a large fire in a very neat
paved kitchen, and with a cheerful countenance accosted us in these
words: "Salvete, pueri. Ingredimini." I was not a little pleased to hear
our host speak Latin, because I was in hope of recommending myself to
him by my knowledge in that language; I therefore answered, without
hesitation, "Dissolve frigus, ligna super foco--large reponens." I
had no sooner pronounced these words, than the old gentleman, running
towards me, shook me by the hand, crying, "Fili mi dilectissime! unde
venis?--a superis, ni fallor?" In short, finding we were both read in
the classics, he did not know how to testify his regard enough; but
ordered his daughter, a jolly rosy-cheeked damsel who was his sole
domestic, to bring us a bottle of his quadrimum, repeating from Horace
at the same time, "Deprome quadrimum sabina, O Tholiarche, merum diota."
This was excellent ale of his own brewing, of which he told us he had
always an amphora four years old, for the use of himself and friends.

In the course of our conversation, which was interlarded with scraps
of Latin, we understood that this facetious person was a schoolmaster,
whose income being small, he was fain to keep a glass of good liquor for
the entertainment of passengers by which he made shift to make the
two ends of the year meet. "I am this day," said he, "the happiest old
fellow in his majesty's dominions. My wife, rest her soul, is in heaven.
My daughter is to be married next week; but the two chief pleasures of
my life are these (pointing to the bottle and a large edition of Horace
that lay on the table). I am old, 'tis true--what then? the more reason
I should enjoy the small share of life that remains, as my friend
Flaccus advises: 'Tu ne quaesieris (scire nefas) quem mihi, quem tibi
finem dii dederint. Carpe diem, quam minimum credula postero.'"

As he was very inquisitive about our affairs, we made no scruple of
acquainting him with our situation, which when he had learned, he
enriched us with advices how to behave in the world, telling us that he
was no stranger to the deceits of mankind. In the meantime he ordered
his daughter to lay a fowl to the fire for supper, for he was resolved
this night to regale his friends--permittens divis caetera. While our
entertainment was preparing, our host recounted the adventures of his
own life, which, as they contained nothing remarkable, I forbear to
rehearse. When we had fared sumptuously, and drunk several bottles
of his I expressed a desire of going to rest, which was with some
difficulty complied with, after he had informed us that we should
overtake the waggon by noon next day; and that there was room enough in
it for half-a-dozen, for there were only four passengers as yet in that
convenience.

Before my comrade and I fell asleep, we had some conversation about
the good humour of our landlord, which gave Strap such an idea of his
benevolence, that he positively believed we should pay nothing for our
lodging and entertainment. "Don't you observe," said he, "that he has
conceived a particular affection for us--nay, even treated us at supper
with extraordinary fare, which, to be sure, we should not of ourselves
have called for?"

I was partly of Strap's opinion; but the experience I had of the world
made me suspend my belief till the morning, when, getting up betimes, we
breakfasted with our host and his daughter on hasty-pudding and ale,
and desired to know what we had to pay. "Biddy will let you know,
gentlemen," said he; "for I never mind these matters. Money matters are
beneath the concern of one who lives upon the Horatian plan--Crescentum
sequitur cura pecuniam." Meanwhile, Biddy, having consulted a slate
that hung in the corner, told us our reckoning came to 8s. 7d. "Eight
shillings and seven pence!" cried Strap, "'tis impossible! you must be
mistaken, young woman." "Reckon again, child," says her father, very
deliberately; "perhaps you have miscounted." "No, indeed," replied she,
"I know my business better." I could contain my indignation no longer,
but said it was an unconscionable bill, and demanded to know the
particulars; upon which the old man got up, muttering, "Ay, ay, let us
see the particulars--that's but reasonable." And, taking pen, ink, and
paper, wrote the following items:


To bread and beer 0 6 To a fowl and sausages 2 6 To four bottles of
quadrim. 2 0 To fire and tobacco 0 7 To lodging 2 0 To breakfast 1 0
---- 8 7

As he had not the appearance of a common publican, and had raised a sort
of veneration in me by his demeanour the preceding night, it was not in
my power to upbraid him as he deserved; therefore, I contented myself
with saying I was sure he did not learn to be an extortioner from
Horace. He answered, I was but a young man and did not know the world,
or I would not tax him with extortion, whose only aim was to live
contentus parvo, and keep off importuna pauperies. My fellow traveller
could not so easily put up with this imposition; but swore he should
either take one-third of the money or go without. While we were engaged
in this dispute, I perceived the daughter go out, and, conjecturing the
occasion, immediately paid the exorbitant demand, which was no sooner
done than Biddy returned with two stout fellows, who came in on pretence
of taking their morning draught, but in reality to frighten us into
compliance. Just as we departed, Strap, who was half-distracted on
account of this piece of expense, went up to the schoolmaster, and,
grinning in his face, pronounced with great emphasis--"Semper avarus
eget." To which the pedant replied, with a malicious smile--"Animum
rege, qui, nisi paret, imperat."






CHAPTER XI

We descry the Waggon--get into it--arrive at an inn--our Fellow
Travellers described--a Mistake is committed by Strap, which produces
strange things

We travelled half-a-mile without exchanging one word; my thoughts being
engrossed by the knavery of the world, to which I must be daily exposed,
and the contemplation of my finances, which began sensibly to diminish.
At length, Strap, who could hold no longer, addressed me thus: "Well,
fools and their money are soon parted. If my advice had been taken, that
old skin-flint should have been d--n'd before he had got more than the
third of his demand. 'Tis a sure sign you came easily by your money,
when you squander it away in this manner. Ah! God help you, how many
bristly beards must I have mowed before I earned four shillings and
threepence-halfpenny, which is all thrown to the dogs! How many days
have I sat weaving hair till my toes were numbed by the cold, my fingers
cramped, and my nose as blue as the sign of the periwig that hung over
the door! What the devil was you afraid of? I would have engaged to box
with any one of those fellows who came in for a guinea--I'm sure--I have
beat stouter men than either of them." And, indeed, my companion would
have fought anybody when his life was in no danger; but he had a mortal
aversion to fire-arms and all instruments of death. In order to appease
him, I assured him no part of this extraordinary expense should fall
upon his shoulders; at which declaration he was affronted, and told me
he would have me to know that, although he was a poor barber's boy, yet
he had a soul to spend big money with the best squire of the land.

Having walked all day at a great pace, without halting for a
refreshment, we descried, toward the evening, to our inexpressible joy,
the waggon about a quarter of a mile before us; and, by that time we
reached it, were both of us so weary that I verily believe it would
have been impracticable for us to have walked one mile farther. We,
therefore, bargained with the driver, whose name was Joey, to give us a
cast to the next stage for a shilling; at which place we should meet
the master of the waggon, with whom we might agree for the rest of the
journey.

Accordingly the convenience stopped, and Joey having placed the ladder,
Strap (being loaded with our baggage) mounted first; but, just as he was
getting in, a tremendous voice assailed his ears in these words: "God's
fury! there shall no passengers come here." The poor shaver was so
disconcerted at this exclamation, which both he and I imagined proceeded
from the mouth of a giant, that he descended with great velocity and
a countenance as white as paper. Joey, perceiving our astonishment,
called, with an arch sneer, "Waunds, coptain, whay woant yau sooffer
the poor waggoneer to meake a penny? Coom, coom, young man, get oop, get
oop, never moind the coptain; I'se not afeard of the coptain."

This was not encouragement sufficient to Strap, who could not be
prevailed upon to venture up again; upon which I attempted, though not
without a quaking heart, when I heard the same voice muttering, like
distant thunder--"Hell and the devil confound me, if I don't make you
smart for this!" However, I crept in, and by accident got an empty place
in the straw, which I immediately took possession of, without being
able to discern the faces of my fellow-travellers in the dark. Strap
following, with the knapsack on his back, chanced to take the other
side, and, by a jolt of the carriage, pitched directly upon the stomach
of the captain, who bellowed out, in a most dreadful manner, "Blood and
thunder! where's my sword?" At these words my frighted comrade started
up, and, at one spring, bounced against me with such force that I
thought he was the supposed son of Anak, who intended to press me to
death. In the meantime a female voice cried, "Bless me! what is the
matter, my dear?" "The matter," replied the captain, "d--n my blood!
my guts are squeezed into a pancake by that Scotchman's hump." Strap,
trembling all the while at my back, asked him pardon, and laid the blame
of what had happened upon the jolting of the waggon; and the woman who
spoke before went on: "Ay, ay, my dear, it is our own fault; we may
thank ourselves for all the inconveniences we meet with. I thank God I
never travelled so before. I am sure if my lady or Sir John were to know
where we are they would not sleep this night for vexation. I wish to God
we had writ for the chariot; I know we shall never be forgiven." "Come,
come, my dear," replied the captain, "it don't signify fretting now;
we shall laugh it over as a frolic; I hope you will not suffer in your
health. I shall make my lord very merry with our adventures in this
diligence."

The discourse gave me such a high notion of the captain and his lady
that I durst not venture to join in the conversation; but immediately
after another female voice began: "Some people give themselves a great
many needless airs; better folks than any here have travelled in waggons
before now. Some of us have rode in coaches and chariots, with three
footmen behind them, without making so much fuss about it. What then? We
are now all upon a footing; therefore let us be sociable and merry. What
do you say, Isaac? Is not this a good motion, you doting rogue? Speak,
you old cent per cent fornicator? What desperate debt are you thinking
of? What mortgage are you planning? Well, Isaac, positively you shall
never gain my favour till you turn over a new leaf, grow honest, and
live like a gentleman. In the meantime give me a kiss, you old fumbler."
These words, accompanied with a hearty smack, enlivened the person to
whom they were addressed to such a degree that he cried, in transport,
though with a faltering voice, "Ah! you wanton baggage--upon my credit,
you are a waggish girl--he, he, he!" This laugh introduced a fit of
coughing, which almost suffocated the poor usurer (such we afterwards
