learn, when we lie with our chins up, and our ten toes like stopped
organ-pipes--as Sandra says--we learn then that it means fresh health and
activity, and is better than rivers of your fiery wines.  You love her,
do you not?"

The question came with great simplicity.

"If I can give a proof of it, I am ready to answer," said Merthyr, in
some surprise.

"Your whole life is the proof of it.  The women of your country are
intolerable to me, Merthyr: but I do see the worth of the men.  Sandra
has taught me.  She can think of you, talk of you, kiss the vision of
you, and still be a faithful woman in our bondage of flesh; and to us you
know what a bondage it is: How can that be?  I should have asked, if I
had not seen it.  Dearest, she loves her husband, and she loves you.  She
has two husbands, and she turns to the husband of her spirit when that,
or any, dagger strikes her bosom.  Carlo has an unripe mind.  They have
been married but a little more than four months; and he reveres her and
loves her."  .  .  .  .  Laura's voice dragged.  "Multiply the months by
thousands, we shall not make those two lives one.  It is the curse of
man's education in Italy?  He can see that she has wits and courage.  He
will not consent to make use of them.  You know her: she is not one to
talk of these things.  She, who has both heart and judgement--she is
merely a little boat tied to a big ship.  Such is their marriage.  She
cannot influence him.  She is not allowed to advise him.  And she is the
one who should lead the way.  And--if she did, we should now be within
sight of the City."

Laura took his hand.  She found it moist, though his face was calm and
his chest heaved regularly.  An impish form of the pity women feel for us
at times moved her to say, "Your skin is as bronzed as it was last year.
Sandra spoke of it.  She compared it to a young vine-leaf.  I wonder
whether girls have really an admonition of what is good for them while
they are going their ways like destined machines?"

"Almost all men are of flesh and blood," said Merthyr softly.

"I spoke of girls."

"I speak of men."

"Blunt--witted that I am!  Of course you did.  But do not imagine that
she is not happy with her husband.  They are united firmly."

"The better for her, and him, and me," said Merthyr.

Laura twisted an end of her scarf with fretful fingers.  "Carlo Albert
has crossed the Ticino?"

"Is about to do so," Merthyr rejoined.

"Will Rome hold on if he is defeated?"

"Rome has nothing to fear on that side."

"But you do not speak hopefully of Rome."

"I suppose I am thinking of other matters."

"You confess it!"

The random conversation wearied him.  His foot tapped the floor.

"Why do you say that?"  he asked.

"Verily, for no other reason than that I have a wicked curiosity, and
that you come from Rome," said Laura, now perfectly frank, and believing
that she had explained her enigmatical talk, if she had not furnished
an excuse for it.  Merthyr came from the City which was now encircled
by an irradiating halo in her imagination, and a fit of spontaneous
inexplicable feminine tenderness being upon her at the moment of their
meeting, she found herself on a sudden prompted to touch and probe and
brood voluptuously over an unfortunate lover's feelings, supposing that
they existed.  For the glory of Rome was on him, and she was at the same
time angry with Carlo Ammiani.  It was the form of passion her dedicated
widowhood could still be subject to in its youth; the sole one.  By this
chance Merthyr learnt what nothing else would have told him.

Her tale of the attempted assassination was related with palpable
indifference.  She stated the facts.  "The woman seemed to gasp while she
had her hand up; she struck with no force; and she has since been
inanimate, I hear.  The doctor says that a spasm of the heart seized her
when she was about to strike.  It has been shaken--I am not sure that he
does not say displaced, or unseated--by some one of her black tempers.
She shot Rinaldo Guidascarpi dead.  Perhaps it was that.  I am informed
that she worshipped the poor boy, and has been like a trapped she-wolf
since she did it.  In some way she associated our darling with Rinaldo's
death, like the brute she is.  The ostensible ground for her futile bit
of devilishness was that she fancied Sandra to have betrayed Barto Rizzo,
her husband, into the hands of the polizia.  He wrote to the Countess
Alessandra--such a letter!--a curiosity!--he must see her and cross-
examine her to satisfy himself that she was a true patriot, &c.  You know
the style: we neither of us like it.  Sandra was waiting to receive him
when they pounced on him by the door.  Next day the woman struck at her.
Decidedly a handsome woman.  She is the exact contrast to the Countess
Violetta in face, in everything.  Heart-disease will certainly never
affect that pretty spy!  But, mark," pursued Laura, warming, "when Carlo
arrived, tears, penitence, heaps of self-accusations: he had been unkind
to her even on Lake Orta, where they passed their golden month; he had
neglected her at Turin; he had spoken angry words in Milan; in fact, he
had misused his treasure, and begged pardon;--'If you please, my poor
bleeding angel, I am sorry.  But do not, I entreat, distract me with
petitions of any sort, though I will perform anything earthly to satisfy
you.  Be a good little boat in the wake of the big ship.  I will look
over at you, and chirrup now and then to you, my dearest, when I am not
engaged in piloting extraordinary.'--Very well; I do not mean to sneer at
the unhappy boy, Merthyr; I love him; he was my husband's brother in
arms; the sweetest lad ever seen.  He is in the season of faults.  He
must command; he must be a chief; he fancies he can intrigue poor thing!
It will pass.  And so will the hour to be forward to Rome.  But I call
your attention to this: when he heard of the dagger--I have it from
Colonel Corte, who was with him at the time in Turin--he cried out
Violetta d'Isorella's name.  Why?  After he had buried his head an hour
on Sandra's pillow, he went straight to Countess d'Isorella, and was
absent till night.  The woman is hideous to me.  No; don't conceive that
I think her Sandra's rival.  She is too jealous.  She has him in some
web.  If she has not ruined him, she will.  She was under my eyes the
night she heard of his marriage: I saw how she will look at seventy!
Here is Carlo at the head of a plot she has prepared for him; and he has
Angelo Guidascarpi, and Ugo Corte, Marco Sana, Giulio Bandinelli, and
about fifty others.  They have all been kept away from Rome by that
detestable ----- you object to hear bad names cast on women, Merthyr.
Hear Agostino!  The poor old man comes daily to this house to persuade
Carlo to lead his band to Rome.  It is so clearly Rome--Rome, where all
his comrades are; where the chief stand must be made by the side of
Italy's Chief.  Worst sign of all, it has been hinted semi-officially to
Carlo that he may upon application be permitted to re-issue his journal.
Does not that show that the Government wishes to blindfold him, and keep
him here, and knows his plans?"

Laura started up as the door opened, and Vittoria appeared leaning upon
Carlo's arm.  Countess Ammiani, Countess d'Isorella, and Pericles were
behind them.  Laura's children followed.

When Merthyr rose, Vittoria was smiling in Carlo's face at something that
had been spoken.  She was pale, and her arm was in a sling, but there was
no appearance of her being unnerved.  Merthyr waited for her recognition
of him.  She turned her eyes from Carlo slowly.  The soft dull smile in
them died out as it were with a throb, and then her head drooped on one
shoulder, and she sank to the floor.




CHAPTER XLII

THE SHADOW ON CONSPIRACY

Merthyr left the house at Laura's whispered suggestion.  He was agitated
beyond control, for Vittoria had fallen with her eyes fixed on him; and
at times the picture of his beloved, her husband, and Countess Ammiani,
and the children bending over her still body, swam before him like a dark
altar-piece floating in incense, so lost was he to the reality of that
scene.  He did not hear Beppo, his old servant, at his heels.  After a
while he walked calmly, and Beppo came up beside him.  Merthyr shook his
hand.

"Ah, signor Mertyrio! ah, padrone!"  said Beppo.

Merthyr directed his observation to a regiment of Austrians marching down
the Corso Venezia to the Ticinese gate.

"Yes, they are ready enough for us," Beppo remarked.  "Perhaps Carlo
Alberto will beat them this time.  If he does, viva to him!  If they beat
him, down goes another Venetian pyramid.  The Countess Alessandra--"
Beppo's speech failed.

"What of your mistress?"  said Merthyr.

"When she dies, my dear master, there's no one for me but the Madonna to
serve."

"Why should she die, silly fellow?"

"Because she never cries."

Merthyr was on the point of saying, "Why should she cry?"  His heart was
too full, and he shrank from inquisitive shadows of the thing known to
him.

"Sit down at this caffe with me," he said.  It's fine weather for March.
The troops will camp comfortably.  Those Hungarians never require tents.
Did you see much sacking of villages last year?"

"Padrone, the Imperial command is always to spare the villages."

"That's humane."

"Padrone, yes; if policy is humanity."

"It's humanity not carried quite as far as we should wish it."

Beppo shrugged and said: "It won't leave much upon the conscience if we
kill them."

"Do you expect a rising?"  said Merthyr.

"If the Ticino overflows, it will flood Milan," was the answer.

"And your occupation now is to watch the height of the water?"

"My occupation, padrone?  I am not on the watch-tower."  Beppo winked,
adding: "I have my occupation."  He threw off the effort or pretence to
be discreet.  "Master of my soul! this is my occupation.  I drink coffee,
but I do not smoke, because I have to kiss a pretty girl, who means to
object to the smell of the smoke.  Via! I know her!  At five she draws me
into the house."

"Are you relating your amours to me, rascal?"  Merthyr interposed.

"Padrone, at five precisely she draws me into the house.  She is a German
girl.  Pardon me if I make no war on women.  Her name is Aennchen, which
one is able to say if one grimaces;--why not?  It makes her laugh; and
German girls are amiable when one can make them laugh.  'Tis so that they
begin to melt.  Behold the difference of races!  I must kiss her to melt
her, and then have a quarrel.  I could have it after the first, or the
fiftieth with an Italian girl; but my task will be excessively difficult
with a German girl, if I am compelled to allow myself to favour her with
one happy solicitation for a kiss, to commence with.  We shall see.  It
is, as my abstention from tobacco declares, an anticipated catastrophe."

"Long-worded, long-winded, obscure, affirmatizing by negatives,
confessing by implication!--where's the beginning and end of you, and
what's your meaning?" said Merthyr, who talked to him as one may talk to
an Italian servant.

"The contessa, my mistress, has enemies.  Padrone, I devote myself to her
service."

"By making love to a lady's maid?"

"Padrone, a rat is not born to find his way up the grand staircase.  She
has enemies.  One of them was the sublime Barto Rizzo--admirable--though
I must hate him.  He said to his wife: 'If a thing happens to me, stab to
the heart the Countess Alessandra Ammiani.'"

"Inform me how you know that?"  said Merthyr.

Beppo pointed to his head, and Merthyr smiled.  To imagine, invent, and
believe, were spontaneous with Beppo when has practical sagacity was not
on the stretch.  He glanced at the caffe clock.

"Padrone, at eleven to-night shall I see you here?  At eleven I shall
come like a charged cannon.  I have business.  I have seen my mistress's
blood!  I will tell you: this German girl lets me know that some one
detests my mistress.  Who? I am off to discover.  But who is the damned
creature?  I must coo and kiss, while my toes are dancing on hot plates,
to find her out.  Who is she?  If she were half Milan .  .  ."

His hands waved in outline the remainder of the speech, and he rose, but
sat again.  He had caught sight of the spy, Luigi Saracco, addressing the
signor Antonio-Pericles in his carriage.  Pericles drove on.  The horses
presently turned, and he saluted Merthyr.

"She has but one friend in Milan: it is myself," was his introductory
remark.  "My poor child! my dear Powys, she is the best--'I cannot sing
to you to-day, dear Pericles'--she said that after she had opened her
eyes; after the first mist, you know.  She is the best child upon earth.
I could wish she were a devil, my Powys.  Such a voice should be in an
iron body.  But she has immense health.  The doctor, who is also mine,
feels her pulse.  He assures me it goes as Time himself, and Time, my
friend, you know, has the intention of going a great way.  She is good:
she is too good.  She makes a baby of Pericles, to whom what is woman?
Have I not the sex in my pocket?  Her husband, he is a fool, ser."
Pericles broke thundering into a sentence of English, fell in love with
it, and resumed in the same tongue: "I--it is I zat am her guard, her
safety.  Her husband--oh! she must marry a young man, little donkey zat
she is!  We accept it as a destiny, my Powys.  And he plays false to her.
Good; I do not object.  But, imagine in your own mind, my Powys--instead
of passion, of rage, of tempest, she is frozen wiz a repose.  Do you,
hein? sink it will come out,"--Pericles eyed Merthyr with a subtle smile
askew,--"I have sot so;--it will come out when she is one day in a
terrible scene .  .  .  Mon Dieu! it was a terrible scene for me when I
looked on ze clout zat washed ze blood of ze terrible assassination.  So
goes out a voice, possibly!  Divine, you say?  We are a machine.  Now,
you behold, she has faints.  It may happen at my concert where she sings
to-morrow night.  You saw me in my carriage speaking to a man.  He is my
spy--my dog wiz a nose.  I have set him upon a woman.  If zat woman has a
plot for to-morrow night to spoil my concert, she shall not know where
she shall wake to-morrow morning after.  Ha! here is military music--
twenty sossand doors jam on horrid hinge; and right, left, right, left,
to it, confound!  like dolls all wiz one face.  Look at your soldiers,
Powys.  Put zem on a stage, and you see all background people--a bawling
chorus.  It shows to you how superior it is--a stage to life!  Hark to
such music!  I cannot stand it; I am driven away; I am violent; I rage."

Pericles howled the name of his place of residence, with an offer of
lodgings in it, and was carried off writhing his body as he passed a fine
military marching band.

The figure of old Agostino Balderini stood in front of Merthyr.
They exchanged greetings.  At the mention of Rome, Agostino frowned
impatiently.  He spoke of Vittoria in two or three short exclamations,
and was about to speak of Carlo, but checked his tongue.  "Judge for
yourself.  Come, and see, and approve, if you can.  Will you come?
There's a meeting; there's to be a resolution.  Question--Shall we second
the King of Sardinia, Piedmont, and Savoy?  If so, let us set this
pumpkin, called Milan, on its legs.  I shall be an attentive listener
like you, my friend.  I speak no more."

Merthyr went with him to the house of a carpenter, where in one of the
uppermost chambers communicating with the roof, Ugo Corte, Marco Sana,
Giulio Bandinelli, and others, sat waiting for the arrival of Carlo
Ammiani; when he came Carlo had to bear with the looks of mastiffs for
being late.  He shook Merthyr's hand hurriedly, and as soon as the door
was fastened, began to speak.  His first sentence brought a grunt of
derision from Ugo Corte.  It declared that there was no hope of a rising
in Milan.  Carlo swung round upon the Bergamasc.  "Observe our leader,"
Agostino whispered to Merthyr; "it would be kindness to give him a duel."
More than one tumult of outcries had to be stilled before Merthyr
gathered any notion of the designs of the persons present.  Bergamasc
sneered at Brescian, and both united in contempt of the Milanese, who,
having a burden on their minds, appealed at once to their individual
willingness to use the sword in vindication of Milan against its
traducers.  By a great effort, Carlo got some self-mastery.  He admitted,
colouring horribly, that Brescia and Bergamo were ready, and Milan was
not; therefore those noble cities (he read excerpts from letters showing
their readiness) were to take the lead, and thither on the morrow-night
he would go, let the tidings from the king's army be what they might.

Merthyr quitted the place rather impressed by his eloquence, but
unfavourably by his feverish look.  Countess d'Isorella had been referred
to as one who served the cause ably and faithfully.  In alluding to her,
Carlo bit his lip; he did not proceed until surrounding murmurs of
satisfaction encouraged him to continue a sort of formal eulogy of the
lady, which proved to be a defence against foregone charges, for Corte
retracted an accusation, and said that he had no fault to find with the
countess.  A proposal to join the enterprise was put to Merthyr, but his
engagement with the Chief in Rome saved him from hearing much of the
marvellous facilities of the plot.  "I should have wished to see you to-
night," Carlo said as they were parting.  Merthyr named his hotel.  Carlo
nodded.  "My wife is still slightly feeble," he said.

"I regret it," Merthyr rejoined.

"She is not ill."

"No, it cannot be want of courage," Merthyr spoke at random.

"Yes, that's true," said Carlo, as vacantly.  "You will see her while I
am travelling."

"I hope to find the Countess Alessandra well enough to receive me."

"Always; always," said Carlo, wishing apparently to say more.  Merthyr
waited an instant, but Carlo broke into a conventional smile of adieu.

"While he is travelling," Merthyr repeated to Agostino, who had stood by
during the brief dialogue, and led the way to the Corso.

"He did not say how far!" was the old man's ejaculation.

"But, good heaven!  if you think he's on an unfortunate errand, why don't
you stop him, advise him?"  Merthyr broke out.

