
"Not now," said Rinaldo.

"Do you think of going?"

"I will speak to you presently, my friend."

"Hound!" cried Wilfrid, and turned his face to the wall.

Until he slept, he heard the rapid travelling of a pen; on his awakening,
the pen vexed him like a chirping cricket that tells us that cock-crow is
long distant when we are moaning for the dawn.  Great drops of sweat were
on Rinaldo's forehead.  He wrote as one who poured forth a history
without pause.  Barto's wife came to the lamp and beckoned him out,
bearing the lamp away.  There was now for the first time darkness in this
vault.  Wilfrid called Rinaldo by name, and heard nothing but the fear of
the place, which seemed to rise bristling at his voice and shrink from
it.  He called till dread of his voice held him dumb.  "I am, then, a
coward," he thought.  Nor could he by-and-by repress a start of terror on
hearing Rinaldo speak out of the darkness.  With screams for the lamp,
and cries that he was suffering slow murder, he underwent a paroxysm in
the effort to conceal his abject horror.  Rinaldo sat by his side
patiently.  At last, he said: "We are both of us prisoners on equal terms
now."  That was quieting intelligence to Wilfrid, who asked eagerly:
"What hour is it?"

It was eleven of the forenoon.  Wilfrid strove to dissociate his
recollection of clear daylight from the pressure of the hideous
featureless time surrounding him.  He asked: "What week?"  It was the
first week in March.  Wilfrid could not keep from sobbing aloud.  In the
early period of such a captivity, imagination, deprived of all other
food, conjures phantasms for the employment of the brain; but there is
still some consciousness within the torpid intellect wakeful to laugh at
them as they fly, though they have held us at their mercy.  The face of
time had been imaged like the withering mask of a corpse to him.  He had
felt, nevertheless, that things had gone on as we trust them to do at the
closing of our eyelids: he had preserved a mystical remote faith in the
steady running of the world above, and hugged it as his most precious
treasure.  A thunder was rolled in his ears when he heard of the flight
of two months at one bound.  Two big months!  He would have guessed, at
farthest, two weeks.  "I have been two months in one shirt?  Impossible!"
he exclaimed.  His serious idea (he cherished it for the support of his
reason) was, that the world above had played a mad prank since he had
been shuffled off its stage.

"It can't be March," he said.  "Is there sunlight overhead?"

"It is a true Milanese March," Rinaldo replied.

"Why am I kept a prisoner?"

"I cannot say.  There must be some idea of making use of you."

"Have you arms?"

"I have none."

"You know where they're to be had."

"I know, but I would not take them if I could.  They, my friend, are for
a better cause."

"A thousand curses on your country!"  cried Wilfrid.  "Give me air; give
me freedom, I am stifled; I am eaten up with dirt; I am half dead.  Are
we never to have the lamp again?"

"Hear me speak," Rinaldo stopped his ravings.  "I will tell you what my
position is.  A second attempt has been made to help Count Ammiani's
escape; it has failed.  He is detained a prisoner by the Government under
the pretence that he is implicated in the slaying of an Austrian noble by
the hands of two brothers, one of whom slew him justly--not as a dog is
slain, but according to every honourable stipulation of the code.  I was
the witness of the deed.  It is for me that my cousin, Count Ammiani,
droops in prison when he should be with his bride.  Let me speak on, I
pray you.  I have said that I stand between two lovers.  I can release
him, I know well, by giving myself up to the Government.  Unless I do so
instantly, he will be removed from Milan to one of their fortresses in
the interior, and there he may cry to the walls and iron-bars for his
trial.  They are aware that he is dear to Milan, and these two miserable
attempts have furnished them with their excuse.  Barto Rizzo bids me
wait.  I have waited: I can wait no longer.  The lamp is withheld from me
to stop my writing to my brother, that I may warn him of my design, but
the letter is written; the messenger is on his way to Lugano.  I do not
state my intentions before I have taken measures to accomplish them.  I
am as much Barto Rizzo's prisoner now as you are."

The plague of darkness and thirst for daylight prevented Wilfrid from
having any other sentiment than gladness that a companion equally
unfortunate with himself was here, and equally desirous to go forth.
When Barto's wife brought their meal, and the lamp to light them eating
it, Rinaldo handed her pen, ink, pencil, paper, all the material of
correspondence; upon which, as one who had received a stipulated
exchange, she let the lamp remain.  While the new and thrice-dear rays
were illumining her dark-coloured solid beauty, I know not what touch of
man-like envy or hurt vanity led Wilfrid to observe that the woman's eyes
dwelt with a singular fulness and softness on Rinaldo.  It was fulness
and softness void of fire, a true ox-eyed gaze, but human in the fall of
the eyelids; almost such as an early poet of the brush gave to the Virgin
carrying her Child, to become an everlasting reduplicated image of a
mother's strong beneficence of love.  He called Rinaldo's attention to it
when the woman had gone.  Rinaldo understood his meaning at once.

"It will have to be so, I fear," he said; "I have thought of it.  But if
I lead her to disobey Barto, there is little hope for the poor soul."  He
rose up straight, like one who would utter grace for meat.  "Must we, O
my God, give a sacrifice at every step?"

With that he resumed his seat stiffly, and bent and murmured to himself.
Wilfrid had at one time of his life imagined that he was marked by a
peculiar distinction from the common herd; but contact with this young
man taught him to feel his fellowship to the world at large, and to
rejoice at it, though it partially humbled him.

They had no further visit from Barto Rizzo.  The woman tended them in the
same unswerving silence, and at whiles that adorable maternity of aspect.
Wilfrid was touched by commiseration for her.  He was too bitterly
fretful on account of clean linen and the liberty which fluttered the
prospect of it, to think much upon what her fate might be: perhaps a
beating, perhaps the knife.  But the vileness of wearing one shirt two
months and more had hardened his heart; and though he was considerate
enough not to prompt his companion very impatiently, he submitted
desperate futile schemes to him, and suggested--"To-night?--tomorrow?--
the next day?"  Rinaldo did not heed him.  He lay on his couch like one
who bleeds inwardly, thinking of the complacent faithfulness of that poor
creature's face.  Barto Rizzo had sworn to him that there should be a
rising in Milan before the month was out; but he had lost all confidence
in Milanese risings.  Ammiani would be removed, if he delayed; and he
knew that the moment his letter reached Lugano, Angelo would start for
Milan and claim to surrender in his stead.  The woman came, and went
forth, and Rinaldo did not look at her until his resolve was firm.

He said to Wilfrid in her presence, "Swear that you will reveal nothing
of this house."

Wilfrid spiritedly pronounced his gladdest oath.

"It is dark in the streets," Rinaldo addressed the woman.  "Lead us out,
for the hour has come when I must go."

She clutched her hands below her bosom to stop its great heaving, and
stood as one smitten by the sudden hearing of her sentence.  The sight
was pitiful, for her face scarcely changed; the anguish was
expressionless.  Rinaldo pointed sternly to the door.

"Stay," Wilfrid interposed.  "That wretch may be in the house, and will
kill her."

"She is not thinking of herself," said Rinaldo.

"But, stay," Wilfrid repeated.  The woman's way of taking breath shocked
and enfeebled him.

Rinaldo threw the door open.

"Must you?  must you?" her voice broke.

"Waste no words."

"You have not seen a priest?"

"I go to him."

"You die."

"What is death to me?  Be dumb, that I may think well of you till my last
moment."

"What is death tome?  Be dumb!"

She had spoken with her eyes fixed on his couch.  It was the figure of
one upon the scaffold, knitting her frame to hold up a strangled heart.

"What is death to me?  Be dumb!" she echoed him many times on the rise
and fall of her breathing, and turned to get him in her eyes.  "Be dumb!
be dumb!"  She threw her arms wide out, and pressed his temples and
kissed him.

The scene was like hot iron to Wilfrid's senses.  When he heard her
coolly asking him for his handkerchief to blind him, he had forgotten the
purpose, and gave it mechanically.  Nothing was uttered throughout the
long mountings and descent of stairs.  They passed across one corridor
where the walls told of a humming assemblage of men within.  A current of
keen air was the first salute Wilfrid received from the world above; his
handkerchief was loosened; he stood foolish as a blind man, weak as a
hospital patient, on the steps leading into a small square of visible
darkness, and heard the door shut behind him.  Rinaldo led him from the
court to the street.

"Farewell," he said.  "Get some housing instantly; avoid exposure to the
air.  I leave you."

Wilfrid spent his tongue in a fruitless and meaningless remonstrance.
"And you?" he had the grace to ask.

"I go straight to find a priest.  Farewell."

So they parted.




CHAPTER XXX

EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR

THE FIVE DAYS OF MILAN

The same hand which brought Rinaldo's letter to his brother delivered a
message from Barto Rizzo, bidding Angelo to start at once and head a
stout dozen or so of gallant Swiss.  The letter and the message appeared
to be grievous contradictions: one was evidently a note of despair, while
the other sang like a trumpet.  But both were of a character to draw him
swiftly on to Milan.  He sent word to his Lugano friends, naming a
village among the mountains between Como and Varese, that they might join
him there if they pleased.

Toward nightfall, on the nineteenth of the month, he stood with a small
band of Ticinese and Italian fighting lads two miles distant from the
city.  There was a momentary break in long hours of rain; the air was
full of inexplicable sounds, that floated over them like a toning of
multitudes wailing and singing fitfully behind a swaying screen.  They
bent their heads.  At intervals a sovereign stamp on the pulsation of the
uproar said, distinct as a voice in the ear--Cannon.  "Milan's alive!"
Angelo cried, and they streamed forward under the hurry of stars and
scud, till thumping guns and pattering musket-shots, the long big boom of
surgent hosts, and the muffled voluming and crash of storm-bells,
proclaimed that the insurrection was hot.  A rout of peasants bearing
immense ladders met them, and they joined with cheers, and rushed to the
walls.  As yet no gate was in the possession of the people.  The walls
showed bayonet-points: a thin edge of steel encircled a pit of fire.
Angelo resolved to break through at once.  The peasants hesitated, but
his own men were of one mind to follow, and, planting his ladder in the
ditch, he rushed up foremost.  The ladder was full short; he called out
in German to a soldier to reach his hand down, and the butt-end of a
musket was dropped, which he grasped, and by this aid sprang to the
parapet, and was seized.  "Stop," he said, "there's a fellow below with
my brandy-flask and portmanteau."  The soldiers were Italians; they
laughed, and hauled away at man after man of the mounting troop, calling
alternately "brandy-flask!--portmanteau!"  as each one raised a head
above the parapet.  "The signor has a good supply of spirits and
baggage," they remarked.  He gave them money for porterage, saying, "You
see, the gates are held by that infernal people, and a quiet traveller
must come over the walls.  Viva l'Italia! who follows me?"  He carried
away three of those present.  The remainder swore that they and their
comrades would be on his side on the morrow.  Guided by the new accession
to his force, Angelo gained the streets.  All shots had ceased; the
streets were lighted with torches and hand-lamps; barricades were up
everywhere, like a convulsion of the earth.  Tired of receiving
challenges and mounting the endless piles of stones, he sat down at the
head of the Corso di Porta Nuova, and took refreshments from the hands
of ladies.  The house-doors were all open.  The ladies came forth bearing
wine and minestra, meat and bread, on trays; and quiet eating and
drinking, and fortifying of the barricades, went on.  Men were rubbing
their arms and trying rusty gun-locks.  Few of them had not seen Barto
Rizzo that day; but Angelo could get no tidings of his brother.  He slept
on a door-step, dreaming that he was blown about among the angels of
heaven and hell by a glorious tempest.  Near morning an officer of
volunteers came to inspect the barricade defences.  Angelo knew him by
sight; it was Luciano Romara.  He explained the position of the opposing
forces.  The Marshal, he said, was clearly no street-fighter.  Estimating
the army under his orders in Milan at from ten to eleven thousand men of
all arms, it was impossible for him to guard the gates and then walls,
and at the same time fight the city.  Nor could he provision his troops.
Yesterday the troops had made one: charge and done mischief, but they had
immediately retired.  "And if they take to cannonading us to-day, we
shall know what that means," Romara concluded.  Angelo wanted to join
him.  "No, stay here," said Romara.  "I think you are a man who won't
give ground."  He had not seen either Rinaldo or Ammiani, but spoke of
both as certain to be rescued.

Rain and cannon filled the weary space of that day.  Some of the
