in the Netherlands; and Coligny was as ardent as a youth in the cause,
hoping at once to aid his brethren, to free the young King from evil
influences, and to strike one good stroke against the old national
enemy. He talked eagerly to Sidney of alliances with England, and then
lamented over the loss of so promising a youth as young Ribaumont to the
Reformed cause in France. If the marriage with the heiress could have
taken effect, he would have obtained estates near enough to some of
the main Huguenot strongholds to be very important, and these would now
remain under the power of Narcisse de Ribaumont, a determined ally of
the Guise faction. It was a pity, but the Admiral could not blame the
youth for obeying the wish of his guardian grandfather; and he owned,
with a sigh, that England was a more peaceful land than his own beloved
country. Berenger was a little nettled at this implication, and began to
talk of joining the French standard in a campaign in their present home
and described the conversation, Walsingham said,--

'The Admiral's favourite project! He would do wisely not to brag of it
so openly. The King of Spain has too many in his interest in this place
not to be warned, and to be thus further egged on to compass the ruin of
Coligny.'

'I should have thought,' said Sidney. 'that nothing could add to his
hatred of the Reformed.'

'Scarcely,' said Walsingham; 'save that it is they who hinder the Duke
of Guise from being a good Frenchman, and a foe to Spain.'

Politics had not developed themselves in Berenger's mind, and he
listened inattentively while Walsingham talked over with Sidney the
state of parties in France, where natural national enmity to Spain was
balanced by the need felt by the Queen-mother of the support of that
great Roman Catholic power against the Huguenots; whom Walsingham
believed her to dread and hate less for their own sake than from the
fear of loss of influence over her son. He believed Charles IX. himself
to have much leaning towards the Reformed, but the late victories has
thrown the whole court entirely into the power of the Guises, the truly
unscrupulous partisans of Rome. They were further inflamed against the
Huguenots by the assassination of the last Duke of Guise, and by the
violences that had been committed by some of the Reformed party, in
especial a massacre of prisoners at _Nerac_.

Sidney exclaimed that the Huguenots had suffered far worse cruelties.

'That is true,' replied Sir Francis, 'but, my young friend, you will
find, in all matters of reprisals, that a party has no memory for what
it may commit, only for what it may receive.'

The conversation was interrupted by an invitation to the Ambassador's
family and guests to a tilting-match and subsequent ball at the Louvre.
In the first Berenger did his part with credit; to the second he went
feeling full of that strange attraction of repulsion. He knew gentlemen
enough in Coligny's suite for it to be likely that he might remain
unperceived among them, and he knew this would be prudent, but he found
himself unexpectedly near the ranks of ladies, and smile and gesture
absolutely drew him towards his semi-spouse, so that he had no
alternative but to lead her out to dance.

The stately measure was trod in silence as usual, but he felt the dark
eyes studying him all the time. However, he could bear it better now
that the deed was done, and she had voluntarily made him less to her
than any gallant parading or mincing about the room.

'So you bear the pearls, sir?' she said, as the dance finished.

'The only heirloom I shall take with me,' he said.

'Is a look at them too great a favour to ask from their jealous
guardian?' she asked.

He smiled, half ashamed of his own annoyance at being obliged to place
them in her hands. He was sure she would try to cajole him out of them,
and by way of asserting his property in them he did not detach them from
the band of his black velvet cap, but gave it with them into her hand.
She looked at each one, and counted them wistfully.

'Seventeen!' she said;' and how beautiful! I never saw them so near
before. They are so becoming to that fair cheek that I suppose no offer
from my--my uncle, on our behalf, would induce you to part with them?'

An impulse of open-handed gallantry would have made him answer, 'No
offer from your uncle, but a simple request from you;' but he thought in
time of the absurdity of returning without them, and merely answered,
'I have no right to yield them, fair lady. They are the witness to my
forefather's fame and prowess.'

'Yes, sir, and to those of mine also,' she replied. 'And you would take
them over to the enemy from whom that prowess extorted them?'

'The country which honoured and rewarded that prowess!' replied
Berenger.

She looked at him with an interrogative glance of surprise at the
readiness of his answer; then, with half a sigh, said, 'There are your
pearls, sir; I cannot establish our right, though I verily believe it
was the cause of our last quarrel;' and she smiled archly.

'I believe it was,' he said, gravely; but added, in the moment of relief
at recovering the precious heirloom, 'though it was Diane who inspired
you to seize upon them.'

'Ah! poor Diane! you sometimes recollect her then? If I remember right,
you used to agree with her better than with your little spouse, cousin!'

'If I quarrelled with her less, I liked her less,' answered
Berenger--who, since the act of separation, had not been so guarded in
his demeanour, and began to give way to his natural frankness.

'Indeed! Diane would be less gratified than I ought to be. And why, may
I ask?'

'Diane was more caressing, but she had no truth.'

'Truth! that was what _feu_ M. le Baron ever talked of; what Huguenots
weary one with.'

'And the only thing worth seeking, the real pearl,' said Berenger,
'without which all else is worthless.'

'Ah!' she said, 'who would have thought that soft, youthful face could
be so severe! You would never forgive a deceit?'

'Never,' he said, with the crystal hardness of youth; 'or rather I might
forgive; I could never esteem.'

'What a bare, rude world yours must be,' she said, shivering. 'And no
weak ones in it! Only the strong can dare to be true.'

'Truth is strength!' said Berenger. 'For example: I see yonder a face
without bodily strength, perhaps, but with perfect candour.'

'Ah! some Huguenot girl of Madame Catherine's, no doubt--from the depths
of Languedoc, and dressed like a fright.'

'No, no; the young girl behind the pale, yellow-haired lady.'

'Comment, Monsieur. Do you not yet know the young Queen?'

'But who is the young demoiselle!--she with the superb black eyes, and
the ruby rose in her black hair?'

'Take care, sir, do you not know I have still a right to be jealous?'
she said, blushing, bridling, and laughing.

But this pull on the cords made him the more resolved; he would not be
turned from his purpose. 'Who is she?' he repeated; 'have I ever seen
her before? I am sure I remember that innocent look of _espieglerie_.'

'You may see it on any child's face fresh out of the convent; it does
not last a month!' was the still displeased, rather jealous answer.
'That little thing--I believe they call her Nid-de-Merle--she has only
just been brought from her nunnery to wait on the young Queen. Ah! your
gaze was perilous, it is bringing on you one of the jests of Madame
Marguerite.'

With laughter and gaiety, a troop of gentlemen descended on M. de
Ribaumont, and told him that Madame Marguerite desired that he should be
presented to her. The princess was standing by her pale sister-in-law,
Elizabeth of Austria, who looked grave and annoyed at the mischievous
mirth flashing in Marguerite's dark eyes.

'M. de Ribaumont,' said the latter, her very neck heaving with
suppressed fun, 'I see I cannot do you a greater favour than by giving
you Mademoiselle de Nid-de-Merle for your partner.'

Berenger was covered with confusion to find that he had been guilty of
such a fixed stare as to bring all this upon the poor girl. He feared
that his vague sense of recognition had made his gaze more open than he
knew, and he was really and deeply ashamed of this as his worst act of
provincial ill-breeding.

Poor little convent maid, with crimson cheeks, flashing eyes, panting
bosom, and a neck evidently aching with proud dignity and passion, she
received his low bow with a sweeping curtsey, as lofty as her little
person would permit.

His cheeks burnt like fire, and he would have found words to apologize,
but she cut him short by saying, hastily and low, 'Not a word, Monsieur!
Let us go through it at once. No one shall make game of us.'

He hardly durst look at her again; but as he went through his own
elaborate paces he knew that the little creature opposite was swimming,
bending, turning, bounding with the fluttering fierceness of an angry
little bird, and that the superb eyes were casting flashes on him that
seemed to carry him back to days of early boyhood.

Once he caught a mortified, pleading, wistful glance that made him feel
as if he had inflicted a cruel injury by his thoughtless gaze, and he
resolved to plead the sense of recognition in excuse; but no sooner
was the performance over than she prevented all conversation by saying,
'Lead me back at once to the Queen, sir; she is about to retire.' They
were already so near that there was no time to say anything; he could
only hold as lightly as possible the tiny fingers that he felt burning
and quivering in his hand, and then, after bringing her to the side of
the chair of state, he was forced to release her with the mere whisper
of 'Pardon, Mademoiselle;' and the request was not replied to, save by
the additional stateliness of her curtsey.

It was already late, and the party was breaking up; but his head
and heart were still in a whirl when he found himself seated in the
ambassadorial coach, hearing Lady Walsingham's well-pleased rehearsal of
all the compliments she had received on the distinguished appearance
of both her young guests. Sidney, as the betrothed of her daughter, was
property of her own; but she also exulted in the praises of the young
Lord de Ribaumont, as proving the excellence of the masters whom she
had recommended to remove the rustic clownishness of which he had been
accused.

'Nay,' said Sir Francis; 'whoever called him too clownish for court
spake with design.'

The brief sentence added to Berenger's confused sense of being in a
mist of false play. Could his kinsman be bent on keeping him from
court? Could Narcisse be jealous of him? Mademoiselle de Ribaumont was
evidently inclined to seek him, and her cousin might easily think her
lands safer in his absence. He would have been willing to hold aloof as
much as his uncle and cousin could wish, save for an angry dislike to
being duped and cajoled; and, moreover, a strong curiosity to hear and
see more of that little passionate bird, fresh from the convent cage.
Her gesture and her eyes irresistibly carried him back to old times,
though whether to an angry blackbird in the yew-tree alleys at Leurre,
or to the eager face that had warned him to save his father, he could
not remember with any distinctness. At any rate, he was surprised to
find himself thinking so little in comparison about the splendid beauty
and winning manners of his discarded spouse, though he quite believed
that, now her captive was beyond her grasp, she was disposed to catch
at him again, and try to retain him, or, as his titillated vanity might
whisper, his personal graces might make her regret the family resolution
which she had obeyed.




CHAPTER VI. FOULLY COZENED



      I was the more deceived.--HAMLET


The unhappy Charles IX. had a disposition that in good hands might have
achieved great nobleness; and though cruelly bound and trained to evil,
was no sooner allowed to follow its natural bent than it reached out
eagerly towards excellence. At this moment, it was his mother's policy
to appear to leave the ascendancy to the Huguenot party, and he was
therefore allowed to contract friendships which deceived the intended
victims the more completely, because his admiration and attachment were
spontaneous and sincere. Philip Sidney's varied accomplishment and pure
lofty character greatly attracted the young King, who had leant on his
arm conversing during great part of the ball, and the next morning
sent a royal messenger to invite the two young gentlemen to a part at
pall-mall in the Tuileries gardens.

Pall-mall was either croquet or its nearest relative, and was so
much the fashion that games were given in order to keep up political
influence, perhaps, because the freedom of a garden pastime among groves
and bowers afforded opportunities for those seductive arts on which
Queen Catherine placed so much dependence. The formal gardens, with
their squares of level turf and clipped alleys, afforded excellent scope
both for players and spectators, and numerous games had been set on
foot, from all of which, however, Berenger contrived to exclude himself,
in his restless determination to find out the little Demoiselle de
Nid-de-Merle, or, at least, to discover whether any intercourse in early
youth accounted for his undefined sense of remembrance.

He interrogated the first disengaged person he could find, but it was
only the young Abbe de Mericour, who had been newly brought up from
Dauphine by his elder brother to solicit a benefice, and who knew
nobody. To him ladies were only bright phantoms such as his books had
taught him to regard like the temptations of St. Anthony, but whom he
actually saw treated with as free admiration by the ecclesiastic as by
the layman.

Suddenly a clamour of voices arose on the other side of the
closely-clipped wall of limes by which the two youths were walking.
There were the clear tones of a young maiden expostulating in indignant
distress, and the bantering, indolent determination of a male annoyer.

'Hark!' exclaimed Berenger; 'this must be seen to.'

'Have a care,' returned Mericour; 'I have heard that a man needs look
twice are meddling.'

Scarcely hearing, Berenger strode on as he had done at the last village
wake, when he had rescued Cis of the Down from the impertinence of a
Dorchester scrivener. It was a like case, he saw, when breaking
through the arch of clipped limed he beheld the little Demoiselle de
Nid-de-Merle, driven into a corner and standing at bay, with glowing
cheeks, flashing eyes, and hands clasped over her breast, while a young
man, dressed in the extreme of foppery, was assuring her that she was
the only lady who had not granted him a token--that he could not allow
such _pensionnaire_ airs, and that now he had caught her he would have
his revenge, and win her rose-coloured break-knot. Another gentleman
stood by, laughing, and keeping guard in the walk that led to the more
frequented part of the gardens.

'Hold!' thundered Berenger.

The assailant had just mastered the poor girl's hand, but she took
advantage of his surprise to wrench it away and gather herself up as
for a spring, but the Abbe in dismay, the attendant in anger, cried out,
'Stay--it is Monsieur.'

'Monsieur; be he who he may,' exclaimed Berenger, 'no honest man can see
a lady insulted.'

'Are you mad? It is Monsieur the Duke of Anjou,' said Mericour, pouncing
on his arm.

'Shall we have him to the guardhouse?' added the attendant, coming up on
the other side; but Henri de Valois waved them both back, and burst
into a derisive laugh. 'No, no; do you not see who it is? Monsieur the
English Baron still holds the end of the halter. His sale is not yet
made. Come away, D'O, he will soon have enough on his hands without
us. Farewell, fair lady, another time you will be free of your jealous
giant.'

So saying, the Duke of Anjou strolled off, feigning indifference and
contempt, and scarcely heeding that he had been traversed in one of the
malicious adventures which he delighted to recount in public before the
discomfited victim herself, often with shameful exaggeration.

The girl clasped her hands over her brow with a gesture of dismay, and
cried, 'Oh! if you have only not touched your sword.'

'Let me have the honour of reconducting you, Mademoiselle,' said
Berenger, offering his hand; but after the first sigh of relief, a
tempestuous access seized her. She seemed about to dash away his
hand, her bosom swelled with resentment, and with a voice striving for
dignity, though choked with strangled tears, she exclaimed, 'No, indeed!
Had not M. le Baron forsaken me, I had never been thus treated!' and her
eyes flashed through their moisture.

'Eustacie! You are Eutacie!'

'Whom would you have me to be otherwise? I have the honour to wish M. le
Baron a good morning.'

'Eustacie! Stay! Hear me! It concerns my honour. I see it is you--but
whom have I seen? Who was she?' he cried, half wild with dismay and
confusion. 'Was it Diane?'

'You have seen and danced with Diane de Ribaumont,' answered Eustacie,
still coldly; 'but what of that? Let me go, Monsieur; you have cast me
off already.'

'I! when all this has been of your own seeking?'

'Mine?' cried Eustacie, panting with the struggle between her dignity
and her passionate tears. 'I meddled not. I heard that M. le Baron was
gone to a strange land, and had written to break off old ties.' Her face
was in a flame, and her efforts for composure absolute pain.

'I!' again exclaimed Berenger. 'The first letter came from your uncle,
declaring that it was your wish!' And as her face changed rapidly, 'Then
it was not true! He has not had your consent?'

'What! would I hold to one who despised me--who came here and never even
asked to see this hated spouse!'

I did! I entreated to see you. I would not sign the application
till--Oh, there has been treachery! And have they made you too sign it!'

When they showed me your name they were welcome to mine.'

Berenger struck his forehead with wrath and perplexity, then cried,
joyfully, 'It will not stand for moment. So foul a cheat can be at once
exposed. Eutacie, you know--you understand, that it was not you but
Diane whom I saw and detested; and no wonder, when she was acting such a
cruel treason!'

'Oh no, Diane would never so treat me,' cried Eustacie. 'I see how it
was! You did not know that my father was latterly called Marquis de
Nid-de-Merle, and when they brought me here, they WOULD call me after
him: they said a maid of honour must be Demoiselle, and my uncle said
there was only one way in which I could remain Madame de Ribaumont! And
the name must have deceived you. Thou wast always a great dull boy,' she
added, with a sudden assumption of childish intimacy that annihilated
the nine years since their parting.

'Had I seen thee, I had not mistaken for an instant. This little face
stirred my heart; hers repelled me. And she deceived me wittingly,
Eustacie, for I asked after her by name.'

'Ah, she wished to spare my embarrassment. And then her brother must
have dealt with her.'

'I see,' exclaimed Berenger, 'I am to be palmed off thus that thou
mayest be reserved for Narcisse. Tell me, Eustacie, wast thou willing?'

'I hate Narcisse!' she cried. 'But oh, I am lingering too long. Monsieur
will make some hateful tale! I never fell into his way before, my Queen
and Madame la Comtesse are so careful. Only to-day, as I was attending
her alone, the King came and gave her his arm, and I had to drop behind.
I must find her; I shall be missed,' she added, in sudden alarm. 'Oh,
what will they say?'

'No blame for being with thy husband,' he answered, clasping her hand.
'Thou art mine henceforth. I will soon cut our way out of the web thy
treacherous kindred have woven. Meantime---'

'Hush! There are voices,' cried Eustacie in terror, and, guided by
something he could not discern, she fled with the swiftness of a bird
down the alley. Following, with the utmost speed that might not bear
the appearance of pursuit, he found that on coming to the turn she
had moderated her pace, and was more tranquilly advancing to a bevy
of ladies, who sat perched on the stone steps like great butterflies
sunning themselves, watching the game, and receiving the attentions of
their cavaliers. He saw her absorbed into the group, and then began to
prowl round it, in the alleys, in a tumult of amazement and indignation.
He had been shamefully deceived and cheated, and justice he would have!
He had been deprived of a thing of his own, and he would assert his
right. He had been made to injure and disown the creature he was bound
to protect, and he must console her and compensate to her, were it only
to redeem his honour. He never even thought whether he loved her;
he merely felt furious at the wrong he had suffered and been made to
commit, and hotly bent on recovering what belonged to him. He might even
have plunged down among the ladies and claimed her as his wife, if the
young Abbe de Mericour, who was two years older than he, and far less
of a boy for his years, had not joined him in his agitated walk. He then
learnt that all the court knew that the daughter of the late Marquis
de Nid-de-Merle, Comte de Ribaumont, was called by his chief title, but
that her marriage to himself had been forgotten by some and unknown to
others, and thus that the first error between the cousins had not been
wonderful in a stranger, since the Chevalier's daughter had always been
Mdlle. de Ribaumont. The error once made, Berenger's distaste to Diane
had been so convenient that it had been carefully encouraged, and the
desire to keep him at a distance from court and throw him into the
background was accounted for. The Abbe was almost as indignant as
Berenger, and assured him both of his sympathy and his discretion.

'I see no need for discretion,' said Berenger. 'I shall claim my wife in
the face of the sun.'

'Take counsel first, I entreat,' exclaimed Mericour. 'The Ribaumonts
have much influence with the Guise family, and now you have offended
Monsieur.'

'Ah! Where are those traitorous kinsmen?' cried Berenger.

'Fortunately all are gone on an expedition with the Queen-mother.
You will have time to think. I have heard my brother say no one ever
prospered who offended the meanest follower of the house of Lorraine.'

'I do not want prosperity, I only want my wife. I hope I shall never see
Paris and its deceivers again.'

'Ah! But is it true that you have applied to have the marriage annulled
at Rome?'

'We were both shamefully deceivers. That can be nothing.'

'A decree of his Holiness: you a Huguenot; she an heiress. All is
against you. My friend, be cautions, exclaimed the young ecclesiastic,
alarmed by his passionate gestures. 'To break forth now and be accused
of brawling in the palace precincts would be fatal--fatal--most fatal!'

'I am as calm as possible,' returned Berenger. 'I mean to act most
reasonably. I shall stand before the King and tell him openly how I have
been tamperes with, demanding my wife before the whole court.'

'Long before you could get so far the ushers would have dragged you away
for brawling, or for maligning an honour-able gentlemen. You would have
to finish your speech in the Bastille, and it would be well if even your
English friends could get you out alive.'

'Why, what a place is this!' began Berenger; but again Mericour
entreated him to curb himself; and his English education had taught
him to credit the house of Guide with so much mysterious power and
wickedness, that he allowed himself to be silenced, and promised to take
no open measures till he had consulted the Ambassador.

'He could not obtain another glimpse of Eustacie, and the hours passed
tardily till the break up of the party. Charles could scarcely release
Sidney from his side, and only let him go on condition that he should
join the next day in an expedition to the hunting chateau of Montpipeau,
to which the King seemed to look forward as a great holiday and
breathing time.

When at length the two youths did return, Sir Francis Walsingham was
completely surprised by the usually tractable, well-behaved stripling,
whose praises he had been writing to his old friend, bursting in on him
with the outcry, 'Sir, sir, I entreat your counsel! I have been foully
cozened.'

'Of how much?' said Sir Francis, in a tone of reprobation.

'Of my wife. Of mine honour. Sir, your Excellency, I crave pardon, if I
spoke too hotly,' said Berenger, collecting himself; 'but it is enough
to drive a man to frenzy.'

'Sit down, my Lord de Ribaumont. Take breath, and let me know what is
this coil. What hath thus moved him, Mr. Sidney?'

'It is as he says, sir,' replied Sidney, who had beard all as they
returned; 'he has been greatly wronged. The Chevalier de Ribaumont not
only writ to propose the separation without the lady's knowledge, but
imposed his own daughter on our friend as the wife he had not seen since
infancy.'

'There, sir,' broke forth Berenger; 'surely if I claim mine own in the
face of day, no man can withhold her from me!'

'Hold!' said Sir Francis. 'What mean this passion, young sir? Methought
you came hither convinced that both the religion and the habits in which
the young lady had been bred up rendered your infantine contract most
unsuitable. What hath fallen out to make this change in your mind?'

'That I was cheated, sir. The lady who palmed herself off on me as my
wife was a mere impostor, the Chevalier's own daughter!'

'That may be; but what known you of this other lady? Has she been bred
up in faith or manners such as your parents would have your wife?'

'She is my wife,' reiterated Berenger. 'My faith is plighted to her.
That is enough for me.'

Sir Francis made a gesture of despair. 'He has seen her, I suppose,'
said he to Sidney.

'Yes truly, sir,' answered Berenger; 'and found that she had been as
greatly deceived as myself.'

'Then mutual consent is wanting,' said the statesman, gravely musing.

'That is even as I say,' began Berenger, but Walsingham help up his
hand, and desired that he would make his full statement in the presence
of his tutor. Then sounding a little whistle, the Ambassador despatched
a page to request the attendance of Mr. Adderley, and recommended young
Ribaumont in the meantime to compose himself.

Used to being under authority as Berenger was, the somewhat severe tone
did much to allay his excitement, and remind him that right and reason
were so entirely on his side, that he had only to be cool and rational
to make them prevail. He was thus able to give a collected and coherent
account of his discovery that the part of his wife had been assumed by
her cousin Diane, and that the signature of both the young pair to the
application to the Pope had been obtained on false pretences. That he
had, as Sidney said, been foully cozened, in both senses of the word,
was as clear as daylight; but he was much angered and disappointed to
find that neither the Ambassador nor his tutor could see that Eustacie's
worthiness was proved by the iniquity of her relation, or that any one
of the weighty reasons for the expediency of dissolving the marriage was
remove. The whole affair had been in such good train a little before,
that Mr. Adderley was much distressed that it should thus have been
crossed, and thought the new phase of affairs would be far from
acceptable at Combe Walwyn.

'Whatever is just and honourable must be acceptable to my grandfather,'
said Berenger.

'Even so,' said Walsingham; 'but it were well to consider whether
justice and honour require you to overthrow the purpose wherewith he
sent you hither.'

'Surely, sir, justice and require me to fulfil a contract to which the
other party is constant,' said Berenger, feeling very wise and prudent
for calling that wistful, indignant creature the other party.

'That is also true,' said the Ambassador, 'provided she be constant; but
you own that she signed the requisition for the dissolution.'

'She did so, but under the same deception as myself, and further
mortified and aggrieved at my seeming faithlessness.'

'So it may easily be represented,' muttered Walsingham.

'How, sir?' cried Berenger, impetuously; 'do you doubt her truth?'

'Heaven forefend,' said Sir Francis, 'that I should discuss any
fair lady's sincerity! The question is how far you are bound. Have I
understood you that you are veritably wedded, not by a mere contract of
espousal?'

'Berenger could produce no documents, for they had been left at Chateau
Leurre, and on his father's death the Chevalier had claimed the custody
of them; but he remembered enough of the ceremonial to prove that the
wedding had been a veritable one, and that only the papal intervention
could annul it.

Indeed an Englishman, going by English law, would own no power in the
Pope, nor any one on earth, to sever the sacred tie of wedlock; but
French courts of law would probably ignore the mode of application, and
would certainly endeavour to separate between a Catholic and a heretic.

'I am English, sir, in heart and faith,' said Berenger, earnestly. 'Look
upon me as such, and tell me, am I married or single at this moment?'

'Married assuredly. More's the pity,' said Sir Francis.

'And no law of God or man divides us without our own consent.' There was
no denying that the mutual consent of the young pair at their present
age was all that was wanting to complete the inviolability of their
marriage contract.

Berenger was indeed only eighteen, and Eustacie more than a year
younger, but there was nothing in their present age to invalidate their
marriage, for persons of their rank were usually wedded quite as
young or younger. Walsingham was only concerned at his old friend's
disappointment, and at the danger of the young man running headlong into
a connection probably no more suitable than that with Diane de Ribaumont
would have been. But it was not convenient to argue against the
expediency of a man's loving his own wife; and when Berenger boldly
declared he was not talking of love but of justice, it was only possible
to insist that he should pause and see where true justice lay.

And thus the much-perplexed Ambassador broke up the conference with his
hot and angry young guest.

'And Mistress Lucy---?' sighed Mr. Adderley, in rather an _inapropos_
fashion it must be owned; but then he had been fretted beyond endurance
by his pupil striding up and down his room, reviling Diane, and
describing Eustacie, while he was trying to write these uncomfortable
tidings to Lord Walwyn.

'Lucy! What makes you bring her up to me?' exclaimed Berenger. 'Little
Dolly would be as much to the purpose!'

'Only, sir, no resident at Hurst Walwyn could fail to know that has been
planned and desired.'

'Pshaw!' cries Berenger; 'have you not heard that it was a mere figment,
and that I could scarce have wedded Lucy safely, even had this matter
gone as you wish? This is the luckiest chance that could have befallen
her.'

'That may be,' said Mr. Adderley; 'I wish she may think so--sweet young
lady!'

'I tell you, Mr. Adderley, you should know better! Lucy has more sense.
My aunt, whom she follows more than any other creature, ever silenced
the very sport or semblance of love passages between us even as
children, by calling them unseemly in one wedded as I am. Brother and
sister we have ever been, and have loved as such--ay, and shall! I know
of late some schemes have crossed my mother's mind---'

'Yea, and that of others.'

'But they have not ruffled Lucy's quiet nature--trust me! And for the
rest? What doth she need me in comparison of this poor child? She--like
a bit of her own gray lavender in the shadiest nook of the walled
garden, tranquil there--sure not to be taken there, save to company
with fine linen in some trim scented coffer, whilst this fresh glowing
rosebud has grown up pure and precious in the very midst of the foulest
corruption Christendom can show, and if I snatch her not from it, I,
the innocence and sweetness, what is to be her fate? The very pity of a
