"Now I will return to the banqueting hall," said Ani, after a fete
moments of reflection.  "But I must ask you one thing more.  I spoke to
you of a secret that will put Paaker into our power.  The old sorceress
Hekt, who has taken charge of the paraschites' wife and grandchild, knows
all about it.  Send some policeguards over there, and let her be brought
over here as a prisoner; I will examine her myself, and so can question
her without exciting observation."

Ameni at once sent off a party of soldiers, and then quietly ordered a
faithful attendant to light up the so-called audience-chamber, and to put
a seat for him in an adjoining room.




CHAPTER XXX.

While the banquet was going forward at the temple, and Ameni's messengers
were on their way to the valley of the kings' tombs, to waken up old
Hekt, a furious storm of hot wind came up from the southwest, sweeping
black clouds across the sky, and brown clouds of dust across the earth.
It bowed the slender palm-trees as an archer bends his bow, tore the
tentpegs up on the scene of the festival, whirled the light tent-cloths
up in the air, drove them like white witches through the dark night, and
thrashed the still surface of the Nile till its yellow waters swirled and
tossed in waves like a restless sea.

Paaker had compelled his trembling slaves to row him across the stream;
several times the boat was near being swamped, but he had seized the helm
himself with his uninjured hand, and guided it firmly and surely, though
the rocking of the boat kept his broken hand in great and constant pain.
After a few ineffectual attempts he succeeded in landing.  The storm had
blown out the lanterns at the masts--the signal lights for which his
people looked--and he found neither servants nor torch-bearers on the
bank, so he struggled through the scorching wind as far as the gate of
his house.  His big dog had always been wont to announce his return home
to the door-keeper with joyful barking; but to-night the boatmen long
knocked in vain at the heavy doer.  When at last he entered the court-
yard, he found all dark, for the wind had extinguished the lanterns and
torches, and there were no lights but in the windows of his mother's
rooms.

The dogs in their open kennels now began to make themselves heard, but
their tones were plaintive and whining, for the storm had frightened the
beasts; their howling cut the pioneer to the heart, for it reminded him
of the poor slain Descher, whose deep voice he sadly missed; and when he
went into his own room he was met by a wild cry of lamentation from the
Ethiopian slave, for the dog which he had trained for Paaker's father,
and which he had loved.

The pioneer threw himself on a seat, and ordered some water to be
brought, that he might cool his aching hand in it, according to the
prescription of Nebsecht.

As soon as the old man saw the broken fingers, he gave another yell of
woe, and when Paaker ordered him to cease he asked:

"And is the man still alive who did that, and who killed Descher?"

Paaker nodded, and while he held his hand in the cooling water he looked
sullenly at the ground.  He felt miserable, and he asked himself why the
storm had not swamped the boat, and the Nile had not swallowed him.
Bitterness and rage filled his breast, and he wished he were a child,
and might cry.  But his mood soon changed, his breath came quickly, his
breast heaved, and an ominous light glowed in his eyes.  He was not
thinking of his love, but of the revenge that was even dearer to him.

"That brood of Rameses!"  he muttered.  "I will sweep them all away
together--the king, and Mena, and those haughty princes, and many more--
I know how.  Only wait, only wait!"  and he flung up his right fist with
a threatening gesture.

The door opened at this instant, and his mother entered the room; the
raging of the storm had drowned the sound of her steps, and as she
approached her revengeful son, she called his name in horror at the mad
wrath which was depicted in his countenance.  Paaker started, and then
said with apparent composure:

"Is it you, mother?  It is near morning, and it is better to be asleep
than awake in such an hour."

"I could not rest in my rooms," answered Setchem.  "The storm howled so
wildly, and I am so anxious, so frightfully unhappy--as I was before your
father died."

Then stay with me," said Paaker affectionately, and lie down on my
couch."

"I did not come here to sleep," replied Setchem.  "I am too unhappy at
all that happened to you on the larding-steps, it is frightful!  No, no,
my son, it is not about your smashed hand, though it grieves me to see
you in pain; it is about the king, and his anger when he hears of the
quarrel.  He favors you less than he did your lost father, I know it
well.  But how wildly you smile, how wild you looked when I carne in!
It went through my bones and marrow."

Both were silent for a time, and listened to the furious raging of the
storm.  At last Setchem spoke.  "There is something else," she said,
"which disturbs my mind.  I cannot forget the poet who spoke at the
festival to-day, young Pentaur.  His figure, his face, his movements, nay
his very voice, are exactly like those of your father at the time when he
was young, and courted me.  It is as if the Gods were fain to see the
best man that they ever took to themselves, walk before them a second
time upon earth."

"Yes, my lady," said the black slave; "no mortal eye ever saw such a
likeness.  I saw him fighting in front of the paraschites' cottage, and
he was more like my dead master than ever.  He swung the tent-post over
his head, as my lord used to swing his battle-axe."

"Be silent,"  cried  Paaker, "and  get out-idiot!  The priest is like my
father; I grant it, mother; but he is an insolent fellow, who offended me
grossly, and with whom I have to reckon--as with many others."

"How violent you are!"  interrupted his mother, "and how full of
bitterness and hatred.  Your father was so sweet-tempered, and kind to
everybody."

"Perhaps they are kind to me?"  retorted Paaker with a short laugh.
"Even the Immortals spite me, and throw thorns in my path.  But I will
push them aside with my own hand, and will attain what I desire without
the help of the Gods and overthrow all that oppose me."

"We cannot blow away a feather without the help of the Immortals,"
answered Setchem.  "So your father used to say, who was a very different
man both in body and mind from you!  I tremble before you this evening,
and at the curses you have uttered against the children of your lord and
sovereign, your father's best friend."

"But my enemy," shouted Paaker.  "You will get nothing from me but
curses.  And the brood of Rameses shall learn whether your husband's
son will let himself be ill-used and scorned without revenging him self.
I will fling them into an abyss, and I will laugh when I see them
writhing in the sand at my feet!"

"Fool!"  cried Setchem, beside herself.  "I am but a woman, and have
often blamed myself for being soft and weak; but as sure as I am faithful
to your dead father--who you are no more like than a bramble is like a
palm-tree--so surely will I tear my love for you out of my heart if you
--if you--Now I see! now I know!  Answer me-murderer!  Where are the
seven arrows with the wicked words which used to hang here?  Where are
the arrows  on which you had scrawled 'Death to Mena?'"

With these words Setchem breathlessly started forward, but the pioneer
drew back as she confronted him, as in his youthful days when she
threatened to punish him for some misdemeanor.  She followed him up,
caught him by the girdle, and in a hoarse voice repeated her question.
He stood still, snatched her hand angrily from his belt, and said
defiantly:

"I have put them in my quiver--and not for mere play.  Now you know."

Incapable of words, the maddened woman once more raised her hand against
her degenerate son, but he put back her arm.

"I am no longer a child," he said, "and I am master of this house.  I
will do what I will, if a hundred women hindered me!"  and with these
words he pointed to the door.  Setchem broke into loud sobs, and turned
her back upon him; but at the door once more she turned to look at him.
He had seated himself, and was resting his forehead on the table on which
the bowl of cold water stood.

Setchem fought a hard battle.  At last once more through her choking
tears she called his name, opened her arms wide and exclaimed:

"Here I am--here I am!  Come to my heart, only give up these hideous
thoughts of revenge."

But Paaker did not move, he did not look up at her, he did not speak,
he only shook his head in negation.  Setchem's hands fell, and she said
softly:

"What did your father teach you out of the scriptures?  'Your highest
praise consists in this, to reward your mother for what she has done for
you, in bringing you up, so that she may not raise her hands to God, nor
He hear her lamentation.'"

At these words, Paaker sobbed aloud, but he did not look at his mother.
She called him tenderly by his name; then her eyes fell on his quiver,
which lay on a bench with other arms.  Her heart shrunk within her, and
with a trembling voice she exclaimed:

"I forbid this mad vengeance--do you hear?  Will you give it up?  You do
not move?  No!  you will not!  Ye Gods, what can I do?"

She wrung her hands in despair; then she hastily crossed the room,
snatched out one of the arrows, and strove to break it.  Paaker sprang
from his seat, and wrenched the weapon from her hand; the sharp point
slightly scratched the skin, and dark drops of blood flowed from it, and
dropped upon the floor.

The Mohar would have taken the wounded hand, for Setchem, who had the
weakness of never being able to see blood flow--neither her own nor
anybody's else--had turned as pale as death; but she pushed him from her,
and as she spoke her gentle voice had a dull estranged tone.

"This hand," she said--"a mother's hand wounded by her son--shall never
again grasp yours till you have sworn a solemn oath to put away from you
all thoughts of revenge and murder, and not to disgrace your father's
name.  I have said it, and may his glorified spirit be my witness, and
give me strength to keep my word!"

Paaker had fallen on his knees, and was engaged in a terrible mental
struggle, while his mother slowly went towards the door.  There again she
stood still for a moment; she did not speak, but her eyes appealed to him
once more.

In vain.  At last she left the room, and the wind slammed the door
violently behind her.  Paaker groaned, and pressed his hand over his
eyes.

"Mother, mother!"  he cried.  "I cannot go back--I cannot."

A fearful gust of wind howled round the house, and drowned his voice,
and then he heard two tremendous claps, as if rocks had been hurled from
heaven.  He started up and went to the window, where the melancholy grey
dawn was showing, in order to call the slaves.  Soon they came trooping
out, and the steward called out as soon as he saw him:

"The storm has blown down the masts at the great gate!"

"Impossible!"  cried Paaker.

"Yes, indeed!"  answered the servant.  "They have been sawn through close
