gay, reckless temper like yours.  Now shake hands with each other."

The young princes went up to each other, and Rameri fell on his brother's
neck and kissed him.  The king stroked their heads.  "Now go in peace,"
he said, "and to-morrow you shall both strive to win a fresh mark of
honor."

When his sons had left the tent, Rameses turned to his charioteer and
said: "I have to speak to you too before the battle.  I can read your
soul through your eyes, and it seems to me that things have gone wrong
with you since the keeper of your stud arrived here.  What has happened
in Thebes?"  Mena looked frankly, but sadly at the king:

"My mother-in-law Katuti," he said, "is managing my estate very badly,
pledging the land, and selling the cattle."

"That can be remedied," said  Rameses kindly.  "You know I promised to
grant you the fulfilment of a wish, if Nefert trusted you as perfectly as
you believe.  But it appears to me as if something more nearly concerning
you than this were wrong, for I never knew you anxious about money and
lands.  Speak openly! you know I am your father, and the heart and the
eye of the man who guides my horses in battle, must be open without
reserve to my gaze."

Mena kissed the king's robe; then he said:

"Nefert has left Katuti's house, and as thou knowest has followed thy
daughter, Bent-Anat, to the sacred mountain, and to Megiddo."

"I thought the change was a good one," replied Rameses.  "I leave Bent-
Anat in the care of Bent-Anat, for she needs no other guardianship, and
your wife can have no better protector than Bent-Anat."

"Certainly not!"  exclaimed Mena with sincere emphasis.  "But before
they started, miserable things occurred.  Thou knowest that before she
married me she was betrothed to her cousin, the pioneer Paaker, and he,
during his stay in Thebes, has gone in and out of my house, has helped
Katuti with an enormous sum to pay the debts of my wild brother-in-law,
and-as my stud-keeper saw with his own eyes-has made presents of flowers
to Nefert."

The king smiled, laid his hand on Mena's shoulder, and said, as he looked
in his face: "Your wife will trust you, although you take a strange woman
into your tent, and you allow yourself to doubt her because her cousin
gives her some flowers!  Is that wise or just?  I believe you are jealous
of the broad-shouldered ruffian that some spiteful Wight laid in the nest
of the noble Mohar, his father."

"No, that I am not," replied Mena, "nor does any doubt of Nefert disturb
my soul; but it torments me, it nettles me, it disgusts me, that Paaker
of all men, whom I loathe as a venomous spider, should look at her and
make her presents under my very roof."

"He who looks for faith must give faith," said the king.  "And must not I
myself submit to accept songs of praise from the most contemptible
wretches?  Come--smooth your brow; think of the approaching victory, of
our return home, and remember that you have less to forgive Paaker than
he to forgive you.  Now, pray go and see to the horses, and to-morrow
morning let me see you on my chariot full of cheerful courage--as I love
to see you."

Mena left the tent, and went to the stables; there he met Rameri, who was
waiting to speak to him.  The eager boy said that he had always looked up
to him and loved him as a brilliant example, but that lately he had been
perplexed as to his virtuous fidelity, for he had been informed that Mena
had taken a strange woman into his tent--he who was married to the
fairest and sweetest woman in Thebes.

"I have known her," he concluded, "as well as if I were her brother; and
I know that she would die if she heard that you had insulted and
disgraced her.  Yes, insulted her; for such a public breach of faith is
an insult to the wife of an Egyptian.  Forgive my freedom of speech, but
who knows what to-morrow may bring forth--and I would not for worlds go
out to battle, thinking evil of you."

Mena let Rameri speak without interruption, and then answered:

"You are as frank as your father, and have learned from him to hear the
defendant before you condemn him.  A strange maiden, the daughter of the
king of the Danaids,

     [A people of the Greeks at the time of the Trojan war.  They are
     mentioned among the nations of the Mediterranean allied against
     Rameses III.  The Dardaneans were inhabitants of the Trojan
     provinces of Dardanin, and whose name was used for the Trojans
     generally.]

lives in my tent, but I for months have slept at the door of your
father's, and I have not once entered my own since she has been there.
Now sit down by me, and let me tell you how it all happened.  We had
pitched the camp before Kadesh, and there was very little for me to do,
as Rameses was still laid up with his wound, so I often passed my time in
hunting on the shores of the lake.  One day I went as usual, armed only
with my bow and arrow, and, accompanied by my grey-hounds, heedlessly
followed a hare; a troop of Danaids fell upon me, bound me with cords,
and led me into their camp.

     [Grey-hounds, trained to hunt hares, are represented in the most
     ancient tombs, for instance, the Mastaba at Meydum, belonging to the
     time of Snefru (four centuries B. C.).]

There I was led before the judges as a spy, and they had actually
condemned me, and the rope was round my neck, when their king came up,
saw me, and subjected me to a fresh examination.  I told him the facts
at full length--how I had fallen into the hands of his people while
following up my game, and not as an enemy, and he heard me favorably,
and granted me not only life but freedom.  He knew me for a noble, and
treated me as one, inviting me to feed at his own table, and I swore in
my heart, when he let me go, that I would make him some return for his
generous conduct.

"About a month after, we succeeded in surprising the Cheta position, and
the Libyan soldiers, among other spoil, brought away the Danaid king's
only daughter.  I had behaved valiantly, and when we came to the division
of the spoils Rameses allowed me to choose first.  I laid my hand on the
maid, the daughter of my deliverer and host, I led her to my tent, and
left her there with her waiting-women till peace is concluded, and I can
restore her to her father."

"Forgive my doubts!"  cried Rameri holding out his hand.  "Now I
understand why the king so particularly enquired whether Nefert believed
in your constancy to her."

"And what was your answer?"  asked Mena.

"That she thinks of you day and night, and never for an instant doubted
you.  My father seemed delighted too, and he said to Chamus: 'He has won
there!"

"He will grant me some great favor," said Mena in explanation, "if, when
she hears I have taken a strange maiden to my tent her confidence in me
is not shaken, Rameses considers it simply impossible, but I know that I
shall win.  Why! she must trust me."




CHAPTER XXXIX.

Before the battle,

     [The battle about to be described is taken entirely from the epos of
     Pentaur.]

prayers were offered and victims sacrificed for each division of the
army.  Images of the Gods were borne through the ranks in their festal
barks, and miraculous relics were exhibited to the soldiers; heralds
announced that the high-priest had found favorable omens in the victims
offered by the king, and that the haruspices foretold a glorious victory.
Each Egyptian legion turned with particular faith to the standard which
bore the image of the sacred animal or symbol of the province where it
had been levied, but each soldier was also provided with charms and
amulets of various kinds; one had tied to his neck or arm a magical text
in a little bag, another the mystic preservative eye, and most of them
wore a scarabaeus in a finger ring.  Many believed themselves protected
by having a few hairs or feathers of some sacred animal, and not a few
put themselves under the protection of a living snake or beetle carefully
concealed in a pocket of their apron or in their little provision-sack.

When the king, before whom were carried the images of the divine Triad of
Thebes, of Menth, the God of War and of Necheb, the Goddess of Victory,
reviewed the ranks, he was borne in a litter on the shoulders of twenty-
four noble youths; at his approach the whole host fell on their knees,
and did not rise till Rameses, descending from his position, had, in the
presence of them all, burned incense, and made a libation to the Gods,
and his son Chamus had delivered to him, in the name of the Immortals,
the symbols of life and power.  Finally, the priests sang a choral hymn
to the Sun-god Ra, and to his son and vicar on earth, the king.

Just as the troops were put in motion, the paling stars appeared in
the sky, which had hitherto been covered with thick clouds; and this
occurrence was regarded as a favorable omen, the priests declaring to
the army that, as the coming Ra had dispersed the clouds, so the Pharaoh
would scatter his enemies.

With no sound of trumpet or drum, so as not to arouse the enemy, the
foot-soldiers went forward in close order, the chariot-warriors, each in
his light two-wheeled chariot drawn by two horses, formed their ranks,
and the king placed himself at their head.  On each side of the gilt
chariot in which he stood, a case was fixed, glittering with precious
stones, in which were his bows and arrows.  His noble horses were richly
caparisoned; purple housings, embroidered with turquoise beads, covered
their backs and necks, and a crown-shaped ornament was fixed on their
heads, from which fluttered a bunch of white ostrich-feathers.  At the
end of the ebony pole of the chariot, were two small padded yokes, which
rested on the necks of the horses, who pranced in front as if playing
with the light vehicle, pawed the earth with their small hoofs, and
tossed and curved their slender necks.

The king wore a shirt of mail,

     [The remains of a shirt of mail, dating from the time of Scheschenk
     I. (Sesonchis), who belonged to the 22d dynasty, is in the British
     Museum.  It is made of leather, on which bronze scales are
     fastened.]

over which lay the broad purple girdle of his apron, and on his head was
the crown of Upper and Lower Egypt; behind him stood Mena, who, with his
left hand, tightly held the reins, and with his right the shield which
was to protect his sovereign in the fight.

The king stood like a storm-proof oak, and Mena by his side like a
sapling ash.

The eastern horizon was rosy with the approaching sun-rise when they
quitted the precincts of the camp; at this moment the pioneer Paaker
advanced to meet the king, threw himself on the ground before him, kissed
the earth, and, in answer to the king's question as to why he had come
without his brother, told him that Horus was taken suddenly ill.  The
shades of dawn concealed from the king the guilty color, which changed
to sallow paleness, on the face of the pioneer--unaccustomed hitherto to
lying and treason.

"How is it with the enemy?"  asked Rameses.

"He is aware," replied Paaker, "that a fight is impending, and is
collecting numberless hosts in the camps to the south and east of the
city.  If thou could'st succeed in falling on the rear from the north of
Kadesh, while the foot soldiers seize the camp of the Asiatics from the
south, the fortress will be thine before night.  The mountain path that
thou must follow, so as not to be discovered, is not a bad one."

"Are you ill as well as your brother, man?"  asked the king.  "Your voice
trembles."

"I was never better," answered the Mohar.

Lead the way," commanded the king, and Paaker obeyed.  They went on in
silence, followed by the vast troop of chariots through the dewy morning
