
"Of course--no doubt," said the baker, "good-bye, there go my cases!"




CHAPTER XXVI.

Notwithstanding the advanced hour, hundreds of people were crossing over
to the Necropolis at the same time as the baker.  They were permitted to
linger late on into the evening, under the inspection of the watch,
because it was the eve of the great feast, and they had to set out their
counters and awnings, to pitch their tents, and to spread out their
wares; for as soon as the sun rose next day all business traffic would be
stopped, none but festal barges might cross from Thebes, or such boats as
ferried over pilgrims--men, women, and children whether natives or
foreigners, who were to take part in the great procession.

In the halls and work-rooms of the House of Seti there was unusual stir.
The great miracle of the wonderful heart had left but a short time for
the preparations for the festival.  Here a chorus was being practised,
there on the sacred lake a scenic representation was being rehearsed;
here the statues of the Gods were being cleaned and dressed,

     [The dressing and undressing of the holy images was conducted in
     strict accordance with a prescribed ritual.  The inscriptions in the
     seven sanctuaries of Abydos, published by Alariette, are full of
     instruction as to these ordinances, which were significant in every
     detail.]

and the colors of the sacred emblems were being revived, there the
panther-skins and other parts of the ceremonial vestments of the priests
were being aired and set out; here sceptres, censers and other metal-
vessels were being cleaned, and there the sacred bark which was to be
carried in the procession was being decorated.  In the sacred groves of
the temple the school-boys, under the direction of the gardeners, wove
garlands and wreaths to decorate the landing-places, the sphinxes, the
temple, and the statues of the Gods.  Flags were hoisted on the brass-
tipped masts in front of the pylon, and purple sails were spread to
give shadow to the court.

The inspector of sacrifices was already receiving at a side-door the
cattle, corn and fruit, offerings which were brought as tribute to the
House of Seti, by citizens from all parts of the country, on the occasion
of the festival of the Valley, and he was assisted by scribes, who kept
an account of all that was brought in by the able-bodied temple-servants
and laboring serfs.

Ameni was everywhere: now with the singers, now with the magicians, who
were to effect wonderful transformations before the astonished multitude;
now with the workmen, who were erecting thrones for the Regent, the
emissaries from other collegiate foundations--even from so far as the
Delta--and the prophets from Thebes; now with the priests, who were
preparing the incense, now with the servants, who were trimming the
thousand lamps for the illumination at night--in short everywhere; here
inciting, there praising.  When he had convinced himself that all was
going on well he desired one of the priests to call Pentaur.

After the departure of the exiled prince Rameri, the young priest had
gone to the work-room of his friend Nebsecht.

The leech went uneasily from his phials to his cages, and from his cages
back to his flasks.  While he told Pentaur of the state he had found his
room in on his return home, he wandered about in feverish excitement,
unable to keep still, now kicking over a bundle of plants, now thumping
down his fist on the table; his favorite birds were starved to death, his
snakes had escaped, and his ape had followed their example, apparently in
his fear of them.

"The brute, the monster!"  cried Nebsecht in a rage.  He has thrown over
the jars with the beetles in them, opened the chest of meal that I feed
the birds and insects upon, and rolled about in it; he has thrown my
knives, prickers, and forceps, my pins, compasses, and reed pens all out
of window; and when I came in he was sitting on the cupboard up there,
looking just like a black slave that works night and day in a corn-mill;
he had got hold of the roll which contained all my observations on the
structure of animals--the result of years of study-and was looking at it
gravely with his head on one side.  I wanted to take the book from him,
but he fled with the roll, sprang out of window, let himself down to the
edge of the well, and tore and rubbed the manuscript to pieces in a rage.
I leaped out after him, but he jumped into the bucket, took hold of the
chain, and let himself down, grinning at me in mockery, and when I drew
him up again he jumped into the water with the remains of the book."

"And the poor wretch is drowned?"  asked Pentaur.

"I fished him up with the bucket, and laid him to dry in the sun; but he
had been tasting all sorts of medicines, and he died at noon.  My
observations are gone!  Some of them certainly are still left; however,
I must begin again at the beginning.  You see apes object as much to my
labors as sages; there lies the beast on the shelf."

Pentaur had laughed at his friend's story, and then lamented his loss;
but now he said anxiously:

"He is lying there on the shelf?  But you forget that he ought to have
been kept in the little oratory of Toth near the library.  He belongs to
the sacred dogfaced apes,

     [The dog faced baboon, Kynokephalos, was sacred to Toth as the
     Moongod.  Mummies of these apes have been found at Thebes and
     Hermopolis, and they are often represented as reading with much
     gravity.  Statues of them have been found to great quantities, and
     there is a particularly life-like picture of a Kynokephalos in
     relief on the left wall of the library of the temple of Isis at
     Philoe.]

and all the sacred marks were found upon him.  The librarian gave him
into your charge to have his bad eye cured."

"That was quite well," answered Nebsecht carelessly.

"But they will require the uninjured corpse of you, to embalm it," said
Pentaur.

"Will they?"  muttered Nebsecht; and he looked at his friend like a boy
who is asked for an apple that has long been eaten.

"And you have already been doing something with it," said Pentaur, in a
tone of friendly vexation.

The leech nodded.  "I have opened him, and examined his heart.'

"You are as much set on hearts as a coquette!"  said Pentaur.  "What is
become of the human heart that the old paraschites was to get for you?"

Nebsecht related without reserve what the old man had done for him, and
said that he had investigated the human heart, and had found nothing in
it different from what he had discovered in the heart of beasts.

"But I must see it in connection with the other organs of the human
body," cried he; "and my decision is made.  I shall leave the House of
Seti, and ask the kolchytes to take me into their guild.  If it is
necessary I will first perform the duties of the lowest paraschites."

Pentaur pointed out to the leech what a bad exchange he would be making,
and at last exclaimed, when Nebsecht eagerly contradicted him, "This
dissecting of the heart does not please me.  You say yourself that you
learned nothing by it.  Do you still think it a right thing, a fine
thing--or even useful?"

"I do not trouble myself about it," replied Nebsecht.  "Whether my
observations seem good or evil, right or heinous, useful or useless,
I want to know how things are, nothing more."

"And so for mere curiosity," cried Pentaur, "you would endanger the
blissful future of thousands of your fellow-men, take upon yourself the
most abject duties, and leave this noble scene of your labors, where we
all strive for enlightenment, for inward knowledge and truth."

The naturalist laughed scornfully; the veins swelled angrily in Pentaur's
forehead, and his voice took a threatening tone as he asked:

"And do you believe that your finger and your eyes have lighted on the
truth, when the noblest souls have striven in vain for thousands of years
to find it out?  You descend beneath the level of human understanding by
madly wallowing in the mire; and the more clearly you are convinced that
you have seized the truth, the more utterly you are involved in the toils
of a miserable delusion."

"If I believed I knew the truth should I so eagerly seek it?"  asked
Nebsecht.  "The more I observe and learn, the more deeply I feel my want
of knowledge and power."

"That sounds modest enough," said the poet, "but I know the arrogance to
which your labors are leading you.  Everything that you see with your own
eyes and touch with your own hand, you think infallible, and everything
that escapes your observation you secretly regard as untrue, and pass by
with a smile of superiority.  But you cannot carry your experiments
beyond the external world, and you forget that there are things which lie
in a different realm."

"I know nothing of those things," answered Nebsecht quietly.

"But we--the Initiated," cried Pentaur, "turn our attention to them also.
Thoughts--traditions--as to their conditions and agency have existed
among us for a thousand years; hundreds of generations of men have
examined these traditions, have approved them, and have handed them down
to us.  All our knowledge, it is true, is defective, and yet prophets
have been favored with the gift of looking into the future, magic powers
have been vouchsafed to mortals.  All this is contrary to the laws of the
external world, which are all that you recognize, and yet it can easily
be explained if we accept the idea of a higher order of things.  The
spirit of the Divinity dwells in each of us, as in nature.  The natural
man can only attain to such knowledge as is common to all; but it is the
divine capacity for serene discernment--which is omniscience--that works
in the seer; it is the divine and unlimited power--which is omnipotence
--that from time to time enables the magician to produce supernatural
effects!"

"Away with prophets and marvels!"  cried Nebsecht.

"I should have thought," said Pentaur, "that even the laws of nature
which you recognize presented the greatest marvels daily to your eyes;
nay the Supreme One does not disdain sometimes to break through the
common order of things, in order to reveal to that portion of Himself
which we call our soul, the sublime Whole of which we form part--Himself.
Only today you have seen how the heart of the sacred ram--"

"Man, man!"  Nebsecht interrupted, "the sacred heart is the heart of a
hapless sheep that a sot of a soldier sold for a trifle to a haggling
grazier, and that was slaughtered in a common herd.  A proscribed
paraschites put it into the body of Rui, and--and--" he opened the
cupboard, threw the carcase of the ape and some clothes on to the floor,
and took out an alabaster bowl which he held before the poet--"the
muscles you see here in brine, this machine, once beat in the breast of
the prophet Rui.  My sheep's heart wilt be carried to-morrow in the
procession!  I would have told you all about it if I had not promised the
old man to hold my tongue, and then--But what ails you, man?"  Pentaur
had turned away from his friend, and covered his face with his hands,
and he groaned as if he were suffering some frightful physical pain.
Nebsecht divined what was passing in the mind of his friend.  Like a
child that has to ask forgiveness of its mother for some misdeed, he went
close up to Pentaur, but stood trembling behind him not daring to speak
to him.

Several minutes passed.  Suddenly Pentaur raised his head, lifted his
hands to heaven, and cried:

"O Thou! the One!--though stars may fall from the heavens in summer
nights, still Thy eternal and immutable laws guide the never-resting
planets in their paths.  Thou pure and all-prevading Spirit, that
dwellest in me, as I know by my horror of a lie, manifest Thyself in me--
as light when I think, as mercy when I act, and when I speak, as truth--
always as truth!"

The poet spoke these words with absorbed fervor, and Nebsecht heard them
as if they were speech from some distant and beautiful world.  He went
affectionately up to his friend, and eagerly held out his hand.  Pentaur
grasped it, pressed it warmly, and said:

"That was a fearful moment!  You do not know what Ameni has been to me,
and now, now!"

He hardly had ceased speaking when steps were heard approaching the
physician's room, and a young priest requested the friends to appear at
once in the meeting-room of the Initiated.  In a few moments they both
entered the great hall, which was brilliantly lighted.

Not one of the chiefs of the House of Seti was absent.

Ameni sat on a raised seat at a long table; on his right hand was old
Gagabu, on his left the third Prophet of the temple.  The principals of
the different orders of priests had also found places at the table, and
among them the chief of the haruspices, while the rest of the priests,
all in snow-white linen robes, sat, with much dignity, in a large
semicircle, two rows deep.  In the midst stood a statue of the Goddess
of truth and justice.

Behind Ameni's throne was the many-colored image of the ibis-headed Toth,
who presided over the measure and method of things, who counselled the
Gods as well as men, and presided over learning and the arts.  In a niche
at the farther end of the hall were painted the divine Triad of Thebes,
with Rameses I. and his son Seti, who approached them with offerings.
The priests were placed with strict regard to their rank, and the order
of initiation.  Pentaur's was the lowest place of all.

No discussion of any importance had as yet taken place, for Ameni was
making enquiries, receiving information, and giving orders with reference
to the next day's festival.  All seemed to be well arranged, and promised
a magnificent solemnity; although the scribes complained of the scarce
influx of beasts from the peasants, who were so heavily taxed for the
war, and although that feature would be wanting in the procession which
was wont to give it the greatest splendor--the presence of the king and
the royal family.

This circumstance aroused the disapprobation of some of the priests, who
were of opinion that it would be hazardous to exclude the two children of
Rameses, who remained in Thebes, from any share in the solemnities of the
feast.

Ameni then rose.

