"No, children, I cannot, indeed I cannot.  This cup I drain to the health
of the charming Sappho, and this second to your good fortune, my
favorite, Darius."

"Thanks, Araspes!"  exclaimed Bartja, joyfully raising his goblet to his
lips.

"You mean well, I know," muttered Darius, looking down gloomily.

"What's this, you son of Hystaspes?"  cried the old man, looking more
narrowly at the serious face of the youth.  "Dark looks like these don't
sit well on a betrothed lover, who is to drink to the health of his
dearest one.  Is not Gobryas' little daughter the noblest of all the
young Persian girls after Atossa? and isn't she beautiful?"

"Artystone has every talent and quality that a daughter of the
Achaemenidae ought to possess," was Darius's answer, but his brow did not
clear as he said the words.

"Well, if you want more than that, you must be very hard to please."

Darius raised his goblet and looked down into the wine.

"The boy is in love, as sure as my name is Araspes!"  exclaimed the elder
man.

"What a set of foolish fellows you are," broke in Zopyrus at this
exclamation.  "One of you has remained a bachelor in defiance of all
Persian customs; another has been frightened out of marrying by an
oracle; Bartja has determined to be content with only one wife; and
Darius looks like a Destur chanting the funeral-service, because his
father has told him to make himself happy with the most beautiful and
aristocratic girl in Persia!"

"Zopyrus is right," cried Araspes.  "Darius is ungrateful to fortune."

Bartja meanwhile kept his eyes fixed on the friend, who was thus blamed
by the others.  He saw that their jests annoyed him, and feeling his own
great happiness doubly in that moment, pressed Darius's hand, saying:
"I am so sorry that I cannot be present at your wedding.  By the time I
come back, I hope you will be reconciled to your father's choice."

"Perhaps," said Darius, "I may be able to show a second and even a third
wife by that time."

"Anahita" grant it!"  exclaimed Zopyrus.  "The Achaemenidae would soon
become extinct, if every one were to follow such examples as Gyges and
Araspes have set us.  And your one wife, Bartja, is really not worth
talking about.  It is your duty to marry three wives at once, in order to
keep up your father's family--the race of Cyrus."

"I hate our custom of marrying many wives," answered Bartja.  "Through
doing this, we make ourselves inferior to the women, for we expect them
to remain faithful to us all our lives, and we, who are bound to respect
truth and faithfulness above every thing else, swear inviolable love to
one woman to-day, and to another to-morrow."

"Nonsense!"  cried Zopyrus.  "I'd rather lose my tongue than tell a he to
a man, but our wives are so awfully deceitful, that one has no choice but
to pay them back in their own coin."

"The Greek women are different," said Bartja, "because they are
differently treated.  Sappho told me of one, I think her name was
Penelope, who waited twenty years faithfully and lovingly for her
husband, though every one believed he was dead, and she had fifty lovers
a day at her house."

"My wives would not wait so long for me," said Zopyrus laughing.  "To
tell the truth, I don't think I should be sorry to find an empty house,
if I came back after twenty years.  For then I could take some new wives
into my harem, young and beautiful, instead of the unfaithful ones, who,
besides, would have grown old.  But alas!  every woman does not find some
one to run away with her, and our women would rather have an absent
husband than none at all."

"If your wives could hear what you are saying!"  said Araspes.

"They would declare war with me at once, or, what is still worse,
conclude a peace with one another."

"How would that be worse?"

"How? it is easy to see, that you have had no experience."

"Then let us into the secrets of your married life."

"With pleasure.  You can easily fancy, that five wives in one house do
not live quite so peacefully as five doves in a cage; mine at least carry
on an uninterrupted, mortal warfare.  But I have accustomed myself to
that, and their sprightliness even amuses me.  A year ago, however, they
came to terms with one another, and this day of peace was the most
miserable in my life."

"You are jesting."

"No, indeed, I am quite in earnest.  The wretched eunuch who had to keep
watch over the five, allowed them to see an old jewel-merchant from Tyre.
Each of them chose a separate and expensive set of jewels.  When I came
home Sudabe came up and begged for money to pay for these ornaments.  The
things were too dear, and I refused.  Every one of the five then came and
begged me separately for the money; I refused each of them point blank
and went off to court.  When I came back, there were all my wives weeping
side by side, embracing one another and calling each other fellow-
sufferers.  These former enemies rose up against me with the most
touching unanimity, and so overwhelmed me with revilings and threats that
I left the room.  They closed their doors against me.  The next morning
the lamentations of the evening before were continued.  I fled once more
and went hunting with the king, and when I came back, tired, hungry and
half-frozen--for it was in spring, we were already at Ecbatana, and the
snow was lying an ell deep on the Orontes--there was no fire on the
hearth and nothing to eat.  These noble creatures had entered into an
alliance in order to punish me, had put out the fire, forbidden the cooks
to do their duty and, which was worse than all--had kept the jewels!  No
sooner had I ordered the slaves to make a fire and prepare food, than the
impudent jewel-dealer appeared and demanded his money.  I refused again,
passed another solitary night, and in the morning sacrificed ten talents
for the sake of peace.  Since that time harmony and peace among my
beloved wives seems to me as much to be feared as the evil Divs
themselves, and I see their little quarrels with the greatest pleasure."

"Poor Zopyrus!"  cried Bartja.

"Why poor?"  asked this five-fold husband.  "I tell you I am much happier
than you are.  My wives are young and charming, and when they grow old,
what is to hinder me from taking others, still handsomer, and who, by the
side of the faded beauties, will be doubly charming.  Ho! slave--bring
some lamps.  The sun has gone down, and the wine loses all its flavor
when the table is not brightly lighted."

At this moment the voice of Darius, who had left the arbor and gone out
into the garden, was heard calling: "Come and hear how beautifully the
nightingale is singing."

"By Mithras, you son of Hystaspes, you must be in love," interrupted
Araspes.  "The flowery darts of love must have entered the heart of him,
who leaves his wine to listen to the nightingale."

"You are right there, father," cried Bartja.  "Philomel, as the Greeks
call our Gulgul, is the lovers' bird among all nations, for love has
given her her beautiful song.  What beauty were you dreaming of, Darius,
when you went out to listen to the nightingale?"

"I was not dreaming of any," answered he.  "You know how fond I am of
watching the stars, and the Tistar-star rose so splendidly to-night, that
I left the wine to watch it.  The nightingales were singing so loudly to
one another, that if I had not wished to hear them I must have stopped my
ears."

"You kept them wide open, however," said Araspes laughing.  "Your
enraptured exclamation proved that."

"Enough of this," cried Darius, to whom these jokes were getting
wearisome.  "I really must beg you to leave off making allusions to
matters, which I do not care to hear spoken of."

"Imprudent fellow!"  whispered the older man; "now you really have
betrayed yourself.  If you were not in love, you would have laughed
instead of getting angry. Still I won't go on provoking you--tell me
what you have just been reading in the stars."

At these words Darius looked up again into the starry sky and fixed his
eyes on a bright constellation hanging over the horizon.  Zopyrus watched
him and called out to his friends, "Something important must be happening
up there.  Darius, tell us what's going on in the heavens just now."

"Nothing good," answered the other.  "Bartja, I have something to say to
you alone."

"Why to me alone?  Araspes always keeps his own counsel, and from the
rest of you I never have any secrets."

"Still--"

"Speak out."

"No, I wish you would come into the garden with me."

Bartja nodded to the others, who were still sitting over their wine, laid
his hand on Darius' shoulder and went out with him into the bright
moonlight.  As soon as they were alone, Darius seized both his friend's
hands, and said: "To-day is the third time that things have happened in
the heavens, which bode no good for you.  Your evil star has approached
your favorable constellation so nearly, that a mere novice in astrology
could see some serious danger was at hand.  Be on your guard, Bartja, and
start for Egypt to-day; the stars tell me that the danger is here on the
Euphrates, not abroad."

"Do you believe implicitly in the stars?"

"Implicitly.  They never lie."

"Then it would be folly to try and avoid what they have foretold."

"Yes, no man can run away from his destiny; but that very destiny is like
a fencing-master--his favorite pupils are those who have the courage and
skill to parry his own blows.  Start for Egypt to-day, Bartja."

"I cannot--I haven't taken leave of my mother and Atossa."

"Send them a farewell message, and tell Croesus to explain the reason of
your starting so quickly."

"They would call me a coward."

"It is cowardly to yield to any mortal, but to go out of the way of one's
fate is wisdom."

"You contradict yourself, Darius.  What would the fencing-master say to a
runaway-pupil?"

"He would rejoice in the stratagem, by which an isolated individual tried
to escape a superior force."

"But the superior force must conquer at last.--What would be the use of
my trying to put off a danger which, you say yourself, cannot be averted?
If my tooth aches, I have it drawn at once, instead of tormenting and
making myself miserable for weeks by putting off the painful operation as
a coward or a woman would, till the last moment.  I can await this coming
danger bravely, and the sooner it comes the better, for then I shall have
it behind me."

"You do not know how serious it is."

"Are you afraid for my life?"

"No."

"Then tell me, what you are afraid of."

"That Egyptian priest with whom I used to study the stars, once cast your
horoscope with me.  He knew more about the heavens, than any man I ever
saw.  I learnt a great deal from him, and I will not hide from you that
even then he drew my attention to dangers that threaten you now."

"And you did not tell me?"

"Why should I have made you uneasy beforehand?  Now that your destiny is
drawing near, I warn you."

"Thank you,--I will be careful.  In former times I should not have
listened to such a warning, but now that I love Sappho, I feel as if my
life were not so much my own to do what I like with, as it used to be."

"I understand this feeling  .  .  ."

"You understand it?  Then Araspes was right?  You don't deny?"

"A mere dream without any hope of fulfilment."

"But what woman could refuse you?"

"Refuse!"

"I don't understand you.  Do you mean to say that you--the boldest
sportsman, the strongest wrestler--the wisest of all the young Persians
--that you, Darius, are afraid of a woman?"

"Bartja, may I tell you more, than I would tell even to my own father?"

