pockets.  You were scourging yourself this night, boy; I heard the blows.
It is well; if the sinful flesh revolts, thus we may subdue it."

"He groaned heavily and could not sleep," said Stephanus.

"Aye, did he indeed!" cried Paulus to the youth, and held his powerful
arms out towards him with clenched fists; but the threatening voice was
loud rather than terrible, and wild as the exceptionally big man looked
in his sheepskin, there was such irresistible kindliness in his gaze and
in his voice, that no one could have believed that his wrath was in
earnest.

"Fiends of hell had met him," said Stephanus in excuse for his son, "and
I should not have closed an eye even without his groaning; it is the
fifth night."

"But in the sixth," said Paulus, "sleep is absolutely necessary.  Put on
your sheep-skin, Hermas; you must go down to the oasis to the Senator
Petrus, and fetch a good sleeping-draught for our sick man from him or
from Dame Dorothea, the deaconess.  Just look! the youngster has really
thought of his father's breakfast--one's own stomach is a good reminder.
Only put the bread and the water down here by the couch; while you are
gone I will fetch some fresh--now, come with me."

"Wait a minute, wait," cried Stephanus.  "Bring a new jar with you from
the town, my son.  You lent us yours yesterday, Paulus, and I must--"

"I should soon have forgotten it," interrupted the other.  "I have to
thank the careless fellow, for I have now for the first time discovered
the right way to drink, as long as one is well and able.  I would not
have the jar back for a measure of gold; water has no relish unless you
drink it out of the hollow of your hand!  The shard is yours.  I should
be warring against my own welfare, if I required it back.  God be
praised! the craftiest thief can now rob me of nothing save my
sheepskin."

Stephanus would have thanked him, but he took Hermas by the hand, and led
him out into the open air.  For some time the two men walked in silence
over the clefts and boulders up the mountain side.  When they had reached
a plateau, which lay on the road that led from the sea over the mountain
into the oasis, he turned to the youth, and said:

"If we always considered all the results of our actions there would be no
sins committed."

Hermas looked at him enquiringly, and Paulus went on, "If it had occurred
to you to think how sorely your poor father needed sleep, you would have
lain still this night."

"I could not," said the youth sullenly.  "And you know very well that I
scourged myself hard enough."

"That was quite right, for you deserved a flogging for a misconducted
boy."

Hermas looked defiantly at his reproving friend, the flaming color
mounted to his cheek: for he remembered the shepherdess's words that he
might go and complain to his nurse, and he cried out angrily:

"I will not let any one speak to me so; I am no longer a child."

"Not even your father's?"  asked Paulus, and he looked at the boy with
such an astonished and enquiring air, that Hermas turned away his eyes in
confusion.

"It is not right at any rate to trouble the last remnant of life of that
very man who longs to live for your sake only."

"I should have been very willing to be still, for I love my father as
well as any one else."

"You do not beat him," replied Paulus, "you carry him bread and water,
and do not drink up the wine yourself, which the Bishop sends him home
from the Lord's supper; that is something certainly, but not enough by a
long way."

"I am no saint!"

"Nor I neither," exclaimed Paulus, "I am full of sin and weakness.  But I
know what the love is which was taught us by the Saviour, and that you
too may know.  He suffered on the cross for you, and for me, and for all
the poor and vile.  Love is at once the easiest and the most difficult of
attainments.  It requires sacrifice.  And you?  How long is it now since
you last showed your father a cheerful countenance?"

"I cannot be a hypocrite."

"Nor need you, but you must love.  Certainly it is not by what his hand
does but by what his heart cheerfully offers, and by what he forces
himself to give up that a man proves his love."

"And is it no sacrifice that I waste all my youth here?"  asked the boy.

Paulus stepped back from him a little way, shook his matted head, and
said, "Is that it?  You are thinking of Alexandria!  Ay! no doubt life
runs away much quicker there than on our solitary mountain.  You do not
fancy the tawny shepherd girl, but perhaps some pretty pink and white
Greek maiden down there has looked into your eyes?"

"Let me alone about the women," answered Hermas, with genuine annoyance.
"There are other things to look at there."

The youth's eyes sparkled as he spoke, and Paulus asked, not without
interest, "Indeed?"

"You know Alexandria better than I," answered Hermas evasively.
"You were born there, and they say you had been a rich young man."

"Do they say so?"  said Paulus.  "Perhaps they are right; but you must
know that I am glad that nothing any longer belongs to me of all the
vanities that I possessed, and I thank my Saviour that I can now turn my
back on the turmoil of men.  What was it that seemed to you so
particularly tempting in all that whirl?"

Hermas hesitated.  He feared to speak, and yet something urged and drove
him to say out all that was stirring his soul.  If any one of all those
grave men who despised the world and among whom he had grown up, could
ever understand him, he knew well that it would be Paulus; Paulus whose
rough beard he had pulled when he was little, on whose shoulders he had
often sat, and who had proved to him a thousand times how truly he loved
him.  It is true the Alexandrian was the severest of them all, but he was
harsh only to himself.  Hermas must once for all unburden his heart, and
with sudden decision he asked the anchorite:

"Did you often visit the baths?"

"Often?  I only wonder that I did not melt away and fall to pieces in the
warm water like a wheaten loaf."

"Why do you laugh at that which makes men beautiful?"  cried Hermas
hastily.  "Why may Christians even visit the baths in Alexandria, while
we up here, you and my father and all anchorites, only use water to
quench our thirst?  You compel me to live like one of you, and I do not
like being a dirty beast."

"None can see us but the Most High," answered Paulus, "and for him we
cleanse and beautify our souls."

"But the Lord gave us our body too," interrupted Hermas.  "It is written
that man is the image of God.  And we!  I appeared to myself as repulsive
as a hideous ape when at the great baths by the Gate of the Sun I saw the
youths and men with beautifully arranged and scented hair and smooth
limbs that shone with cleanliness and purification.  And as they went
past, and I looked at my mangy sheepfell, and thought of my wild mane and
my arms and feet, which are no worse formed or weaker than theirs were,
I turned hot and cold, and I felt as if some bitter drink were choking
me.  I should have liked to howl out with shame and envy and vexation.
I will not be like a monster!"

Hermas ground his teeth as he spoke the last words, and Paulus looked
uneasily at him as he went on: "My body is God's as much as my soul is,
and what is allowed to the Christians in the city--"

"That we nevertheless may not do," Paulus interrupted gravely.  "He who
has once devoted himself to Heaven must detach himself wholly from the
charm of life, and break one tie after another that binds him to the
dust.  I too once upon a time have anointed this body, and smoothed this
rough hair, and rejoiced sincerely over my mirror; but I say to you,
Hermas--and, by my dear Saviour, I say it only because I feel it, deep in
my heart I feel it--to pray is better than to bathe, and I, a poor
wretch, have been favored with hours in which my spirit has struggled
free, and has been permitted to share as an honored guest in the festal
joys of Heaven!"

While he spoke, his wide open eyes had turned towards Heaven and had
acquired a wondrous brightness.  For a short time the two stood opposite
each other silent and motionless; at last the anchorite pushed the hair
from off his brow, which was now for the first time visible.  It was
well-formed, though somewhat narrow, and its clear fairness formed a
sharp contrast to his sunburnt face.

"Boy," he said with a deep breath, "you know not what joys you would
sacrifice for the sake of worthless things.  Long ere the Lord, calls the
pious man to Heaven, the pious has brought Heaven down to earth in
himself."

Hermas well understood what the anchorite meant, for his father often for
hours at a time gazed up into Heaven in prayer, neither seeing nor
hearing what was going on around him, and was wont to relate to his son,
when he awoke from his ecstatic vision, that he had seen the Lord or
heard the angel-choir.

He himself had never succeeded in bringing himself into such a state,
although Stephanus had often compelled him to remain on his knees praying
with him for many interminable hours.  It often happened that the old
man's feeble flame of life had threatened to become altogether extinct
after these deeply soul-stirring exercises, and Hermas would gladly have
forbidden him giving himself up to such hurtful emotions, for he loved
his father; but they were looked upon as special manifestations of grace,
and how should a son dare to express his aversion to such peculiarly
sacred acts?  But to Paulus and in his present mood he found courage to
speak out.

"I have sure hope of Paradise," he said, "but it will be first opened
to us after death.  The Christian should be patient; why can you not wait
for Heaven till the Saviour calls you, instead of desiring to enjoy its
pleasures here on earth?  This first and that after!  Why Should God have
bestowed on us the gifts of the flesh if not that we may use them?
Beauty and strength are not empty trifles, and none but a fool gives
noble gifts to another, only in order to throw them away."

Paulus gazed in astonishment at the youth, who up to this moment had
always unresistingly obeyed his father and him, and he shook his head as
he answered,

"So think the children of this world who stand far from the Most High.
In the image of God are we made no doubt, but what child would kiss the
image of his father, when the father offers him his own living lips?"

Paulus had meant to say 'mother' instead of 'father,' but he remembered
in time that Hermas had early lost the happiness of caressing a mother,
and he had hastily amended the phrase.  He was one of those to whom it is
so painful to hurt another, that they never touch a wounded soul unless
to heal it, divining the seat of even the most hidden pain.

He was accustomed to speak but little, but now he went on eagerly:

"By so much as God is far above our miserable selves, by so much is the
contemplation of Him worthier of the Christian than that of his own
person.  Oh! who is indeed so happy as to have wholly lost that self and
to be perfectly absorbed in God!  But it pursues us, and when the soul
fondly thinks itself already blended in union with the Most High it cries
