Not our grandsons, no, but our own children will ask: Who--what was
Serapis?  For he who shall be overthrown is no longer a mighty god but
an idol bereft of his splendor and his dignity.  This is no struggle of
might against might; it is the death-stroke given to a wounded and
vanquished foe.  The tree is rotten to the core and can crush no one in
its fall, but it will cover all who stand near it with dust and rubbish.
The sovereign has outlived his dominion, and when his fingers drop the
sceptre few indeed will bewail him, for the new King has already mounted
the throne and His is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever!
Amen."

Dada had listened to the deacon's address with no particular interest,
but the conclusion struck her attention.  The old man looked dignified
and honest; but Father Karnis was a well-meaning man, no doubt, and one
of those who are wont to keep on the winning side.  How was it that the
preacher could draw so pitiable a picture of the very same god whose
greatness her uncle had praised in such glowing terms only two days
since?  How could the same thing appear so totally different to two
different people?

The priest looked more sagacious than the musician; Marcus, the young
Christian, had a most kind heart; there was not a better or gentler
creature under the sun than Agne--it was quite possible that Christianity
was something very different in reality from what her foster parents
chose to represent.  As to the frightful consequences of the overthrow of
the temple of Serapis, on that point she was completely reassured, and
she prepared to listen with greater attention as Eusebius went on:

"Let us rejoice, beloved!  The great idol's days are numbered!  Do you
know what that false worship has been in our midst?  It has been like a
splendid and richly-dressed trireme sailing, plague-stricken, into a
harbor full of ships and boats.  Woe to those who allow themselves to be
tempted on board by the magnificence of its decorations!  How great is
their chance of infection, how easily they will carry it from ship to
ship, and from the ships on to the shore, till the pestilence has spread
from the harbor to the city!  Let us then be thankful to those who
destroy the gorgeous vessel, who drive it from amongst us, or sink or
burn it.  May our Father in Heaven give courage to their hearts, strength
to their hands and blessing on their deeds!  When we hear: "Great Serapis
has fallen to the earth and is no more, we and the world are free from
him! then, in this city, and wherever Christians dwell and worship, let a
solemn festival be held.

"But still let us be just, still let us bear in mind all the great and
good gifts that the trireme brought to our parents when it rode the waves
manned by a healthy crew.  If we do, it will be with sincere pity that we
shall watch the proud vessel sink to the bottom, and we shall understand
the grief of those whom once it bore over ebb and flow, and who believe
they owe every thing to it.  We shall rejoice doubly, too, to think that
we ourselves have a safe bark with stout planks and strong masts, and a
trustworthy pilot at the helm; and that we may confidently invite others
to join us on board as soon as they have purified themselves of the
plague with which they have been smitten.

"I think you will all have understood this parable.  When Serapis falls
there will be lamentation and woe among the heathen; but we, who are true
Christians, ought not to pass them by, but must strive to heal and save
the wounded and sick at heart.  When Serapis falls you must be the
physicians--healers of souls, as the Lord hath said; and if we desire to
heal, our first task must be to discover in what the sufferings consist
of those we wish to succor, for our choice of medicine must depend on the
nature of the injury.

"What I mean is this: None can give comfort but those who know how to
sympathize with the soul that craves it, who feel the sorrows of others
as keenly as though they were their own.  And this gift, my brethren, is,
next to faith, the Christian grace which of all others best pleases our
Heavenly Master.

"I see it in my mind's eye!  The ruined edifice of the Serapeum, the
masterpiece of Bryaxis laid in fragments in the dust, and thousands of
wailing heathen!  As the Jews wept and hung their harps on the trees by
the waters of Babylon when they remembered Zion, so do I see the heathen
weep as they think of the perished splendor.  They themselves, indeed,
ruined and desecrated the glory they bewail; and when something higher
and purer took its place they hardened their hearts, and, instead of
leaving the dead to bury their dead and throwing themselves hopefully
into the new life, they refused to be parted from the putrefying corpse.
They were fools, but their folly was fidelity; and if we can win them
over to our holy faith they will be faithful unto death, as they have
been to their old gods, clinging to Jesus and earning the crown of life.
'There will be more joy in Heaven over one sinner that repenteth than
over ninety and nine that need no repentance,'--that you have heard; and
whichever among you loves the Saviour can procure him a great joy if he
guides only one of these weeping heathen into the Kingdom of Heaven.

"But perhaps you will ask: Is not the sorrow of the heathen a vain thing?
What is it after all that they bewail?  To understand that, try to
picture to yourselves what it is that they think they are losing.  Verily
it is not a small matter, and it includes many things for which we and
all mankind owe them a debt of gratitude.  We call ourselves Christians
and are proud of the name; but we also call ourselves Hellenes, and are
proud of that name too.  It was under the protection of the old gods,
whose fall is about to be consummated, that the Greeks achieved
marvellous deeds, nurturing the gifts of the intellect which the Almighty
bestowed on their race, like faithful gardeners, and making them bring
forth marvellous fruit.  In the realm of thought the Greek is sovereign
of the nations, and he has given to perishable matter a perfection of
form which has elevated and vivified it to immortality.  Nothing more
beautiful has ever been imagined or executed, before or since, or by any
other people, than was produced by Greece in its prime.  But perhaps you
will ask, why did not the Redeemer come down among our fathers in those
glorious days?  Because beauty, as they conceived and still conceive of
it, is a mere perishable accident of matter, and because a race which
thus devoted every thought and feeling to an inspired and fervent worship
of beauty--which was so absorbed in the contemplation of the visible,
could have no longing for the invisible which is the real life that came
down among us with the only-begotten Son of God.  Nevertheless Beauty is
beautiful; and when the time shall come when the visible is married to
the invisible, when eternal Truth is clothed in perfect form, then, and
not till then, will the ideal which our fathers strove after in the great
old days be realized, by the grace of the Saviour.

"But this visible beauty, which they so passionately cherished, does us
good service too, so long as we do not allow it to dazzle us and lead us
astray from the one thing needful.  To whom, if not to the heathen
Hellenes, do our great teachers owe, under God, the noble art of
coordinating their loftiest feelings, and casting them in forms which are
intelligible to the Christian and at once instruct, delight, and edify
him?  It was in a heathen school that each one of your pastors--that even
I, the humblest of them--studied that rhetoric which enables me to utter
with a flowing tongue the things which the Spirit gives me to speak to
you; and if some day there are Christian schools, in which our sons may
acquire the same power, they must adopt many of the laws devised by the
heathen.  If in the future we are rich enough to raise churches to the
Almighty, to the Virgin Mary and the great Saints, in any way worthy of
their sublime merits, we shall owe our skill to the famous architects of
heathen Hellas.  We are indebted to the arts of the heathen for a
thousand things in daily use, beside numberless others that lend charm to
existence.  Yes, my beloved, when we consider all they did for us we
cannot in justice withhold our tribute of gratitude and admiration.

"Nor can we doubt that the best of them were acceptable to the Almighty
himself, for he granted to them to see darkly and from afar what he has
brought nigh to us, and poured into our hearts by divine revelation.
You all know the name of Plato.  He, from whom Salvation was hidden,
saw remotely, by presentiment as it were, many things which to us, the
Redeemed, are clear and plain and near.  He perceived the relation of
earthly beauty and heavenly truth.  The great gift of Love binds and
supports us all and Plato gave the name of the divine Eros, that is
divine love, to an inspired devotion to the Imperishable.  He placed
goodness--the Good--at the top of the great scale of Ideas which he
constructed.  The Good was, to him, the highest Idea and the uttermost of
which we can conceive:--Good, whose properties he made manifest by every
means his lofty and lucid mind could command.  This heathen, my brethren
and sisters, was well worthy of the grace bestowed on us.  Do justice
then to the blinded souls, justice in Plato's sense of the word; he calls
the virtue of reason Wisdom; the virtue of spirit Courage, and the virtue
of the senses Temperance.  Well, well!  'Prove all things and hold fast
that which is good.'  That is to say: consider what may be worth anything
in the works of the heathen that it may be duly preserved; but, on the
other hand, tread all that is idolatry in the dust, all that brings the
unclean thing among us, all that imperils our souls and bodies, or
anything that is high and pure in life; but do not forget, my beloved,
all that the heathen have done for us.  Be temperate in all things; avoid
excess of zeal; for thus, and thus only, can we be just.  'It is not to
hate, but to love each other that we are here.'  It was not a Christian
but Sophocles, one of the greatest of the heathen, who uttered those
words, and he speaks them still to us!"

Eusebius paused and drew a deep breath.

Dada had listened eagerly, for it pleased her to hear all that she had
been wont to prize spoken of here with due appreciation.  But since
Eusebius had begun to discourse about Plato she had been disturbed by two
men sitting just in front of her.  One was tall and lean, with a long
narrow head, and the other a shorter and more comfortable-looking
personage.  The first fidgeted incessantly, nudging and twitching his
companion, and looking now and then as if he were ready to start up and
interrupt the preacher.  This behavior evidently annoyed his neighbors
who kept signing to him to be quiet and hushing him down, while he took
no notice of their demonstrations but kept clearing his throat with
obtrusive emphasis and at last scraped and shuffled his feet on the
floor, though not very noisily.  But Eusebius began again:

"And now, my brethren, how ought we to demean ourselves in these fateful
times of disturbance?  As Christians; only--or rather, by God's aiding
grace as Christians in the true sense of our Lord and Master, according
to the precepts given by Him through the Apostles.  Their words shall be
mine.  They say there are two paths--the path of Life and the path of
Death, and there is a great difference between them.  The path of Life is
this: First, Thou shalt love God who hath created thee; next thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself, and whatsoever thou wouldst men should do
unto thee even so do unto them; but what thou wouldst not have done unto
thee do thou not to them.  And the sum of the doctrine contained in these
words is this: Bless those that curse you, pray for your enemies and
repent for those who persecute you, for 'if ye love them that love you
what thank have ye?  Do not even the heathen the same?'  Love those that
hate you and you will have no enemies.

"Take this teaching of the holy Apostles to heart this day.  Beware of
mocking or persecuting those who have been your enemies.  Even the nobler
heathen regarded it as an act of grace to respect the conquered foe, and
to you, as Christians, it should be a law.  It is not so hard to forgive
an enemy when we regard him as a possible friend in the future; and the
Christian can go so far as to love him when he remembers that every man
is his brother and neighbor, and equally precious in the sight of the
Saviour who is dearer to us than life.

"The heathen, the idolater, is the Christian's archfoe; but soon he will
he in fetters at our feet.  And, then, my brethren, pray for him; for
if the Almighty, who is without spot or stain and perfect beyond words,
can forgive the sinner, ye who are base and guilty may surely forgive.
'Fishers of souls' we all should be; try to fulfil the injunction.  Draw
the enemy to you by kindness and love; show him by your example the
