
"And supposing we restore the unhappy girl--what good will she get by
it?"

"She will breathe and see the sunshine," replied the leech; "she will be
grateful to you, and finally she will contribute what she can to the
whole body.  She will be alive in short, she will live.  For life--feel
it, understand it as I do--life is the best thing we have."  Paula gazed
with astonishment in the man's unlovely but enthusiastic face.  How
radiantly joyful!

No one could have called it ugly at this moment, or have said that it
lacked charm.

He believed what he had asserted with such fervent feeling, though it was
in contradiction to a view he had held only yesterday and often defended:
that life in itself was misery to all who could not grasp it of their own
strength, and make something of it worth making.  At this moment he
really felt that it was the best gift.

Paula went forward, and his eyes followed her, as the gaze of the pious
pilgrim is fixed on the holy image he has travelled to see, over seas and
mountains, with bruised feet.

They went up to the sick girl's bed.  The nun drew back, making her own
reflections on the physician's altered mien, and his childlike, beaming
contentment, as he explained to Paula what particular peril threatened
the sufferer, and by what treatment he hoped to save her; how to make the
bandages and give the medicines, and how necessary it was to accept the
poor crazy girl's fancies and treat them as rational ideas so long as the
fever lasted.

At last he was forced to go and attend to other patients.  Paula remained
sitting at the head of the bed and gazing at the face of the sufferer.

How fair it was!  And Orion had snatched this rose in the bud, and
trodden it under foot!  She had, no doubt, felt for him what Paula
herself felt.  And now?  Did she feel nothing but hatred of him, or could
her heart, in spite of her indignation and scorn, not altogether cast off
the spell that had once bound it?

What weakness was this!  She was, she must, she would be his foe!

Her thoughts went back to the idle and futile life that she had led for
so many years.  The physician had hit the mark; and he had been too easy
rather than severe.  Yes, she would begin to make good use of her powers
--but how, in what way, here and among these people?  How transfigured
poor Philippus had seemed when she had given him her hand; with what
energy had he poured forth his words.

"And how false," she mused, "is the saying that the body is the mirror of
the soul!  If it were so, Philippus would have the face of Orion, and
Orion that of Philippus."  But could Orion's heart be wholly reprobate?
Nay, that was impossible; her every impulse resisted the belief.  She
must either love him or hate him, there was no third alternative; but as
yet the two passions were struggling within her in a way that was quite
intolerable.

The physician had spoken of being a brother to her, and she could not
help smiling at the idea.  She could, she thought, live very happily and
calmly with him, with her nurse Betta, and with the learned old friend
who shared his home, and of whom he had often talked to her; she could
join him in his studies, help him in his calling, and discuss many things
well worth knowing.  Such a life, she told herself, would be a thousand
times preferable to this, with Neforis.  In him she had certainly found
a friend; and her glad recognition of the fact was the first step towards
the fulfilment of his promise, since it showed that her heart was still
ready to go forth to the kindness of another.

Amid these meditations, however, her anxiety for Hiram constantly
recurred to her, and it was clear to her mind that, if she and Orion
should come to extremities, she could no longer dwell under the
governor's roof.  Often she had longed for nothing so fervently as to be
able to quit it; but to-day it filled her with dread, for parting from
her uncle necessarily involved parting from his son.  She hated him;
still, to lose sight of him altogether would be very hard to bear.
To go with Philippus and live with him as his sister would never do;
nay, it struck her as something inconceivable, strangely incongruous.

Meanwhile she listened to Mandane's breathing and treated her in
obedience to the leech's orders, longing for his return; presently
however, not he but the nun came to the bed-side, laid her hand on the
girl's forehead, and without paying any heed to Paula, whispered kindly:
"That is right child, sleep away; have a nice long sleep.  So long as she
can be kept quiet; if only she goes on like this!--Her head is cooler.
Philippus will certainly say there is scarcely any fever.  Thank God, the
worst danger is over!"

"Oh, how glad I am!"  cried Paula, and she spoke with such warmth and
sincerity that the nun gave her a friendly nod and left the sick girl to
her care, quite satisfied.

It was long since Paula had felt so happy.  She fancied that her presence
had had a good affect on the sufferer, that Mandane had already been
brought by her nursing to the threshold of a new life.  Paula, who but
just now had regarded herself as a persecuted victim of Fate, now
breathed more freely in the belief that she too might bring joy to some
one.  She looked into Mandane's more than pretty face with real joy and
tenderness, laid the bandage which had slipped aside gently over her
ears, and breathed a soft kiss on her long silken lashes.

She rapidly grew in favor with the shrewd nun; when the hour for prayer
came round, the sister included in her petitions--Paula--the orphan under
a stranger's roof, the Greek girl born, by the inscrutable decrees of
God, outside the pale of her saving creed.  At length Philippus returned;
he was rejoiced at his new friend's brightened aspect, and declared that
Mandane had, under her care, got past the first and worst danger, and
might be expected to recover, slowly indeed, but completely.

After Paula had renewed the compress--and he intentionally left her to do
it unaided, he said encouragingly:

"How quickly you have learnt your business.--Now, the patient is asleep
again; the Sister will keep watch, and for the present we can be of no
use to the girl; sleep is the best nourishment she can have.  But with
us--or at any rate with me, it is different.  We have still two hours to
wait for the next meal: my breakfast is standing untouched, and yours no
doubt fared the same; so be my guest.  They always send up enough to
satisfy six bargemen."

Paula liked the proposal, for she had long been hungry.  The nun was
desired to hasten to fetch some more plates, of drinking-vessels there
was no lack--and soon the new allies were seated face to face, each at a
small table.  He carved the duck and the roast quails, put the salad
before her and some steaming artichokes, which the nun had brought up at
the request of the cook whose only son the physician had saved; he
invited her attention to the little pies, the fruits and cakes which were
laid ready, and played the part of butler; and then, while they heartily
enjoyed the meal, they carried on a lively conversation.

Paula for the first time asked Philippus to tell her something of his
early youth; he began with an account of his present mode of life, as a
partner in the home of the singular old priest of Isis, Horus Apollo, a
diligent student; he described his strenuous activity by day and his
quiet studies by night, and gave everything such an amusing aspect that
often she could not help laughing.  But presently he was sad, as he told
her how at an early age he had lost his father and mother, and was left
to depend solely on himself and on a very small fortune, having no
relations; for his father had been a grammarian, invited to Alexandria
from Athens, who had been forced to make a road for himself through life,
which had lain before him like an overgrown jungle of papyrus and reeds.
Every hour of his life was devoted to his work, for a rough, outspoken
Goliath, such as he, never could find it easy to meet with helpful
patrons.  He had managed to live by teaching in the high schools of
Alexandria, Athens, and Caesarea, and by preparing medicines from choice
herbs--drinking water instead of wine, eating bread and fruit instead of
quails and pies; and he had made a friend of many a good man, but never
yet of a woman--it would be difficult with such a face as his!

"Then I am the first?"  said Paula, who felt deep respect for the man who
had made his way by his own energy to the eminent position which he had
long held, not merely in Memphis, but among Egyptian physicians
generally.

He nodded, and with such a blissful smile that she felt as though a
sunbeam had shone into her very soul.  He noticed this at once, raised
his goblet, and drank to her, exclaiming with a flush on his cheek:

"The joy that comes to others early has come to me late; but then the
woman I call my friend is matchless!"

"Well, it is to be hoped she may not prove to be so wicked as you just
now described her.--If only our alliance is not fated to end soon and
abruptly."

"Ah!"  cried the physician, "every drop of blood in my veins......"

"You would be ready to shed it for me," Paula broke in, with a pathetic
gesture, borrowed from a great tragedian she had seen at the theatre in
Damascus.  "But never fear: it will not be a matter of life and death--
at worst they will but turn me out of the house and of Memphis."

"You?"  cried Philippus startled, "but who would dare to do so?"

"They who still regard me as a stranger.--You described the case
admirably.  If they have their way, my dear new friend, our fate will be
like that of the learned Dionysius of Cyrene."

"Of Cyrene?"

"Yes.  It was my father who told me the story.  When Dionysius sent his
son to the High School at Athens, he sat down to write a treatise for him
on all the things a student should do and avoid.  He devoted himself to
the task with the utmost diligence; but when, at the end of four years,
he could write on the last leaf of the roll.  "Here this book hath a
happy ending," the young man whose studies it was intended to guide
came home to Cyrene, a finished scholar."

"And we have struck up a friendship.... ?"

"And made a treaty of alliance, only to be parted ere long."

Philippus struck his fist vehemently on the little table in front of his
couch and exclaimed: "That I will find means to prevent!--But now, tell
me in confidence, what has last happened between you and the family down-
stairs?"

"You will know quite soon enough."

"Whichever of them fancies that you can be turned out of doors without
more ado and there will be an end between us, may find himself mistaken!"
cried the physician with an angry sparkle in his eyes.  "I have a right
to put in a word in this house.  It has not nearly come to that yet, and
what is more, it never shall.  You shall quit it certainly; but of your
own free will, and holding your head high...."

As he spoke the door of the outer room was hastily opened and the next
instant Orion was standing before them, looking with great surprise at
the pair who had just finished their meal.  He said coldly:

"I am disturbing you, I see."

"Not in the least," replied the leech; and the young man, perceiving what
bad taste it would be and how much out of place to give expression to his
jealous annoyance, said, with a smile: "If only it had been granted to a
third person to join in this symposium!"

"We found each other all-sufficient company," answered Philippus.

"A man who could believe in all the doctrines of the Church as readily as
in that statement would be assured of salvation," laughed Orion.  "I am
no spoilsport, respected friends; but I deeply regret that I must, on the
present occasion, disturb your happiness.  The matter in question......"
And he felt he might now abandon the jesting tone which so little
answered to his mood, "is a serious one.  In the first instance it
concerns your freedman, my fair foe."

"Has Hiram come back?"  asked Paula, feeling herself turn pale.

"They have brought him in," replied Orion.  "My father at once summoned
the court of judges.  Justice has a swift foot here with us; I am sorry
for the man, but I cannot prevent its taking its course.  I must beg of
you to appear at the examination when you are called."

"The whole truth shall be told!"  said Paula sternly and firmly.

"Of course," replied Orion.  Then turning to the physician, he added: "I
would request you, worthy Esculapius, to leave me and my cousin together
for a few minutes.  I want to give her a word of counsel which will
certainly be to her advantage."

Philippus glanced enquiringly at the girl; she said with clear decision:
"You and I can have no secrets.  What I may hear, Philippus too may
know."

Orion, with a shrug, turned to leave the room:

On the threshold he paused, exclaiming with some excitement and genuine
distress:

"If you will not listen to me for your own sake, do so at least, whatever
ill-feeling you may bear me, because I implore you not to refuse me this
favor.  It is a matter of life or death to one human being, of joy or
misery to another.  Do not refuse me.--I ask nothing unreasonable,
Philippus.  Do as I entreat you and leave us for a moment alone."

