father while he shouted to the ladies--for only his mother and the
physician accompanied the invalid after carefully wrapping him in shawls
--to get out of the barge and wait for him.  Then he went forward,
lighted by the torches which were carried before them.

"Poor man!"  thought the merchant as he looked after the Mukaukas.
"But to a man who has such a son to carry him the saddest and hardest
lot floats by like a cloud before the wind."

He was now ready to forgive Orion even the rejected flowers; and when the
young girl stepped on shore, the child clinging fondly to her arm, he
confessed to himself that Dame Susannah's little daughter would find it
hard indeed to hold her own by the side of this tall and royal vision of
beauty.  What a form was this maiden's, and what princely bearing; and
how sweet and engaging the voice in which she named some of the
constellations to her little companion, and pointed out the comet which
was just rising!

Haschim was sitting in shadow; he could see without being seen, and note
all that took place on the bench, which was lighted by one of the barge's
lanterns.  The unexpected entertainment gave him pleasure, for everything
that affected the governor's son roused his sympathy and interest.  The
idea of forming an opinion of this remarkable young man smiled on his
fancy, and the sight of the beautiful girl who sat on the bench yonder
warmed his old heart.  The child must certainly be Mary, the governor's
granddaughter.

Then the chariot started off, clattering away down the road, and in a few
minutes Orion came back to the rest of the party.

Alas!  Poor little heiress of Susannah's wealth!  How different was his
demeanor to this beautiful damsel from his treatment of that little
thing!  His eyes rested on her face in rapture, his speech failed him now
and again as he addressed her, and what he said must be sometimes grave
and captivating and sometimes witty, for not she alone but the little
maid's governess listened to him eagerly, and when the fair one laughed
it was in particularly sweet, clear tones.  There was something so lofty
in her mien that this frank expression of contentment was almost
startling; like a breath of perfume from some gorgeous flower which seems
created to rejoice the eye only.  And she, to whom all that Orion had to
say was addressed, listened to him not only with deep attention, but in a
way which showed the merchant that she cared even more for the speaker
than for what he was so eager in expressing.  If this maiden wedded the
governor's son, they would indeed be a pair!  Taus, the innkeeper's wife,
now came out, a buxom and vigorous Egyptian woman of middle age, carrying
some of the puffs for which she was famous, and which she had just made
with her own hands.  She also served them with milk, grapes and other
fruit, her eyes sparkling with delight and gratified ambition; for the
son of the great Mukaukas, the pride of the city, who in former years had
often been her visitor, and not only for the sake of her cakes, in water
parties with his gay companions--mostly Greek officers who now were all
dead and gone or exiles from the country--now did her the honor to come
here so soon after his return.  Her facile tongue knew no pause as she
told him that she and her husband had gone forth with the rest to welcome
him at the triumphal arch near Menes' Gate, and Emau with them, and the
little one.  Yes, Emau was married now, and had called her first child
Orion.  And when the young man asked Dame Taus whether Emau was as
charming as ever and as like her mother as she used to be, she shook her
finger at him and asked in her turn, as she pointed towards the young
lady, whether the fickle bird at whose departure so many had sighed, was
to be caged at last, and whether yon fair lady....

But Orion cut her short, saying that he was still his own master though
he already felt the noose round his neck; and the fair lady blushed even
more deeply than at the good woman's first question.  He however soon got
over his awkwardness and gaily declared that the worthy Taus' little
daughter was one of the prettiest girls in Memphis, and had had quite as
many admirers as her excellent mother's puff-pastry.  Taus was to greet
her kindly from him.

The landlady departed, much touched and flattered; Orion took up his
lute, and while the ladies refreshed themselves he did the maiden's
bidding and sang the song by Alcaeus which she asked for, in a rich
though subdued voice to the lute, playing it like a master.  The young
girl's eyes were fixed on his lips, and again, he seemed to be making
music for her alone.  When it was time to start homewards, and the ladies
returned to the barge, he went up to the inn to pay the reckoning.  As he
presently returned alone the Arab saw him pick up a handkerchief that the
young lady had left on the table, and hastily press it to his lips as he
went towards the barge.

The gorgeous red blossoms had fared worse in the morning.  The young
man's heart was given to that maiden on the water.  She could not be his
sister; what then was the connection between them?

The merchant soon gained this information, for the guide on his return
could give it him.  She was Paula, the daughter of Thomas, the famous
Greek general who had defended the city of Damascus so long and so
bravely against the armies of Islam.  She was Mukaukas George's niece,
but her fortune was small; she was a poor relation of the family, and
after her father's disappearance--for his body had never been found--
she had been received into the governor's house out of pity and charity
--she, a Melchite!  The interpreter had little to say in her favor, by
reason of her sect; and though he could find no flaw in her beauty, he
insisted on it that she was proud and ungracious, and incapable of
winning any man's love; only the child, little Mary--she, to be sure, was
very fond of her.  It was no secret that even her uncle's wife, worthy
Neforis, did not care for her haughty niece and only suffered her to
please the invalid.  And what business had a Melchite at Memphis, under
the roof of a good Jacobite?  Every word the dragoman spoke breathed the
scorn which a mean and narrow-minded man is always ready to heap on those
who share the kindness of his own benefactors.

But this beautiful and lofty-looking daughter of a great man had
conquered the merchant's old heart, and his opinion of her was quite
unmoved by the Memphite's strictures.  It was ere long confirmed indeed,
for Philip, the leech whom the guide had been to find, and whose
dignified personality inspired the Arab with confidence, was a daily
visitor to the governor, and he spoke of Paula as one of the most perfect
creatures that Heaven had ever formed in a happy hour.  But the Almighty
seemed to have forgotten to care for his own masterpiece; for years her
life had been indeed a sad one.

The physician could promise the old man some mitigation of his
sufferings, and they liked each other so well that they parted the best
of friends, and not till a late hour.




CHAPTER III.

The Mukaukas' barge, urged forward by powerful rowers, made its way
smoothly down the river.  On board there was whispering, and now and
again singing.  Little Mary had dropped asleep on Paula's shoulder; the
Greek duenna gazed sometimes at the comet which filled her with terrors,
sometimes at Orion, whose handsome face had bewitched her mature heart,
and sometimes at the young girl whom she was ill-pleased to see thus
preferred by this favorite of the gods.  It was a deliciously warm, still
night, and the moon, which makes the ocean swell and flow, stirs the tide
of feeling to rise in the human breast.

Whatever Paula asked for Orion sang, as though nothing was unknown to him
that had ever sounded on a Greek lute; and the longer they went on the
clearer and richer his voice grew, the more melting and seductive its
expression, and the more urgently it appealed to the young girl's heart.
Paula gave herself up to the sweet enchantment, and when he laid down the
lute and asked in low tones if his native land was not lovely on such a
night as this, or which song she liked best, and whether she had any idea
of what it had been to him to find her in his parents' house, she yielded
to the charm and answered him in whispers like his own.

Under the dense foliage of the sleeping garden he pressed her hand to his
lips, and she, tremulous, let him have his way.--Bitter, bitter years lay
behind her.  The physician had spoken only too truly.  The hardest blows
of fate had brought her--the proud daughter of a noble father--to a
course of cruel humiliations.  The life of a friendless though not
penniless relation, taken into a wealthy house out of charity, had proved
a thorny path to tread, but now-since the day before yesterday--all was
changed.  Orion had come.  His home and the city had held high festival
on his return, as at some gift of Fortune, in which she too had a goodly
share.  He had met her, not as the dependent relative, but as a beautiful
and high-born woman.  There was sunshine in his presence which warmed her
very heart, and made her raise her head once more like a flower that is
brought out under the open sky after long privation of light and air.
His bright spirit and gladness of life refreshed her heart and brain; the
respect he paid her revived her crushed self-confidence and filled her
soul with fervent gratitude.  Ah! and how delightful it was to feel that
she might be grateful, devotedly grateful.--And then, then this evening
had been hers, the sweetest, most blessed that she had known for years.
He had reminded her of what she had almost forgotten:  that she was still
young, that she was still lovely, that she had a right to be happy, to
enchant and be enchanted--perhaps even to love and to be loved.

Her hand was still conscious of his burning kiss as she entered the cool
room where the Lady Neforis sat awaiting the return of the party, turning
her spinning-wheel by the couch of her invalid husband who always went to
rest at late hours.  It was with an overflowing heart that Paula raised
her uncle's hand to her lips--Orion's father, might she not say HER
Orion's?--Then she kissed her aunt--his mother, and it was long since she
had done so--as she and little Mary bid her good-night.  Neforis accepted
the kiss coolly but with some surprise, and looked up enquiringly at the
girl and at her son.  No doubt she thought many things, but deemed it
prudent to give them no utterance for the present.  She allowed the girl
to retire as though nothing unusual had occurred, superintended the
servants who came to carry her husband into his bedroom, gave him the
white globule which was to secure him sleep, and with indefatigable
patience turned and moved his pillows till his couch was to his mind.
Not till then, nor till she was satisfied that a servant was keeping
watch in the adjoining room, did she leave him; and then--for there was
danger in delay--she went to seek her son.

This tall, large and rather too portly woman had been in her youth a
slender and elegant girl; a graceful creature though her calm and
expressionless features had never been strikingly beautiful.  Age had
altered them but little; her face was now that of a good-looking, plump,
easy-going matron, which had lost its freshness through long and devoted
attendance on the sick man.  Her birth and position gave her confidence
and self-reliance, but there was nothing gracious or captivating in her
individuality.  The joys and woes of others were not hers; still she
could be moved and stirred by them, even to self-denial, and was very
capable of feeling quite a passionate interest for others; only, those
others must be her own immediate belongings and no one else.  Thus a more
devoted and anxious wife, or a more loving mother would have been hard to
find; but, if we compare her faculty for loving with a star, its rays
were too short to reach further than to those nearest to her, and these
regarded it as an exceptional state of grace to be included within the
narrow circle of those beloved by her somewhat grudging soul.

She knocked at Orion's sitting-room, and he hailed her late visit with
surprise and pleasure.  She had come to speak of a matter of importance,
and had done so promptly, for her son's and Paula's conduct just now
urged her to lose no time.  Something was going on between these two and
her husband's niece was far outside the narrow limits of her loving
kindness.

This, she began by saying, would not allow her to sleep.  She had but one
heart's desire and his father shared it: Orion must know full well what
she meant; she had spoken to him about it only yesterday.  His father had
received him with warm affection, had paid his debts unhesitatingly and
