Where were they taking her?

Did the Emperor intend to make her a prisoner?  He certainly possessed
the power.  Who would dare to resist him?

She could attain no clearness of thought, for, while giving free course
to the indignation of her soul, she was gazing out at the open sides of
the sedan chair.

Every house, every paving stone here was familiar and awakened some
memory.  A crowd of people surrounded her, and among them appeared many a
foreign soldier on foot and on horseback, who would have been well worthy
of an attentive glance.  But what did she care for the Italians in
helmets and coats of mail who filled the Altstadt--the main business
street of Landshut--through which she was being carried?  She doubtless
cast a glance toward the Town Hall, where her uncle was now devising
means to provide shelter for this legion of soldiers and steeds,
doubtless put her head a little out of the window as she approached the
houses and arcades in the lower stories, and the Lorberer mansion, with
the blunt gable, where she had spent such happy days, appeared.  But she
quickly drew it back again; if any of her relatives should see her, what
answer could she make to questions?

But no one perceived her, and who knows whether they would not have
supposed the delicate, troubled face, short locks of hair, and
unnaturally large eyes to be those of another girl who only resembled
the blooming, healthful Barbara of former days?

She also glanced toward the richly decorated portal of St. Martin's
Church, standing diagonally opposite to the sedan chair, and tried to
look up to the steeple, which was higher than almost any other in the
world.

Even in Ratisbon there was not a handsomer, wider street than this
Altstadt, with its stately gable-roofed houses, and certainly not in
Munich, where her uncle had once taken her, and the Bavarian dukes now
resided.

But where, in Heaven's name, would she be borne?

The sedan chair was now swaying past the place where the "short cut" for
pedestrians led up to the Trausnitzburg, the proud citadel of the dukes
of Bavarian Landshut.  She leaned forward again to look up at it as it
towered far above her head on the opposite side of the way; the powerful
ruler whose captive she was probably lodged there.

But now!

What did this mean?

The sedan chair was set down, and it was just at the place where the road
at her left, leading to the citadel, climbed the height where rose the
proud Trausnitz fortress.

Perhaps she might now find an opportunity to escape.

Barbara hastily opened the door, but one of her attendants closed it
again, and in doing so pressed her gently back into the chair.  At the
same time he shook his head, and, while his little black eyes twinkled
slyly at her, his broad, smiling mouth, over which hung a long black
mustache, uttered a good-natured "No, no."

Now the ascent of the mountain began.  A wall bordered the greater
portion of the road, which often led through a ravine overgrown with
brushwood and past bastions and other solid masonry.

The bearers had already mounted to a considerable height, yet there was
no view of the city and the neighbouring country.  But even the loveliest
prospect would not have induced Barbara to open her eyes, for the
indignation which overpowered her had increased to fierce rage, blended
with a fear usually alien to her courageous soul.

In the one tower of the citadel there were prisons of tolerably pleasant
aspect, but she had heard whispers of terrible subterranean dungeons
connected with the secret tribunal.

Suppose the Emperor Charles intended to lock her in one of these dungeons
and withdraw her from the eyes of the world?  Who could guard her from
this horrible fate? who could prevent him from keeping her buried alive
during her life?

Shuddering, she looked out again.  If she was not mistaken, they were
nearing the end of the road, and she would soon learn what was before
her.  Perhaps the Emperor Charles himself was awaiting her up there.  But
if he asked her whether she intended always to defy him, she would show
him that Barbara Blomberg was not to be intimidated; that she knew how to
defend herself and, if necessary, to suffer; that she would be ready to
risk everything to baffle his design and carry out her own resolve.  Then
he should see that nations and kings, nay, even the Holy Father in Rome-
as Charles had once sacrilegiously done--may be vanquished and humbled;
that the hard, precious stone may be crushed and solid metal melted, but
the steadfast will of a woman battling for what she holds dearest can not
be broken.

The sedan chair had already passed through half a dozen citadel gates and
left one solid wall behind it, but now a second rose, with a lofty door
set in its strong masonry.

When Barbara had formerly ascended the Trausnitz, with what pleasure she
had gazed at the deep moat at her left, the pheasants, the stately
peacocks, and other feathered creatures, as well as a whole troop of
lively monkeys; but this time she saw nothing except that the heavy iron-
bound portals of the entrance opened before her, that the drawbridge,
though the sun was close to the western horizon, was still lowered, and
that Quijada stood at the end, motioning to the bearers to set the sedan
chair on the ground.

Now the major-domo opened the door, and this time he was not alone;
Barbara saw behind him a woman whose appearance, spite of her angry
excitement, inspired confidence.

The questions which, without heeding his companion, she now with crimson
cheeks poured upon Don Luis as if fairly frantic, he answered in brief,
businesslike words.

The Emperor Charles wished to place her in safe quarters up here, while
he himself had taken lodgings in the modest house of a Schwaiger--a
small farmer who tilled his own garden and land in the valley below.

For the present, some of the most distinguished officers were here in the
citadel as guests of the Duke of Bavaria.  Barbara was to live in the
ladies' apartments of the fortress, under the care of the worthy woman at
his side.

"His Majesty could not have provided for you more kindly," he concluded.

"Then may the Virgin preserve every one from such kindness!" she
impetuously exclaimed.  "I am dragged to this citadel against my will---"

"And that irritates your strong feeling of independence, which we know,"
replied the Spaniard quietly.  "But when you listen to reason, fairest
lady, you will soon be reconciled to this wise regulation of his Majesty.
If not, it will be your own loss.  But," he added in a lowered tone,
"this is no fitting place for a conversation which might easily
degenerate into a quarrel.  It can be completed better in your own
apartments."

While speaking he led the way, and Barbara followed without another word
of remonstrance, for soldiers of all ages and other gentlemen were
walking in the large, beautiful courtyard which she overlooked; a group
of lovers of horseflesh were examining some specially fine steeds, and
from several of the broad windows which surrounded the Trausnitz
courtyard on all sides men's faces were looking down at her.

This courtyard had always seemed to her a stage specially suitable for
the display of royal magnificence, and yet, in spite of its stately size,
it would be difficult to imagine anything more pleasant, more thoroughly
secluded.

It had formerly witnessed many brilliant knightly games and festal
scenes, but even now it was the favourite gathering place for the
inhabitants of the citadel and the guests of the ducal owner, though
the latter, it is true, had ceased to live here since Landshut had become
the heritage of the Munich branch of the Wittelsbach family, and the
Bavarian dukes resided in Munich, the upper city on the Isar.

Just as Barbara entered the castle the vesper bell rang, and Quijada
paused with bared head, his companions with clasped hands.

The girl prisoner felt little inclination to pray; she was probably
thinking of a dance given here by torchlight, in which, as her uncle's
guest, she had taken part until morning began to dawn.

While they were walking on again, she also remembered the riding at the
ring in the Trausnitz courtyard, which she had been permitted to witness.

The varied, magnificent spectacle had made her almost wild with delight.
The dance in this square had been one of her fairest memories.  And with
what feelings she looked down into this courtyard again!  What could such
an amusement be to her now?  Yet it roused a bitter feeling that, in
spite of her youth, such scenes should be closed to her forever.

She silently followed the others into an airy room in the third story,
whose windows afforded a beautiful view extending to the Bohemian
forests.

But Barbara was too weary to bestow more than a fleeting glance upon it.

Paying no heed to the others, she sank down upon the bench near one of
the walls of the room, and while she was still talking with Don Luis her
new companion, of whose name she was still ignorant, brought several
cushions and silently placed them behind her back.

This chamber, Quijada explained, he had selected for her by his Majesty's
permission.  The adjoining room would be occupied by this good lady--he
motioned to his companion--the wife of Herr Adrian Dubois, his Majesty's
valet.  Being a native of Cologne, she understood German, and had offered
to bear her company.  If Barbara desired, she could also summon the
garde-robiere Lamperi from Ratisbon to the Trausnitz.

Here she interrupted him with the question how long the Emperor intended
to detain her here.

"As long as it suits his imperial pleasure and the physician deems
advisable," was the reply.  Barbara merely shrugged her shoulders again;
she felt utterly exhausted.  But when Quijada, who perceived that she
needed rest, was about to leave her, she remembered the cause of her
drive to Landshut, and asked whether she might speak to her father's
travelling companion, who could give her information about the health of
the old man who, after the Emperor had sent him out into the world, had
fallen ill in Antwerp.

This was willingly granted, and Don Luis even undertook to send Sir
Pyramus Kogel, whom he knew by sight, to her.  Then commending her to
the care of Fran Dubois, who was directed to gratify every reasonable
wish, he left the room.  Meanwhile Barbara desired nothing except rest,
but she studiously refrained from addressing even a word to her new
companion.  Besides, there was little time to do so, she was soon sound
asleep.

When at the end of two hours she awoke, she found herself lying at full
length upon the bench, while a careful hand had removed her shoes, and
the pillows which had supported her weary back were now under her head.

During her slumber it had grown dark, and a small lamp, whose rays a
handkerchief shielded from her eyes, was standing on the stove in one
corner of the room.

Yet she was alone; but she had scarcely stirred when Frau Dubois
appeared with a maid-servant bearing a candelabrum with lighted candles.
The careful nurse asked in brief but pleasant words whether she felt
stronger, if it would be agreeable to her to have supper served in
fifteen minutes, and if she would allow her to help her.

"Willingly," replied Barbara, very pleasantly surprised.  Her companion,
as it were, anticipated her strongest wishes--to satisfy her hunger and
to change her dress.

She must be capable and, moreover, a woman of kindly, delicate feelings,
and it certainly was no fault of hers that she was intrusted with her
guardianship and that she belonged to no higher station in life.  She was
only punishing herself by persisting in her silence and, as Frau Dubois
tended her like a watchful mother, though without addressing a single
word to her unasked, Barbara's grateful heart and the satisfaction which
the valet's wife inspired silenced her arrogance.

When an attendant laid the table for only one person, the girl kindly
invited Frau Dubois to dine with her; the former, however, had already
had her meal, but she said that she would be very glad to bear the young
lady company if she desired.

The first long conversation between the two took place at the table.

The pretty face of the native of the Rhine country, with its little snub
nose, which in youth must have lent a touch of gay pertness to the well-
formed features, was still unwrinkled, though Frau Dubois was nearer
fifty than forty.  Her gray, nearly white hair, though ill-suited to her
almost youthful features, lent them a peculiar charm, and how brightly
her round, brown eyes still sparkled!  The plain gown of fine Brabant
stuff fitted as if moulded to her figure, and it was difficult to imagine
