devoted to destruction.

To rise above everything petty, and with the imperial motto "More,
farther," before her eyes, to attain a lofty height from which to look
down upon others and show her own generosity to them, had been the
longing of her life.  She was still permitted to feel herself the object
of the love of the mightiest sovereign on earth, and should she be denied
performing, by her own power, an act of deliverance to which heart and
mind urged her?

No, and again no!

She was no longer poor Wawerl!

She could and would show this, for, like an illumination, words which she
had heard the day before in the Golden Cross had flashed into her memory.

Master Wenzel Jamnitzer, the famous Nuremberg goldsmith, had addressed
them to her in the imperial apartments, where he had listened to her
singing the day before.

He had come to consult with the Emperor Charles about the diadems which
he wished to give his two nieces, the daughters of Ferdinand, King
of the Romans, who were to be married in July in Ratisbon.  Their
manufacture had been intrusted to Master Jamnitzer, and after the concert
the Nuremberg artist had thanked Barbara for the pleasure which he owed
her.  In doing so, he had noticed the Emperor's first gift, the
magnificent star which she wore on her breast at the side of her
squarenecked dress.  Examining it with the eye of an expert, he had
remarked that the central stone alone was worth an estate.

If she deprived herself of this superb ornament, the despairing old
mother would be consoled, and the lovely child saved from hunger and
disgrace.

With Barbara, thought, resolve, and action followed one another in rapid
succession.

"You shall have what you need to-morrow," she called to the marquise,
kissed--obeying a hasty impulse--her little namesake's picture, rejected
any expression of thanks from the astonished old dame, and went to rest.

Frau Lerch had never seen her so radiant with happiness, yet she was
irritated by the reserve of the girl for whom she thought she had
sacrificed so much, yet whose new garments had already brought her
more profit than the earnings of the three previous years.

The next morning Master Jamnitzer called the valuable star his own, and
pledged himself to keep the matter secret, and to obtain from the Fuggers
a bill of exchange upon Paris for ten thousand lire.

The honest man sent her through the Haller banking house a thousand
ducats, that he might not be open to the reproach of having defrauded
her.

Yet the gold which she did not need for the marquise seemed to Barbara
like money unjustly obtained.  While she was riding out at noon, Frau
Lerch found it in her chest, and thought that she now knew what had made
the girl so happy the day before.  She was all the more indignant when,
soon after, Barbara gave half the new wealth to the Prebrunn town clerk
to distribute among the poor journeymen potters whose huts had been
burned down the previous night.  The rest she kept to give to the
relatives of her one-eyed maid-servant at home, who were in the direst
poverty.

For the first time she had felt the pleasure of interposing, like a
higher power, in the destiny of others.  What she had hoped from the
greatness to which she had risen now appeared on the eve of being
actually and wholly fulfilled.

Even the strange manner in which the marquise thanked her for her
generosity could but partially impair the exquisite sense of happiness
which filled her heart.

As soon as the old noblewoman heard that the bill of exchange for her son
was on the way to Paris, she expressed her intention of thanking his
Majesty for this noble donation.

Startled and anxious, Barbara was obliged to forbid this, and to confess
that, on the contrary, the Emperor had refused to do anything whatever
for her son, and that morning, for little Babette's sake, she had used
her own property.

The marquise then angrily declared that a Marquise de Leria could accept
such a favour without a blush solely from his Majesty.  Even from an
equal in station she must refuse gifts of such value.  If Barbara was
honest, she would admit that she had never, even by a syllable, asked for
a donation, but always only for her intercession with his Majesty.  Her
hasty action made withdrawal impossible, but the humiliation which she
had experienced through her was so hard to conquer that she could
scarcely bring herself to feel grateful for a gift which, in itself,
was certainly worthy of appreciation.

In fact, from that time the marquise entirely changed her manner, and
instead of flattering her ward as before, she treated her with haughty
coldness, and sometimes remarked that poverty and hostility were often
easier to bear than intrusive kindness and humiliating gifts.

Hitherto Barbara had placed no one under obligation to be grateful, and
therefore the ugliness of ingratitude was unknown to her.

Now she was to become acquainted with it.

At first this disappointment wounded her, but soon the marquise's
intention of ridding herself, by this conduct, of a heavy debt became
apparent, and she opposed to the base cunning a gay defence, but was then
forced to encounter the marquise's condemnation of it as the outgrowth of
an ungenerous soul.

How unpleasant this was!  Yet she kept what she had done for the old
aristocrat and the way in which she had requited it a secret, even from
Frau Lerch, especially as the Emperor soon alluded to his denial of her
entreaty, and gave a description of young Leria which filled her with
horror, and led to the conviction that the sacrifice which she had made
for him and his little daughter had been utterly futile.

Little Babette, she also heard, was cared for in the best possible
manner, having been withdrawn front her father's influence long before
and placed in charge of an estimable, wealthy, and aristocratic aunt,
her mother's sister, who filled the latter's place.

This act of charity had been utterly spoiled for the overhasty giver,
and, while the glad remembrance of the pure delight which she had felt
after her generous resolve faded more and more, she began to be uneasy
about her reckless transaction with the Nuremberg goldsmith, for the
Emperor during his very next visit had asked about the star, and in her
confusion she had again been forced into a falsehood, and tried to excuse
herself for so rarely wearing his beautiful present by the pretext that
the gold pin which fastened it was bent.

She could have inflicted various punishments upon herself for her
precipitate yielding to a hastily awakened sympathy, for it would surely
anger the Emperor if he learned how carelessly she had treated his first
costly gift.

Perhaps some hint of its sale had already reached his ears, for, although
he had made no opposition to her apology, he afterward remained taciturn
and irritable.

Every subsequent interview with her lover was terribly shadowed by the
dread that he might think of the unlucky ornament again.

Yet, on this occasion also, fear prevented the brave girl from confessing
the whole truth.




CHAPTER XXVI.

On St. Desiderius's Day--[May 23rd]--the Emperor again missed the star,
and, as it was in the Golden Cross and the heat was great, Barbara
replied that her dress was too thin for the heavy ornament.  But the
inquiry had made her fear of additional questions so great that she
rejoiced over the news that her lover would not visit her the next day.

On the day before yesterday Christoph Madrucci, the Cardinal of Trent,
his warlike brother Hildebrand, and the Count of Arco had arrived,
bringing news from the Council; but on the morrow Duke Maurice of Saxony
was expected, and the most important negotiations were to be carried on
not only with him, but also with the former, each individual being dealt
with singly and at different hours.

In the evening the welcome guest was to be entertained by music and, if
agreeable to Barbara, by singing also.  On the twenty-fifth the city had
decided to give a May festival under the lindens in honour of the duke.
The Emperor and the whole court were of course invited.

Barbara then acknowledged that she was fond of such magnificent
exhibitions, and begged Charles to allow her to attend the festival with
the marquise.

The answer was an assent, but the Emperor gave it after some delay, and
with the remark that he could devote little time to her, and expected
that she would subject herself to some restraint.

True, the painful surprise which her features expressed vividly enough
led him to add the apology that, on account of the presence of the two
cardinals--for one had come from Augsburg--he would be compelled to deny
himself the pleasure of showing her anything more than courteous
consideration in public; but she could not succeed in conquering the
mortification which, besides the grief of disappointment, had taken
possession of her sensitive soul.

Charles probably perceived, by the alternate flushing and paling of her
cheeks, what was passing in her thoughts, and would gladly have soothed
her; but he refrained, and forced himself to be content with the few
conciliatory words which he had already addressed to her.

Great events were impending.  If he decided upon war, nothing, not even
love, could be permitted to encroach too heavily upon his time and
strength; but Barbara and the demands which her love made upon him would
surely do this if he did not early impose moderation upon her and
himself.

He had heard nothing about the sale of the star, and whatever had
displeased him in Barbara's conduct during the last few weeks she had
succeeded in effacing.  Yet he had often been on the point of breaking
off his relations with her, for just at this time it was of infinite
importance that he should keep himself free and strong in mind and body.

Moreover, in a few days he expected his brother Ferdinand with his grown
children.  Two of his nieces were to be married here in his presence, and
he felt that he ought not to let either them or the Cardinal of Trent--
who was coming from the Council and would return there--see how strong
were the fetters with which, at his age and just at this time, he allowed
himself to be bound by love for a beautiful singer.

The wisdom which had long been characteristic of him commanded him to
sever abruptly the connection with the woman he loved and remove her from
his path.  But the demands of the heart and the senses were too powerful
for the man who indulged to excess in fiery wine and spiced foods, though
he knew that greater abstinence would have spared him torturing pangs.

He had succeeded hundreds of times in obtaining the victory over other
urgent wishes, and conquering strong affections.  But this was different,
for separation from Barbara must, at any rate, destroy the exquisite late
happiness of the newly unfolded enjoyment of life, and for this heavy
loss he saw no compensation.  To part from her entirely, therefore,
seemed to him impossible--at any rate, for the present.  On the other
hand, the duty of the sovereign and consideration for his relatives both
commanded him to restrict the demands of her passionate young heart and
his own, which had so recently awaked from slumber.

He had recognised this necessity, and considered the pros and cons
precisely as if the matter were a political question.  He who, without
the quiver of an eyelash, had sent many a band of soldiers to certain
death in order to execute a well-conceived plan of battle, was compelled
to inflict keen suffering upon the woman he loved and himself, that
greater interests might not be injured.

He had commenced the retreat that day.

The constraint which it was necessary to impose upon themselves must be
equally painful to them both, yet this could not be altered.

Had it affected him alone, in defiance of his sense of rank and the
tyranny of court etiquette, he would have led Barbara, attired like a
true queen, with his own hand to the festival under the lindens, but the
gratification of this heartfelt wish would have entailed too many evil
consequences.

Toying with her, who so quickly understood and so gratefully accepted the
gifts of the intellect which he offered, was so sweet, but in these days
it must not be permitted to impair mental repose, keen thought.  What he
had to discuss and settle with Maurice of Saxony and Cardinal Madrucci
was of too momentous importance to the destiny of the world, to the
Church, to his fame as a sovereign, to his own greatness and that of his
race.
