the children, too, even the smallest ones--isn't that so, Peperle?--like
their own silly mothers."  She smoothed the blind boy's golden hair as
she spoke, then added, sighing:

"But the little fellow was too young to remember it.  The rattle which
she gave him at Augsburg--it was just before the accident--because she
was so fond of him--Saint Kunigunde, how could we keep such worthless
jewels in our sore need?--was made of pure silver.  True, the simpletons
who were so madly in love with her, and with whom she played so cruelly,
would have believed her capable of anything sooner than such kindness.
There was a Swabian knight, a young fellow----"

Here she stopped, for Cyriax and the other vagabonds, even the girl of
whom she was speaking, had started up and were gazing at the door.

Kuni opened her eyes as wide as if a miracle had happened, and the
crimson spots on her sunken cheeks betrayed how deeply she was agitated.
But she had never experienced anything of this kind; for while thinking
of the time when, through Lienhard Groland's intercession, she had
entered the house of the wealthy old Frau Schurstab, in order to become
estranged from a vagabond life, and recalling how once, when he saw her
sorrowful there, he had spoken kindly to her, it seemed as if she had
actually heard his own voice.  As it still appeared to echo in her ears,
she suddenly became aware that the words really did proceed from his
lips.  What she had heard in her dream and what now came from his own
mouth, as he stood at the door, blended into one.  She would never have
believed that the power of imagination could reproduce anything so
faithfully.

Listening intently, she said to herself that, during the many thousand
times when she had talked with him in fancy, it had also seemed as if she
heard him speak.  And the same experience had befallen her eyes; for
whenever memory reverted to those distant days, she had beheld him just
as he now looked standing on the threshold, where he was detained by the
landlady of The Pike.  Only his face had become still more manly, his
bearing more dignified.  The pleasant, winning expression of the bearded
lips remained unchanged, and more than once she had seen his eyes sparkle
with a far warmer light than now, while he was thanking the portly woman
for her cordial welcome.

While Kuni's gaze still rested upon him as if spellbound, Cyriax nudged
her, stammering hurriedly:

"They will have to pass us.  Move forward, women, in front of me.  Spread
out your skirt, you Redhead!  It might be my death if yonder Nuremberg
fine gentleman should see me here and recollect one thing and another."

As he spoke he dragged Kuni roughly from the window, flung the sack which
he had brought in from the cart down before him, and made them sit on it,
while he stretched himself on the floor face downward, and pretended to
be asleep behind the women.

This suited Kuni.  If Lienhard Groland passed her now he could not help
seeing her, and she had no greater desire than to meet his glance once
more before her life ended.  Yet she dreaded this meeting with an
intensity plainly revealed by the passionate throbbing of her heart and
the panting of her weakened lungs.  There was a rushing noise in her
ears, and her eyes grew dim.  Yet she was obliged to keep them wide open-
-what might not the next moment bring?

For the first time since her entrance she gazed around the large, long
apartment, which would have deserved the name of hall had it not been too
low.

The heated room, filled with buzzing flies, was crowded with travellers.
The wife and daughter of a feather-curler, who were on their way with the
husband and father to the Reichstag, where many an aristocratic gentleman
would need plumes for his own head and his wife's, had just dropped the
comb with which they were arranging each other's hair.  The shoemaker and
his dame from Nuremberg paused in the sensible lecture they were
alternately addressing to their apprentices.  The Frankfort messenger put
down the needle with which he was mending the badgerskin in his knapsack.
The travelling musicians who, to save a few pennies, had begun to eat
bread, cheese, and radishes, instead of the warm meals provided for the
others, let their knives drop and set down the wine-jugs.  The traders,
who were hotly arguing over Italian politics and the future war with
Turkey, were silent.  The four monks, who had leaned their heads against
the cornice of the wide, closed fireplace and, in spite of the flies
which buzzed around them, had fallen asleep, awoke.  The vender of
indulgences in the black cowl interrupted the impressive speech which he
was delivering to the people who surrounded his coffer.  This group also
--soldiers, travelling artisans, peasants, and tradesfolk with their
wives, who, like most of those present, were waiting for the vessel which
was to sail down the Main early the next morning--gazed toward the door.
Only the students and Bacchantes,--[Travelling scholars]--who were fairly
hanging on the lips of a short, slender scholar, with keen, intellectual
features, noticed neither the draught of air caused by the entrance of
the distinguished arrivals and their followers, nor the general stir
aroused by their appearance, until Dr. Eberbach, the insignificant,
vivacious speaker, recognised in one of the group the famous Nuremberg
humanist, Wilibald Pirckheimer.




CHAPTER II.

At first Dietel, the old waiter, whose bullet-shaped head was covered
with thick gray hair, also failed to notice them.  Without heeding their
entrance, he continued,--aided by two assistants who were scarcely beyond
boyhood,--to set the large and small pine tables which he had placed
wherever he could find room.

The patched tablecloths which he spread over the tops were coarse and
much worn; the dishes carried after him by the two assistants, whose
knees bent under the burden, were made of tin, and marred by many a dent.
He swung his stout body to and fro with jerks like a grasshopper, and in
doing so his shirt rose above his belt, but the white napkin under his
arm did not move a finger's width.  In small things, as well as great
ones, Dietel was very methodical.  So he continued his occupation
undisturbed till an inexperienced merchant's clerk from Ulm, who wanted
to ride farther speedily, accosted him and asked for some special dish.
Dietel drew his belt farther down and promptly snubbed the young man with
the angry retort; "Everybody must wait for his meal.  We make no
exceptions here."

Interrupted in his work, he also saw the newcomers, and then cast a
peevish glance at one corner of the room, where stood a table covered
with fine linen and set with silver dishes, among them a platter on which
early pears and juicy plums were spread invitingly.  The landlady of The
Pike had arranged them daintily upon fresh vine leaves an hour before
with her own plump but nimble hands.  Of course they were intended for
the gentlemen from Nuremberg and their guests.  Dietel, too, now knew
them, and saw that the party numbered a person no less distinguished than
the far-famed and highly learned Doctor and Imperial Councillor, Conrad
Peutinger.  They were riding to Cologne together under the same escort.
The citizens of Nuremberg were distinguished men, as well as their guest,
but Dietel had served distinguished personages by the dozen at The Blue
Pike for many years--among them even crowned heads--and they had wanted
for nothing.  His skill, however, was not sufficient for these city
demigods; for the landlord of The Pike intended to look after their table
himself.  Tomfoolery!  There was more than enough for him to do that day
over yonder in the room occupied by the lansquenets and the city
soldiers, where he usually directed affairs in person.  It roused
Dietel's ire.  The cooking of The Blue Pike, which the landlady
superintended, could vie with any in the Frank country, on the Rhine, or
in Swabia, yet, forsooth, it wasn't good enough for the Nuremberg guests.
The Council cook, a fat, pompous fellow, accompanied them, and had
already begun to bustle about the hearth beside the hostess.  They
really would have required no service at all, for they brought their own
attendants.  It certainly was not Dietel's usual custom to wish any one
evil, but if Gotz Berlichinger, who had recently attacked a party of
Leipsic merchants at Forchheim, or Hans von Geisslingen had fallen upon
them and subdued their arrogance, it would not have spoiled Dietel's
appetite.

At last they moved forward.  The others might treat them as they chose;
he, at least, would neither say anything to them nor bow before them as
the ears did before Joseph in Holy Writ.  Nevertheless, he looked out of
the corner of his eye at them as he took from the basket of the round-
checked kitchen maid, who had now found her way to him, one fresh brown
roll after another, and placed them beside plate after plate.  How well
risen and how crusty they were!  They fairly cracked under the pressure
of the thumb, yet wheat rolls had been baked specially for the Nuremberg
party.  Was God's good gift too poor for the Honourables with the gold
chains?

Now, even fragile little Dr. Eberbach, and the students and Bacchantes
who had stood around him like disciples, intently listening to his words,
