anxiety, and a great desire to comfort him, if possible. She placed on
the breakfast-table a noble piece of cold powdered beef, with its usual
guards of turnip and carrot, recommended her mustard as coming direct
from her cousin at Tewkesbury, and spiced the toast with her own
hands--and with her own hands, also, drew a jug of stout and nappy ale,
all of which were elements of the substantial breakfast of the period.

When she saw that her guest's anxiety prevented him from doing justice
to the good cheer which she set before him, she commenced her career
of verbal consolation with the usual volubility of those women in her
station, who, conscious of good looks, good intentions, and good lungs,
entertain no fear either of wearying themselves or of fatiguing their
auditors.

"Now, what the good year! are we to send you down to Scotland as thin
as you came up?--I am sure it would be contrary to the course of nature.
There was my goodman's father, old Sandie Christie, I have heard he was
an atomy when he came up from the North, and I am sure he died, Saint
Barnaby was ten years, at twenty stone weight. I was a bare-headed girl
at the time, and lived in the neighbourhood, though I had little thought
of marrying John then, who had a score of years the better of me--but he
is a thriving man and a kind husband--and his father, as I was saying,
died as fat as a church-warden. Well, sir, but I hope I have not
offended you for my little joke--and I hope the ale is to your honour's
liking,--and the beef--and the mustard?"

"All excellent--all too good," answered Olifaunt; "you have every thing
so clean and tidy, dame, that I shall not know how to live when I go
back to my own country--if ever I go back there."

This was added as it seemed involuntarily, and with a deep sigh.

"I warrant your honour go back again if you like it," said the dame:
"unless you think rather of taking a pretty well-dowered English lady,
as some of your countryfolk have done. I assure you, some of the best of
the city have married Scotsmen. There was Lady Trebleplumb, Sir Thomas
Trebleplumb the great Turkey merchant's widow, married Sir Awley
Macauley, whom your honour knows, doubtless; and pretty Mistress
Doublefee, old Sergeant Doublefee's daughter, jumped out of window,
and was married at May-fair to a Scotsman with a hard name; and old
Pitchpost the timber merchant's daughters did little better, for they
married two Irishmen; and when folks jeer me about having a Scotsman
for lodger, meaning your honour, I tell them they are afraid of their
daughters and their mistresses; and sure I have a right to stand up for
the Scots, since John Christie is half a Scotsman, and a thriving man,
and a good husband, though there is a score of years between us; and so
I would have your honour cast care away, and mend your breakfast with a
morsel and a draught."

"At a word, my kind hostess, I cannot," said Olifaunt; "I am anxious
about this knave of mine, who has been so long absent in this dangerous
town of yours."

It may be noticed in passing that Dame Nelly's ordinary mode of
consolation was to disprove the existence of any cause for distress; and
she is said to have carried this so far as to comfort a neighbour, who
had lost her husband, with the assurance that the dear defunct would be
better to-morrow, which perhaps might not have proved an appropriate,
even if it had been a possible, mode of relief.

On this occasion she denied stoutly that Richie had been absent
altogether twenty hours; and as for people being killed in the streets
of London, to be sure two men had been found in Tower-ditch last week,
but that was far to the east, and the other poor man that had his throat
cut in the fields, had met his mishap near by Islington; and he that was
stabbed by the young Templar in a drunken frolic, by Saint Clement's
in the Strand, was an Irishman. All which evidence she produced to show
that none of these casualties had occurred in a case exactly parallel
with that of Richie, a Scotsman, and on his return from Westminster.

"My better comfort is, my good dame," answered Olifaunt, "that the lad
is no brawler or quarreller, unless strongly urged, and that he has
nothing valuable about him to any one but me."

"Your honour speaks very well," retorted the inexhaustible hostess, who
protracted her task of taking away, and putting to rights, in order
that she might prolong her gossip. "I'll uphold Master Moniplies to be
neither reveller nor brawler, for if he liked such things, he might
be visiting and junketing with the young folks about here in the
neighbourhood, and he never dreams of it; and when I asked the young
man to go as far as my gossip's, Dame Drinkwater, to taste a glass of
aniseed, and a bit of the groaning cheese,--for Dame Drinkwater has had
twins, as I told your honour, sir,--and I meant it quite civilly to the
young man, but he chose to sit and keep house with John Christie; and
I dare say there is a score of years between them, for your honour's
servant looks scarce much older than I am. I wonder what they could have
to say to each other. I asked John Christie, but he bid me go to sleep."

"If he comes not soon," said his master, "I will thank you to tell me
what magistrate I can address myself to; for besides my anxiety for the
poor fellow's safety, he has papers of importance about him."

"O! your honour may be assured he will be back in a quarter of an hour,"
said Dame Nelly; "he is not the lad to stay out twenty-four hours at a
stretch. And for the papers, I am sure your honour will pardon him for
just giving me a peep at the corner, as I was giving him a small cup,
not so large as my thimble, of distilled waters, to fortify his stomach
against the damps, and it was directed to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty; and so doubtless his Majesty has kept Richie out of civility to
consider of your honour's letter, and send back a fitting reply."

Dame Nelly here hit by chance on a more available topic of consolation
than those she had hitherto touched upon; for the youthful lord had
himself some vague hopes that his messenger might have been delayed at
Court until a fitting and favourable answer should be dispatched back to
him. Inexperienced, however, in public affairs as he certainly was,
it required only a moment's consideration to convince him of the
improbability of an expectation so contrary to all he had heard of
etiquette, as well as the dilatory proceedings in a court suit, and he
answered the good-natured hostess with a sigh, that he doubted whether
the king would even look on the paper addressed to him, far less take it
into his immediate consideration.

"Now, out upon you for a faint-hearted gentleman!" said the good
dame; "and why should he not do as much for us as our gracious Queen
Elizabeth? Many people say this and that about a queen and a king, but
I think a king comes more natural to us English folks; and this good
gentleman goes as often down by water to Greenwich, and employs as many
of the barge-men and water-men of all kinds; and maintains, in his royal
grace, John Taylor, the water-poet, who keeps both a sculler and a pair
of oars. And he has made a comely Court at Whitehall, just by the river;
and since the king is so good a friend to the Thames, I cannot see,
if it please your honour, why all his subjects, and your honour in
specialty, should not have satisfaction by his hands."

"True, dame--true,--let us hope for the best; but I must take my cloak
and rapier, and pray your husband in courtesy to teach me the way to a
magistrate."

"Sure, sir," said the prompt dame, "I can do that as well as he, who has
been a slow man of his tongue all his life, though I will give him his
due for being a loving husband, and a man as well to pass in the world
as any betwixt us and the top of the lane. And so there is the sitting
alderman, that is always at the Guildhall, which is close by Paul's, and
so I warrant you he puts all to rights in the city that wisdom can mend;
and for the rest there is no help but patience. But I wish I were as
sure of forty pounds as I am that the young man will come back safe and
sound."

Olifaunt, in great and anxious doubt of what the good dame so strongly
averred, flung his cloak on one shoulder, and was about to belt on his
rapier, when first the voice of Richie Moniplies on the stair, and
then that faithful emissary's appearance in the chamber, put the matter
beyond question. Dame Nelly, after congratulating Moniplies on his
return, and paying several compliments to her own sagacity for having
foretold it, was at length pleased to leave the apartment. The truth
was, that, besides some instinctive feelings of good breeding which
combated her curiosity, she saw there was no chance of Richie's
proceeding in his narrative while she was in the room, and she therefore
retreated, trusting that her own address would get the secret out of one
or other of the young men, when she should have either by himself.

"Now, in Heaven's name, what is the matter?" said Nigel
Olifaunt.--"Where have you been, or what have you been about? You look
as pale as death. There is blood on your hand, and your clothes are
torn. What barns-breaking have you been at? You have been drunk,
Richard, and fighting."

"Fighting I have been," said Richard, "in a small way; but for being
drunk, that's a job ill to manage in this town, without money to come
by liquor; and as for barns-breaking, the deil a thing's broken but my
head. It's not made of iron, I wot, nor my claithes of chenzie-mail; so
a club smashed the tane, and a claught damaged the tither. Some misleard
rascals abused my country, but I think I cleared the causey of them.
However, the haill hive was ower mony for me at last, and I got this
eclipse on the crown, and then I was carried, beyond my kenning, to
a sma' booth at the Temple Port, whare they sell the whirligigs and
mony-go-rounds that measure out time as a man wad measure a tartan
web; and then they bled me, wold I nold I, and were reasonably civil,
especially an auld country-man of ours, of whom more hereafter."

"And at what o'clock might this be?" said Nigel.

"The twa iron carles yonder, at the kirk beside the Port, were just
banging out sax o' the clock."

"And why came you not home as soon as you recovered?" said Nigel.

"In troth, my lord, every _why_ has its _wherefore_, and this has a gude
ane," answered his follower. "To come hame, I behoved to ken whare hame
was; now, I had clean tint the name of the wynd, and the mair I asked,
the mair the folk leugh, and the farther they sent me wrang; sae I gave
it up till God should send daylight to help me; and as I saw mysell near
a kirk at the lang run, I e'en crap in to take up my night's quarters in
the kirkyard."

"In the churchyard?" said Nigel--"But I need not ask what drove you to
such a pinch."

"It wasna sae much the want o' siller, my Lord Nigel," said Richie,
with an air of mysterious importance, "for I was no sae absolute without
means, of whilk mair anon; but I thought I wad never ware a saxpence
sterling on ane of their saucy chamberlains at a hostelry, sae lang as
I could sleep fresh and fine in a fair, dry, spring night. Mony a time,
when I hae come hame ower late, and faund the West-Port steekit, and the
waiter ill-willy, I have garr'd the sexton of Saint Cuthbert's calf-ward
serve me for my quarters. But then there are dainty green graffs in
Saint Cuthbert's kirkyard, whare ane may sleep as if they were in a
down-bed, till they hear the lavrock singing up in the air as high as
the Castle; whereas, and behold, these London kirkyards are causeyed
with through-stanes, panged hard and fast thegither; and my cloak being
something threadbare, made but a thin mattress, so I was fain to give
up my bed before every limb about me was crippled. Dead folks may sleep
yonder sound enow, but deil haet else."

"And what became of you next?" said his master.

"I just took to a canny bulkhead, as they ca' them here; that is, the
boards on the tap of their bits of outshots of stalls and booths,
and there I sleepit as sound as if I was in a castle. Not but I was
disturbed with some of the night-walking queans and swaggering billies,
but when they found there was nothing to be got by me but a slash of my
Andrew Ferrara, they bid me good-night for a beggarly Scot; and I was
e'en weel pleased to be sae cheap rid of them. And in the morning, I cam
daikering here, but sad wark I had to find the way, for I had been
east as far as the place they ca' Mile-End, though it is mair like
sax-mile-end."

"Well, Richie," answered Nigel, "I am glad all this has ended so
well--go get something to eat. I am sure you need it."

"In troth do I, sir," replied Moniplies; "but, with your lordship's
leave--"

"Forget the lordship for the present, Richie, as I have often told you
before."

"Faith," replied Richie, "I could weel forget that your honour was a
lord, but then I behoved to forget that I am a lord's man, and that's
not so easy. But, however," he added, assisting his description with the
thumb and the two forefingers of his right hand, thrust out after the
fashion of a bird's claw, while the little finger and ring-finger were
closed upon the palm, "to the Court I went, and my friend that promised
me a sight of his Majesty's most gracious presence, was as gude as
his word, and carried me into the back offices, where I got the best
breakfast I have had since we came here, and it did me gude for the rest
of the day; for as to what I have eaten in this accursed town, it is aye
sauced with the disquieting thought that it maun be paid for. After a',
there was but beef banes and fat brose; but king's cauff, your honour
kens, is better than ither folk's corn; at ony rate, it was a' in free
awmous.--But I see," he added, stopping short, "that your honour waxes
impatient."

"By no means, Richie," said the young nobleman, with an air of
resignation, for he well knew his domestic would not mend his pace for
goading; "you have suffered enough in the embassy to have a right to
tell the story in your own way. Only let me pray for the name of the
friend who was to introduce you into the king's presence. You were very
mysterious on the subject, when you undertook, through his means, to
have the Supplication put into his Majesty's own hands, since those
sent heretofore, I have every reason to think, went no farther than his
secretary's."

"Weel, my lord," said Richie, "I did not tell you his name and quality
at first, because I thought you would be affronted at the like of him
having to do in your lordship's affairs. But mony a man climbs up in
Court by waur help. It was just Laurie Linklater, one of the yeomen of
the kitchen, that was my father's apprentice lang syne."

"A yeoman in the kitchen--a scullion!" exclaimed Lord Nigel, pacing the
room in displeasure.

"But consider, sir," said Richie, composedly, "that a' your great
friends hung back, and shunned to own you, or to advocate your petition;
and then, though I am sure I wish Laurie a higher office, for your
lordship's sake and for mine, and specially for his ain sake, being a
friendly lad, yet your lordship must consider, that a scullion, if a
yeoman of the king's most royal kitchen may be called a scullion, may
weel rank with a master-cook elsewhere; being that king's cauff, as I
said before, is better than--"

"You are right, and I was wrong," said the young nobleman. "I have no
choice of means of making my case known, so that they be honest."

"Laurie is as honest a lad as ever lifted a ladle," said Richie; "not
but what I dare to say he can lick his fingers like other folk, and
reason good. But, in fine, for I see your honour is waxing impatient, he
brought me to the palace, where a' was astir for the king going out to
hunt or hawk on Blackheath, I think they ca'd it. And there was a horse
stood with all the quarries about it, a bonny grey as ever was foaled;
and the saddle and the stirrups, and the curb and bit, o' burning gowd,
or silver gilded at least; and down, sir, came the king, with all his
nobles, dressed out in his hunting-suit of green, doubly laced, and laid
down with gowd. I minded the very face o' him, though it was lang since
I saw him. But my certie, lad, thought I, times are changed since ye
came fleeing down the back stairs of auld Holyrood House, in grit fear,
having your breeks in your hand without time to put them on, and Frank
Stewart, the wild Earl of Bothwell, hard at your haunches; and if auld
Lord Glenvarloch hadna cast his mantle about his arm, and taken bluidy
wounds mair than ane in your behalf, you wald not have craw'd sae
crouse this day; and so saying, I could not but think your lordship's
Sifflication could not be less than most acceptable; and so I banged
in among the crowd of lords. Laurie thought me mad, and held me by the
cloak-lap till the cloth rave in his hand; and so I banged in right
before the king just as he mounted, and crammed the Sifflication into
his hand, and he opened it like in amaze; and just as he saw the first
line, I was minded to make a reverence, and I had the ill luck to hit
his jaud o' a beast on the nose with my hat, and scaur the creature,
and she swarved aside, and the king, that sits na mickle better than a
draff-pock on the saddle, was like to have gotten a clean coup, and that
might have cost my craig a raxing-and he flung down the paper amang the
beast's feet, and cried, 'Away wi' the fause loon that brought it!' And
they grippit me, and cried treason; and I thought of the Ruthvens that
were dirked in their ain house, for, it may be, as small a forfeit.
However, they spak only of scourging me, and had me away to the porter's
lodge to try the tawse on my back, and I was crying mercy as loud as
I could; and the king, when he had righted himself on the saddle, and
gathered his breath, cried to do me nae harm; for, said he, he is ane
of our ain Norland stots, I ken by the rowt of him,--and they a'
laughed and rowted loud eneugh. And then he said, 'Gie him a copy of
the Proclamation, and let him go down to the North by the next light
collier, before waur come o't.' So they let me go, and rode out, a
sniggering, laughing, and rounding in ilk ither's lugs. A sair life I
had wi' Laurie Linklater; for he said it wad be the ruin of him. And
then, when I told him it was in your matter, he said if he had known
before he would have risked a scauding for you, because he minded
the brave old lord, your father. And then he showed how I suld have
done,--and that I suld have held up my hand to my brow, as if the
grandeur of the king and his horse-graith thegither had casten the
glaiks in my een, and mair jackanape tricks I suld hae played, instead
of offering the Sifflication, he said, as if I had been bringing guts to
a bear." [Footnote: I am certain this prudential advice is not original
on Mr. Linklater's part, but I am not at present able to produce my
authority. I think it amounted to this, that James flung down a petition
presented by some supplicant who paid no compliments to his horse,
and expressed no admiration at the splendour of his furniture, saying,
"Shall a king cumber himself about the petition of a beggar, while
the beggar disregards the king's splendour?" It is, I think, Sir John
Harrington who recommends, as a sure mode to the king's favour, to
praise the paces of the royal palfrey.]

'For,' said he, 'Richie, the king is a weel-natured and just man of
his ain kindly nature, but he has a wheen maggots that maun be cannily
guided; and then, Richie,' says he, in a very laigh tone, 'I would tell
it to nane but a wise man like yoursell, but the king has them about him
wad corrupt an angel from heaven; but I could have gi'en you avisement
how to have guided him, but now it's like after meat mustard.'--'Aweel,
aweel, Laurie,' said I, 'it may be as you say', but since I am clear of
the tawse and the porter's lodge, sifflicate wha like, deil hae Richie
Moniplies if he come sifflicating here again.'--And so away I came, and
I wasna far by the Temple Port, or Bar, or whatever they ca' it, when I
met with the misadventure that I tauld you of before."

"Well, my honest Richie," said Lord Nigel, "your attempt was well meant,
and not so ill conducted, I think, as to have deserved so bad an issue;
but go to your beef and mustard, and we'll talk of the rest afterwards."

"There is nae mair to be spoken, sir," said his follower, "except that
I met ane very honest, fair-spoken, weel-put-on gentleman, or rather
burgher, as I think, that was in the whigmaleery man's back-shop; and
when he learned wha I was, behold he was a kindly Scot himsell, and,
what is more, a town's-bairn o' the gude town, and he behoved to compel
me to take this Portugal piece, to drink, forsooth--my certie, thought
I, we ken better, for we will eat it--and he spoke of paying your
lordship a visit."

"You did not tell him where I lived, you knave?" said the Lord Nigel,
angrily. "'Sdeath! I shall have every clownish burgher from Edinburgh
come to gaze on my distress, and pay a shilling for having seen the
motion of the Poor Noble!"

"Tell him where you lived?" said Richie, evading the question; "How
could I tell him what I kendna mysell? If I had minded the name of the
wynd, I need not have slept in the kirkyard yestreen."

"See, then, that you give no one notice of our lodging," said the young
nobleman; "those with whom I have business I can meet at Paul's, or in
the Court of Requests."

"This is steeking the stable-door when the steed is stolen," thought
Richie to himself; "but I must put him on another pin."

So thinking, he asked the young lord what was in the Proclamation which
he still held folded in his hand; "for, having little time to spell at
it," said he, "your lordship well knows I ken nought about it but the
grand blazon at the tap--the lion has gotten a claught of our auld
Scottish shield now, but it was as weel upheld when it had a unicorn on
ilk side of it."

Lord Nigel read the Proclamation, and he coloured deep with shame and
indignation as he read; for the purport was, to his injured feelings,
like the pouring of ardent spirits upon a recent wound.

"What deil's in the paper, my lord?" said Richie, unable to suppress his
curiosity as he observed his master change colour; "I wadna ask such a
thing, only the Proclamation is not a private thing, but is meant for a'
men's hearing."

"It is indeed meant for all men's hearing," replied Lord Nigel, "and it
proclaims the shame of our country, and the ingratitude of our Prince."

"Now the Lord preserve us! and to publish it in London, too!" ejaculated
Moniplies.

"Hark ye, Richard," said Nigel Olifaunt, "in this paper the Lords of the
Council set forth, that, 'in consideration of the resort of idle persons
of low condition forth from his Majesty's kingdom of Scotland to his
English Court--filling the same with their suits and supplications,
and dishonouring the royal presence with their base, poor, and beggarly
persons, to the disgrace of their country in the estimation of the
English; these are to prohibit the skippers, masters of vessels
and others, in every part of Scotland, from bringing such miserable
creatures up to Court under pain of fine and impisonment."'

"I marle the skipper took us on board," said Richie.

"Then you need not marvel how you are to get back again," said Lord
Nigel, "for here is a clause which says, that such idle suitors are to
be transported back to Scotland at his Majesty's expense, and punished
for their audacity with stripes, stocking, or incarceration, according
to their demerits--that is to say, I suppose, according to the degree of
their poverty, for I see no other demerit specified."

"This will scarcely," said Richie, "square with our old proverb--

     A King's face
     Should give grace--

But what says the paper farther, my lord?"

"O, only a small clause which especially concerns us, making some still
heavier denunciations against those suitors who shall be so bold as to
approach the Court, under pretext of seeking payment of old debts due
to them by the king, which, the paper states, is, of all species of
importunity, that which is most odious to his Majesty."

"The king has neighbours in that matter," said Richie; "but it is not
every one that can shift off that sort of cattle so easily as he does."

Their conversation was here interrupted by a knocking at the door.
Olifaunt looked out at the window, and saw an elderly respectable person
whom he knew not. Richie also peeped, and recognised, but, recognising,
chose not to acknowledge, his friend of the preceding evening. Afraid
that his share in the visit might be detected, he made his escape out
of the apartment under pretext of going to his breakfast; and left their
landlady the task of ushering Master George into Lord Nigel's apartment,
which she performed with much courtesy.




CHAPTER IV


  Ay, sir, the clouted shoe hath oft times craft in't,
  As says the rustic proverb; and your citizen,
  In's grogram suit, gold chain, and well-black'd shoes,
  Bears under his flat cap ofttimes a brain
  Wiser than burns beneath the cap and feather,
  Or seethes within the statesman's velvet nightcap.
                               _Read me my Riddle._

The young Scottish nobleman received the citizen with distant
politeness, expressing that sort of reserve by which those of the higher
ranks are sometimes willing to make a plebeian sensible that he is an
intruder. But Master George seemed neither displeased nor disconcerted.
He assumed the chair, which, in deference to his respectable appearance,
Lord Nigel offered to him, and said, after a moment's pause, during
which he had looked attentively at the young man, with respect not
unmingled with emotion--"You will forgive me for this rudeness, my
lord; but I was endeavouring to trace in your youthful countenance the
features of my good old lord, your excellent father."

There was a moment's pause ere young Glenvarloch replied, still with
a reserved manner,--"I have been reckoned like my father, sir; and am
happy to see any one that respects his memory. But the business which
calls me to this city is of a hasty as well as a private nature, and--"

"I understand the hint, my lord," said Master George, "and would not
be guilty of long detaining you from business, or more agreeable
conversation. My errand is almost done when I have said that my name is
George Heriot, warmly befriended, and introduced into the employment
of the Royal Family of Scotland, more than twenty years since, by your
excellent father; and that, learning from a follower of yours that your
lordship was in this city in prosecution of some business of importance,
it is my duty,--it is my pleasure,--to wait on the son of my respected
patron; and, as I am somewhat known both at the Court, and in the city,
to offer him such aid in the furthering of his affairs as my credit and
experience may be able to afford."

"I have no doubt of either, Master Heriot," said Lord Nigel, "and I
thank you heartily for the good-will with which you have placed them at
a stranger's disposal; but my business at Court is done and ended, and
I intend to leave London and, indeed, the island, for foreign travel
and military service. I may add, that the suddenness of my departure
occasions my having little time at my disposal."

Master Heriot did not take the hint, but sat fast, with an embarrassed
countenance however, like one who had something to say that he knew not
exactly how to make effectual. At length he said, with a dubious smile,
"You are fortunate, my lord, in having so soon dispatched your business
at Court. Your talking landlady informs me you have been but a fortnight
in this city. It is usually months and years ere the Court and a suitor
shake hands and part."

"My business," said Lord Nigel, with a brevity which was intended to
stop further discussion, "was summarily dispatched."

Still Master Heriot remained seated, and there was a cordial good-humour
added to the reverence of his appearance, which rendered it impossible
for Lord Nigel to be more explicit in requesting his absence.

"Your lordship has not yet had time," said the citizen, still attempting
to sustain the conversation, "to visit the places of amusement,--the
playhouses, and other places to which youth resort. But I see in your
lordship's hand one of the new-invented plots of the piece, [Footnote:
Meaning, probably, playbills.] which they hand about of late--May I ask
what play?"

"Oh! a well-known piece," said Lord Nigel, impatiently throwing down
the Proclamation, which he had hitherto been twisting to and fro in
his hand,--"an excellent and well-approved piece--_A New Way to Pay Old
Debts._"

Master Heriot stooped down, saying, "Ah! my old acquaintance, Philip
Massinger;" but, having opened the paper and seen the purport, he looked
at Lord Nigel with surprise, saying, "I trust your lordship does not
think this prohibition can extend either to _your_ person or your
claims?"

"I should scarce have thought so myself," said the young nobleman; "but
so it proves. His Majesty, to close this discourse at once, has been
pleased to send me this Proclamation, in answer to a respectful
Supplication for the repayment of large loans advanced by my father for
the service of the State, in the king's utmost emergencies."

"It is impossible!" said the citizen--"it is absolutely impossible!--If
the king could forget what was due to your father's memory, still
he would not have wished--would not, I may say, have dared--to be so
flagrantly unjust to the memory of such a man as your father, who, dead
in the body, will long live in the memory of the Scottish people."

"I should have been of your opinion," answered Lord Nigel, in the same
tone as before; "but there is no fighting with facts."

"What was the tenor of this Supplication?" said Heriot; "or by whom was
it presented? Something strange there must have been in the contents, or
else--"

"You may see my original draught," said the young lord, taking it out
of a small travelling strong-box; "the technical part is by my lawyer in
Scotland, a skilful and sensible man; the rest is my own, drawn, I hope,
with due deference and modesty."

Master Heriot hastly cast his eye over the draught. "Nothing," he said,
"can be more well-tempered and respectful. Is it possible the king can
have treated this petition with contempt?"

"He threw it down on the pavement," said the Lord of Glenvarloch, "and
sent me for answer that Proclamation, in which he classes me with the
paupers and mendicants from Scotland, who disgrace his Court in the eyes
of the proud English--that is all. Had not my father stood by him with
heart, sword, and fortune, he might never have seen the Court of England
himself."

"But by whom was this Supplication presented, my lord?" said Heriot;
"for the distaste taken at the messenger will sometimes extend itself to
the message."

"By my servant," said the Lord Nigel; "by the man you saw, and, I think,
were kind to."

"By your servant, my lord?" said the citizen; "he seems a shrewd fellow,
and doubtless a faithful; but surely--"

"You would say," said Lord Nigel, "he is no fit messenger to a king's
presence?--Surely he is not; but what could I do? Every attempt I had
made to lay my case before the king had miscarried, and my petitions
got no farther than the budgets of clerks and secretaries; this fellow
pretended he had a friend in the household that would bring him to the
king's presence,--and so--"

"I understand," said Heriot; "but, my lord, why should you not, in
right of your rank and birth, have appeared at Court, and required an
audience, which could not have been denied to you?"

The young lord blushed a little, and looked at his dress, which was very
plain; and, though in perfect good order, had the appearance of having
seen service.

"I know not why I should be ashamed of speaking the truth," he said,
after a momentary hesitation,--"I had no dress suitable for appearing
at Court. I am determined to incur no expenses which I cannot discharge;
and I think you, sir, would not advise me to stand at the palace-door,
in person, and deliver my petition, along with those who are in very
deed pleading their necessity, and begging an alms."

"That had been, indeed, unseemly," said the citizen; "but yet, my lord,
my mind runs strangely that there must be some mistake.--Can I speak
with your domestic?"

"I see little good it can do," answered the young lord, "but the
interest you take in my misfortunes seems sincere, and therefore----"
He stamped on the floor, and in a few seconds afterwards Moniplies
appeared, wiping from his beard and mustaches the crumbs of bread,
and the froth of the ale-pot, which plainly showed how he had been
employed.--"Will your lordship grant permission," said Heriot, "that I
ask your groom a few questions?"

"His lordship's page, Master George," answered Moniplies, with a nod of
acknowledgment, "if you are minded to speak according to the letter."

"Hold your saucy tongue," said his master, "and reply distinctly to the
questions you are to be asked."

"And _truly,_ if it like your pageship," said the citizen, "for you may
remember I have a gift to discover falset."

"Weel, weel, weel," replied the domestic, somewhat embarrassed, in spite
of his effrontery--"though I think that the sort of truth that serves my
master, may weel serve ony ane else."

"Pages lie to their masters by right of custom," said the citizen; "and
you write yourself in that band, though I think you be among the oldest
of such springalds; but to me you must speak truth, if you would not
have it end in the whipping-post."

"And that's e'en a bad resting-place," said the well-grown page; "so
come away with your questions, Master George."

"Well, then," demanded the citizen, "I am given to understand that you
yesterday presented to his Majesty's hand a Supplication, or petition,
from this honourable lord, your master."

"Troth, there's nae gainsaying that, sir," replied Moniplies; "there
were enow to see it besides me."

"And you pretend that his Majesty flung it from him with contempt?" said
the citizen. "Take heed, for I have means of knowing the truth; and you
were better up to the neck in the Nor-Loch, which you like so well, than
tell a leasing where his Majesty's name is concerned."

"There is nae occasion for leasing-making about the matter," answered
Moniplies, firmly; "his Majesty e'en flung it frae him as if it had
dirtied his fingers."

"You hear, sir," said Olifaunt, addressing Heriot.

"Hush!" said the sagacious citizen; "this fellow is not ill named--he
has more plies than one in his cloak. Stay, fellow," for Moniplies,
muttering somewhat about finishing his breakfast, was beginning to
shamble towards the door, "answer me this farther question--When you
gave your master's petition to his Majesty, gave you nothing with it?"

"Ou, what should I give wi' it, ye ken, Master George?"

"That is what I desire and insist to know," replied his interrogator.

"Weel, then--I am not free to say, that maybe I might not just slip
into the king's hand a wee bit Sifflication of mine ain, along with my
lord's--just to save his Majesty trouble--and that he might consider
them baith at ance."

"A supplication of your own, you varlet!" said his master.

"Ou dear, ay, my lord," said Richie--"puir bodies hae their bits of
sifflications as weel as their betters."

"And pray, what might your worshipful petition import?" said Master
Heriot.--"Nay, for Heaven's sake, my lord, keep your patience, or we
shall never learn the truth of this strange matter.--Speak out, sirrah,
and I will stand your friend with my lord."

"It's a lang story to tell--but the upshot is, that it's a scrape of an
auld accompt due to my father's yestate by her Majesty the king's maist
gracious mother, when she lived in the Castle, and had sundry providings
and furnishings forth of our booth, whilk nae doubt was an honour to
my father to supply, and whilk, doubtless, it will be a credit to his
Majesty to satisfy, as it will be grit convenience to me to receive the
saam."

"What string of impertinence is this?" said his master.

"Every word as true as e'er John Knox spoke," said Richie; "here's the
bit double of the Sifflication."

Master George took a crumpled paper from the fellow's hand, and said,
muttering betwixt his teeth--"'Humbly showeth--um--um--his Majesty's
maist gracious mother--um--um--justly addebted and owing the sum of
fifteen merks--the compt whereof followeth--Twelve nowte's feet for
jellies--ane lamb, being Christmas--ane roasted capin in grease for
the privy chalmer, when my Lord of Bothwell suppit with her Grace.'--I
think, my lord, you can hardly be surprised that the king gave this
petition a brisk reception; and I conclude, Master Page, that you took
care to present your own Supplication before your master's?"

"Troth did I not," answered Moniplies. "I thought to have given my
lord's first, as was reason gude; and besides that, it wad have redd the
gate for my ain little bill. But what wi' the dirdum an' confusion, an'
the loupin here and there of the skeigh brute of a horse, I believe I
crammed them baith into his hand cheek-by-jowl, and maybe my ain was
bunemost; and say there was aught wrang, I am sure I had a' the fright
and a' the risk--"

"And shall have all the beating, you rascal knave," said Nigel; "am I to
be insulted and dishonoured by your pragmatical insolence, in blending
your base concerns with mine?"

"Nay, nay, nay, my lord," said the good-humoured citizen, interposing,
"I have been the means of bringing the fellow's blunder to light--allow
me interest enough with your lordship to be bail for his bones. You
have cause to be angry, but still I think the knave mistook more out of
conceit than of purpose; and I judge you will have the better service of
him another time, if you overlook this fault--Get you gone, sirrah--I'll
make your peace."

"Na, na," said Moniplies, keeping his ground firmly, "if he likes to
strike a lad that has followed him for pure love, for I think there has
been little servant's fee between us, a' the way frae Scotland, just
let my lord be doing, and see the credit he will get by it--and I would
rather (mony thanks to you though, Master George) stand by a lick of his
baton, than it suld e'er be said a stranger came between us."

"Go, then," said his master, "and get out of my sight."

