a headless corpse at his feet.  A direful cry proceeded from his
enraged comrades.  Every sword was drawn; and before the bewildered and
soul-struck earl could utter a word, the Furies blew their most
horrible blast through the chamber; and the half-frantic Mar beheld his
brave Scots at one moment victorious, and in the next the floor strewed
with their dead bodies.  A new succession of blood-hounds had rushed in
at every door; and before the exterminating sword was allowed to rest,
the whole of his faithful troops lay around him, wounded and dying.
Several had fallen across his body, having warded with their lives the
strokes they believed leveled at his.  In vain his voice had called
upon his men to surrender--in vain he had implored the iron-hearted
Soulis, and his coadjutor Aymer de Valence, to stop the havoc of death.

All now lay in blood; and the heat of the room, thronged by the
victors, became so intolerable that De Valence, for his own sake,
ordered the earl to be removed into another apartment.

Meanwhile, unconscious of these events, Helen had lain down on her bed,
to seek a few minutes' repose; and having watched the whole of the
preceding night, was sunk into a profound sleep.

Murray, who was present at the abrupt entrance of the enemy, no sooner
heard them declare that the castle was surrounded by a comparatively
large army, than he foresaw all would be lost.  On the instant, and
before the dreadful signal of carnage was given in the fall of the
young Scot, he slid behind the canopy of his uncle's couch; and lifting
the arras by a back door which led to some private rooms, hastily made
way to the chamber of his cousin.  As he hurried along, he heard a
fearful shout.  He paused for a moment, but thinking it best, whatever
might have happened, to secure the safety of Helen, he flew onward, and
entered her room.  She lay upon the bed in a deep sleep.  "Awake,
Helen!" he cried; "for your life, awake!"

She opened her eyes; but, without allowing her time to speak, he
hastily added; "The castle is full of armed men, led hither by the
English commander, Aymer de Valence, and the execrable Soulis.  Unless
you fly through the vaulted passage, you will be their prisoner."

Helen gazed at him in terror.  "Where is my father?  Leave him I
cannot."

"Fly, in pity to your father!  Oh, do not hesitate!  What will be his
anguish, should you fall into the hands of the furious man whose love
you have rejected; when it will no longer be in the power of a parent
to preserve your person from the outrages of his eager and avengeful
passion!  If you had seen Soulis' threatening eyes--" He was
interrupted by a clamor in the opposite gallery, and the shrieks of
women.  Helen grasped his arm.  "Alas, my poor damsels!  I will go with
you, whither you will, to be far from him."

As Murray threw his arm about her waist, to impel her failing steps,
his eyes fell on the banner and the suit of armor.

"All else must be left," exclaimed he, seizing the banner; and hurrying
Helen forward, he hastened with her down the stairs which led from the
western watch-tower to the vaults beneath the castle.  On entering the
first cellar, to which a dim light was admitted through a small grating
near the top, he looked round for the archway that contained the avenue
of their release.  Having descried it, and raised one of the large
flags which paved the floor, he assisted his affrighted cousin down a
short flight of steps, into the secret passage.  "This," whispered he,
"will carry us in a direct line to the cell of the prior of St. Fillan."

"But what will become of my father, and Lady Mar?  This flight, while
they are in danger! oh! I fear to complete it!"

"Rather fear the libertine Soulis," returned Murray, "he can only make
them prisoners; and even that injury shall be of short duration.  I
will soon join the brave Wallace; and then, my sweet cousin, liberty,
and a happy meeting!"

"Alas! his venerable harper," cried she, suddenly remembering Halbert;
"should he be discovered to have belonged to Wallace, he, too, will be
massacred by these merciless men."

Murray stopped.  "Have you courage to remain in this darkness alone?
If so, I will seek him, and he shall accompany us."

Helen had courage for anything but the dangers Murray might encounter
by returning into the castle; but the generous youth had entered too
fully into her apprehensions concerning the old man to be withheld.
"Should I be delayed in coming back," said he, recollecting the
possibility of himself being attacked and slain, "go forward to the end
of this passage; it will lead you to a flight of stairs; ascend them;
and by drawing the bolt of a door, you will find yourself at once in
the prior's cell."

"Talk not of delay," replied Helen; "return quickly, and I will await
you at the entrance of the passage."  So saying, she swiftly retraced
with him her steps to the bottom of the stone stairs by which they had
descended.  He raised the flag, sprung out of the aperture, and closing
it down, left her in solitude and darkness.

Murray passed through the first cellar, and was proceeding to the
second (among the catacombs of which lay the concealed entrance to the
private stairs), when he saw the great gates of the cellar open, and a
large party of English soldiers enter.  They were conducted by the
butler of the castle, who seemed to perform his office unwillingly,
while they crowded in, thirsty and riotous.

Aware how unequal his single arm would be to contend with such numbers,
Murray, at the first glance of these plunderers, retreated behind a
heap of casks in a remote corner.  While the trembling butler was
loading a dozen of the men with flasks for the refreshment of their
masters above, the rest were helping themselves from the adjacent
catacombs.  Some left the cellars with their booty, and others remained
to drink it on the spot.  Glad to escape the insults of the soldiers
who lay wallowing in the wine, Bothwell's old servant quitted the
cellar with the last company which bore flagons to their comrades above.

Murray listened anxiously, in hopes of hearing from his garrulous
neighbors some intimation of the fate of his uncle and aunt.  He
hearkened in vain, for nothing was uttered by these intoxicated
banditti, but loud boastings of the number each had slain in the earl's
apartment; execrations against the Scots for their obstinate
resistance; and a thousand sanguinary wishes, that the nation had but
one neck, to strike off at a blow.

How often, during this conversation, was Murray tempted to rush out
amongst them, and seize a desperate revenge!  But the thought of his
poor cousin, now awaiting his return, and perhaps already suffering
dreadful alarms from such extraordinary uproar, restrained him; and
unable to move from his hiding-place without precipitating himself into
instant death, he remained nearly an hour in the most painful anxiety,
watching the dropping to sleep of this horrid crew, one by one.

When all seemed hushed--not a voice, even in a whisper, startling his
ear--he ventured forth with a stealing step toward the slumbering group.
Like his brave ancestor, Gaul, the son of Morni, "he disdained to stab
a sleeping foe!"  He must pass them to reach the private stairs.  He
paused and listened.  Silence still reigned; not even a hand moved, so
deeply were they sunk in the fumes of wine.  He took courage, and flew
with the lightness of air to the secret door.  As he laid his hand on
it, it opened from without, and two persons appeared.  By the few rays
which gleamed from the expiring torches of the sleepers, he could see
that the first wore English armor.  Murray made a spring, and caught
the man by the throat; when some one seizing his arm, exclaimed, "Stop,
my Lord Murray! it is the faithful Grimsby."  Murray let go his hold,
glad to find that both his English friend and the venerable object of
his solicitude were thus providentially brought to meet him; but
fearing that the violence of his action, and Halbert's exclamation,
might have alarmed the sleeping soldiers (who, drunk as they were, were
too numerous to be resisted), he laid his finger on the tip of Grimsby,
and motioned to the astonished pair to follow him.

As they advanced, they perceived one of the soldiers move as if
disturbed.  Murray held his sword over the sleeping wretch, ready to
plunge it into his heart should he attempt to rise; but he became still
again; and the fugitive having approached the flag, Murray drew it up,
and eager to haven his double charge, he thrust them together down the
stairs.  At that moment, a shriek from Helen (who had discovered, by a
gleam of light which burst into the vault, a man descending in English
armor), echoed through the cellars.  Two of the soldiers jumped upon
their feet, and rushed upon Murray.  He had let the flag drop behind
him; but still remaining by it, in case of an opportunity to escape, he
received the strokes of their weapons upon his target, and returned
them with equal rapidity.  One assailant lay gasping at his feet.  But
the clashing of arms, and the cries of the survivor had already
awakened the whole crew.  With horrid menaces, they threw themselves
toward the young Scot, and would certainly have cut him to pieces, had
he not snatched the only remaining torch out of the hand of the
staggering soldier, and extinguished it under his foot.  Bewildered
where to find their prey, with threats and imprecations, they groped in
darkness, slashing the air with their swords, and not unfrequently
wounding each other in the vain search.

Murray was now far from their pursuit.  He had no sooner put out the
light, than he pulled up the flag, and leaping down, drew it after him,
and found himself in safety.  Desperate as was the contest, it had been
short; for he yet heard the footsteps of the panic-struck Helen, flying
along the passage.  The Englishman and Halbert, on the first falling of
the flag, not knowing its spring, had unsuccessfully tried to re-raise
it, that they might assist Murray in the tumult above.  On his
appearing again so unexpectedly, they declared their joy; but the young
lord, impatient to calm the apprehensions of his cousin, returned no
other answer than "Follow me!" while he darted forward.  Terror had
given her wings, and even prevented her hearing the low sounds of
Murray's voice, which he durst not raise to a higher pitch, for fear of
being overheard by the enemy.  Thus, while she lost all presence of
mind, he did not come up with her till she fell breathless against he
stairs at the extremity of the vault.




Chapter X.

St. Fillan's.


As soon as Murray found her within his arms, he clasped her insensible
form to his breast, and carrying her up the steps, drew the bolt of the
door.  It opened to his pressure, and discovered a large monastic cell,
into which the daylight shone through one long narrow window.  A straw
pallet, an altar, and a marble basin, were the furniture.  The cell was
solitary the owner being then at mass in the chapel of the monastery.
Murray laid down his death-like burden on the monk's bed.  He then
ventured (believing, as it was to restore so pure a being to life, it
could not be sacrilege) to throw some of the holy water upon his
cousin's face; and by means of a little chalice, which stood upon the
altar, he poured some into her mouth.  At last opening her eyes, she
recognized the figure of her young kinsman leaning over her.  The
almost paralyzed Halbert stood at her feet.  "Blessed Virgin! am I yet
safe, and with my dear Andrew!  Oh! I feared you were slain!" cried
she, bursting into tears.

"Thank God, we are both safe," answered he; "comfort yourself, my
beloved cousin! you are now on holy ground; this is the cell of the
prior of St. Fillan.  None but the hand of an infidel dare wrest you
from this sanctuary."

"But my father, and Lady Mar?"  And again her tears flowed.

"The countess, my gracious lady," answered Halbert, "since you could
not be found in the castle, is allowed to accompany your father to
Dumbarton Castle, there to be treated with every respect, until De
Valence receives further orders from King Edward."

"But for Wallace!" cried she, "ah, where are now the succors that were
to be sent to him!  And without succors, how can he, or you, dearest
Andrew, rescue my father from this tyranny!"

"Do not despair," replied Murray; "look but at the banner you held
fast, even while insensible; your own hands have engraven my answer--God
armeth the patriot!  Convinced of that, can you still fear for you
father?  I will join Wallace to-morrow.  Your own fifty warriors await
me at the bottom of Cartlane Craigs; and if any treachery should be
meditated against my uncle, that moment we will make the towers of
Dumbarton shake to their foundation."

Helen's reply was a deep sigh: she though it might be Heaven's will
that her father, like the good Lord Douglas, should fall a victim to
royal revenge; and so sad were her forebodings, that she hardly dared
to hope what the sanguine disposition of her cousin promised.  Grimsby
now came forward; and unloosing an iron box from under his arm, put it
into the hands of Lord Murray.

"This fatal treasure," said he, "was committed to my care by the earl,
your uncle, to deliver to the prior of St. Fillan's."

"What does it contain?" demanded Murray; "I never saw it before."

"I know not its contents," returned the soldier; "it belongs to Sir
William Wallace."

"Indeed!" ejaculated Helen.  "If it be treasure, why was it not rather
sent to him!"

"But how, honest soldier," asked Murray, "did you escape with it, and
Halbert, too!  I am at a loss to conjecture, but by miracle."

He replied, that as soon as the English, and their Scottish partisans
under Lord Soulis, had surprised the castle, he saw that his only
chance of safety was to throw off the bonnet and plaid, and mix amongst
the numerous soldiers who had taken possession of the gates.  His
armor, and his language, showed he was their countryman; and they
easily believed that he had joined the plunderers as a volunteer from
the army, which at a greater distance beleaguered the castle.  The
story of his desertion from the Lanark garrison had not yet reached
those of Glasgow and Dumbarton; and one or two men, who had known him
in former expeditions, readily reported that he had been drafted into
the present one.  Their recognition warranted his truth; and he had no
difficulty, after the carnage in the state apartment, to make his way
to the bed-chamber where Lord Aymer de Valence had ordered Lord Mar to
be carried.   He found the earl alone, and lost in grief.  He knew not
but that his nephew, and even his daughter and wife, had fallen beneath
the impetuous swords of the enemy.  Astonished at seeing the soldier
walking at large, he expressed his surprise with some suspicions.  But
Grimsby told him the strategem he had used, and assured him Lord Andrew
had not been seen since the onset.  This information inspired the earl
with a hope that his nephew might have escaped: and when the soldier
also said, that he had seen the countess led by Lord Soulis across the
hall toward the Lady Helen's apartments, while he overheard him
promising them every respect, the earl seemed comforted.  "But how,"
inquired he of Grimsby, "has this hard fate befallen us?  Have you
learned how De Valence knew that I meant to take up arms for my
country?"

When the soldier was relating this part of the conference, Murray
interrupted him with the same demand.

"On that head I cannot fully satisfy you," replied he; "I could only
gather from the soldiers that a sealed packet had been delivered to Lor
Aymer de Valence late last night at Dumbarton Castle.  Soulis was then
there; and he immediately set off to Glasgow, for the followers he had
left in that town.  Early this morning he joined De Valence and his
legions on Bothwell Moor.  The consequences there you know.  But they
do not end at Bothwell.  The gallant Wallace-"

At that name, so mentioned, the heart of Helen grew cold.

"What of him?" exclaimed Murray.

"No personal harm yet happened to Sir William Wallace," replied
Grimsby; "but at the same moment in which De Valence gave orders for
his troops to march on Bothwell, he sent others to intercept that
persecuted knight's escape from the Cartlane Craigs."

"That accursed sealed packet," cried Murray, "has been the traitor!
Some villian in Bothwell Castle must have written it.  Whence else
could have come the double information?  And if so," added he, with
tremendous emphasis, "may the blast of slavery ever pursue him and his
posterity!"

Helen shuddered, as the amen to this frightful malediction was echoed
by the voices of Halbert and the soldier.  The latter continued:

"When I informed Lord Mar of these measures against Wallace, he
expressed a hope that your first detachment to his assistance might,
with yourself, perhaps, at its head, elude their vigilance, and join
his friend.  This discourse reminded him of the iron box.  'It is in
that closet,' said his lordship, pointing to an opposite door; you will
find it beneath the little altar, before which I pay my daily duties to
the allwise Dispenser of the fates of men; else where would be my
confidence now?  Take it thence, and buckle it to your side."

"I obeyed, and he then proceeded: 'There are two passages in this house
which lead to the sanctuary.  The one nearest to us is the safest for
you.  A staircase from the closet you have just left will lead you
directly into the chapel.  When there hasten to the image of the
Virgin, and slip aside the marble tablet on the back of the pedestal:
it will admit you to a flight of steps; descend them, and at the bottom
you will find a door, that will convey you into a range of cellars.
Lift up the largest flag-stone in the second, and you will be conducted
through a dark vault to an iron door; draw the bolt, and remain in the
cell it will open to you till the owner enters.  He is the prior of St.
Fillan's and a Murray.  Give him this golden cross, which he well
knows, as a mark you come from me; and say it is my request that he
assist you to gain the sea-shore.  As for the iron box, tell him to
preserve it as he would his life; and never to give it up, but to
myself, my children, or to Sir William Wallace, it's rightful master.'"

"Alas!" cried Halbert, "that he had never been its owner! that he had
never brought it to Ellerslie, to draw down misery on his head!
Ill-omened trust! whatever it contains, its presence carried blood and
sorrow in its train.  Wherever it has been deposited war and murder
have followed: I trust my dear master will never see it more!"

"He may indeed never see it more!" murmured Helen, in a low voice.
"Where are now my proud anticipations of freedom to Scotland?  Alas,
Andrew," said she, taking his hand, and weeping over it.  "I have been
too presumptuous; my father is a prisoner, and Sir William Wallace is
lost!"

"Cease, my dear Helen," cried he, "cease to distress yourself! These
are merely the vicissitudes of the great contention we are engaged in.
We must expect occasional disappointments, or look for miracles every
day.  Such disasters are sent as lessons to teach us precaution,
proptitude and patience--these are the soldier's graces, my sweet
cousin, and depend on it, I will pay them due obedience."

"But why," asked Helen, taking comfort from the unsubdued spirits of
her cousin, "why, my good soldier, did not my dear father take
advantage of this sanctuary?"

"I urged the earl to accompany me," returned Grimsby; "but he said such
a proceeding would leave his wife and babes in unprotected captivity.
'No,' added he, 'I will await my fate; for the God of those who trust
in him knows that I do not fear!'

"Having received such peremptory orders from the earl, I took my leave;
and entering the chapel by the way he directed, was agreeably surprised
to find the worthy Halbert, whom, never having seen since the funeral
obsequies, I supposed had fallen during the carnage in the
state-chamber.  He was still kneeling by the tomb of his buried
mistress.  I did not take long to warn him of his danger, and desired
him to follow me.  We descended together beneath the holy statue, and
were just emerging into the cellars when you, sir, met us at the
entrance.

"It was while we were yet in the chapel that I heard De Valence and
Soulis at high words in the courtyard.  The former, in a loud voice,
gave orders that, as Lady Helen Mar could nowhere be found, the earl
and countess, with their two infant children, should not be separated,
but be conveyed as his prisoners to Dumbarton Castle."

"That is a comfort," cried Helen; "my father will then be consoled by
the presence of his wife."

"But very different would have been the case, madam, had you appeared,"
rejoined the soldier.  "One of Lord de Valence's men told me, that Lord
Soulis intended to have taken you and the countess to Dunglass Castle,
near Glasgow, while the sick earl was to have been carried alone to
Dumbarton, and detained in solitary confinement.  Lord Soulis was in so
dreadful a rage, when you could not be found, that he accused the
English commander of having leagued with Lady Mar to deceived him.  In
the midst of this contention we descended into the vaults."

Helen shuddered at the thought of how near she was to falling into the
hands of so fierce a spirit.  In his character, he united every quality
which could render power formidable; combining prodigious bodily
strength with cruelty, dissimulation, and treachery.  He was feared by
the common people as a sorcerer; and avoided by the virtuous of his own
rank, as an enemy to all public law, and the violator of every private
tie.  Helen Mar had twice refused his hand: first, during the contest
for the kingdom, when his pretended claim to the crown was disallowed.
She was then a mere child, hardly more than fourteen; but she rejected
him with abhorrence.  Though stung to the quick at being denied the
objects both of his love and ambition at the same moment, he did not
hesitate at another period to renew his offer to her.  At the fall of
Dunbar, when he again founded his uprise on the ruins of his country,
as soon as he had repeated his oaths of fidelity to Edward, he hastened
to Thirlestane, to throw himself a second time at the feet of Lady
Helen.  Her ripened judgment confirmed her youthful dislike of his
ruffian qualities, and again he was rejected.

"By the powers of hell," exclaimed he, when the project of surprising
Bothwell was imparted to him, "if I once get that proud minion into my
grasp, she shall be mine as I will, and learn to beg for even a look
from the man who has humbled her!"

Helen knew not half the afflictions with which his resentful heart had
meditated to subdue and torture her; and therefore, though she shrunk
at the sound of a name so generally infamous, yet, not aware of all the
evils she had escaped, she replied with languor, though with gratitude,
to the almost rapturous congratulations of her cousin on her timely
flight.

At this period the door of the cell opened, and the prior entered from
the cloisters--he started on seeing his room filled with strangers.
Murray took off his helmet, and approached him.  On recognizing the son
of his patron, the prior inquired his commands; and expressed some
surprise that such a company, and above all, a lady, could have passed
the convent-gate without his previous notice.

Murray pointed to the recess behind the altar; and then explained to
the good priest the necessity which had compelled them to thus seek the
protection of St. Fillan.  "Lady Helen," continued he, "must share your
care until Heaven empowers the Earl of Mar to reclaim his daughter, and
adequately reward this holy church."

The soldier then presented the cross, with the iron box; repeating the
message that confided them also to his keeping.

The prior listened to these recitals with sorrowful attention.  He had
not heard the noise of armed men advancing to the castle; but knowing
that the earl was making warlike preparations, he had no suspicion that
these were other than the Bothwell soldiers.  He took the box, and
laying it on the altar, pressed the cross to his lips.  "The Earl of
Mar shall find that fidelity here which his faith in the church merits.
That mysterious chest, to which you tell me so terrible a denunciation
is annexed, shall be preserved sacred as the relics of St. Fillan."

Halbert groaned heavily at these words, but he did not speak.  The
father looked at him attentively, and then proceeded: "But for you,
virtuous Southron, I will give you a pilgrim's habit.  Travel in that
privileged garb to Montrose; and there a brother of the church, the
prior of Aberbrothick, will, by a letter from me, convey you in a
vessel to Normandy; thence you may safely find your way to Guienne."

The soldier bowed his head; and the priest, turning to Lady Helen, told
her that a cell should be appointed for her, and some pious woman
brought from the adjoining hamlet to pay her due attendance.

"As for this venerable man," continued he, "his silver hairs already
proclaim him near his heavenly country!  He had best put on the cowl of
the holy brotherhood, and, in the arms of religion, repose securely,
till he passes through the sleep of death to wake in everlasting life!"

Tears started into the eyes of Halbert.  "I thank you, reverend father;
I have indeed drawn near the end of my pilgrimage--too old to serve my
dear master in fields of blood and hardship, I will at least devote my
last hours to uniting my prayers with his, and all good souls, for the
repose of his sainted lady.  I accept your invitation thankfully; and,
considering it a call from Heaven to give me rest, I welcome the day
that marks the poor harper of Ellerslie with the sacred tonsure."

The sound of approaching trumpets, and, soon after, the clattering of
horses and the clang of armor, made an instantaneous silence in the
cell.  Helen looked fearfully at her cousin, and grasped his hand;
Murray clasped his sword with a firmer hold.  "I will protect you with
my life."  He spoke in a low tone, but he soldier heard him: "There is
no cause of alarm," rejoined he; "Lord de Valence is only marching by
on his way to Dumbarton."

"Alas, my poor father!" cried Helen, covering her face with her hands.

The venerable prior, pitying her affliction, knelt down by her.  "My
daughter, be comforted," said he; "they dare not commit any violence on
the earl.  King Edward too well understands his own interest to allow
even a long imprisonment to so popular a nobleman."  This assurance,
assisted by the consolations of a firm trust in God, caused her to
raise her head with a meek smile.  He continued to speak of the
impregnable hopes of the Christian who founds his confidence on
Omnipotence; and while his words spread a serenity through her soul,
that seemed the ministration of a descended saint, she closed her hands
over her breast, and silently invoked the protection of the Almighty
Jehovah for her suffering parent.

The prior, seeing her composed, recommended leaving her to rest.  And
Helen, comforted by holy meditations, allowing her cousin to depart, he
led Murray and his companions into the convent library.




Chapter XI.

The Chapter House.


The march of De Valence from the castle having proved that no suspicion
of any of its late inhabitants being still in the neighborhood remained
with its usurpers, Grimsby thought he might depart in safety; and next
morning he begged permission of the prior to commence his journey.  "I
am anxious to quit a land," said he, "where my countrymen are
committing violences which make me blush at the name of Englishman."

Murray put a purse of gold into the soldier's hand, while the prior
covered his armor with a pilgrim's gown.  Grimsby, with a respectful
bow, returned the gift;  "I cannot take money from you, my lord.  But
bestow on me the sword at your side, and that I will preserve forever."

Murray took it off, and gave it to the soldier.  "Let us exchange, my
brave friend!" said he; "give me yours, and it shall be a memorial to
me of having found virtue in an Englishman."

Grimsby unlocked his rude weapon in a moment, and as he put the iron
hilt into the young Scot's hand, a tear stood in his eye: "When you
raise this sword against my countrymen, think on Grimsby, a faithful,
though humble soldier of the cross, and spare the blood of all who ask
for mercy."

Murray looked a gracious assent, for the tear of mercy was infectious.
Without speaking, he gave the good soldier's hand a parting grasp; and
with regret that superior claims called so brave a man from his side,
he saw him leave the monastery.

The mourner banquets on memory; making that which seems the poison of
life, its ailment.  During the hours of regret we recall the images of
departed joys; and in weeping over each tender remembrance, tears so
softly shed embalm the wounds of grief.  To be denied the privilege of
pouring forth our love and our lamentations over the grave of one who
in life was our happiness, is to shut up the soul of the survivor in a
solitary tomb, where the bereaved heart pines in secret till it breaks
with the fullness of uncommunicated sorrow; but listen to the mourner,
give his feelings way, and, like the river rolling from the hills into
the valley, they will flow with a gradually gentler stream, till they
become lost in time's wide ocean.

So Murray judged when the poor old harper, finding himself alone with
him, again gave loose to his often-recapitulated griefs.  He wept like
an infant; and recounting the afflictions of his master, while
bewailing the disasters at Bothwell, implored Murray to go without
delay to support the now almost friendless Wallace.  Murray was
consoling him with the assurance that he would set off for the
mountains that very evening, when the prior returned to conduct Halbert
to a cell appointed for his novitiate.  The good priest had placed one
of his most pious fathers there, to administer both temporal and
spiritual cordials to the aged sufferer.

The sorrowing domestic of Wallace being thus disposed of, the prior and
Murray remained together, consulting on the safest means of passing to
the Cartlane hills.  A lay brother whom the prior had sent in pursuit
of Helen's fifty warriors, to apprise them of the English being in the
craigs, at this juncture entered the library.  He informed the father
that, secure in his religious garb, he had penetrated many of the
Cartlane defiles, but could neither see nor hear anything of the party.
Every glen or height was occupied by the English: and from a woman, of
whom he begged a draught of milk, he had learned how closely the
mountains were invested.  The English commander, in his zeal to prevent
provisions being conveyed to Wallace and his famishing garrison, had
stopped a procession of monks bearing a dead body to the sepulchral
cave of St. Columba.  He would not allow them to ascend the heights
until he had examined whether the bier really bore a corpse, or was a
vehicle to carry food to the beleaguered Scots.

In the midst of this information, the prior and his friends were
startled by a shout, and soon after a tumult of voices, in which might
be distinguished the cry of "A gallows for the traitor!"

"Our brave Englishman has fallen into their hands," cried Murray,
hastening toward the door.

"What would you do?" interrupted the prior, holding him.  "Your single
arm could not save the soldier.  The cross has more power; I will seek
these violent men.  Meanwhile stay here, as you value the lives of all
in the convent."

Murray had now recollected himself, and acquiesced.  The prior took the
crucifix from the altar, and ordering the porter to throw open the
great doors (near which the incessant shouting seemed to proceed), he
appeared before a turbulent band of soldiers, who were dragging a man
along, fast bound with their leathern belts.  Blood trickling from his
face fell on the hands of the ruthless wretches, who, with horrid
yells, were threatening him with instant death.

The prior, raising the cross, rushed in among them, and, in the name of
the blessed Son who died on that tree, bade them stand!  The soldiers
trembled before the holy majesty of his figure, and at his awful
adjuration.  The prior looked on the prisoner, but he did not see the
dark locks of the Englishman; it was the yellow hair of Scotland that
mingled with the blood on his forehead.

"Whither do you hurry that wounded man?"

"To his death," answered a surly fellow.

"What is his offense?"

"He is a traitor."

"How has he proved it?"

"He is a Scot, and he belongs to the disloyal Lord of Mar.  This bugle,
with its crowned falcon, proves it," added the Southron, holding up the
very bugle which the earl had sent by Halbert to Wallace, and which was
ornamented with the crest of Mar wrought in gold.

"That this has been Lord Mar's," replied the prior, "there is no doubt;
but may not this man have found it?  Or may it not have been given to
him by the earl, before that chief incurred the displeasure of King
Edward?  Which of you would think it just to be made to die because
your friend was condemned to the scaffold?  Unless you substantiate
your charge against this man, by a better proof than this bugle, his
death would be a murder, which the Lord of life will requite in the
perdition of your souls."  As the father spoke, he again elevated the
cross: the men turned pale.

"I am a minister of Christ," continued he, "and must be the friend of
justice.  Release, therefore, that wounded man to me.  Before the altar
of the Searcher of all hearts he shall confess himself; and if I find
that he is guilty unto death, I promise you by the holy St. Fillan, to
release him to your commanding officer, and so let justice take its
course.  But if he proves innocent, I am the soldier of Christ, and no
monarch on earth shall wrest his children from the protection of the
church."

While he spoke, the men who held the prisoner let go their hold, and
the prior stretching out his hand, gave him to a party of monks to
conduct into the convent.  Then, to convince the soldiers that it was
the man's life he sought to save, and not the spoil, he returned the
golden bugle, and bade him depart in peace.

Awed by the father's address, and satisfied with the money and arms of
which they had rifled the stranger, the marauders retreated;
determining, indeed, to say nothing of the matter to the officer in the
castle, lest he should demand the horn; and, elated with the present
booty, they marched off to pursue their plundering excursion.  Bursting
into yeomen's houses and peasants' huts, stripping all of their
substance who did or did not swear fealty to Edward; thus robbing the
latter, and exacting contributions from the former; while vain prayers
for mercy and unanswered cries for redress echoed dolefully through the
vale of Bothwell, they sped gayly on, as if murder were pastime and
rapine honor.

The prior, on returning into the convent, ordered the gates to be
bolted.  When he entered the chapter-house, finding the monks had
already bound up the wounds of the stranger, he made a sign for the
brethren to withdraw: and then, approaching the young man, "My son,"
said he, in a mild tone, "you heard my declaration to the men from whom
I took you!  Answer me the truth and you shall find that virtue or
repentance have alike a refuge in the arms of the church.  As I am its
servant, no man need fear to confide in me.  Speak with candor!  How
came you by that bugle?"

The stranger looked steadfastly on his questioner; "A minister of the
all righteous God cannot mean to deceive.  You have saved my life, and
I should be less than man could I doubt the evidence of that deed.  I
received that bugle from a brave Scot who dwells amongst the eastern
mountains; and who gave it to me to assure the Earl of Mar that I came
from him."

The prior apprehended that it was of Wallace he spoke.  "You come to
request a military aid from the Earl of Mar!" rejoined the father,
willing to sound him, before he committed Murray, by calling him to the
conference.

The stranger replied: "If, reverend sir, you are in the confidence of
the good earl, pronounce but the Christian name of the man who charged
me with the bugle, and allow me, then, for his sake, to ask you what
has indeed happened to the earl! that I was seized by foes, when I
expected to meet with friends only!  Reply to this, and I shall speak
freely; but at present, though I would confide all of myself to your
sacred character, yet the confidence of others is not mine to bestow."

The prior, being convinced by this caution, that he was indeed speaking
with some messenger from Wallace, made no hesitation to answer.  "Your
master is a knight, and a braver never drew breath since the time of
his royal namesake, William the Lion!"

The man rose hastily from his seat, and falling on his knees before the
prior, put his garment to his lips: "Father, I now know that I am with
a friend of my persecuted master!  But if, indeed, the situation of
Lord Mar precludes assistance from him, all hope is lost!  The noble
Wallace is penned within the hills, without any hopes of escape.
Suffer me, then, thou venerable saint! to rejoin him immediately, that
I may at least die with my friend!"

"Hope for a better destiny," returned the prior; "I am a servant, and
not to be worshiped; turn to that altar, and kneel to Him who can alone
send the succor you need!"

The good man, thinking it was now time to call the young lord of
Bothwell, by a side-door from the chapter-house entered the library,
where Murray was anxiously awaiting his return.  On his entrance, the
impatient youth eagerly exclaimed, "Have you rescued him?"

"Grimsby, I hope, is far and safely on his journey," answered the good
priest; "but the man those murderers were dragging to death, is in the
chapter-house.  Follow me, and he will give you news of Wallace."

Murray gladly obeyed.

At sight of a Scottish knight in armor, the messenger of Wallace
thought his prayers were answered, and that he saw before him the
leader of the host which was to march to the preservation of his brave
commander.  Murray told him who he was; and learned from him in return,
that Wallace now considered himself in a state of siege; that the
women, children, and old men with him, had nothing to feed on but wild
strawberries and birds' eggs, which they found in the hollows of the
rocks.  "To relieve them from such hard quarters, girded by a barrier
of English soldiers," continued the narrator, "is his first wish: but
that cannot be effected by our small number.  However, he would make
the attempt by a strategem, could we be at all supported by succors
from the Earl of Mar!"

"My uncle's means," replied Murray, "are for a time cut off: but mine
shall be exerted to the utmost.  Did you not meet, somewhere, a company
of Scots to the number of fifty?  I sent them off yesterday to seek
your noble chief."

"No," rejoined the young man; "I fear they have been taken by the
enemy; for in my way to Sir William Wallace, not knowing the English
were so close to his sanctuary, I was nearly seized myself.  I had not
the good fortune to be with him, when he struck the first blow for
Scotland in the citadel of Lanark; but as soon as I heard the tale of
his wrongs, and that he had retired in arms toward the Cartlane Craigs,
I determined to follow his fate.  We had been companions in our boyish
days, and friends after.  He saved my life once, in swimming; and now
that a formidable nation menaces his, I seek to repay the debt.  For
this purpose, a few nights ago I left my guardian's house by stealth,
and sought my way to my friend.  I found the banks of the Mouse
occupied by the English; but exploring the most intricate passes, at
last gained the bottom of the precipice on the top of which Wallace is
encamped; and as I lay among the bushes, watching an opportunity to
ascend, I perceived two English soldiers near me.  They were in
discourse, and I overheard them say, that besides Heselrigge himself,
nearly two hundred of his garrison had fallen by the hand of Wallace's
men in the contention at the castle; that the tidings were sent to Sir
Richard Arnulf, the Deputy-governor of Ayr; and he had dispatched a
thousand men to surround the Cartland Craigs, spies having given notice
that they were Sir William's strongholds, and the orders were, that he
must be taken dead or alive; while all his adherents, men and women,
should receive no quarter.

"Such was the information I brought to my gallant friend, when in the
dead of night I mounted the rock, and calling to the Scottish sentinel
in Gaelic, gave him my name, and was allowed to enter the sacred spot.
Wallace welcomed his faithful Ker,** and soon unfolded his distress and
his hopes.  He told me of the famine that threatened his little
garrison; of the constant watching, day and night, necessary to prevent
a surprise.  But in his extremity, he observed that one defile was
thinly guarded by the enemy; probably because, as it lay at the bottom
of a perpendicular angle of the rock, they thought it unattainable by
the Scots.  To this point, however, my dauntless friend turns his eyes.
He would attempt it, could he procure a sufficient number of fresh men
to cover the retreat of his exhausted few.  For this purpose, as I had
so lately explored the most hidden paths of the craigs, I volunteered
to visit the Lord Mar, and to conduct, in safety, any succors he might
send to our persecuted leader."

**The stem of this brave name, in subsequent times, became two great
branches, the Roxburghe and the Lothian.

"This," continued Ker, "was the errand on which I came to the earl.
Think then my horror, when in my journey I found redoubled legions
hemming in the hills; and on advancing toward Bothwell Castle, was
seized with that nobleman, who, they said, was condemned to lose his
head!"

"Not so bad as that, my brave Ker," cried Murray, a glow of indignation
flushing his cheek; "many a bull's head** shall frown in this land, on
the Southron tables, before my uncle's neck gluts their axes!  No true
Scottish blood, I trust, will ever stain their scaffolds; for while we
have arms to wield a sword, he must be a fool that grounds them on any
other terms than freedom or death.  We have cast our lives on the die;
and Wallace's camp or the narrow house must be our prize!"

**A bull's head, presented at a feast, was a sign that some one of the
company was immediately to be put to death.-(1809.)

"Noble youth!" exclaimed the prior, "may the innocence which gives
animation to your courage, continue its moving soul!  They only are
invincible who are as ready to die as to live; and no one can be firm
in that principle, whose exemplary life is not a happy preparation for
the awful change."

Murray bowed modestly to this pious encomium, and turning to Ker,
informed him, that since he must abandon all hope of hearing any more
of the fifty brave men his cousin Helen had sent to the craigs, he
bethought him of applying to his uncle, Sir John Murray, who dwelt hard
by, on his estate at Drumshargard.  "It is small," said he, "and cannot
afford many men; but still he may spare sufficient to effect the escape
of our commander; and that for the present will be a host!"

To accomplish his design without delay--for promptitude is the earnest
of success--and to avoid a surprise from the English lieutenant at
Bothwell (who, hearing of the reencounter before the castle, might
choose to demand his men's prisoner).  Murray determined to take Ker
with him; and, disguised as peasants, as soon as darkness should shroud
their movements, proceed to Drumshargard.




Chapter XII.

Drumshargard.


While these transactions occupied the morning, Lady Helen (who the
night before had been removed into the quiet cell appointed for her)
slept long and sweetly.  Her exhausted frame found renovation; and she
awoke with a heavenly calm at her heart.  A cheering vision had visited
her sleeping thoughts; and a trance of happy feelings absorbed her
senses, while her hardly disengaged spirit still hovered over its
fading images.

She had seen in her dream a young knight enter her cell, bearing her
father in his arms.  He laid the earl down before her; but as she
stooped to embrace him, the knight took her by the hand, leading her to
the window of the apartment (which seemed extended to an immense size),
he smiled, and said, "Look out and see how I have performed my vow!"
She obeyed, and saw crowds of rejoicing people, who at sight of the
young warrior raised such a shout, that Helen awoke.  She started--she
looked around--she was still in the narrow cell, and lone; but the
rapture of beholding her father yet fluttered in her breast, and the
touch of the warrior's hand seemed still warm upon hers.  "Angels of
rest," cried she, "I thank ye for this blessed vision!"

The prior of St. Fillan might have read his own just sentiment in the
heart of Lady Helen.  While the gentlest of human beings, she was an
evidence that an ardent and pious mind contains the true principles of
heroism.  Hope, in such a mind, treads down impossibilities; and,
regardless of impediments or dangers, rushes forward to seize the
prize.  In the midst of hosts, it feels a conqueror's power; or, when
its strength fails, sees, by the eye of faith, legions of angels
watching to support the natural weakness.  Lady Helen knew that the
cause was just which had put the sword into the hand of Wallace; that
it was virtue which had prompted her father to second him; and where
justice is there are the wings of the Most High stretched out as a
shield!

This dream seemed prophetic.  "Yes," cried she, "though thousands of
Edward's soldiers surrounded my father and his friend, I should not
despair.  Thy life, O noble Wallace, was not give to be extinguished in
an hour!  Thy morn has hardly risen, the perfect day must come that is
to develop thy greatness--that is to prove thee (and oh! gracious God,
grant my prayer!) the glory of Scotland!"

Owing to the fervor of her apostrophe, she did not observe the door of
the cell open, till the prior stood before her.  After expressing his
pleasure at the renovation in her countenance, he informed her of the
departure of the English soldier, and of the alarm which he and Murray
had sustained for his safety, by the adventure which had thrown a
stranger from the craigs into their protection.  At the mention of that
now momentous spot, she blushed; the golden-haired warrior of her dream
seemed ready to rise before her; and with a beating heart she prepared
to hear some true but miraculous account of her father's rescue.

Unconscious of what was passing in her young and eager mind, the prior
calmly proceeded to relate all that Ker had told of the dangerous
extremity to which Wallace was reduced; and then closed his
intelligence, by mentioning the attempt which meditated to save him.
The heightened color gradually faded from the face of Helen, and low
sighs were her only responses to the observations the good priest made
on the difficulty of the enterprise.  But when his pity for the brave
man engaged in the cause, betrayed him into expressing his fears that
the patriotic zeal of Wallace would only make him and them a sacrifice,
Helen looked up; there was inspiration on her lips and in her eyes.
"Father," said she, "hast thou not taught me that God shieldeth the
patriot as well as armeth him!"

"True!" returned he, with an answering smile; "steadily believe this,
and where will be the sighs you have just been breathing!"

"Nature will shrink," replied she; "but the Christian's hope checks her
ere she falls.  Pardon me then, holy father, that I sometimes weep; but
they are often tears of trust and consolation."

"Daughter of heaven," replied the good prior, "you might teach devotion
to age, and cause youth to be enamored of the graces of religion!  Be
ever thus, and you may look with indifference on the wreck of worlds."

Helen having meekly replied to this burst from the heart of the holy
man, begged to see her cousin before he set off on his expedition.  The
prior withdrew, and within an hour after, Murray entered the apartment.
Their conversation was long, and their parting full of an interest
that dissolved them both into tears.  "When I see you again, my brave
cousin, tell me that my father is free, and his preserver safe.  Your
own life, dear Andrew," added she, as he pressed his cheek to hers,
"must always be precious to me."

Murray hastily withdrew, and Helen was again alone.

The young chieftain and Ker covered their armor with shepherd's plaids;
and having received a thousand blessings from the prior and Halbert,
proceeded under shelter of the night, through the obscurest paths of
the wood which divided Bothwell from Drumshargard.

Sir John Murray was gone to rest when his nephew arrived, but Lord
Andrew's voice being well known by the porter, he was admitted into the
house; and leaving his companion in the dining-hall, went to the
apartment of his uncle.  The old knight was soon aroused, and welcomed
his nephew with open arms; for he had feared, from the accounts brought
by the fugitive tenants of Bothwell, that he also had been carried away
prisoner.

Murray now unfolded his errand--first to obtain a band of Sir John's
trustiest people to assist in rescuing the preserver of the earl's life
from immediate destruction; and secondly, if a commission for Lord
Mar's release did not arrive from King Edward, to aid him to free his
uncle and the countess from Dumbarton Castle.

Sir John listened with growing anxiety to his nephew's details.  When
he heard of Lady Helen's continuing in the convent, he highly approved
it.  "That is well," said he; "so bring her to any private protection
would only spread calamity.  She might be traced, and her protector put
in danger; none but the church, with safety to itself, can grant asylum
to the daughter of a state prisoner."

"Then I doubly rejoice she is there," replied Murray, "and there she
will remain, till your generous assistance empowers me to rescue her
father."

"Lord Mar has been very rash, nephew," returned Drumshargard.  "What
occasion was there for him to volunteer sending men to support Sir
William Wallace? and how durst he bring ruin on Bothwell Castle, by
collecting unauthorized by my brother, its vassals for so dangerous an
experiment?"

Murray started at these unexpected observations.  He knew his uncle was
timid, but he had never suspected him of meanness; however, in
consideration of the respect he owed to him as his father's brother, he
smothered his disgust, and gave him a mild answer.  But the old man
could not approve of a nobleman of his rank running himself, his
fortune, and his friends into peril, to pay any debt of gratitude; and,
as to patriotic sentiments being a stimulus, he treated the idea with
contempt.  "Trust me, Andrew," said he, "nobody profits by these
notions but thieves and desperate fellows ready to become thieves!"

"I do not understand you, sir!"

"Not understand me?" replied the knight, rather impatiently.  "Who
suffers in these contests for liberty, as you choose to call them, but
such men as Lord Mar and your father?  Betrayed by artful declamation,
they rush into conspiracies against the existing government, are
detected, ruined, and perhaps finally lose their lives!  Who gains by
rebellion, but a few penniless wretches, that embrace these vaunted
principles from the urgency of their necessities?   They acquire
plunder, under the mask of extraordinary disinterestedness; and
hazarding nothing of themselves but their worthless lives, they would
make tools of the first men in the realm; and throw the whole country
into flames, that they may catch a few brands from the fire!"

Young Murray felt his anger rise with this speech.  "You do not speak
to my point, sir!  I do not come here to dispute the general evil of
revolt, but to ask your assistance to snatch two of the bravest men in
Scotland from the fangs of the tyrant who has made you a slave!"

"Nephew!" cried the knight, starting from his couch; and darting a
fierce look at him, "if any man but one of my own blood had uttered
that word, this hour should have been his last."

"Every man, sir," continued Murray, "who acts upon your principles,
must know himself to be a slave;-and to resent being called so, is to
affront his conscience.  A name is nothing, the fact ought to knock
upon your heart, and there arouse the indignation of a Scot and a
Murray.  See you not the villages of your country burning around you?
the castles of your chieftains razed to the ground?   Did not the
plains of Dunbar reek with the blood of your kinsmen; and even now, do
you not see them led away in chains to the strongholds of the tyrant?
Are not your stoutest vassals pressed from your service, and sent into
foreign wars?  And yet you exclaim, 'I see no injury--I spurn at the
name of slave!'"

Murray rose from his seat as he ended, and walking the room in
agitation, did not perceive the confusion of his uncle, who, at once
overcome with conviction and fear, again ventured to speak:  "It is too
sure you speak truth, Andrew; but what am I, or any other private
individual, that we should make ourselves a forlorn hope for the whole
nation?  Will Baliol, who was the first to bow to the usurper, will he
thank us for losing our heads in resentment of his indignity?  Bruce
himself, the rightful heir of the crown, leaves us to our fates, and
has become a courtier in England!  For whom, then, should I adventure
my gray hairs, and the quiet of my home, to seek an uncertain liberty,
and to meet an almost certain death?"

"For Scotland, uncle," replied he; "just laws are her right.  You are
her son; and if you do not make one in the grand attempt to rescue her
from the bloodhounds which tear her vitals, the guilt of parricide will
be on your soul!  Think not, sir, to preserve your home, or even your
gray hairs, by hugging the chains by which you are bound.  You are a
