Having communicated thus freely with you, my dear Captain, it follows,
of course, that I will gratefully accept of your communication, which,
as your Benedictine observed, divides itself both by subject, manner,
and age, into two parts. But I am sorry I cannot gratify your literary
ambition, by suffering your name to appear upon the title-page; and I
will candidly tell you the reason.

The Editors of your country are of such a soft and passive disposition,
that they have frequently done themselves great disgrace by giving up
the coadjutors who first brought them into public notice and public
favour, and suffering their names to be used by those quacks and
impostors who live upon the ideas of others. Thus I shame to tell how
the sage Cid Hamet Benengeli was induced by one Juan Avellaneda to play
the Turk with the ingenious Miguel Cervantes, and to publish a Second
Part of the adventures of his hero the renowned Don Quixote, without the
knowledge or co-operation of his principal aforesaid. It is true, the
Arabian sage returned to his allegiance, and thereafter composed a
genuine continuation of the Knight of La Mancha, in which the said
Avellaneda of Tordesillas is severely chastised. For in this you
pseudo-editors resemble the juggler's disciplined ape, to which a sly
old Scotsman likened James I., "if you have Jackoo in your hand, you can
make him bite me; if I have Jackoo in my hand, I can make him bite
you." Yet, notwithstanding the _amende honorable_ thus made by Cid Hamet
Benengeli, his temporary defection did not the less occasion the decease
of the ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote, if he can be said to die, whose
memory is immortal. Cervantes put him to death, lest he should again
fall into bad hands. Awful, yet just consequence of Cid Hamet's
defection!

To quote a more modern and much less important instance. I am sorry to
observe my old acquaintance Jedediah Cleishbotham has misbehaved himself
so far as to desert his original patron, and set up for himself. I am
afraid the poor pedagogue will make little by his new allies, unless
the pleasure of entertaining the public, and, for aught I know, the
gentlemen of the long robe, with disputes about his identity.

[Footnote: I am since more correctly informed, that Mr. Cleishbotham
died some months since at Gandercleuch, and that the person assuming
his name is an impostor. The real Jedediah made a most Christian
and edifying end; and, as I am credibly informed, having sent for a
Cameronian clergyman when he was _in extremis_, was so fortunate as to
convince the good man, that, after all, he had no wish to bring down on
the scattered remnant of Mountain folks, "the bonnets of Bonny Dundee."
Hard that the speculators in print and paper will not allow a good man
to rest quiet in his grave.

This note, and the passages in the text, were occasioned by a London
bookseller having printed, as a Speculation, an additional collection
of Tales of My Landlord, which was not so fortunate as to succeed in
passing on the world as genuine.]

Observe, therefore, Captain Clutterbuck, that, wise by these great
examples, I receive you as a partner, but a sleeping partner only. As
I give you no title to employ or use the firm of the copartnery we are
about to form, I will announce my property in my title-page, and put my
own mark on my own chattels, which the attorney tells me it will be a
crime to counterfeit, as much as it would to imitate the autograph of
any other empiric--a crime amounting, as advertisements upon little
vials assure to us, to nothing short of felony. If, therefore, my dear
friend, your name should hereafter appear in any title-page without
mine, readers will know what to think of you. I scorn to use either
arguments or threats; but you cannot but be sensible, that, as you owe
your literary existence to me on the one hand, so, on the other, your
very all is at my disposal. I can at pleasure cut off your annuity,
strike your name from the half-pay establishment, nay, actually put you
to death, without being answerable to any one. These are plain words to
a gentleman who has served during the whole war; but, I am aware, you
will take nothing amiss at my hands.

And now, my good sir, let us address ourselves to our task, and arrange,
as we best can, the manuscript of your Benedictine, so as to suit the
taste of this critical age. You will find I have made very liberal use
of his permission, to alter whatever seemed too favourable to the Church
of Rome, which I abominate, were it but for her fasts and penances.

Our reader is doubtless impatient, and we must own, with John Bunyan,

  We have too long detain'd him in the porch,
  And kept him from the sunshine with a torch.

Adieu, therefore, my dear Captain--remember me respectfully to the
parson, the schoolmaster, and the bailie, and all friends of the happy
club in the village of Kennaquhair. I have never seen, and never shall
see, one of their faces; and notwithstanding, I believe that as yet I am
better acquainted with them than any other man who lives.--I shall soon
introduce you to my jocund friend, Mr. John Ballantyne of Trinity Grove,
whom you will find warm from his match at single-stick with a brother
Publisher. [Footnote: In consequence of the pseudo Tales of My Landlord
printed in London, as already mentioned, the late Mr. John Ballantyne,
the author's publisher, had a controversy with the interloping
bibliopolist, each insisting that his Jedediah Cleishbotham was the real
Simon Pure.] Peace to their differences! It is a wrathful trade, and
the _irritabile genus_ comprehends the bookselling as well as the
book-writing species.--Once more adieu!

THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY.



       *       *       *       *       *

THE MONASTERY.




Chapter the First.


  O ay! the Monks, the Monks they did the mischief!
  Theirs all the grossness, all the superstition
  Of a most gross and superstitious age--
  May He be praised that sent the healthful tempest
  And scatter'd all these pestilential vapours!
  But that we owed them _all_ to yonder Harlot
  Throned on the seven hills with her cup of gold,
  I will as soon believe, with kind Sir Roger,
  That old Moll White took wing with cat and broomstick,
  And raised the last night's thunder.
                                       OLD PLAY.

The village described in the Benedictine's manuscript by the name
of Kennaquhair, bears the same Celtic termination which occurs in
Traquhair, Caquhair, and other compounds. The learned Chalmers derives
this word Quhair, from the winding course of a stream; a definition
which coincides, in a remarkable degree, with the serpentine turns of
the river Tweed near the village of which we speak. It has been long
famous for the splendid Monastery of Saint Mary, founded by David the
First of Scotland, in whose reign were formed, in the same county, the
no less splendid establishments of Melrose, Jedburgh, and Kelso. The
donations of land with which the King endowed these wealthy fraternities
procured him from the Monkish historians the epithet of Saint, and from
one of his impoverished descendants the splenetic censure, "that he had
been a sore saint for the Crown."

It seems probable, notwithstanding, that David, who was a wise as well
as a pious monarch, was not moved solely by religious motives to those
great acts of munificence to the church, but annexed political views to
his pious generosity. His possessions in Northumberland and Cumberland
became precarious after the loss of the Battle of the Standard; and
since the comparatively fertile valley of Teviot-dale was likely to
become the frontier of his kingdom, it is probable he wished to secure
at least a part of these valuable possessions by placing them in the
hands of the monks, whose property was for a long time respected, even
amidst the rage of a frontier war. In this manner alone had the King
some chance of ensuring protection and security to the cultivators of
the soil; and, in fact, for several ages the possessions of these
Abbeys were each a sort of Goshen, enjoying the calm light of peace
and immunity, while the rest of the country, occupied by wild clans and
marauding barons, was one dark scene of confusion, blood, and unremitted
outrage.

But these immunities did not continue down to the union of the crowns.
Long before that period the wars betwixt England and Scotland had lost
their original character of international hostilities, and had become
on the part of the English, a struggle for subjugation, on that of
the Scots a desperate and infuriated defence of their liberties. This
introduced on both sides a degree of fury and animosity unknown to the
earlier period of their history; and as religious scruples soon gave way
to national hatred spurred by a love of plunder, the patrimony of the
Church was no longer sacred from incursions on either side. Still,
however, the tenants and vassals of the great Abbeys had many advantages
over those of the lay barons, who were harassed by constant military
duty, until they became desperate, and lost all relish for the arts of
peace. The vassals of the church, on the other hand, were only liable
to be called to arms on general occasions, and at other times were
permitted in comparative quiet to possess their farms and feus.
[Footnote: Small possessions conferred upon vassals and their heirs,
held for a small quit-rent, or a moderate proportion of the produce.
This was a favourite manner, by which the churchmen peopled the
patrimony of their convents; and many descendants of such _feuars_, as
they are culled, are still to be found in possession of their family
inheritances in the neighbourhood of the great Monasteries of Scotland.]
They of course exhibited superior skill in every thing that related
to the cultivation of the soil, and were therefore both wealthier and
better informed than the military retainers of the restless chiefs and
nobles in their neighbourhood.

The residence of these church vassals was usually in a small village or
hamlet, where, for the sake of mutual aid and protection, some thirty
or forty families dwelt together. This was called the Town, and the land
belonging to the various families by whom the Town was inhabited, was
called the Township. They usually possessed the land in common, though
in various proportions, according to their several grants. The part of
the Township properly arable, and kept as such continually under the
plough, was called _in-field_. Here the use of quantities of manure
supplied in some degree the exhaustion of the soil, and the feuars
raised tolerable oats and bear, [Footnote: Or bigg, a kind of coarse
barley.] usually sowed on alternate ridges, on which the labour of the
whole community was bestowed without distinction, the produce being
divided after harvest, agreeably to their respective interests.

There was, besides, _out-field_ land, from which it was thought possible
to extract a crop now and then, after which it was abandoned to the
"skiey influences," until the exhausted powers of vegetation were
restored. These out-field spots were selected by any feuar at his own
choice, amongst the sheep-walks and hills which were always annexed to
the Township, to serve as pasturage to the community. The trouble of
cultivating these patches of out-field, and the precarious chance that
the crop would pay the labour, were considered as giving a right to any
feuar, who chose to undertake the adventure, to the produce which might
result from it.

There remained the pasturage of extensive moors, where the valleys often
afforded good grass, and upon which the whole cattle belonging to the
community fed indiscriminately during the summer, under the charge of
the Town-herd, who regularly drove them out to pasture in the morning,
and brought them back at night, without which precaution they would
have fallen a speedy prey to some of the Snatchers in the neighbourhood.
These are things to make modern agriculturists hold up their hands and
stare; but the same mode of cultivation is not yet entirely in desuetude
in some distant parts of North Britain, and may be witnessed in full
force and exercise in the Zetland Archipelago.

The habitations of the church-feuars were not less primitive than their
agriculture. In each village or town were several small towers, having
battlements projecting over the side walls, and usually an advanced
angle or two with shot-holes for flanking the door-way, which was always
defended by a strong door of oak, studded with nails, and often by an
exterior grated door of iron. These small peel-houses were ordinarily
inhabited by the principal feuars and their families; but, upon the
alarm of approaching danger, the whole inhabitants thronged from their
own miserable cottages, which were situated around, to garrison these
points of defence. It was then no easy matter for a hostile party to
penetrate into the village, for the men were habituated to the use of
bows and fire-arms, and the towers being generally so placed, that the
discharge from one crossed that of another, it was impossible to assault
any of them individually.

The interior of these houses was usually sufficiently wretched, for it
would have been folly to have furnished them in a manner which could
excite the avarice of their lawless neighbours. Yet the families
themselves exhibited in their appearance a degree of comfort,
information, and independence, which could hardly have been expected.
Their in-field supplied them with bread and home-brewed ale, their herds
and flocks with beef and mutton (the extravagance of killing lambs or
calves was never thought of). Each family killed a mart, or fat bullock,
in November, which was salted up for winter use, to which the good wife
could, upon great occasions, add a dish of pigeons or a fat capon,--the
ill-cultivated garden afforded "lang-cale,"--and the river gave salmon
to serve as a relish during the season of Lent.

Of fuel they had plenty, for the bogs afforded turf; and the remains
of the abused woods continued to give them logs for burning, as well as
timber for the usual domestic purposes. In addition to these comforts,
the good-man would now and then sally forth to the greenwood, and mark
down a buck of season with his gun or his cross-bow; and the Father
Confessor seldom refused him absolution for the trespass, if duly
invited to take his share of the smoking haunch. Some, still bolder,
made, either with their own domestics, or by associating themselves with
the moss-troopers, in the language of shepherds, "a start and overloup;"
and the golden ornaments and silken head-gear--worn by the females of
one or two families of note, were invidiously traced by their neighbours
to such successful excursions. This, however, was a more inexplicable
crime in the eyes of the Abbot and Community of Saint Mary's, than
the borrowing one of the "gude king's deer;" and they failed not to
discountenance and punish, by every means in their power, offences which
were sure to lead to severe retaliation upon the property of the church,
and which tended to alter the character of their peaceful vassalage.

As for the information possessed by those dependents of the Abbacies,
they might have been truly said to be better fed than taught, even
though their fare had been worse than it was. Still, however, they
enjoyed opportunities of knowledge from which others were excluded. The
monks were in general well acquainted with their vassals and tenants,
and familiar in the families of the better class among them, where they
were sure to be received with the respect due to their twofold character
of spiritual father and secular landlord. Thus it often happened, when
a boy displayed talents and inclination for study, one of the brethren,
with a view to his being bred to the church, or out of good-nature,
in order to pass away his own idle time, if he had no better motive,
initiated him into the mysteries of reading and writing, and imparted to
him such other knowledge as he himself possessed. And the heads of these
allied families, having more time for reflection, and more skill, as
well as stronger motives for improving their small properties, bore
amongst their neighbours the character of shrewd, intelligent men, who
claimed respect on account of their comparative wealth, even while they
were despised for a less warlike and enterprising turn than the other
Borderers. They lived as much as they well could amongst themselves,
avoiding the company of others, and dreading nothing more than to be
involved in the deadly feuds and ceaseless contentions of the secular
landholders.

Such is a general picture of these communities. During the fatal wars in
the commencement of Queen Mary's reign, they had suffered dreadfully by
the hostile invasions. For the English, now a Protestant people, were
so far from sparing the church-lands, that they forayed them with more
unrelenting severity than even the possessions of the laity. But
the peace of 1550 had restored some degree of tranquillity to those
distracted and harassed regions, and matters began again gradually
to settle upon the former footing. The monks repaired their ravaged
shrines--the feuar again roofed his small fortalice which the enemy had
ruined--the poor labourer rebuilt his cottage--an easy task, where a few
sods, stones, and some pieces of wood from the next copse, furnished
all the materials necessary. The cattle, lastly, were driven out of the
wastes and thickets in which the remnant of them had been secreted; and
the mighty bull moved at the head of his seraglio and their followers,
to take possession of their wonted pastures. There ensued peace and
quiet, the state of the age and nation considered, to the Monastery of
Saint Mary, and its dependencies, for several tranquil years.




Chapter the Second.


  In yon lone vale his early youth was bred,
  Not solitary then--the bugle-horn
  Of fell Alecto often waked its windings,
  From where the brook joins the majestic river,
  To the wild northern bog, the curlew's haunt,
  Where oozes forth its first and feeble streamlet.
                                           OLD PLAY.

We have said, that most of the feuars dwelt in the village belonging to
their townships. This was not, however, universally the case. A lonely
tower, to which the reader must now be introduced, was at least one
exception to the general rule.

It was of small dimensions, yet larger than those which occurred in the
village, as intimating that, in case of assault, the proprietor would
have to rely upon his own unassisted strength. Two or three miserable
huts, at the foot of the fortalice, held the bondsmen and tenants of the
feuar. The site was a beautiful green knoll, which started up suddenly
in the very throat of a wild and narrow glen, and which, being
surrounded, except on one side, by the winding of a small stream,
afforded a position of considerable strength.

But the great security of Glendearg, for so the place was called, lay
in its secluded, and almost hidden situation. To reach the tower, it was
necessary to travel three miles up the glen, crossing about twenty times
the little stream, which, winding through the narrow valley, encountered
at every hundred yards the opposition of a rock or precipitous bank on
the one side, which altered its course, and caused it to shoot off in an
oblique direction to the other. The hills which ascend on each side of
this glen are very steep, and rise boldly over the stream, which is
thus imprisoned within their barriers. The sides of the glen are
impracticable for horse, and are only to be traversed by means of
the sheep-paths which lie along their sides. It would not be readily
supposed that a road so hopeless and so difficult could lead to any
habitation more important than the summer shealing of a shepherd.

Yet the glen, though lonely, nearly inaccessible, and sterile, was not
then absolutely void of beauty. The turf which covered the small portion
of level ground on the sides of the stream, was as close and verdant as
if it had occupied the scythes of a hundred gardeners once a-fortnight;
and it was garnished with an embroidery of daisies and wild flowers,
which the scythes would certainly have destroyed. The little brook, now
confined betwixt closer limits, now left at large to choose its course
through the narrow valley, danced carelessly on from stream to pool,
light and unturbid, as that better class of spirits who pass their way
through life, yielding to insurmountable obstacles, but as far from
being subdued by them as the sailor who meets by chance with an
unfavourable wind, and shapes his course so as to be driven back as
little as possible.

The mountains, as they would have been called in England, _Scottice_ the
steep _braes_, rose abruptly over the little glen, here presenting
the gray face of a rock, from which the turf had been peeled by the
torrents, and there displaying patches of wood and copse, which had
escaped the waste of the cattle and the sheep of the feuars, and which,
feathering naturally up the beds of empty torrents, or occupying the
concave recesses of the bank, gave at once beauty and variety to the
landscape. Above these scattered woods rose the hill, in barren, but
purple majesty; the dark rich hue, particularly in autumn, contrasting
beautifully with the thickets of oak and birch, the mountain ashes and
thorns, the alders and quivering aspens, which checquered and varied
the descent, and not less with the dark-green and velvet turf, which
composed the level part of the narrow glen.

Yet, though thus embellished, the scene could neither be strictly termed
sublime nor beautiful, and scarcely even picturesque or striking. But
its extreme solitude pressed on the heart; the traveller felt that
uncertainty whither he was going, or in what so wild a path was to
terminate, which, at times, strikes more on the imagination than the
grand features of a show-scene, when you know the exact distance of the
inn where your dinner is bespoke, and at the moment preparing. These
are ideas, however, of a far later age; for at the time we treat of,
the picturesque, the beautiful, the sublime, and all their intermediate
shades, were ideas absolutely unknown to the inhabitants and occasional
visitors of Glendearg.

These had, however, attached to the scene feelings fitting the time. Its
name, signifying the Red Valley, seems to have been derived, not only
from the purple colour of the heath, with which the upper part of the
rising banks was profusely clothed, but also from the dark red colour of
the rocks, and of the precipitous earthen banks, which in that country
are called _scaurs_. Another glen, about the head of Ettrick, has
acquired the same name from similar circumstances; and there are
probably more in Scotland to which it has been given.

As our Glendearg did not abound in mortal visitants, superstition, that
it might not be absolutely destitute of inhabitants, had peopled
its recesses with beings belonging to another world. The savage and
capricious Brown Man of the Moors, a being which seems the genuine
descendant of the northern dwarfs, was supposed to be seen there
frequently, especially after the autumnal equinox, when the fogs were
thick, and objects not easily distinguished. The Scottish fairies, too,
a whimsical, irritable, and mischievous tribe, who, though at times
capriciously benevolent, were more frequently adverse to mortals, were
also supposed to have formed a residence in a particularly wild
recess of the glen, of which the real name was, in allusion to that
circumstance, _Corrie nan Shian_, which, in corrupted Celtic, signifies
the Hollow of the Fairies. But the neighbours were more cautious in
speaking about this place, and avoided giving it a name, from an idea
common then throughout all the British and Celtic provinces of Scotland,
and still retained in many places, that to speak either good or ill
of this capricious race of imaginary beings, is to provoke their
resentment, and that secrecy and silence is what they chiefly desire
from those who may intrude upon their revels, or discover their haunts.

A mysterious terror was thus attached to the dale, which afforded
access from the broad valley of the Tweed, up the little glen we have
described, to the fortalice called the Tower of Glendearg. Beyond the
knoll, where, as we have said, the tower was situated, the hills grew
more steep, and narrowed on the slender brook, so as scarce to leave
a footpath; and there the glen terminated in a wild waterfall, where a
slender thread of water dashed in a precipitous line of foam over two
or three precipices. Yet farther in the same direction, and above these
successive cataracts, lay a wild and extensive morass, frequented only
by waterfowl, wide, waste, apparently almost interminable, and serving
in a great measure to separate the inhabitants of the glen from those
who lived to the northward.

To restless and indefatigable moss-troopers, indeed, these morasses were
well known, and sometimes afforded a retreat. They often rode down the
glen--called at this tower--asked and received hospitality--but still
with a sort of reserve on the part of its more peaceful inhabitants, who
entertained them as a party of North-American Indians might be received
by a new European settler, as much out of fear as hospitality, while
the uppermost wish of the landlord is the speedy departure of the savage
guests.

This had not always been the current of feeling in the little valley
and its tower. Simon Glendinning, its former inhabitant, boasted his
connexion by blood to that ancient family of Glendonwyne, on the western
border. He used to narrate, at his fireside, in the autumn evenings, the
feats of the family to which he belonged, one of whom fell by the side
of the brave Earl of Douglas at Otterbourne. On these occasions Simon
usually held upon his knee an ancient broadsword, which had belonged to
his ancestors before any of the family had consented to accept a fief
under the peaceful dominion of the monks of St. Mary's. In modern days,
Simon might have lived at ease on his own estate, and quietly murmured
against the fate that had doomed him to dwell there, and cut off his
access to martial renown. But so many opportunities, nay so many calls
there were for him, who in those days spoke big, to make good his words
by his actions, that Simon Glendinning was soon under the necessity of
marching with the men of the Halidome, as it was called, of St. Mary's,
in that disastrous campaign which was concluded by the battle of Pinkie.

The Catholic clergy were deeply interested in that national quarrel, the
principal object of which was, to prevent the union of the infant Queen
Mary, with the son of the heretical Henry VIII. The Monks had called out
their vassals, under an experienced leader. Many of themselves had taken
arms, and marched to the field, under a banner representing a female,
supposed to personify the Scottish Church, kneeling in the attitude of
prayer, with the legend, _Afflictae Sponsae ne obliviscaris_. [Footnote:
Forget not the afflicted spouse.]

The Scots, however, in all their wars, had more occasion for good
and cautious generals, than for excitation, whether political or
enthusiastic. Their headlong and impatient courage uniformly induced
them to rush into action without duly weighing either their own
situation, or that of their enemies, and the inevitable consequence was
frequent defeat. With the dolorous slaughter of Pinkie we have nothing
to do, excepting that, among ten thousand men of low and high degree,
Simon Glendinning, of the Tower of Glendearg, bit the dust, no way
disparaging in his death that ancient race from which he claimed his
descent.

When the doleful news, which spread terror and mourning through the
whole of Scotland, reached the Tower of Glendearg, the widow of
Simon, Elspeth Brydone by her family name, was alone in that desolate
habitation, excepting a hind or two, alike past martial and agricultural
labour, and the helpless widows and families of those who had fallen
with their master. The feeling of desolation was universal;--but what
availed it? The monks, their patrons and protectors, were driven from
their Abbey by the English forces, who now overran the country, and
enforced at least an appearance of submission on the part of the
inhabitants. The Protector, Somerset, formed a strong camp among the
ruins of the ancient Castle of Roxburgh, and compelled the neighbouring
country to come in, pay tribute, and take assurance from him, as the
phrase then went. Indeed, there was no power of resistance remaining;
and the few barons, whose high spirit disdained even the appearance
of surrender, could only retreat into the wildest fastnesses of the
country, leaving their houses and property to the wrath of the English,
who detached parties everywhere to distress, by military exaction, those
whose chiefs had not made their submission. The Abbot and his community
having retreated beyond the Forth, their lands were severely forayed,
as their sentiments were held peculiarly inimical to the alliance with
England.

Amongst the troops detached on this service was a small party, commanded
by Stawarth Bolton, a captain in the English army, and full of the
blunt and unpretending gallantry and generosity which has so often
distinguished that nation. Resistance was in vain. Elspeth Brydone, when
she descried a dozen of horsemen threading their way up the glen, with
a man at their head, whose scarlet cloak, bright armour, and dancing
plume, proclaimed him a leader, saw no better protection for herself
than to issue from the iron grate, covered with a long mourning
veil, and holding one of her two sons in each hand, to meet the
Englishman--state her deserted condition--place the little tower at his
command--and beg for his mercy. She stated, in a few brief words,
her intention, and added, "I submit, because I have nae means of
resistance."

"And I do not ask your submission, mistress, for the same reason,"
replied the Englishman. "To be satisfied of your peaceful intentions
is all I ask; and, from what you tell me, there is no reason to doubt
them."

"At least, sir," said Elspeth Brydone, "take share of what our
spence and our garners afford. Your horses are tired--your folk want
refreshment."

"Not a whit--not a whit," answered the honest Englishman; "it shall
never be said we disturbed by carousal the widow of a brave soldier,
while she was mourning for her husband.--Comrades, face about.--Yet
stay," he added, checking his war-horse, "my parties are out in every
direction; they must have some token that your family are under my
assurance of safety.--Here, my little fellow," said he, speaking to
the eldest boy, who might be about nine or ten years old, "lend me thy
bonnet."

The child reddened, looked sulky, and hesitated, while the mother,
with many a _fye_ and _nay pshaw_, and such sarsenet chidings as tender
mothers give to spoiled children, at length succeeded in snatching the
bonnet from him, and handing it to the English leader.

Stawarth Bolton took his embroidered red cross from his barret-cap, and
putting it into the loop of the boy's bonnet, said to the mistress, (for
the title of lady was not given to dames of her degree,) "By this token,
which all my people will respect, you will be freed from any importunity
on the part of our forayers." [Footnote: As gallantry of all times and
nations has the same mode of thinking and acting, so it often expresses
itself by the same symbols. In the civil war 1745-6, a party of
Highlanders, under a Chieftain of rank, came to Rose Castle, the seat of
the Bishop of Carlisle, but then occupied by the family of Squire Dacre
of Cumberland. They demanded quarters, which of course were not to be
refused to armed men of a strange attire and unknown language. But the
domestic represented to the captain of the mountaineers, that the lady
of the mansion had been just delivered of a daughter, and expressed her
hope, that, under these circumstances, his party would give as little
trouble as possible. "God forbid," said the gallant chief, "that I or
mine should be the means of adding to a lady's inconvenience at such a
time. May I request to see the infant?" The child was brought, and the
Highlander, taking his cockade out of his bonnet, and pinning it on the
child's breast, "That will be a token," he said, "to any of our people
who may come hither, that Donald McDonald of Kinloch-Moidart, has taken
the family of Rose Castle under his protection." The lady who received
in infancy this gage of Highland protection, is now Mary, Lady Clerk
of Pennycuik; and on the 10th of June still wears the cockade which was
pinned on her breast, with a white rose as a kindred decoration.] He
placed it on the boy's head; but it was no sooner there, than the little
fellow, his veins swelling, and his eyes shooting fire through tears,
snatched the bonnet from his head, and, ere his mother could interfere,
skimmed it into the brook. The other boy ran instantly to fish it out
again, threw it back to his brother, first taking out the cross, which,
with great veneration, he kissed and put into his bosom. The Englishman
was half diverted, half surprised, with the scene.

"What mean ye by throwing away Saint George's red cross?" said he to the
elder boy, in a tone betwixt jest and earnest.

"Because Saint George is a southern saint," said the child, sulkily.
"Good"--said Stawarth Bolton.--"And what did you mean by taking it
out of the brook again, my little fellow?" he demanded of the younger.
"Because the priest says it is the common sign of salvation to all good
Christians."

"Why, good again!" said the honest soldier. "I protest unto you,
mistress, I envy you these boys. Are they both yours?"

Stawarth Bolton had reason to put the question, for Halbert Glendinning,
the elder of the two, had hair as dark as the raven's plumage, black
eyes, large, bold, and sparkling, that glittered under eyebrows of the
same complexion; a skin deep embrowned, though it could not be termed
swarthy, and an air of activity, frankness, and determination, far
beyond his age. On the other hand, Edward, the younger brother, was
light-haired, blue-eyed, and of fairer complexion, in countenance rather
pale, and not exhibiting that rosy hue which colours the sanguine cheek
of robust health. Yet the boy had nothing sickly or ill-conditioned in
his look, but was, on the contrary, a fair and handsome child, with a
smiling face, and mild, yet cheerful eye.

The mother glanced a proud motherly glance, first at the one, and then
at the other, ere she answered the Englishman, "Surely, sir, they are
both my children."

"And by the same father, mistress?" said Stawarth; but, seeing a blush
of displeasure arise on her brow, he instantly added, "Nay, I mean no
offence; I would have asked the same question at any of my gossips in
merry Lincoln.--Well, dame, you have two fair boys; I would I could
borrow one, for Dame Bolton and I live childless in our old hall.--Come,
little fellows, which of you will go with me?"

The trembling mother, half-fearing as he spoke, drew the children
towards her, one with either hand, while they both answered the
stranger. "I will not go with you," said Halbert, boldly, "for you are
a false-hearted Southern; and the Southerns killed my father; and I will
war on you to the death, when I can draw my father's sword."

"God-a-mercy, my little levin-bolt," said Stawarth, "the goodly custom
of deadly feud will never go down in thy day, I presume.--And you, my
fine white-head, will you not go with me, to ride a cock-horse?" "No,"
said Edward, demurely, "for you are a heretic."

"Why, God-a-mercy still!" said Stawarth Bolton. "Well, dame, I see I
shall find no recruits for my troop from you; and yet I do envy you
these two little chubby knaves." He sighed a moment, as was visible,
in spite of gorget and corslet, and then added, "And yet, my dame and I
would but quarrel which of the knaves we should like best; for I
should wish for the black-eyed rogue--and she, I warrant me, for that
blue-eyed, fair-haired darling. Natheless, we must brook our solitary
wedlock, and wish joy to those that are more fortunate. Sergeant
Brittson, do thou remain here till recalled--protect this family, as
under assurance--do them no wrong, and suffer no wrong to be done to
them, as thou wilt answer it.--Dame, Brittson is a married man, old and
