
It was the first encounter between Asia, the ancient teacher, and
Europe, the young and eager pupil. A great many of the other chapters
of this book will tell you how the struggle between east and west has
continued until this very day.




THE AEGEAN SEA

THE PEOPLE OF THE AEGEAN SEA CARRIED THE CIVILISATION OF OLD ASIA INTO
THE WILDERNESS OF EUROPE


WHEN Heinrich Schliemann was a little boy his father told him the story
of Troy. He liked that story better than anything else he had ever heard
and he made up his mind, that as soon as he was big enough to leave
home, he would travel to Greece and "find Troy." That he was the son of
a poor country parson in a Mecklenburg village did not bother him. He
knew that he would need money but he decided to gather a fortune first
and do the digging afterwards. As a matter of fact, he managed to get
a large fortune within a very short time, and as soon as he had enough
money to equip an expedition, he went to the northwest corner of Asia
Minor, where he supposed that Troy had been situated.

In that particular nook of old Asia Minor, stood a high mound covered
with grainfields. According to tradition it had been the home of Priamus
the king of Troy. Schliemann, whose enthusiasm was somewhat greater than
his knowledge, wasted no time in preliminary explorations. At once he
began to dig. And he dug with such zeal and such speed that his trench
went straight through the heart of the city for which he was looking
and carried him to the ruins of another buried town which was at least
a thousand years older than the Troy of which Homer had written. Then
something very interesting occurred. If Schliemann had found a few
polished stone hammers and perhaps a few pieces of crude pottery, no one
would have been surprised. Instead of discovering such objects, which
people had generally associated with the prehistoric men who had lived
in these regions before the coming of the Greeks, Schliemann found
beautiful statuettes and very costly jewelry and ornamented vases of a
pattern that was unknown to the Greeks. He ventured the suggestion that
fully ten centuries before the great Trojan war, the coast of the AEgean
had been inhabited by a mysterious race of men who in many ways had been
the superiors of the wild Greek tribes who had invaded their country and
had destroyed their civilisation or absorbed it until it had lost
all trace of originality. And this proved to be the case. In the late
seventies of the last century, Schliemann visited the ruins of Mycenae,
ruins which were so old that Roman guide-books marvelled at their
antiquity. There again, beneath the flat slabs of stone of a small round
enclosure, Schliemann stumbled upon a wonderful treasure-trove, which
had been left behind by those mysterious people who had covered the
Greek coast with their cities and who had built walls, so big and so
heavy and so strong, that the Greeks called them the work of the Titans,
those god-like giants who in very olden days had used to play ball with
mountain peaks.

A very careful study of these many relics has done away with some of the
romantic features of the story. The makers of these early works of
art and the builders of these strong fortresses were no sorcerers, but
simple sailors and traders. They had lived in Crete, and on the many
small islands of the AEgean Sea. They had been hardy mariners and they
had turned the AEgean into a center of commerce for the exchange of
goods between the highly civilised east and the slowly developing
wilderness of the European mainland.

For more than a thousand years they had maintained an island empire
which had developed a very high form of art. Indeed their most important
city, Cnossus, on the northern coast of Crete, had been entirely modern
in its insistence upon hygiene and comfort. The palace had been properly
drained and the houses had been provided with stoves and the Cnossians
had been the first people to make a daily use of the hitherto unknown
bathtub. The palace of their King had been famous for its winding
staircases and its large banqueting hall. The cellars underneath this
palace, where the wine and the grain and the olive-oil were stored, had
been so vast and had so greatly impressed the first Greek visitors, that
they had given rise to the story of the "labyrinth," the name which we
give to a structure with so many complicated passages that it is almost
impossible to find our way out, once the front door has closed upon our
frightened selves.

But what finally became of this great AEgean Empire and what caused its
sudden downfall, that I can not tell.

The Cretans were familiar with the art of writing, but no one has yet
been able to decipher their inscriptions. Their history therefore is
unknown to us. We have to reconstruct the record of their adventures
from the ruins which the AEgeans have left behind. These ruins make it
clear that the AEgean world was suddenly conquered by a less civilised
race which had recently come from the plains of northern Europe. Unless
we are very much mistaken, the savages who were responsible for the
destruction of the Cretan and the AEgean civilisation were none other
than certain tribes of wandering shepherds who had just taken possession
of the rocky peninsula between the Adriatic and the AEgean seas and who
are known to us as Greeks.




THE GREEKS

MEANWHILE THE INDO-EUROPEAN TRIBE OF THE HELLENES WAS TAKING POSSESSION
OF GREECE


THE Pyramids were a thousand years old and were beginning to show the
first signs of decay, and Hammurabi, the wise king of Babylon, had been
dead and buried several centuries, when a small tribe of shepherds left
their homes along the banks of the River Danube and wandered southward
in search of fresh pastures. They called themselves Hellenes, after
Hellen, the son of Deucalion and Pyrrha. According to the old myths
these were the only two human beings who had escaped the great flood,
which countless years before had destroyed all the people of the world,
when they had grown so wicked that they disgusted Zeus, the mighty God,
who lived on Mount Olympus.

Of these early Hellenes we know nothing. Thucydides, the historian of
the fall of Athens, describing his earliest ancestors, said that they
"did not amount to very much," and this was probably true. They were
very ill-mannered. They lived like pigs and threw the bodies of their
enemies to the wild dogs who guarded their sheep. They had very little
respect for other people's rights, and they killed the natives of the
Greek peninsula (who were called the Pelasgians) and stole their farms
and took their cattle and made their wives and daughters slaves and
wrote endless songs praising the courage of the clan of the Achaeans,
who had led the Hellenic advance-guard into the mountains of Thessaly
and the Peloponnesus.

But here and there, on the tops of high rocks, they saw the castles
of the AEgeans and those they did not attack for they feared the metal
swords and the spears of the AEgean soldiers and knew that they could
not hope to defeat them with their clumsy stone axes.

For many centuries they continued to wander from valley to valley and
from mountain side to mountain side Then the whole of the land had been
occupied and the migration had come to an end.

That moment was the beginning of Greek civilisation. The Greek farmer,
living within sight of the AEgean colonies, was finally driven by
curiosity to visit his haughty neighbours. He discovered that he could
learn many useful things from the men who dwelt behind the high stone
walls of Mycenae, and Tiryns.

He was a clever pupil. Within a short time he mastered the art of
handling those strange iron weapons which the AEgeans had brought
from Babylon and from Thebes. He came to understand the mysteries of
navigation. He began to build little boats for his own use.

And when he had learned everything the AEgeans could teach him he turned
upon his teachers and drove them back to their islands. Soon afterwards
he ventured forth upon the sea and conquered all the cities of the
AEgean. Finally in the fifteenth century before our era he plundered and
ravaged Cnossus and ten centuries after their first appearance upon the
scene the Hellenes were the undisputed rulers of Greece, of the
AEgean and of the coastal regions of Asia Minor. Troy, the last great
commercial stronghold of the older civilisation, was destroyed in the
eleventh century B.C. European history was to begin in all seriousness.




THE GREEK CITIES

THE GREEK CITIES THAT WERE REALLY STATES


WE modern people love the sound of the word "big." We pride ourselves
upon the fact that we belong to the "biggest" country in the world and
possess the "biggest" navy and grow the "biggest" oranges and potatoes,
and we love to live in cities of "millions" of inhabitants and when we
are dead we are buried in the "biggest cemetery of the whole state."

A citizen of ancient Greece, could he have heard us talk, would not have
known what we meant. "Moderation in all things" was the ideal of
his life and mere bulk did not impress him at all. And this love of
moderation was not merely a hollow phrase used upon special occasions:
it influenced the life of the Greeks from the day of their birth to the
hour of their death. It was part of their literature and it made them
build small but perfect temples. It found expression in the clothes
which the men wore and in the rings and the bracelets of their wives. It
followed the crowds that went to the theatre and made them hoot down any
playwright who dared to sin against the iron law of good taste or good
sense.

The Greeks even insisted upon this quality in their politicians and in
their most popular athletes. When a powerful runner came to Sparta and
boasted that he could stand longer on one foot than any other man in
Hellas the people drove him from the city because he prided himself
upon an accomplishment at which he could be beaten by any common goose.
"That is all very well," you will say, "and no doubt it is a great
virtue to care so much for moderation and perfection, but why should
the Greeks have been the only people to develop this quality in olden
times?" For an answer I shall point to the way in which the Greeks
lived.

The people of Egypt or Mesopotamia had been the "subjects" of a
mysterious Supreme Ruler who lived miles and miles away in a dark palace
and who was rarely seen by the masses of the population. The Greeks on
the other hand, were "free citizens" of a hundred independent little
"cities" the largest of which counted fewer inhabitants than a large
modern village. When a peasant who lived in Ur said that he was a
Babylonian he meant that he was one of millions of other people who paid
tribute to the king who at that particular moment happened to be master
of western Asia. But when a Greek said proudly that he was an Athenian
or a Theban he spoke of a small town, which was both his home and his
country and which recognised no master but the will of the people in the
market-place.

To the Greek, his fatherland was the place where he was born; where he
had spent his earliest years playing hide and seek amidst the forbidden
rocks of the Acropolis; where he had grown into manhood with a thousand
other boys and girls, whose nicknames were as familiar to him as those
of your own schoolmates. His Fatherland was the holy soil where his
father and mother lay buried. It was the small house within the high
city-walls where his wife and children lived in safety. It was a
complete world which covered no more than four or five acres of rocky
land. Don't you see how these surroundings must have influenced a man
in everything he did and said and thought? The people of Babylon and
Assyria and Egypt had been part of a vast mob. They had been lost in
the multitude. The Greek on the other hand had never lost touch with
his immediate surroundings. He never ceased to be part of a little
town where everybody knew every one else. He felt that his intelligent
neighbours were watching him. Whatever he did, whether he wrote plays
or made statues out of marble or composed songs, he remembered that his
efforts were going to be judged by all the free-born citizens of his
home-town who knew about such things. This knowledge forced him to
strive after perfection, and perfection, as he had been taught from
childhood, was not possible without moderation.

In this hard school, the Greeks learned to excel in many things. They
created new forms of government and new forms of literature and new
ideals in art which we have never been able to surpass. They performed
these miracles in little villages that covered less ground than four or
five modern city blocks.

And look, what finally happened!

In the fourth century before our era, Alexander of Macedonia conquered
the world. As soon as he had done with fighting, Alexander decided that
he must bestow the benefits of the true Greek genius upon all mankind.
He took it away from the little cities and the little villages and tried
to make it blossom and bear fruit amidst the vast royal residences of
his newly acquired Empire. But the Greeks, removed from the familiar
sight of their own temples, removed from the well-known sounds and
smells of their own crooked streets, at once lost the cheerful joy and
the marvellous sense of moderation which had inspired the work of
their hands and brains while they laboured for the glory of their old
city-states. They became cheap artisans, content with second-rate work.
The day the little city-states of old Hellas lost their independence and
were forced to become part of a big nation, the old Greek spirit died.
And it has been dead ever since.




GREEK SELF-GOVERNMENT

THE GREEKS WERE THE FIRST PEOPLE TO TRY THE DIFFICULT EXPERIMENT OF
SELF-GOVERNMENT


IN the beginning, all the Greeks had been equally rich and equally poor.
Every man had owned a certain number of cows and sheep. His mud-hut had
been his castle. He had been free to come and go as he wished. Whenever
it was necessary to discuss matters of public importance, all the
citizens had gathered in the market-place. One of the older men of the
village was elected chairman and it was his duty to see that everybody
had a chance to express his views. In case of war, a particularly
energetic and self-confident villager was chosen commander-in-chief, but
the same people who had voluntarily given this man the right to be
their leader, claimed an equal right to deprive him of his job, once the
danger had been averted.

But gradually the village had grown into a city. Some people had worked
hard and others had been lazy. A few had been unlucky and still others
had been just plain dishonest in dealing with their neighbours and had
gathered wealth. As a result, the city no longer consisted of a number
of men who were equally well-off. On the contrary it was inhabited by a
small class of very rich people and a large class of very poor ones.

There had been another change. The old commander-in-chief who had been
willingly recognised as "headman" or "King" because he knew how to lead
his men to victory, had disappeared from the scene. His place had been
taken by the nobles--a class of rich people who during the course of
time had got hold of an undue share of the farms and estates.

These nobles enjoyed many advantages over the common crowd of freemen.
They were able to buy the best weapons which were to be found on the
market of the eastern Mediterranean. They had much spare time in which
they could practise the art of fighting. They lived in strongly
built houses and they could hire soldiers to fight for them. They were
constantly quarrelling among each other to decide who should rule the
city. The victorious nobleman then assumed a sort of Kingship over all
his neighbours and governed the town until he in turn was killed or
driven away by still another ambitious nobleman.

Such a King, by the grace of his soldiers, was called a "Tyrant" and
during the seventh and sixth centuries before our era every Greek city
was for a time ruled by such Tyrants, many of whom, by the way, happened
to be exceedingly capa-ble men. But in the long run, this state of
affairs became unbearable. Then attempts were made to bring about
reforms and out of these reforms grew the first democratic government of
which the world has a record.

It was early in the seventh century that the people of Athens decided to
do some housecleaning and give the large number of freemen once more a
voice in the government as they were supposed to have had in the days
of their Achaean ancestors. They asked a man by the name of Draco to
provide them with a set of laws that would protect the poor against
the aggressions of the rich. Draco set to work. Unfortunately he was a
professional lawyer and very much out of touch with ordinary life. In
his eyes a crime was a crime and when he had finished his code, the
people of Athens discovered that these Draconian laws were so severe
that they could not possibly be put into effect. There would not have
been rope enough to hang all the criminals under their new system of
jurisprudence which made the stealing of an apple a capital offence.

The Athenians looked about for a more humane reformer. At last they
found some one who could do that sort of thing better than anybody else.
His name was Solon. He belonged to a noble family and he had travelled
all over the world and had studied the forms of government of many other
countries. After a careful study of the subject, Solon gave Athens a set
of laws which bore testimony to that wonderful principle of moderation
which was part of the Greek character. He tried to improve the condition
of the peasant without however destroying the prosperity of the nobles
who were (or rather who could be) of such great service to the state as
soldiers. To protect the poorer classes against abuse on the part of
the judges (who were always elected from the class of the nobles because
they received no salary) Solon made a provision whereby a citizen with a
grievance had the right to state his case before a jury of thirty of his
fellow Athenians.

Most important of all, Solon forced the average freeman to take a direct
and personal interest in the affairs of the city. No longer could he
stay at home and say "oh, I am too busy today" or "it is raining and I
had better stay indoors." He was expected to do his share; to be at the
meeting of the town council; and carry part of the responsibility for
the safety and the prosperity of the state.

This government by the "demos," the people, was often far from
successful. There was too much idle talk. There were too many hateful
and spiteful scenes between rivals for official honor. But it taught
the Greek people to be independent and to rely upon themselves for their
salvation and that was a very good thing.




GREEK LIFE

HOW THE GREEKS LIVED


BUT how, you will ask, did the ancient Greeks have time to look after
their families and their business if they were forever running to the
market-place to discuss affairs of state? In this chapter I shall tell
you.

In all matters of government, the Greek democracy recognised only one
class of citizens--the freemen. Every Greek city was composed of a small
number of free born citizens, a large number of slaves and a sprinkling
of foreigners.

At rare intervals (usually during a war, when men were needed for the
army) the Greeks showed themselves willing to confer the rights of
citizenship upon the "barbarians" as they called the foreigners. But
this was an exception. Citizenship was a matter of birth. You were an
Athenian because your father and your grandfather had been Athenians
before you. But however great your merits as a trader or a soldier, if
you were born of non-Athenian parents, you remained a "foreigner" until
the end of time.

The Greek city, therefore, whenever it was not ruled by a king or a
tyrant, was run by and for the freemen, and this would not have been
possible without a large army of slaves who outnumbered the free
citizens at the rate of six or five to one and who performed those tasks
to which we modern people must devote most of our time and energy if we
wish to provide for our families and pay the rent of our apartments.
The slaves did all the cooking and baking and candlestick making of the
entire city. They were the tailors and the carpenters and the jewelers
and the school-teachers and the bookkeepers and they tended the store
and looked after the factory while the master went to the public meeting
to discuss questions of war and peace or visited the theatre to see the
latest play of AEschylus or hear a discussion of the revolutionary
ideas of Euripides, who had dared to express certain doubts upon the
omnipotence of the great god Zeus.

Indeed, ancient Athens resembled a modern club. All the freeborn citizens
were hereditary members and all the slaves were hereditary servants, and
waited upon the needs of their masters, and it was very pleasant to be a
member of the organisation.

But when we talk about slaves, we do not mean the sort of people about
whom you have read in the pages of "Uncle Tom's Cabin." It is true that
the position of those slaves who tilled the fields was a very unpleasant
one, but the average freeman who had come down in the world and who had
been obliged to hire himself out as a farm hand led just as miserable
a life. In the cities, furthermore, many of the slaves were more
prosperous than the poorer classes of the freemen. For the Greeks, who
loved moderation in all things, did not like to treat their slaves after
the fashion which afterward was so common in Rome, where a slave had as
few rights as an engine in a modern factory and could be thrown to the
wild animals upon the smallest pretext.

The Greeks accepted slavery as a necessary institution, without which no
city could possibly become the home of a truly civilised people.

The slaves also took care of those tasks which nowadays are performed by
the business men and the professional men. As for those household duties
which take up so much of the time of your mother and which worry your
father when he comes home from his office, the Greeks, who understood
the value of leisure, had reduced such duties to the smallest possible
minimum by living amidst surroundings of extreme simplicity.

To begin with, their homes were very plain. Even the rich nobles spent
their lives in a sort of adobe barn, which lacked all the comforts which
a modern workman expects as his natural right. A Greek home consisted
of four walls and a roof. There was a door which led into the street but
there were no windows. The kitchen, the living rooms and the sleeping
quarters were built around an open courtyard in which there was a small
fountain, or a statue and a few plants to make it look bright. Within
this courtyard the family lived when it did not rain or when it was not
too cold. In one corner of the yard the cook (who was a slave) prepared
the meal and in another corner, the teacher (who was also a
slave) taught the children the alpha beta gamma and the tables of
multiplication and in still another corner the lady of the house, who
rarely left her domain (since it was not considered good form for a
married woman to be seen on the street too often) was repairing her
husband's coat with her seamstresses (who were slaves,) and in the
little office, right off the door, the master was inspecting the
accounts which the overseer of his farm (who was a slave) had just
brought to him.

When dinner was ready the family came together but the meal was a very
simple one and did not take much time. The Greeks seem to have regarded
eating as an unavoidable evil and not a pastime, which kills many dreary
hours and eventually kills many dreary people. They lived on bread and
on wine, with a little meat and some green vegetables. They drank water
only when nothing else was available because they did not think it very
healthy. They loved to call on each other for dinner, but our idea of a
festive meal, where everybody is supposed to eat much more than is good
for him, would have disgusted them. They came together at the table for
the purpose of a good talk and a good glass of wine and water, but as
they were moderate people they despised those who drank too much.

The same simplicity which prevailed in the dining room also dominated
