fierce and dark and unrelenting m the human heart!--all that seems most
like the deadliest and the blackest hate, and yet is not hate!  I saw
this being, and from that moment my real nature, which had slept
hitherto, awoke!  I remember well it was one evening in the beginning of
summer that I first saw her.  She sat alore in the little garden beside
the cottage door, and I paused, and, unseen, looked over the slight
fence that separated us, and fed my eyes with a loveliness that I
thought till then only twilight or the stars could wear!  From that
evening I came, night after night, to watch her from the same spot; and
every time I beheld her the poison entered deeper and deeper into my
system.  At length I had an opportunity of being known to her, of
speaking to her, of hearing her speak, of touching the ground she had
hallowed, of entering the home where she dwelt!

I must explain: I said that both Gerald and myself corresponded
privately with Montreuil; we were both bound over to secrecy with regard
to you; and this, my temper and Gerald's coolness with you rendered an
easy obligation to both;--I say my temper, for I loved to think I had a
secret not known to another; and I carried this reserve even to the
degree of concealing from Gerald himself the greater part of the
correspondence between me and the Abbe.  In his correspondence with each
of us, Montreuil acted with his usual skill; to Gerald, as the elder in
years, the more prone to enterprise, and the manlier in aspect and in
character, was allotted whatever object was of real trust or importance.
Gerald it was who, under pretence of pursuing his accustomed sports,
conferred with the various agents of intrigue who from time to time
visited our coast; and to me the Abbe gave words of endearment and
affected the language of more entire trust.  "Whatever," he would say,
"in our present half mellowed projects, is exposed to danger, but does
not promise reward, I entrust to Gerald; hereafter, far higher
employment, under far safer and surer auspices, will be yours.  We are
the heads: be ours the nobler occupation to plan; and let us leave to
inferior natures the vain and perilous triumph to execute what we
design."

All this I readily assented to; for, despite my acquiescence in
Montreuil's wishes, I loved not enterprise, or rather I hated whatever
roused me from the dreamy and abstracted indolence which was most dear
to my temperament.  Sometimes, however, with a great show of confidence,
Montreuil would request me to execute some quiet and unimportant
commission; and of this nature was one I received while I was thus,
unknown even to the object, steeping my soul in the first intoxication
of love.  The plots then carried on by certain ecclesiastics I need not
say extended, in one linked chain, over the greater part of the
Continent.  Spain, in especial, was the theatre of these intrigues; and
among the tools employed in executing them were some who, though
banished from that country, still, by the rank they had held in it,
carried a certain importance in their very names.  Foremost of these was
the father of the woman I loved; and foremost, in whatever promised
occupation to a restless mind, he was always certain to be.

Montreuil now commissioned me to seek out a certain Barnard (an
underling in those secret practices or services, for which he afterwards
suffered, and who was then in that part of the country), and to
communicate to him some messages of which he was to be the bearer to
this Spaniard.  A thought flashed upon me--Montreuil's letter mentioned,
accidentally, that the Spaniard had never hitherto seen Barnard: could I
not personate the latter, deliver the messages myself, and thus win that
introduction to the daughter which I so burningly desired, and which,
from the close reserve of the father's habits, I might not otherwise
effect?  The plan was open to two objections: one, that I was known
personally in the town in the environs of which the Spaniard lived, and
he might therefore very soon discover who I really was; the other that I
was not in possession of all the information which Barnard might
possess, and which the Spaniard might wish to learn; but these
objections had not much weight with me.  To the first, I said inly, "I
will oppose the most constant caution; I will go always on foot and
alone; I will never be seen in the town itself; and even should the
Spaniard, who seems rarely to stir abroad, and who, possibly, does not
speak our language,--even should he learn by accident that Barnard is
only another name for Aubrey Devereux, it will not be before I have
gained my object; nor, perhaps, before the time when I myself may wish
to acknowledge my identity."  To the second objection I saw a yet more
ready answer.  "I will acquaint Montreuil at once," I said, "with my
intention; I will claim his connivance as a proof of his confidence, and
as an essay of my own genius of intrigue."  I did so; the priest,
perhaps delighted to involve me so deeply, and to find me so ardent in
his project, consented.  Fortunately, as I before said, Barnard was an
underling,--young, unknown, and obscure.  My youth, therefore, was not
so great a foe to my assumed disguise as it might otherwise have been.
Montreuil supplied all requisite information.  I tried (for the first
time, with a beating heart and a tremulous voice) the imposition! it
succeeded; I continued it.  Yes, Morton, yes!--pour forth upon me your
bitterest execration, in me, in your brother, in the brother so dear to
you,--in the brother whom you imagined so passionless, so pure; so
sinless,--behold that Barnard, the lover, the idolatrous lover--the foe,
the deadly foe,--of Isora d'Alvarez!


Here the manuscript was defaced for some pages by incoherent and
meaningless ravings.  It seemed as if one of his dark fits of frenzy had
at that time come over the writer.  At length, in a more firm and clear
character than that immediately preceding it, the manuscript continued
as follows:--


I loved her, but even then it was with a fierce and ominous love
(ominous of what it became).  Often in the still evenings, when we stood
together watching the sun set; when my tongue trembled, but did not dare
to speak; when all soft and sweet thoughts filled the heart and
glistened in the eye of that most sensitive and fairy being; when my own
brow perhaps seemed to reflect the same emotions,--feelings which I even
shuddered to conceive raged within me.  Had we stood together in those
moments upon the brink of a precipice, I could have wound my arms around
her and leaped with her into the abyss.  Everything but one nursed my
passion; nature, solitude, early dreams, all kindled and fed that fire:
Religion only combated it; I knew it was a crime to love any of earth's
creatures as I loved.  I used the scourge and the fast;* I wept hot,
burning tears; I prayed, and the intensity of my prayer appalled even
myself, as it rose from my maddened heart, in the depth and stillness of
the lone night: but the flame burned higher and more scorchingly from
the opposition; nay, it was the very knowledge that my love was criminal
that made it assume so fearful and dark a shape.  "Thou art the cause of
my downfall from Heaven!" I muttered, when I looked upon Isora's calm
face: "thou feelest it not, and I could destroy thee and myself,--myself
the criminal, thee the cause of the crime!"


* I need not point out to the novel-reader how completely the character
of Aubrey has been stolen in a certain celebrated French romance.  But
the writer I allude to is not so unmerciful as M. de Balzac, who has
pillaged scenes in "The Disowned" with a most gratifying politeness.


It must have been that my eyes betrayed my feelings that Isora loved me
not, that she shrank from me even at the first: why else should I not
have called forth the same sentiments which she gave to you?  Was not my
form cast in a mould as fair as yours? did not my voice whisper in as
sweet a tone? did I not love her with as wild a love?  Why should she
not have loved me?  I was the first whom she behold: she would--ay,
perhaps she would have loved me, if you had not come and marred all.
Curse yourself, then, that you were my rival! curse yourself that you
made my heart as a furnace, and smote my brain with frenzy; curse--O
sweet Virgin, forgive me!--I know not,--I know not what my tongue utters
or my hand traces!

You came, then, Morton, you came; you knew her; you loved her; she loved
you.  I learned that you had gained admittance to the cottage, and the
moment I learned it, I looked on Isora, and felt my fate, as by
intuition: I saw at once that she was prepared to love you; I saw the
very moment when that love kindled from conception into form; I saw--and
at that moment my eyes reeled and my ears rang as with the sound of a
rushing sea, and I thought I felt a cord snap within my brain, which has
never been united again.

Once only, after your introduction to the cottage, did I think of
confiding to you my love and rivalship; you remember one night when we
met by the castle cave, and when your kindness touched and softened me
despite of myself.  The day after that night I sought you, with the
intention of communicating to you all; and while I was yet struggling
with my embarrassment and the suffocating tide of my emotions, you
premeditated me by giving me /your/ confidence.  Engrossed by your own
feelings, you were not observant of mine; and as you dwelt and dilated
upon your love for Isora, all emotions, save those of agony and of fury,
vanished from my breast.  I did not answer you then at any length, for I
was too agitated to trust to prolix speech; but by the next day I had
recovered myself, and I resolved, as far as I was able, to play the
hypocrite.  "he cannot love her as I do!" I said; "perhaps I may,
without disclosure of my rivalship and without sin in the attempt,
detach him from her by reason."  Fraught with this idea, I collected
myself, sought you, remonstrated with you, represented the worldly folly
of your love, and uttered all that prudence preaches--in vain, when it
preaches against passion!

Let me be brief.  I saw that I made no impression on you; I stifled my
wrath; I continued to visit and watch Isora.  I timed my opportunities
well: my constant knowledge of your motions allowed me to do that;
besides, I represented to the Spaniard the necessity, through political
motives, of concealing myself from you; hence, we never encountered each
other.  One evening, Alvarez had gone out to meet one of his countrymen
and confederates.  I found Isora alone, in the most sequestered part of
the garden; her loveliness, and her exceeding gentleness of manner,
melted me.  For the first time audibly my heart spoke out, and I told
her of my idolatry.  Idolatry! ay, /that/ is the only word, since it
signifies both worship and guilt!  She heard me timidly, gently, coldly.
She spoke; and I found confirmed from her own lips what my reason had
before told me,--that there was no hope for me.  The iron that entered
also roused my heart.  "Enough!" I cried fiercely, "you love this
Morton Devereux, and for him I am scorned."  Isora blushed and trembled,
and all my senses fled from me.  I scarcely know in what words my rage
and my despair clothed themselves: but I know that I divulged myself to
her; I know that I told bur I was the brother, the rival, the enemy of
the man she loved,--I know that I uttered the fiercest and the wildest
menaces and execrations,--I know that my vehemence so overpowered and
terrified her that her mind was scarcely less clouded--less lost,
rather--than my own.  At that moment the sound of your horse's hoofs was
heard.  Isora's eyes brightened and her mien grew firm.  "He comes," she
said, "and he will protect me!"  "Hark!" I said, sinking my voice, and,
as my drawn sword flashed in one hand, the other grasped her arm with a
savage force,--"hark, woman!" I said,--and an oath of the blackest fury
accompanied my threats,--"swear that you will never divulge to Morton
Devereux who is his real rival, that you will never declare to him nor
to any one else that the false Barnard and the true Aubrey Devereux are
the same,--swear this, or I swear [and I repeated, with a solemn
vehemence, that dread oath] that I will stay here; that I will confront
my rival; that, the moment he beholds me, I will plunge this sword in
his bosom; and that, before I perish myself, I will hasten to the town,
and will utter there a secret which will send your father to the
gallows: now, your choice?"

Morton, you have often praised, my uncle has often jested at, the
womanish softness of my face.  There have been moments when I have seen
that face in the glass, and known it not, but started in wild affright,
and fancied that I beheld a demon; perhaps in that moment this change
was over it.  Slowly Isora gazed upon me; slowly blanched into the hues
of death grew her cheek and lip; slowly that lip uttered the oath I
enjoined.  I released my gripe, and she fell to the earth suddenly, and
stunned as if struck by lightning.  I stayed not to look on what I had
done; I heard your step advance; I fled by a path that led from the
garden to the beach; and I reached my home without retaining a single
recollection of the space I had traversed to attain it.

Despite the night I passed--a night which I will leave you to imagine--I
rose the next morning with a burning interest to learn from you what had
passed after my flight, and with a power, peculiar to the stormiest
passions, of an outward composure while I listened to the recital.  I
saw that I was safe; and I heard, with a joy so rapturous that I
question whether even Isora's assent to my love would have given me an
equal transport, that she had rejected you.  I uttered some advice to
you commonplace enough: it displeased you, and we separated.

That evening, to my surprise, I was privately visited by Montreuil.  He
had some designs in hand which brought him from France into the
neighbourhood, but which made him desirous of concealment.  He soon drew
from me my secret; it is marvellous, indeed, what power he had of
penetrating, ruling, moulding, my feelings and my thoughts.  He wished,
at that time, a communication to be made and a letter to be given to
Alvarez.  I could not execute this commission personally; for you had
informed me of your intention of watching if you could not discover or
meet with Barnard, and I knew you were absent from home on that very
purpose.  Nor was Montreuil himself desirous of incurring the risk of
being seen by you,--you over whom, sooner or later, he then trusted to
obtain a power equal to that which he held over your brothers.  Gerald
then was chosen to execute the commission.  He did so; he met Alvarez
for the first and only time on the beach, by the town of ------.  You
saw him, and imagined you beheld the real Barnard.

But I anticipate; for you did not inform me of that occurrence, nor the
inference you drew from it, till afterwards.  You returned, however,
after witnessing that meeting, and for two days your passions (passions
which, intense and fierce as mine, show that, under similar
circumstances, you might have been equally guilty) terminated in fever.
You were confined to your bed for three or four days; meanwhile I took
advantage of the event.  Montreuil suggested a plan which I readily
embraced.  I sought the Spaniard, and told him in confidence that you
were a suitor--but a suitor upon the most dishonourable terms--to his
daughter.  I told him, moreover, that you had detected his schemes, and,
in order to deprive Isora of protection and abate any obstacles arising
from her pride, meant to betray him to the Government.  I told him that
his best and most prudent, nay, his only chance of safety for Isora and
himself was to leave his present home and take refuge in the vast mazes
of the metropolis.  I told him not to betray to you his knowledge of
your criminal intentions, lest it might needlessly exasperate you.  I
furnished him wherewithal to repay you the sum which you had lent him,
and by which you had commenced his acquaintance; and I dictated to him
the very terms of the note in which the sum was to be inclosed.  After
this I felt happy.  You were separated from Isora: she might forget you;
you might forget her.  I was possessed of the secret of her father's
present retreat: I might seek it at my pleasure, and ultimately--so hope
whispered--prosper in my love.

Some time afterwards you mentioned your suspicions of Gerald; I did not
corroborate, but I did not seek to destroy them.  "They already hate
each other," I said; "can the hate be greater? meanwhile, let it divert
suspicion from me!"  Gerald knew of the agency of the real Barnard,
though he did not know that I had assumed the name of that person.  When
you taxed him with his knowledge of the man, he was naturally confused.
You interpreted that confusion into the fact of being your rival, while
in truth it arose from his belief that you had possessed yourself of his
political schemes.  Montreuil, who had lurked chiefly in the islet
opposite "the Castle Cave," had returned to France on the same day that
Alvarez repaired to London.  Previous to this, we had held some
conferences together upon my love.  At first he had opposed and reasoned
with it; but, startled and astonished by the intensity with which it
possessed me, he gave way to my vehemence at last.

I have said that I had adopted his advice in one instance.  The fact of
having received his advice,--the advice of one so pious, so free from
human passion, so devoted to one object, which appeared to him the cause
of Religion; advice, too, in a love so fiery and overwhelming, that fact
made me think myself less criminal than I had done before.  He advised
me yet further.  "Do not seek Isora," he said, "till some time has
elapsed; till her new-born love for your brother has died away; till the
impression of fear you have caused in her is somewhat effaced; till time
and absence, too, have done their work in the mind of Morton, and you
will no longer have for your rival one who is not only a brother, but a
man of a fierce, resolute, and unrelenting temper."

I yielded to this advice: partly because it promised so fair; partly
because I was not systematically vicious, and I wished, if possible, to
do away with our rivalship; and principally, because I knew, in the
meanwhile, that if I was deprived of her presence, so also were you; and
jealousy with me was a far more intolerable and engrossing passion than
the very love from which it sprang.  So time passed on: you affected to
have conquered your attachment; you affected to take pleasure in levity
and the idlest pursuits of worldly men.  I saw deeper into your heart;
for the moment I entertained the passion of love in my own breast, my
eyes became gifted with a second vision to penetrate the most mysterious
and hoarded secrets in the love of others.

Two circumstances of importance happened before you left Devereux Court
for London; the one was the introduction to your service of Jean
Desmarais, the second was your breach with Montreuil.  I speak now of
the first.  A very early friend did the priest possess, born in the same
village as himself and in the same rank of life; he had received a good
education and possessed natural genius.  At a time when, from some fraud
in a situation of trust which he had held in a French nobleman's family,
he was in destitute and desperate circumstances, it occurred to
Montreuil to provide for him by placing him in our family.  Some
accidental and frivolous remark of yours which I had repeated in my
correspondence with Montreuil as illustrative of your manner, and your
affected pursuits at that time, presented an opportunity to a plan
before conceived.  Desmarais came to England in a smuggler's vessel,
presented himself to you as a servant, and was accepted.  In this plan
Montreuil had two views: first, that of securing Desmarais a place in
England, tolerably profitable to himself and convenient for any plot or
scheme which Montreuil might require of him in this country; secondly,
that of setting a perpetual and most adroit spy upon all your motions.

As to the second occurrence to which I have referred; namely, your
breach with Montreuil--"


Here Aubrey, with the same terrible distinctness which had characterized
his previous details and which shed a double horror over the contrast of
the darker and more frantic passages in the manuscript, related what the
reader will remember Oswald had narrated before, respecting the letter
he had brought from Madame de Balzac.  It seems that Montreuil's abrupt
appearance in the hall had been caused by Desmarais, who had recognized
Oswald, on his dismounting at the gate, and had previously known that he
was in the employment of the Jansenistical /intriguante/ Madame de
Balzac.

Aubrey proceeded then to say that Montreuil, invested with far more
direct authority and power than he had been hitherto in the projects of
that wise order whose doctrines he had so darkly perverted, repaired to
London; and that, soon after my departure for the same place, Gerald and
Aubrey left Devereux Court in company with each other; but Gerald, whom
very trifling things diverted from any project, however important,
returned to Devereux Court to accomplish the prosecution of some rustic
/amour/, without even reaching London.  Aubrey, on the contrary, had
proceeded to the metropolis, sought the suburb in which Alvarez lived,
procured, in order to avoid any probable chance of meeting me, a lodging
in the same obscure quarter, and had renewed his suit to Isora.  The
reader is already in possession of the ill success which attended it.
Aubrey had at last confessed his real name to the father.  The Spaniard
was dazzled by the prospect of so honourable an alliance for his
daughter.  From both came Isora's persecution, but in both was it
resisted.  Passing over passages in the manuscript of the most stormy
incoherence and the most gloomy passion, I come to what follows--


I learned then from Desmarais that you had taken away her and the dying
father, that you had placed them in a safe and honourable home.  That
man, so implicitly the creature of Montreuil, or rather of his own
interest, with which Montreuil was identified, was easily induced to
betray you also to me,--me whom he imagined, moreover, utterly the tool
of the priest, and of whose torturing interest in this peculiar
disclosure he was not at that time aware.  I visited Isora in her new
abode, and again and again she trembled beneath my rage.  Then, for the
second time, I attempted force.  Ha! ha!  Morton, I think I see you
now!--I think I hear your muttered curse!  Curse on!  When you read this
I shall be beyond your vengeance, beyond human power.  And yet I think
if I were mere clay; if I were the mere senseless heap of ashes that the
grave covers; if I were not the thing that must live forever and
forever, far away in unimagined worlds, where nought that has earth's
life can come,--I should tremble beneath the sod as your foot pressed
and your execration rang over it.  A second time I attempted force; a
second time I was repulsed by the same means,--by a woman's hand and a
woman's dagger.  But I knew that I had one hold over Isora from which,
while she loved you, I could never be driven: I knew that by threatening
your /life/, I could command her will and terrify her into compliance
with my own.  I made her reiterate her vow of concealment; and I
discovered, by some words dropping from her fear, that she believed you
already suspected me, and had been withheld by her entreaties from
seeking me out.  I questioned her more, and soon perceived that it was
(as indeed I knew before) Gerald whom you suspected, not me; but I did
not tell this to Isora.  I suffered her to cherish a mistake profitable
to my disguise; but I saw at once that it might betray me, if you ever
met and conferred at length with Gerald upon this point, and I exacted
from Isora a pledge that she would effectually and forever bind you not
to breathe a single suspicion to him.  When I had left the room, I
returned once more to warn her against uniting herself with you.
Wretch, selfish, accursed wretch that you were, why did you suffer her
to transgress that warning?

I fled from the house, as a fiend flies from a being whom he has
possessed.  I returned at night to look up at the window, and linger by
the door, and keep watch beside the home which held Isora.  Such, in her
former abode, had been my nightly wont.  I had no evil thought nor foul
intent in this customary vigil,--no, not one!  Strangely enough, with
the tempestuous and overwhelming emotions which constituted the greater
part of my love was mingled--though subdued and latent--a stream of the
softest, yea, I might add almost of the holiest tenderness.  Often after
one of those outpourings of rage and menace and despair, I would fly to
some quiet spot and weep till all the hardness of my heart was wept
away.  And often in those nightly vigils I would pause by the door and
murmur, "This shelter, denied not to the beggar and the beggar's child,
this would you deny to me if you could dream that I was so near you.
And yet, had you loved me, instead of lavishing upon me all your hatred
and your contempt,--had you loved me, I would have served and worshipped
you as man knows not worship or service.  You shudder at my vehemence
now: I could not then have breathed a whisper to wound you.  You tremble
now at the fierceness of my breast: you would then rather have marvelled
at its softness."

I was already at my old watch when you encountered me: you addressed me;
I answered not; you approached me, and I fled.  Fled there--there was
the shame, and the sting of my sentiments towards you.  I am not
naturally afraid of danger, though my nerves are sometimes weak and have
sometimes shrunk from it.  I have known something of peril in late years
when my frame has been bowed and broken--perils by storms at sea, and
the knives of robbers upon land--and I have looked upon it with a quiet
eye.  But you, Morton Devereux, you I always feared.  I had seen from
your childhood others whose nature was far stronger than mine yield and
recoil at yours; I had seen the giant and bold strength of Gerald quail
before your bent brow; I had seen even the hardy pride of Montreuil
baffled by your curled lip and the stern sarcasm of your glance; I had
seen you, too, in your wild moments of ungoverned rage, and I knew that
if earth held one whose passions were fiercer than my own it was you.
But your passions were sustained even in their fiercest excess; your
passions were the mere weapons of your mind: my passions were the
torturers and the tyrants of mine.  Your passions seconded your will;
