me, for I shall have need of my right arm for my sword, and my left
for my charger's rein and my trusty shield."

"Thou sayest right, and we can ill spare such a warrior.  Gautier
Giffart, Sire de Longueville, to thee is the gonfanon."

"Beau Sire," answered Gautier; "par Dex, Merci.  But my head is grey
and my arm weak; and the little strength left me I would spend in
smiting the English at the head of my men."

"Per la resplendar De," cried William, frowning;--"do ye think, my
proud vavasours, to fail me in this great need?"

"Nay," said Gautier; "but I have a great host of chevaliers and paid
soldiers, and without the old man at their head will they fight as
well?"

"Then, approach thou, Tonstain le Blanc, son of Rou," said William;
"and be thine the charge of a standard that shall wave ere nightfall
over the brows of thy--King!"  A young knight, tall and strong as his
Danish ancestor, stept forth, and laid gripe on the banner.

Then William, now completely armed, save his helmet, sprang at one
bound on his steed.  A shout of admiration rang from the Quens and
knights.

"Saw ye ever such beau rei?" [266] said the Vicomte de Thouars.

The shout was caught by the lines, and echoed afar, wide, and deep
through the armament, as in all his singular majesty of brow and mien,
William rode forth: lifting his hand, the shout hushed, and thus he
spoke "loud as a trumpet with a silver sound."

"Normans and soldiers, long renowned in the lips of men, and now
hallowed by the blessing of the Church!--I have not brought you over
the wide seas for my cause alone; what I gain, ye gain.  If I take the
land, you will share it.  Fight your best, and spare not; no retreat,
and no quarter!  I am not come here for my cause alone, but to avenge
our whole nation for the felonies of yonder English.  They butchered
our kinsmen the Danes, on the night of St. Brice; they murdered
Alfred, the brother of their last King, and decimated the Normans who
were with him.  Yonder they stand,--malefactors that await their doom!
and ye the doomsmen!  Never, even in a good cause, were yon English
illustrious for warlike temper and martial glory [267].  Remember how
easily the Danes subdued them!  Are ye less than Danes, or I than
Canute?  By victory ye obtain vengeance, glory, honours, lands,
spoil,--aye, spoil beyond your wildest dreams.  By defeat,--yea, even
but by loss of ground, ye are given up to the sword!  Escape there is
not, for the ships are useless.  Before you the foe, behind you the
ocean.  Normans, remember the feats of your countrymen in Sicily!
Behold a Sicily more rich!  Lordships and lands to the living,--glory
and salvation to those who die under the gonfanon of the Church!  On,
to the cry of the Norman warrior; the cry before which have fled so
often the prowest Paladins of Burgundy and France--'Notre Dame et Dex
aide!'" [268]

Meanwhile, no less vigilant, and in his own strategy no less skilful,
Harold had marshalled his men.  He formed two divisions; those in
front of the entrenchments; those within it.  At the first, the men of
Kent, as from time immemorial, claimed the honour of the van, under
"the Pale Charger,"--famous banner of Hengist.  This force was drawn
up in the form of the Anglo-Danish wedge; the foremost lines in the
triangle all in heavy mail, armed with their great axes, and covered
by their immense shields.  Behind these lines, in the interior of the
wedge, were the archers, protected by the front rows of the heavy
armed; while the few horsemen--few indeed compared with the Norman
cavalry--were artfully disposed where they could best harass and
distract the formidable chivalry with which they were instructed to
skirmish, and not peril actual encounter.  Other bodies of the light
armed; slingers, javelin throwers, and archers, were planted in spots
carefully selected, according as they were protected by trees,
bushwood, and dykes.  The Northumbrians (that is, all the warlike
population, north the Humber, including Yorkshire, Westmoreland,
Cumberland, etc.), were, for their present shame and future ruin,
absent from that field, save, indeed, a few who had joined Harold in
his march to London.  But there were the mixed races of Hertfordshire
and Essex, with the pure Saxons of Sussex and Surrey, and a large body
of the sturdy Anglo-Danes from Lincolnshire, Ely and Norfolk.  Men,
too, there were, half of old British blood, from Dorset, Somerset, and
Gloucester.  And all were marshalled according to those touching and
pathetic tactics which speak of a nation more accustomed to defend
than to aggrieve.  To that field the head of each family led his sons
and kinsfolk; every ten families (or tything) were united under their
own chosen captain.  Every ten of these tythings had, again, some
loftier chief, dear to the populace in peace; and so on the holy
circle spread from household, hamlet, town,--till, all combined, as
one county under one Earl, the warriors fought under the eyes of their
own kinsfolk, friends, neighbours, chosen chiefs!  What wonder that
they were brave?

The second division comprised Harold's house-carles, or bodyguard,--
the veterans especially attached to his family,--the companions of his
successful wars,--a select band of the martial East-Anglians,--the
soldiers supplied by London and Middlesex, and who, both in arms,
discipline, martial temper and athletic habits, ranked high among the
most stalwart of the troops, mixed, as their descent was, from the
warlike Dane and the sturdy Saxon.  In this division, too, was
comprised the reserve.  And it was all encompassed by the palisades
and breastworks, to which were but three sorties, whence the defenders
might sally, or through which at need the vanguard might secure a
retreat.  All the heavy armed had mail and shields similar to the
Normans, though somewhat less heavy; the light armed had, some tunics
of quilted linen, some of hide; helmets of the last material, spears,
javelins, swords, and clubs.  But the main arm of the host was in the
great shield, and the great axe wielded by men larger in stature and
stronger of muscle than the majority of the Normans, whose physical
race had deteriorated partly by inter-marriage with the more delicate
Frank, partly by the haughty disdain of foot exercise.

Mounting a swift and light steed, intended not for encounter (for it
was the custom of English kings to fight on foot, in token that where
they fought there was no retreat), but to bear the rider rapidly from
line to line [269], King Harold rode to the front of the vanguard;--
his brothers by his side.  His head, like his great foe's, was bare,
nor could there be a more striking contrast than that of the broad
unwrinkled brow of the Saxon, with his fair locks, the sign of royalty
and freedom, parted and falling over the collar of mail, the clear and
steadfast eye of blue, the cheek somewhat hollowed by kingly cares,
but flushed now with manly pride--the form stalwart and erect, but
spare in its graceful symmetry, and void of all that theatric pomp of
bearing which was assumed by William--no greater contrast could there
be than that which the simple earnest Hero-king presented, to the brow
furrowed with harsh ire and politic wile, the shaven hair of monastic
affectation, the dark, sparkling tiger eye, and the vast proportions
that awed the gaze in the port and form of the imperious Norman.  Deep
and loud and hearty as the shout with which his armaments had welcomed
William, was that which now greeted the King of the English host: and
clear and full, and practised in the storm of popular assemblies, went
his voice down the listening lines.

"This day, O friends and Englishmen, sons of our common land--this day
ye fight for liberty.  The Count of the Normans hath, I know, a mighty
army; I disguise not its strength.  That army he hath collected
together, by promising to each man a share in the spoils of England.
Already, in his court and his camp, he hath parcelled out the lands of
this kingdom; and fierce are the robbers who fight for the hope of
plunder!  But he cannot offer to his greatest chief boons nobler than
those I offer to my meanest freeman--liberty, and right, and law, in
the soil of his fathers!  Ye have heard of the miseries endured in the
old time under the Dane, but they were slight indeed to those which ye
may expect from the Norman.  The Dane was kindred to us in language
and in law, and who now can tell Saxon from Dane?  But yon men would
rule ye in a language ye know not, by a law that claims the crown as
the right of the sword, and divides the land among the hirelings of an
army.  We baptized the Dane, and the Church tamed his fierce soul into
peace; but yon men make the Church itself their ally, and march to
carnage under the banner profaned to the foulest of human wrongs!
Outscourings of all nations, they come against you: Ye fight as
brothers under the eyes of your fathers and chosen chiefs; ye fight
for the women ye would save from the ravisher; ye fight for the
children ye would guard from eternal bondage; ye fight for the altars
which yon banner now darkens!  Foreign priest is a tyrant as ruthless
and stern as ye shall find foreign baron and king!  Let no man dream
of retreat; every inch of ground that ye yield is the soil of your
native land.  For me, on this field I peril all.  Think that mine eye
is upon you wherever ye are.  If a line waver or shrink, ye shall hear
in the midst the voice of your King.  Hold fast to your ranks,
remember, such amongst you as fought with me against Hardrada,--
remember that it was not till the Norsemen lost, by rash sallies,
their serried array, that our arms prevailed against them.  Be warned
by their fatal error, break not the form of the battle; and I tell you
on the faith of a soldier who never yet hath left field without
victory,--that ye cannot be beaten.  While I speak, the winds swell
the sails of the Norse ships, bearing home the corpse of Hardrada.
Accomplish this day the last triumph of England; add to these hills a
new mount of the conquered dead!  And when, in far times and strange
lands, scald and scop shall praise the brave man for some valiant deed
wrought in some holy cause, they shall say, 'He was brave as those who
fought by the side of Harold, and swept from the sward of England the
hosts of the haughty Norman.'"

Scarcely had the rapturous hurrahs of the Saxons closed on this
speech, when full in sight, north-west of Hastings, came the first
division of the Invader.

Harold remained gazing at them, and not seeing the other sections in
movement, said to Gurth, "If these are all that they venture out, the
day is ours."

"Look yonder!" said the sombre Haco, and he pointed to the long array
that now gleamed from the wood through which the Saxon kinsmen had
passed the night before; and scarcely were these cohorts in view, than
lo! from a third quarter advanced the glittering knighthood under the
Duke.  All three divisions came on in simultaneous assault, two on
either wing of the Saxon vanguard, the third (the Norman) towards the
entrenchments.

In the midst of the Duke's cohort was the sacred gonfanon, and in
front of it and of the whole line, rode a strange warrior of gigantic
height.  And as he rode, the warrior sang:

    "Chaunting loud the lusty strain
     Of Roland and of Charlemain,
     And the dead, who, deathless all,
     Fell at famous Roncesval." [270]

And the knights, no longer singing hymn and litany, swelled, hoarse
through their helmets, the martial chorus.  This warrior, in front of
the Duke and the horsemen, seemed beside himself with the joy of
battle.  As he rode, and as he chaunted, he threw up his sword in the
air like a gleeman, catching it nimbly as it fell [271], and
flourishing it wildly, till, as if unable to restrain his fierce
exhilaration, he fairly put spurs to his horse, and, dashing forward
to the very front of a detachment of Saxon riders, shouted:

"A Taillefer! a Taillefer!" and by voice and gesture challenged forth
some one to single combat.

A fiery young thegn who knew the Romance tongue, started forth and
crossed swords with the poet; but by what seemed rather a juggler's
sleight of hand than a knight's fair fence, Taillefer, again throwing
up and catching his sword with incredible rapidity, shore the unhappy
Saxon from the helm to the chine, and riding over his corpse, shouting
and laughing, he again renewed his challenge.  A second rode forth and
shared the same fate.  The rest of the English horsemen stared at each
other aghast; the shouting, singing, juggling giant seemed to them not
knight, but demon; and that single incident, preliminary to all other
battle, in sight of the whole field, might have sufficed to damp the
ardour of the English, had not Leofwine, who had been despatched by
the King with a message to the entrenchments, come in front of the
detachment; and, his gay spirit roused and stung by the insolence of
the Norman, and the evident dismay of the Saxon riders, without
thought of his graver duties, he spurred his light half-mailed steed
to the Norman giant; and, not even drawing his sword, but with his
spear raised over his head, and his form covered by his shield, he
cried in Romance tongue, "Go and chaunt to the foul fiend, O croaking
minstrel!"  Taillefer rushed forward, his sword shivered on the Saxon
shield, and in the same moment he fell a corpse under the hoofs of his
steed, transfixed by the Saxon spear.

A cry of woe, in which even William (who, proud of his poet's
achievements, had pressed to the foremost line to see this new
encounter) joined his deep voice, wailed through the Norman ranks;
while Leofwine rode deliberately towards them, halted a moment, and
then flung his spear in the midst with so deadly an aim, that a young
knight, within two of William, reeled on his saddle, groaned, and
fell.

"How like ye, O Normans, the Saxon gleeman?" said Leofwine, as he
turned slowly, regained the detachment, and bade them heed carefully
the orders they had received, viz., to avoid the direct charge of the
Norman horse, but to take every occasion to harass and divert the
stragglers; and then blithely singing a Saxon stave, as if inspired by
Norman minstrelsy, he rode into the entrenchments.




CHAPTER VIII.


The two brethren of Waltham, Osgood and Ailred, had arrived a little
after daybreak at the spot in which, about half a mile, to the rear of
Harold's palisades, the beasts of burden that had borne the heavy
arms, missiles, luggage, and forage of the Saxon march, were placed in
and about the fenced yards of a farm.  And many human beings, of both
sexes and various ranks, were there assembled, some in breathless
expectation, some in careless talk, some in fervent prayer.

The master of the farm, his sons, and the able-bodied ceorls in his
employ, had joined the forces of the King, under Gurth, as Earl of the
county [272].  But many aged theowes, past military service, and young
children, grouped around: the first, stolid and indifferent--the last,
prattling, curious, lively, gay.  There, too, were the wives of some
of the soldiers, who, as common in Saxon expeditions, had followed
their husbands to the field; and there, too, were the ladies of many a
Hlaford in the neighbouring district, who, no less true to their mates
than the wives of humbler men, were drawn by their English hearts to
the fatal spot.  A small wooden chapel, half decayed, stood a little
behind, with its doors wide open, a sanctuary in case of need; and the
interior was thronged with kneeling suppliants.

The two monks joined, with pious gladness, some of their sacred
calling, who were leaning over the low wall, and straining their eyes
towards the bristling field.  A little apart from them, and from all,
stood a female; the hood drawn over her face, silent in her unknown
thoughts.

By and by, as the march of the Norman multitude sounded hollow, and
the trumps, and the fifes, and the shouts, rolled on through the air,
in many a stormy peal,--the two abbots in the Saxon camp, with their
attendant monks, came riding towards the farm from the entrenchments.

The groups gathered round these new comers in haste and eagerness.

"The battle hath begun," said the Abbot of Hide, gravely.  "Pray God
for England, for never was its people in peril so great from man."

The female started and shuddered at those words.

"And the King, the King," she cried, in a sudden and thrilling voice;
"where is he?--the King?"

"Daughter," said the abbot, "the King's post is by his standard; but I
left him in the van of his troops.  Where he may be now I know not.
Wherever the foe presses sorest."

Then dismounting, the abbots entered the yard, to be accosted
instantly by all the wives, who deemed, poor souls, that the holy men
must, throughout all the field, have seen their lords; for each felt
as if God's world hung but on the single life in which each pale
trembler lived.

With all their faults of ignorance and superstition, the Saxon
churchmen loved their flocks; and the good abbots gave what comfort
was in their power, and then passed into the chapel, where all who
could find room followed them.

The war now raged.

The two divisions of the invading army that included the auxiliaries
had sought in vain to surround the English vanguard, and take it in
the rear: that noble phalanx had no rear.  Deepest and strongest at
the base of the triangle, everywhere front opposed the foe; shields
formed a rampart against the dart--spears a palisade against the
horse.  While that vanguard maintained its ground, William could not
pierce to the entrenchments, the strength of which, however, he was
enabled to perceive.  He now changed his tactics, joined his
knighthood to the other sections, threw his hosts rapidly into many
wings, and leaving broad spaces between his archers--who continued
their fiery hail--ordered his heavy-armed foot to advance on all sides
upon the wedge, and break its ranks for the awaiting charge of his
horse.

Harold, still in the centre of the vanguard, amidst the men of Kent,
continued to animate them all with voice and hand; and, as the Normans
now closed in, he flung himself from his steed, and strode on foot,
with his mighty battle-axe, to the spot where the rush was dreadest.

Now came the shock--the fight hand-to-hand: spear and lance were
thrown aside, axe and sword rose and shore.  But before the close-
serried lines of the English, with their physical strength and veteran
practice in their own special arm, the Norman foot were mowed as by
the scythe.  In vain, in the intervals, thundered the repeated charges
of the fiery knights; in vain, throughout all, came the shaft and the
bolt.

Animated by the presence of their King fighting amongst them as a
simple soldier, but with his eye ever quick to foresee, his voice ever
prompt to warn, the men of Kent swerved not a foot from their
indomitable ranks.  The Norman infantry wavered and gave way; on, step
by step, still unbroken in array, pressed the English.  And their cry,
"Out! out! Holy Crosse!" rose high above the flagging sound of "Ha
Rou! Ha Rou!--Notre Dame!"

"Per la resplendar De," cried William.  "Our soldiers are but women in
the garb of Normans.  Ho, spears to the rescue!  With me to the
charge, Sires D'Aumale and De Littain--with me, gallant Bruse, and De
Mortain; with me, De Graville and Grantmesnil--Dex aide!  Notre Dame."
And heading his prowest knights, William came, as a thunderbolt, on
the bills and shields.  Harold, who scarce a minute before had been in
a remoter rank, was already at the brunt of that charge.  At his word
down knelt the foremost line, leaving nought but their shields and
their spear-points against the horse.  While behind them, the axe in
both hands, bent forward the soldiery in the second rank, to smite and
to crush.  And, from the core of the wedge, poured the shafts of the
archers.  Down rolled in the dust half the charge of those knights.
Bruse reeled on his saddle; the dread right hand of D'Aumale fell
lopped by the axe; De Graville, hurled from his horse, rolled at the
feet of Harold; and William, borne by his great steed and his colossal
strength into the third rank--there dealt, right and left, the fierce
strokes of his iron club, till he felt his horse sinking under him--
and had scarcely time to back from the foe--scarcely time to get
beyond reach of their weapons, ere the Spanish destrier, frightfully
gashed through its strong mail, fell dead on the plain.  His knights
swept round him.  Twenty barons leapt from selle to yield him their
chargers.  He chose the one nearest to hand, sprang to foot and to
stirrup, and rode back to his lines.  Meanwhile De Graville's casque,
its strings broken by the shock, had fallen off, and as Harold was
about to strike, he recognised his guest.

Holding up his hand to keep off the press of his men, the generous
King said briefly: "Rise and retreat!--no time on this field for
captor and captive.  He whom thou hast called recreant knight, has
been Saxon host. Thou hast fought by his side, thou shalt not die by
his hand!--Go."

Not a word spoke De Graville; but his dark eye dwelt one minute with
mingled pity and reverence on the King; then rising, he turned away;
and slowly, as if he disdained to fly, strode back over the corpses of
his countrymen.

"Stay, all hands!" cried the King to his archers; "yon man hath tasted
our salt, and done us good service of old.  He hath paid his
weregeld."

Not a shaft was discharged.

Meanwhile, the Norman infantry, who had been before recoiling, no
sooner saw their Duke (whom they recognised by his steed and
equipment) fall on the ground, than, setting up a shout--"The Duke is
dead!" they fairly turned round, and fled fast in disorder.

The fortune of the day was now well-nigh turned in favour of the
Saxons; and the confusion of the Normans, as the cry of "The Duke is
dead!" reached, and circled round, the host, would have been
irrecoverable, had Harold possessed a cavalry fit to press the
advantage gained, or had not William himself rushed into the midst of
the fugitives, throwing his helmet back on his neck, showing his face,
all animated with fierce valour and disdainful wrath, while he cried
aloud:

"I live, ye varlets!  Behold the face of a chief who never yet forgave
coward!  Ay, tremble more at me than at yon English, doomed and
accursed as they be!  Ye Normans, ye!  I blush for you!" and striking
the foremost in the retreat with the flat of his sword, chiding,
stimulating, threatening, promising in a breath, he succeeded in
staying the flight, reforming the lines, and dispelling the general
panic.  Then, as he joined his own chosen knights, and surveyed the
field, he beheld an opening which the advanced position of the Saxon
vanguard had left, and by which his knights might gain the
entrenchments.  He mused a moment, his face still bare, and
brightening, as he mused.  Looking round him, he saw Mallet de
Graville, who had remounted, and said, shortly:

"Pardex, dear knight, we thought you already with St. Michael!--joy,
that you live yet to be an English earl.  Look you, ride to
Fitzosborne with the signal-word, 'Li Hardiz passent avant!'  Off, and
quick."

De Graville bowed, and darted across the plain.

"Now, my Quens and chevaliers," said William, gaily, as he closed his
helmet, and took from his squire another spear; "now, I shall give ye
the day's great pastime.  Pass the word, Sire de Tancarville, to every
horseman--'Charge!--to the Standard!'"

The word passed, the steeds bounded, and the whole force of William's
knighthood, scouring the plain to the rear of the Saxon vanguard, made
for the entrenchments.

At that sight, Harold, divining the object, and seeing this new and
more urgent demand on his presence, halted the battalions over which
he had presided, and, yielding the command to Leofwine, once more
briefly but strenuously enjoined the troops to heed well their
leaders, and on no account to break the wedge, in the form of which
lay their whole strength, both against the cavalry and the greater
number of the foe.  Then mounting his horse, and attended only by
Haco, he spurred across the plain, in the opposite direction to that
taken by the Normans.  In doing so, he was forced to make a
considerable circuit towards the rear of the entrenchment, and the
farm, with its watchful groups, came in sight.  He distinguished the
garbs of the women, and Haco said to him,--

"There wait the wives, to welcome the living victors."

"Or search their lords among the dead!" answered Harold.  "Who, Haco,
if we fall, will search for us?"

As the word left his lips, he saw, under a lonely thorn-tree, and
scarce out of bowshot from the entrenchments, a woman seated.  The
King looked hard at the bended, hooded form.

"Poor wretch!" he murmured, "her heart is in the battle!"  And he
shouted aloud, "Farther off! farther off?--the war rushes hitherward!"

At the sound of that voice the woman rose, stretched her arms, and
sprang forward.  But the Saxon chiefs had already turned their faces
towards the neighbouring ingress into the ramparts, and beheld not her
movement, while the tramp of rushing chargers, the shout and the roar
of clashing war, drowned the wail of her feeble cry:

"I have heard him again, again!" murmured the woman, "God be praised!"
and she re-seated herself quietly under the lonely thorn.

As Harold and Haco sprang to their feet within the entrenchments, the
shout of "the King--the King!--Holy Crosse!" came in time to rally the
force at the farther end, now undergoing the full storm of the Norman
chivalry.

The willow ramparts were already rent and hewed beneath the hoofs of
horses and the clash of swords; and the sharp points on the frontals
of the Norman destriers were already gleaming within the
entrenchments, when Harold arrived at the brunt of action.  The tide
was then turned; not one of those rash riders left the entrenchments
they had gained; steel and horse alike went down beneath the ponderous
battle-axes; and William, again foiled and baffled, drew off his
cavalry with the reluctant conviction that those breastworks, so
manned, were not to be won by horse.  Slowly the knights retreated
down the slope of the hillock, and the English, animated by that
sight, would have left their stronghold to pursue, but for the warning
cry of Harold.  The interval in the strife thus gained was promptly
and vigorously employed in repairing the palisades.  And this done,
Harold, turning to Haco, and the thegns round him, said joyously:

"By Heaven's help we shall yet win this day.  And know you not that it
is my fortunate day--the day on which, hitherto, all hath prospered
with me, in peace and in war--the day of my birth?"

"Of your birth!" echoed Haco in surprise.  "Ay--did you not know it?"

"Nay!--strange!--it is also the birthday of Duke William!  What would
astrologers say to the meeting of such stars?" [273]

Harold's cheek paled, but his helmet concealed the paleness:--his arm
drooped.  The strange dream of his youth again came distinct before
him, as it had come in the hall of the Norman at the sight of the
ghastly relics;--again he saw the shadowy hand from the cloud--again
heard the voice murmuring: "Lo, the star that shone on the birth of
the victor;" again he heard the words of Hilda interpreting the dream
--again the chaunt which the dead or the fiend had poured from the
rigid lips of the Vala.  It boomed on his ear; hollow as a death bell
it knelled through the roar of battle--

                                "Never
    Crown and brow shall Force dissever,
    Till the dead men, unforgiving,
    Loose the war-steeds on the living;
    Till a sun whose race is ending
    Sees the rival stars contending,
    Where the dead men, unforgiving,
    Wheel their war-steeds round the living!"

Faded the vision, and died the chaunt, as a breath that dims, and
vanishes from, the mirror of steel.  The breath was gone--the firm
steel was bright once more; and suddenly the King was recalled to the
sense of the present hour, by shouts and cries, in which the yell of
Norman triumph predominated, at the further end of the field.  The
signal words to Fitzosborne had conveyed to that chief the order for
the mock charge on the Saxon vanguard, to be followed by the feigned
flight; and so artfully had this stratagem been practised, that
despite all the solemn orders of Harold, despite even the warning cry
of Leofwine, who, rash and gay-hearted though he was, had yet a
captain's skill--the bold English, their blood heated by long contest
and seeming victory, could not resist pursuit.  They rushed forward
impetuously, breaking the order of their hitherto indomitable phalanx,
