(glancing to the river), yonder seems to flow Genius!  A century or so
hence the walls shall vanish, but the river shall roll on.  Man makes
the castle, and founds the power,--God forms the river and creates the
Genius.  And yet, Sibyll, there may be streams as broad and stately as
yonder Thames, that flow afar in the waste, never seen, never heard by
man.  What profits the river unmarked; what the genius never to be
known?"

It was not a common thing with Adam Warner to be thus eloquent.
Usually silent and absorbed, it was not his gift to moralize or
declaim.  His soul must be deeply moved before the profound and buried
sentiment within it could escape into words.

Sibyll pressed her father's hand, and, though her own heart was very
heavy, she forced her lips to smile and her voice to soothe.  Adam
interrupted her.

"Child, child, ye women know not what presses darkest and most
bitterly on the minds of men.  You know not what it is to form out of
immaterial things some abstract but glorious object,--to worship, to
serve it, to sacrifice to it, as on an altar, youth, health, hope,
life,--and suddenly in old age to see that the idol was a phantom, a
mockery, a shadow laughing us to scorn, because we have sought to
clasp it."

"Oh, yes, Father, women have known that illusion."

"What!  Do they study?"

"No, Father, but they feel!"

"Feel!  I comprehend thee not."

"As man's genius to him is woman's heart to her," answered Sibyll, her
dark and deep eyes suffused with tears.  "Doth not the heart create,
invent?  Doth it not dream?  Doth it not form its idol out of air?
Goeth it not forth into the future, to prophesy to itself?  And sooner
or later, in age or youth, doth it not wake at last, and see how it
hath wasted its all on follies?  Yes, Father, my heart can answer,
when thy genius would complain."

"Sibyll," said Warner, roused and surprised, and gazing on her
wistfully, "time flies apace.  Till this hour I have thought of thee
but as a child, an infant.  Thy words disturb me now."

"Think not of them, then.  Let me never add one grief to thine."

"Thou art brave and gay in thy silken sheen," said Adam, curiously
stroking down the rich, smooth stuff of Sibyll's tunic; "her grace the
duchess is generous to us.  Thou art surely happy here!"

"Happy!"

"Not happy!" exclaimed Adam, almost joyfully, "wouldst thou that we
were back once more in our desolate, ruined home?"

"Yes, ob, yes!--but rather away, far away, in some quiet village, some
green nook; for the desolate, ruined home was not safe for thine old
age."

"I would we could escape, Sibyll," said Adam, earnestly, in a whisper,
and with a kind of innocent cunning in his eye, "we and the poor
Eureka!  This palace is a prison-house to me.  I will speak to the
Lord Hastings, a man of great excellence, and gentle too.  He is ever
kind to us."

"No, no, Father, not to him," cried Sibyll, turning pale,--"let him
not know a word of what we would propose, nor whither we would fly."

"Child, he loves me, or why does he seek me so often, and sit and talk
not?"

Sibyll pressed her clasped hands tightly to her bosom, but made no
answer; and while she was summoning courage to say something that
seemed to oppress her thoughts with intolerable weight, a footstep
sounded gently near, and the Lady of Bonville (then on a visit to the
queen), unseen and unheard by the two, approached the spot.  She
paused, and gazed at Sibyll, at first haughtily; and then, as the deep
sadness of that young face struck her softer feelings, and the
pathetic picture of father and child, thus alone in their commune,
made its pious and sweet effect, the gaze changed from pride to
compassion, and the lady said courteously,--

"Fair mistress, canst thou prefer this solitary scene to the gay
company about to take the air in her grace's gilded barge?"

Sibyll looked up in surprise, not unmixed with fear.  Never before had
the great lady spoken to her thus gently.  Adam, who seemed for a
while restored to the actual life, saluted Katherine with simple
dignity, and took up the word,--

"Noble lady, whoever thou art, in thine old age, and thine hour of
care, may thy child, like this poor girl, forsake all gayer comrades
for a parent's side!"

The answer touched the Lady of Bonville, and involuntarily she
extended her hand to Sibyll.  With a swelling heart, Sibyll, as proud
as herself, bent silently over that rival's hand.  Katherine's marble
cheek coloured, as she interpreted the girl's silence.

"Gentle sir," she said, after a short pause, "wilt thou permit me a
few words with thy fair daughter?  And if in aught, since thou
speakest of care, Lord Warwick's sister can serve thee, prithee bid
thy young maiden impart it, as to a friend."

"Tell her, then, my Sibyll,--tell Lord Warwick's sister to ask the
king to give back to Adam Warner his poverty, his labour, and his
hope," said the scholar, and his noble head sank gloomily on his
bosom.

The Lady of Bonville, still holding Sibyll's hand, drew her a few
paces up the walk, and then she said suddenly, and with some of that
blunt frankness which belonged to her great brother, "Maiden, can
there be confidence between thee and me?"

"Of what nature, lady?"

Again Katherine blushed, but she felt the small hand she held tremble
in her clasp, and was emboldened,--

"Maiden, thou mayst resent and marvel at my words; but when I had
fewer years than thou, my father said, 'There are many carks in life
which a little truth could end.'  So would I heed his lesson.  William
de Hastings has followed thee with an homage that has broken,
perchance, many as pure a heart,--nay, nay, fair child, hear me on.
Thou hast heard that in youth he wooed Katherine Nevile,--that we
loved, and were severed.  They who see us now marvel whether we hate
or love,--no, not love--that question were an insult to Lord
Bonville's wife!--Ofttimes we seem pitiless to each other,--why?  Lord
Hastings would have wooed me, an English matron, to forget mine honour
and my House's.  He chafes that he moves me not.  I behold him
debasing a great nature to unworthy triflings with man's conscience
and a knight's bright faith.  But mark me!--the heart of Hastings is
everlastingly mine, and mine alone!  What seek I in this confidence?
To warn thee.  Wherefore?  Because for months, amidst all the vices of
this foul court-air, amidst the flatteries of the softest voice that
ever fell upon woman's ear, amidst, peradventure, the pleadings of
thine own young and guileless love, thine innocence is unscathed.  And
therefore Katherine of Bonville may be the friend of Sibyll Warner."

However generous might be the true spirit of these words, it was
impossible that they should not gall and humiliate the young and
flattered beauty to whom they were addressed.  They so wholly
discarded all belief in the affection of Hastings for Sibyll; they so
haughtily arrogated the mastery over his heart; they so plainly
implied that his suit to the poor maiden was but a mockery or
dishonour, that they made even the praise for virtue an affront to the
delicate and chaste ear on which they fell.  And, therefore, the
reader will not be astonished, though the Lady of Bonville certainly
was, when Sibyll, drawing her hand from Katherine's clasp, stopping
short, and calmly folding her arms upon her bosom, said,--

"To what this tends, lady, I know not.  The Lord Hastings is free to
carry his homage where he will.  He has sought me,--not I Lord
Hastings.  And if to-morrow he offered me his hand, I would reject it,
if I were not convinced that the heart--"

"Damsel," interrupted the Lady Bonville, in amazed contempt, "the hand
of Lord Hastings!  Look ye indeed so high, or has he so far paltered
with your credulous youth as to speak to you, the daughter of the
alchemist, of marriage?  If so, poor child, beware!

"I knew not," replied Sibyll, bitterly, "that Sibyll Warner was more
below the state of Lord Hastings than Master Hastings was once below
the state of Lady Katherine Nevile."

"Thou art distraught with thy self-conceit," answered the dame,
scornfully; and, losing all the compassion and friendly interest she
had before felt, "my rede is spoken,--reject it if thou wilt in pride.
Rue thy folly thou wilt in shame!"

She drew her wimple round her face as she said these words, and,
gathering up her long robe, swept slowly on.




CHAPTER III.

WHEREIN THE DEMAGOGUE SEEKS THE COURTIER.

On quitting Adam's chamber, Hilyard paused not till he reached a
stately house, not far from Warwick Lane, which was the residence of
the Lord Montagu.

That nobleman was employed in reading, or rather, in pondering over,
two letters, with which a courier from Calais had just arrived, the
one from the archbishop, the other from Warwick.  In these epistles
were two passages, strangely contradictory in their counsel.  A
sentence in Warwick's letter ran thus:--

"It hath reached me that certain disaffected men meditate a rising
against the king, under pretext of wrongs from the queen's kin.  It is
even said that our kinsmen, Copiers and Fitzhugh, are engaged therein.
Need I caution thee to watch well that they bring our name into no
