greatly shaken and endangered, when Lord Hastings alighted at Lady
Bonville's gate; but his face gradually grew paler, his mien less
assured, as he drew nearer and nearer to the apartment and the
presence of the widowed Katherine.

She was seated alone, and in the same room in which he had last seen
her.  Her deep mourning only served, by contrasting the pale and
exquisite clearness of her complexion, to enhance her beauty.
Hastings bowed low, and seated himself by her side in silence.

The Lady of Bonville eyed him for some moments with an unutterable
expression of melancholy and tenderness.  All her pride seemed to have
gone; the very character of her face was changed: grave severity had
become soft timidity, and stately self-control was broken into the
unmistaken struggle of hope and fear.

"Hastings--William!" she said, in a gentle and low whisper, and at the
sound of that last name from those lips, the noble felt his veins
thrill and his heart throb.  "If," she continued, "the step I have
taken seems to thee unwomanly and too bold, know, at least, what was
my design and my excuse.  There was a time" (and Katherine blushed)
"when, thou knowest well, that, had this hand been mine to bestow, it
would have been his who claimed the half of this ring."  And Katherine
took from a small crystal casket the well-remembered token.

"The broken ring foretold but the broken troth," said Hastings,
averting his face.

"Thy conscience rebukes thy words," replied Katherine, sadly; "I
pledged my faith, if thou couldst win my father's word.  What maid,
and that maid a Nevile, could so forget duty and honour as to pledge
thee more?  We were severed.  Pass--oh, pass over that time!  My
father loved me dearly; but when did pride and ambition ever deign to
take heed of the wild fancies of a girl's heart?  Three suitors,
wealthy lords, whose alliance gave strength to my kindred in the day
when their very lives depended on their swords, were rivals for Earl
Salisbury's daughter.  Earl Salisbury bade his daughter choose.  Thy
great friend and my own kinsman, Duke Richard of York, himself pleaded
for thy rivals.  He proved to me that my disobedience--if, indeed, for
the first time, a child of my House could disobey its chief--would be
an external barrier to thy fortune; that while Salisbury was thy foe,
he himself could not advance thy valiancy and merit; that it was with
me to forward thy ambition, though I could not reward thy love; that
from the hour I was another's, my mighty kinsmen themselves--for they
were generous--would be the first to aid the duke in thy career.
Hastings, even then I would have prayed, at least, to be the bride,
not of man, but God.  But I was trained--as what noble demoiselle is
not?--to submit wholly to a parent's welfare and his will.  As a nun,
I could but pray for the success of my father's cause; as a wife, I
could bring to Salisbury and to York the retainers and strongholds of
a baron.  I obeyed.  Hear me on.  Of the three suitors for my hand,
two were young and gallant,--women deemed them fair and comely; and
had my choice been one of these, thou mightest have deemed that a new
love had chased the old.  Since choice was mine, I chose the man love
could not choose, and took this sad comfort to my heart, 'He, the
forsaken Hastings, will see in my very choice that I was but the slave
of duty, my choice itself my penance.'"

Katherine paused, and tears dropped fast from her eyes.  Hastings held
his hand over his countenance, and only by the heaving of his heart
was his emotion visible.  Katherine resumed:--

"Once wedded, I knew what became a wife.  We met again; and to thy
first disdain and anger (which it had been dishonour in me to soothe
by one word that said, 'The wife remembers the maiden's love'),--to
these, thy first emotions, succeeded the more cruel revenge, which
would have changed sorrow and struggle to remorse and shame.  And
then, then--weak woman that I was!--I wrapped myself in scorn and
pride.  Nay, I felt deep anger--was it unjust?--that thou couldst so
misread and so repay the heart which had nothing left save virtue to
compensate for love.  And yet, yet, often when thou didst deem me most
hard, most proof against memory and feeling--But why relate the trial?
Heaven supported me, and if thou lovest me no longer, thou canst not
despise me."

At these last words Hastings was at her feet, bending over her hand,
and stifled by his emotions.  Katherine gazed at him for a moment
through her own tears, and then resumed:--

"But thou hadst, as man, consolations no woman would desire or covet.
And oh, what grieved me most was, not--no, not the jealous, the
wounded vanity, but it was at least this self-accusation, this
remorse--that--but for one goading remembrance, of love returned and
love forsaken,--thou hadst never so descended from thy younger nature,
never so trifled with the solemn trust of TIME.  Ah, when I have heard
or seen or fancied one fault in thy maturer manhood, unworthy of thy
bright youth, anger of myself has made me bitter and stern to thee;
and if I taunted or chid or vexed thy pride, how little didst thou
know that through the too shrewish humour spoke the too soft
remembrance!  For this--for this; and believing that through all,
alas! my image was not replaced, when my hand was free, I was grateful
that I might still--" (the lady's pale cheek grew brighter than the
rose, her voice faltered, and became low and indistinct)--"I might
still think it mine to atone to thee for the past. And if," she added,
with a sudden and generous energy, "if in this I have bowed my pride,
it is because by pride thou wert wounded; and now, at last, thou hast
a just revenge."

O terrible rival for thee, lost Sibyll!  Was it wonderful that, while
that head drooped upon his breast, while in that enchanted change
which Love the softener makes in lips long scornful, eyes long proud
and cold, he felt that Katherine Nevile--tender, gentle, frank without
boldness, lofty without arrogance--had replaced the austere dame of
Bonville, whom he half hated while he wooed,--oh, was it wonderful
that the soul of Hastings fled back to the old time, forgot the
intervening vows and more chill affections, and repeated only with
passionate lips, "Katherine, loved still, loved ever, mine, mine, at
last!"

Then followed delicious silence, then vows, confessions, questions,
answers,--the thrilling interchange of hearts long divided, and now
rushing into one.  And time rolled on, till Katherine, gently breaking
from her lover, said,--

"And now that thou hast the right to know and guide my projects,
approve, I pray thee, my present purpose.  War awaits thee, and we
must part a while!"  At these words her brow darkened and her lip
quivered.  "Oh, that I should have lived to mourn the day when Lord
Warwick, untrue to Salisbury and to York, joined his arms with
Lancaster and Margaret,--the day when Katherine could blush for the
brother she had deemed the glory of her House!  No, no" (she
continued, as Hastings interrupted her with generous excuses for the
earl, and allusion to the known slights he had received),--"no, no;
make not his cause the worse by telling me that an unworthy pride, the
grudge of some thwart to his policy or power, has made him forget what
was due to the memory of his kinsman York, to the mangled corpse of
his father Salisbury.  Thinkest thou that but for this I could--" She
stopped, but Hastings divined her thought, and guessed that, if
spoken, it had run thus: "That I could, even now, have received the
homage of one who departs to meet, with banner and clarion, my brother
as his foe?"

The lovely sweetness of the late expression had gone from Katherine's
face, and its aspect showed that her high and ancestral spirit had
yielded but to one passion.  She pursued,--

"While this strife lasts, it becomes my widowhood and kindred position
with the earl to retire to the convent my mother founded.  To-morrow I
depart."

"Alas!" said Hastings, "thou speakest of the strife as if but a single
field.  But Warwick returns not to these shores, nor bows himself to
league with Lancaster, for a chance hazardous and desperate, as Edward
too rashly deems it.  It is in vain to deny that the earl is prepared
for a grave and lengthened war, and much I doubt whether Edward can
resist his power; for the idolatry of the very land will swell the
ranks of so dread a rebel.  What if he succeed; what if we be driven
into exile, as Henry's friends before us; what if the king-maker be
the king-dethroner?  Then, Katherine, then once more thou wilt be at
the best of thy hostile kindred, and once more, dowered as thou art,
and thy womanhood still in its richest bloom, thy hand will be lost to
Hastings."

"Nay, if that be all thy fear, take with thee this pledge,--that
Warwick's treason to the House for which my father fell dissolves his
power over one driven to disown him as a brother,--knowing Earl
Salisbury, had he foreseen such disgrace, had disowned him as a son.
And if there be defeat and flight and exile, wherever thou wanderest,
Hastings, shall Katherine be found beside thee.  Fare thee well, and
Our Lady shield thee! may thy lance be victorious against all foes,--
save one.  Thou wilt forbear my--that is, the earl!"  And Katherine,
softened at that thought, sobbed aloud.

"And come triumph or defeat, I have thy pledge?" said Hastings,
soothing her.

"See," said Katherine, taking the broken ring from the casket; "now,
for the first time since I bore the name of Bonville, I lay this relic
on my heart; art thou answered?"




CHAPTER VI.

HASTINGS LEARNS WHAT HAS BEFALLEN SIBYLL, REPAIRS TO THE KING, AND
ENCOUNTERS AN OLD RIVAL.

"It is destiny," said Hastings to himself, when early the next morning
he was on his road to the farm--"it is destiny,--and who can resist
his fate?"

"It is destiny!"--phrase of the weak human heart!  "It is destiny!"
dark apology for every error!  The strong and the virtuous admit no
destiny!  On earth guides conscience, in heaven watches God.  And
destiny is but the phantom we invoke to silence the one, to dethrone
the other!

Hastings spared not his good steed.  With great difficulty had he
snatched a brief respite from imperious business, to accomplish the
last poor duty now left to him to fulfil,--to confront the maid whose
heart he had seduced in vain, and say at length, honestly and firmly,
"I cannot wed thee.  Forget me, and farewell."

Doubtless his learned and ingenious mind conjured up softer words than
these, and more purfled periods wherein to dress the iron truth.  But
in these two sentences the truth lay.  He arrived at the farm, he
entered the house; he felt it as a reprieve that he met not the
bounding step of the welcoming Sibyll.  He sat down in the humble
chamber, and waited a while in patience,--no voice was heard.  The
silence at length surprised and alarmed him.  He proceeded farther.
He was met by the widowed owner of the house, who was weeping; and her
first greeting prepared him for what had chanced.  "Oh, my lord, you
have come to tell me they are safe, they have not fallen into the
hands of their enemies,--the good gentleman, so meek, the poor lady,
so fair!"

Hastings stood aghast; a few sentences more explained all that he
already guessed.  A strange man had arrived the evening before at the
house, praying Adam and his daughter to accompany him to the Lord
Hastings, who had been thrown from his horse, and was now in a cottage
in the neighbouring lane,--not hurt dangerously, but unable to be
removed, and who had urgent matters to communicate.  Not questioning
the truth of this story, Adam and Sibyll had hurried forth, and
returned no more.  Alarmed by their long absence, the widow, who at
first received the message from the stranger, went herself to the
cottage, and found that the story was a fable.  Every search had since
been made for Adam and his daughter, but in vain.  The widow,
confirmed in her previous belief that her lodgers had been attainted
Lancastrians, could but suppose that they had been thus betrayed to
their enemies.  Hastings heard this with a dismay and remorse
impossible to express.  His only conjecture was that the king had
discovered their retreat, and taken this measure to break off the
intercourse he had so sternly denounced.  Full of these ideas, he
hastily remounted, and stopped not till once more at the gates of the
Tower.  Hastening to Edward's closet, the moment he saw the king, he
exclaimed, in great emotion, "My liege, my liege, do not at this hour,
when I have need of my whole energy to serve thee, do not madden my
brain, and palsy my arm.  This old man--the poor maid--Sibyll--
Warner,--speak, my liege--only tell me they are safe; promise me they
shall go free, and I swear to obey thee in all else!  I will thank
thee in the battlefield!"

"Thou art mad, Hastings!" said the king, in great astonishment.
"Hush!" and he glanced significantly at a person who stood before
several heaps of gold, ranged upon a table in the recess of the room.
"See," he whispered, "yonder is the goldsmith, who hath brought me a
loan from himself and his fellows!  Pretty tales for the city thy
folly will send abroad!"

But before Hastings could vent his impatient answer, this person, to
Edward's still greater surprise, had advanced from his place, and
forgetting all ceremony, had seized Hastings by the hem of his
surcoat, exclaiming,--

"My lord, my lord, what new horror is this?  Sibyll!--methought she
was worthless, and had fled to thee!"

"Ten thousand devils!" shouted the king, "am I ever to be tormented by
that damnable wizard and his witch child?  And is it, Sir Peer and Sir
Goldsmith, in your king's closet that ye come, the very eve before he
marches to battle, to speer and glower at each other like two madmen
as ye are?"

Neither peer nor goldsmith gave way, till the courtier, naturally
recovering himself the first, fell on his knee; and said, with firm
though profound respect: "Sire, if poor William Hastings has ever
merited from the king one kindly thought, one generous word, forgive
now whatever may displease thee in his passion or his suit, and tell
him what prison contains those whom it would forever dishonour his
knighthood to know punished and endangered but for his offence."

"My lord," answered the king, softened but still surprised, "think you
seriously that I, who but reluctantly in this lovely month leave my
green lawns of Shene to save a crown, could have been vexing my brain
by stratagems to seize a lass, whom I swear by Saint George I do not
envy thee in the least?  If that does not suffice, incredulous
dullard, why then take my kingly word, never before passed for so
slight an occasion, that I know nothing whatsoever of thy damsel's
whereabout nor her pestilent father's,--where they abode of late,
where they now be; and, what is more, if any man has usurped his
king's right to imprison the king's subjects, find him out, and name
his punishment.  Art thou convinced?"

"I am, my liege," said Hastings.

"But--" began the goldsmith.

"Holloa, you, too, sir!  This is too much!  We have condescended to
answer the man who arms three thousand retainers--"

"And I, please your Highness, bring you the gold to pay them," said
the trader, bluntly.

The king bit his lip, and then burst into his usual merry laugh.

"Thou art in the right, Master Alwyn.  Finish counting the pieces, and
then go and consult with my chamberlain,--he must off with the cock-
crow; but, since ye seem to understand each other, he shall make thee
his lieutenant of search, and I will sign any order he pleases for the
recovery of the lost wisdom and the stolen beauty.  Go and calm
thyself, Hastings."

"I will attend you presently, my lord," said Alwyn, aside, "in your
