
"Ah, I thought so.  That bird of prey fancies every other bird looking
out for pigeons.  I fancy that Duplessis is, like all those money-
getters, a seeker after fashion, and De Finisterre has not returned his
bow."

"My dear Alain, I am to blame; nothing is so irritating as a dispute
about the worth of the men we like.  I began it, now let it be dropped;
only make me one promise,--that if you should be in arrear, or if need
presses, you will come at once to me.  It was very well to be absurdly
proud in an attic, but that pride will be out of place in your
_appartement au premier_."

"You are the best fellow in the world, Frederic, and I make you the
promise you ask," said Alain, cheerfully, but yet with a secret emotion
of tenderness and gratitude.  "And now, _mon cher_, what day will you
dine with me to meet Raoul and Enguerrand, and some others whom you would
like to know?"

"Thanks, and hearty ones, but we move now in different spheres, and I
shall not trespass on yours. _Je suis trop bourgeois_ to incur the
ridicule of _le bourgeois gentilhomme_."

"Frederic, how dare you speak thus?  My dear fellow, my friends shall
honour you as I do."

"But that will be on your account, not mine.  No; honestly that kind of
society neither tempts nor suits me.  I am a sort of king in my own walk;
and I prefer my Bohemian royalty to vassalage in higher regions.  Say no
more of it.  It will flatter my vanity enough if you will now and then
descend to my coteries, and allow me to parade a Rochebriant as my
familiar crony, slap him on the shoulder, and call him Alain."

"Fie! you who stopped me and the English aristocrat in the Champs
Elysees, to humble us with your boast of having fascinated _une grande
dame_,--I think you said a duchesse."

"Oh," said Lemercier, conceitedly, and passing his hand through his
scented locks, "women are different; love levels all ranks.  I don't
blame Ruy Blas for accepting the love of a queen, but I do blame him for
passing himself off as a noble,--a plagiarism, by the by, from an English
play.  I do not love the English enough to copy them.  _A propos_, what
has become of _ce beau_ Grarm Varn?  I have not seen him of late."

"Neither have I."

"Nor the belle Italienne?"

"Nor her," said Alain, slightly blushing.

At this moment Enguerrand lounged into the room.  Alain stopped Lemercier
to introduce him to his kinsman.  "Enguerrand, I present to you M.
Lemercier, my earliest and one of my dearest friends."

The young noble held out his hand with the bright and joyous grace which
accompanied all his movements, and expressed in cordial words his delight
to make M. Lemercier's acquaintance.  Bold and assured as Frederic was in
his own circles, he was more discomposed than set at ease by the gracious
accost of a lion, whom he felt at once to be of a breed superior to his
own.  He muttered some confused phrases, in which _ravi_ and _flatte_
were alone audible, and evanished.

"I know M. Lemercier by sight very well," said Enguerrand, seating
himself.  "One sees him very often in the Bois; and I have met him in the
Coulisses and the _Bal Mabille_.  I think, too, that he plays at the
Bourse, and is _lie_ with M. Duplessis, who bids fair to rival Louvier
one of these days.  Is Duplessis also one of your dearest friends?"

"No, indeed.  I once met him, and was not prepossessed in his favour."

"Nevertheless, he is a man much to be admired and respected."

"Why so?"

"Because he understands so well the art of making what we all covet,--
money.  I will introduce you to him."

"I have been already introduced."

"Then I will re-introduce you.  He is much courted in a society which I
have recently been permitted by my father to frequent,--the society, of
the Imperial Court."

"You frequent that society, and the Count permits it?"

"Yes; better the Imperialists than the Republicans; and my father begins
to own that truth, though he is too old or too indolent to act on it."

"And Raoul?"

"Oh, Raoul, the melancholy and philosophical Raoul, has no ambition of
any kind, so long as--thanks somewhat to me--his purse is always
replenished for the wants of his stately existence, among the foremost of
which wants are the means to supply the wants of others.  That is the
true reason why he consents to our glove-shop.  Raoul belongs, with some
other young men of the Faubourg, to a society enrolled under the name of
Saint Francois de Sales, for the relief of the poor.  He visits their
houses, and is at home by their sickbeds as at their stinted boards.  Nor
does he confine his visitations to the limits of our Faubourg; he extends
his travels to Montmartre and Belleville.  As to our upper world, he does
not concern himself much with its changes.  He says that we have
destroyed too much ever to rebuild solidly; and that whatever we do build
could be upset any day by a Paris mob, which he declares to be the only
institution we have left.  A wonderful fellow is Raoul,--full of mind,
though he does little with it; full of heart, which he devotes to
suffering humanity, and to a poetic, knightly reverence (not to be
confounded with earthly love, and not to be degraded into that sickly
sentiment called Platonic affection) for the Comtesse di Rimini, who is
six years older than himself, and who is very faithfully attached to her
husband, Raoul's intimate friend, whose honour he would guard as his own.
It is an episode in the drama of Parisian life, and one not so uncommon
as the malignant may suppose.  Di Rimini knows and approves of his
veneration; my mother, the best of women, sanctions it, and deems truly
that it preserves Raoul safe from all the temptations to which ignobler
youth is exposed.  I mention this lest you should imagine there was
anything in Raoul's worship of his star less pure than it is.  For the
rest, Raoul, to the grief and amazement of that disciple of Voltaire, my
respected father, is one of the very few men I know in our circles who is
sincerely religious,--an orthodox Catholic,--and the only man I know who
practises the religion he professes; charitable, chaste, benevolent; and
no bigot, no intolerant ascetic.  His only weakness is his entire
submission to the worldly common-sense of his good-for-nothing, covetous,
ambitious brother Enguerrand.  I cannot say how I love him for that.  If
he had not such a weakness, his excellence would gall me, and I believe I
should hate him."

Alain bowed his head at this eulogium.  Such had been the character that
a few months ago he would have sought as example and model.  He seemed to
gaze upon a flattered portrait of himself as he had been.

"But," said Enguerrand, "I have not come here to indulge in the overflow
of brotherly affection.  I come to take you to your relation, the
Duchesse of Tarascon.  I have pledged myself to her to bring you, and she
is at home on purpose to receive you."

"In that case I cannot be such a churl as to refuse.  And, indeed, I no
longer feel quite the same prejudices against her and the Imperialists as
I brought from Bretagne.  Shall I order my carriage?"

"No; mine is at the door.  Yours can meet you where you will, later.
_Allons_."




CHAPTER III.

The Duchesse de Tarascon occupied a vast apartment in the Rue Royale,
close to the Tuileries.  She held a high post among the ladies who graced
the brilliant court of the Empress.  She had survived her second husband
the duke, who left no issue, and the title died with him.

Alain and Enguerrand were ushered up the grand staircase, lined with
tiers of costly exotics as if for a fete; but in that and in all kinds of
female luxury, the Duchesse lived in a state of _fete perpetuelle_.  The
doors on the landing-place were screened by heavy portieres of Genoa
velvet, richly embroidered in gold with the ducal crown and cipher.  The
two salons through which the visitors passed to the private cabinet or
boudoir were decorated with Gobelin tapestries, fresh, with a mixture of
roseate hues, and depicting incidents in the career of the first emperor;
while the effigies of the late duke's father--the gallant founder of a
short-lived race figured modestly in the background.  On a table of
Russian malachite within the recess of the central window lay, preserved
in glass cases, the baton and the sword, the epaulettes and the
decorations of the brave Marshal.  On the consoles and the mantelpieces
stood clocks and vases of Sevres that could scarcely be eclipsed by those
in the Imperial palaces.  Entering the cabinet, they found the Duchesse
seated at her writing-table, with a small Skye terrier, hideous in the
beauty of the purest breed, nestled at her feet.  This room was an
exquisite combination of costliness and comfort,--Luxury at home.  The
hangings were of geranium-coloured silk, with double curtains of white
satin; near to the writing-table a conservatory, with a white marble
fountain at play in the centre, and a trellised aviary at the back.  The
walls were covered with small pictures,--chiefly portraits and miniatures
of the members of the imperial family, of the late Duc, of his father the
Marshal and Madame la Marechale, of the present Duchesse herself, and of
some of the principal ladies of the court.

The Duchesse was still in the prime of life.  She had passed her fortieth
year, but was so well "conserved" that you might have guessed her to be
ten years younger.  She was tall; not large, but with rounded figure
inclined to _en bon point_; with dark hair and eyes, but fair complexion,
injured in effect rather than improved by pearl-powder, and that
atrocious barbarism of a dark stain on the eyelids which has of late
years been a baneful fashion; dressed,--I am a man, and cannot describe
her dress; all I know is that she had the acknowledged fame of the best-
dressed subject of France.  As she rose from her seat there was in her
look and air the unmistakable evidence of grande dame,--a family likeness
in feature to Alain himself, a stronger likeness to the picture of her
first cousin (his mother) which was preserved at Rochebriant.  Her
descent was indeed from ancient and noble houses.  But to the distinction
of race she added that of fashion, crowning both with a tranquil
consciousness of lofty position and unblemished reputation.

"Unnatural cousin!" she said to Alain, offering her hand to him, with a
gracious smile,--"all this age in Paris, and I see you for the first
time.  But there is joy on earth as in heaven over sinners who truly
repent.  You repent truly--n'est ce pas?"

It is impossible to describe the caressing charm which the Duchesse threw
into her words, voice, and look.  Alain was fascinated and subdued.

"Ah, Madame la Duchesse," said he, bowing over the fait hand he lightly
held, "it was not sin, unless modesty be a sin, which made a rustic
hesitate long before he dared to offer his homage to the queen of the
graces."

"Not badly said for a rustic," cried Enguerrand; "eh, Madame?"

"My cousin, you are pardoned," said the Duchesse.  "Compliment is the
perfume of _gentilhommerie_; and if you brought enough of that perfume
from the flowers of Rochebriant to distribute among the ladies at court,
you will be terribly the mode there.  Seducer!"--here she gave the
Marquis a playful tap on the cheek, not in a coquettish but in a mother-
like familiarity, and looking at him attentively, said: "Why, you are
even handsomer than your father.  I shall be proud to present to their
Imperial Majesties so becoming a cousin.  But seat yourselves here,
Messieurs, close to my arm-chair, _caussons_."

The Duchesse then took up the ball of the conversation.  She talked
without any apparent artifice, but with admirable tact; put just the
questions about Rochebriant most calculated to please Alain, shunning all
that might have pained him; asking him for descriptions of the
surrounding scenery, the Breton legends; hoping that the old castle would
never be spoiled by modernizing restorations; inquiring tenderly after
his aunt, whom she had in her childhood once seen, and still remembered
with her sweet, grave face; paused little for replies; then turned to
Enguerrand with sprightly small-talk on the topics of the day, and every
now and then bringing Alain into the pale of the talk, leading on
insensibly until she got Enguerrand himself to introduce the subject of
the emperor, and the political troubles which were darkening a reign
heretofore so prosperous and splendid.

Her countenance then changed; it became serious, and even grave in its
expression.

"It is true," she said, "that the times grow menacing, menacing not only
to the throne, but to order and property and France.  One by one they are
removing all the breakwaters which the empire had constructed between the
executive and the most fickle and impulsive population that ever shouted
'long live' one day to the man whom they would send to the guillotine the
next.  They are denouncing what they call personal government.  Grant
that it has its evils; but what would they substitute,--a constitutional
monarchy like the English?  That is impossible with universal suffrage
and without an hereditary chamber.  The nearest approach to it was the
monarchy of Louis Philippe,--we know how sick they became of that.  A
republic?--mon Dieu!  composed of Republicans terrified out of their wits
at each other.  The moderate men, mimics of the Girondins, with the Reds
and the Socialists and the Communists, ready to tear them to pieces.  And
then--What then?--the commercialists, the agriculturists, the middle
class combining to elect some dictator who will cannonade the mob and
become a mimic Napoleon, grafted on a mimic Necker or a mimic Danton.
Oh, Messieurs, I am French to the core.  You inheritors of such names
must be as French as I am; and yet you men insist on remaining more
useless to France in the midst of her need than I am,--I, a woman who can
but talk and weep."

The Duchesse spoke with a warmth of emotion which startled and profoundly
affected Alain.  He remained silent, leaving it to Enguerrand to answer.

"Dear Madame," said the latter, "I do not see how either myself or our
kinsman can merit your reproach.  We are not legislators.  I doubt if
there is a single department in France that would elect us, if we offered
ourselves.  It is not our fault if the various floods of revolution leave
men of our birth and opinions stranded wrecks of a perished world.  The
emperor chooses his own advisers, and if they are bad ones, his Majesty
certainly will not ask Alain and me to replace them."

"You do not answer--you evade me," said the Duchesse; with a mournful
smile.  "You are too skilled a man of the world, Monsieur Enguerrand, not
to know that it is not only legislators and ministers that are necessary
to the support of a throne, and the safeguard of a nation.  Do you not
see how great a help it is to both throne and nation when that section of
public opinion which is represented by names illustrious in history,
identified with records of chivalrous deeds and loyal devotion, rallies
round the order established?  Let that section of public opinion stand
aloof, soured and discontented, excluded from active life, lending no
counter-balance to the perilous oscillations of democratic passion, and
tell me if it is not an enemy to itself as well as a traitor to the
principles it embodies?"

"The principles it embodies, Madame," said Alain, "are those of fidelity
to a race of kings unjustly set aside, less for the vices than the
virtues of ancestors.  Louis XV. was the worst of the Bourbons,--he was
the _bien aime_: he escapes.  Louis XVI. was in moral attributes the best
of the Bourbons,--he dies the death of a felon.  Louis XVIII., against
whom much may be said, restored to the throne by foreign bayonets,
reigning as a disciple of Voltaire might reign, secretly scoffing alike
at the royalty and the religion which were crowned in his person, dies
peacefully in his bed.  Charles X., redeeming the errors of his youth by
a reign untarnished by a vice, by a religion earnest and sincere, is sent
into exile for defending established order from the very inroads which
you lament.  He leaves an heir against whom calumny cannot invent a tale,
and that heir remains an outlaw simply because he descends from Henry
IV., and has a right to reign.  Madame, you appeal to us as among the
representatives of the chivalrous deeds and loyal devotion which
characterized the old nobility of France.  Should we deserve that
character if we forsook the unfortunate, and gained wealth and honour in
forsaking?"

