
It was true. Little Alftruda had been clinging to him for five minutes
past. He took the child up in his arms and kissed her with pure kisses,
which for a moment softened his hard heart; then, setting her down, he
turned to Martin.

"I have done it, Martin."

"Yes, you have done it; I spied you. What will the old folks at home say
to this?"

"What care I?"

Martin Lightfoot shook his head, and drew out his knife.

"What is that for?" said Hereward.

"When the master kills the game, the knave can but skin it. We may sleep
warm under this fur in many a cold night by sea and moor."

"Nay," said Hereward, laughing; "when the master kills the game he must
first carry it home. Let us take him and set him up against the bower
door there, to astonish the brave knights inside." And stooping down, he
attempted to lift the huge carcass; but in vain. At last, with Martin's
help, he got it fairly on his shoulders, and the two dragged their
burden to the bower and dashed it against the door, shouting with all
their might to those within to open it.

Windows, it must be remembered, were in those days so few and far
between that the folks inside had remained quite unaware of what was
going on without.

The door was opened cautiously enough; and out looked, to the shame of
knighthood, be it said, two or three knights who had taken shelter in
the bower with the ladies. Whatever they were going to say the
ladies forestalled, for, rushing out across the prostrate bear,
they overwhelmed Hereward with praises, thanks, and, after the
straightforward custom of those days, with substantial kisses.

"You must be knighted at once," cried they. "You have knighted yourself
by that single blow."

"A pity, then," said one of the knights to the others, "that he had not
given that accolade to himself, instead of to the bear."

"Unless some means are found," said another, "of taking down this boy's
conceit, life will soon be not worth having here."

"Either he must take ship," said a third, "and look for adventures
elsewhere, or I must."

Martin Lightfoot heard those words; and knowing that envy and hatred,
like all other vices in those rough-hewn times, were apt to take very
startling and unmistakeable shapes, kept his eye accordingly on those
three knights.

"He must be knighted,--he shall be knighted, as soon as Sir Gilbert
comes home," said all the ladies in chorus.

"I should be sorry to think," said Hereward, with the blundering mock
humility of a self-conceited boy, "that I had done anything worthy of
such an honor. I hope to win my spurs by greater feats than these."

A burst of laughter from the knights and gentlemen followed.

"How loud the young bantam crows after his first little scuffle!"

"Hark to him! What will he do next? Eat a dragon? Fly to the moon? Marry
the Sophy of Egypt's daughter?"

This last touched Hereward to the quick, for it was just what he thought
of doing; and his blood, heated enough already, beat quicker, as some
one cried, with the evident intent of picking a quarrel:

"That was meant for us. If the man who killed the bear has not earned
knighthood, what must we be, who have not killed him? You understand his
meaning, gentlemen,--don't forget it!"

Hereward looked down, and setting his foot on the bear's head, wrenched
out of it the sword which he had left till now, with pardonable pride,
fast set in the skull.

Martin Lightfoot, for his part, drew stealthily from his bosom the
little magic axe, keeping his eye on the brain-pan of the last speaker.

The lady of the house cried "Shame!" and ordered the knights away with
haughty words and gestures, which, because they were so well deserved,
only made the quarrel more deadly.

Then she commanded Hereward to sheathe his sword.

He did so; and turning to the knights, said with all courtesy: "You
mistake me, sirs. You were where brave knights should be, within the
beleaguered fortress, defending the ladies. Had you remained outside,
and been eaten by the bear, what must have befallen them, had he burst
open the door? As for this little lass, whom you left outside, she is
too young to requite knight's prowess by lady's love; and therefore
beneath your attention, and only fit for the care of a boy like me." And
taking up Alftruda in his arms, he carried her in and disappeared.

Who now but Hereward was in all men's mouths? The minstrels made ballads
on him; the lasses sang his praises (says the chronicler) as they danced
upon the green. Gilbert's lady would need give him the seat, and all
the honors, of a belted knight, though knight he was none. And daily
and weekly the valiant lad grew and hardened into a valiant man, and a
courteous one withal, giving no offence himself, and not over-ready to
take offence at other men.

The knights were civil enough to him, the ladies more than civil; he
hunted, he wrestled, he tilted; he was promised a chance of fighting for
glory, as soon as a Highland chief should declare war against Gilbert,
or drive off his cattle,--an event which (and small blame to the
Highland chiefs) happened every six months.

No one was so well content with himself as Hereward; and therefore he
fancied that the world must be equally content with him, and he was much
disconcerted when Martin drew him aside one day, and whispered: "If I
were my lord, I should wear a mail shirt under my coat to-morrow out
hunting."

"What?"

"The arrow that can go through a deer's bladebone can go through a
man's."

"Who should harm me?"

"Any man of the dozen who eat at the same table."

"What have I done to them? If I had my laugh at them, they had their
laugh at me; and we are quits."

"There is another score, my lord, which you have forgotten, and that is
all on your side."

"Eh?"

"You killed the bear. Do you expect them to forgive you that, till they
have repaid you with interest?"

"Pish!"

"You do not want for wit, my lord. Use it, and think. What right has a
little boy like you to come here, killing bears which grown men cannot
kill? What can you expect but just punishment for your insolence,--say,
a lance between your shoulders while you stoop to drink, as Sigfried had
for daring to tame Brunhild? And more, what right have you to come here,
and so win the hearts of the ladies, that the lady of all the ladies
should say, 'If aught happen to my poor boy,--and he cannot live
long,--I would adopt Hereward for my own son, and show his mother what
a fool some folks think her?' So, my lord, put on your mail shirt
to-morrow, and take care of narrow ways, and sharp corners. For
to-morrow it will be tried, that I know, before my Lord Gilbert comes
back from the Highlands; but by whom I know not, and care little, seeing
that there are half a dozen in the house who would be glad enough of the
chance."

Hereward took his advice, and rode out with three or four knights the
next morning into the fir-forest; not afraid, but angry and sad. He
was not yet old enough to estimate the virulence of envy, to take
ingratitude and treachery for granted. He was to learn the lesson then,
as a wholesome chastener to the pride of success. He was to learn it
again in later years, as an additional bitterness in the humiliation of
defeat; and find out, as does many a man, that if he once fall, or seem
to fall, a hundred curs spring up to bark at him, who dared not open
their mouths while he was on his legs.

So they rode into the forest, and parted, each with his footman and his
dogs, in search of boar and deer; and each had his sport without meeting
again for some two hours or more.

Hereward and Martin came at last to a narrow gully, a murderous place
enough. Huge fir-trees roofed it in, and made a night of noon. High
banks of earth and great boulders walled it in right and left for twenty
feet above. The track, what with pack-horses' feet, and what with the
wear and tear of five hundred years' rain-fall, was a rut three feet
deep and two feet broad, in which no horse could turn. Any other day
Hereward would have cantered down it with merely a tightened rein. Today
he turned to Martin and said,--

"A very fit and proper place for this same treason, unless you have been
drinking beer and thinking beer."

But Martin was nowhere to be seen.

A pebble thrown from the right bank struck him, and he looked up.
Martin's face was peering through the heather overhead, his finger on
his lips. Then he pointed cautiously, first up the pass, then down.

Hereward felt that his sword was loose in the sheath, and then gripped
his lance, with a heart beating, but not with fear.

The next moment he heard the rattle of a horse's hoofs behind him;
looked back; and saw a knight charging desperately down the gully, his
bow in hand, and arrow drawn to the head.

To turn was impossible. To stop, even to walk on, was to be ridden over
and hurled to the ground helplessly. To gain the mouth of the gully, and
then turn on his pursuer, was his only chance. For the first and almost
the last time in his life, he struck spurs into his horse, and ran
away. As he went, an arrow struck him sharply in the back, piercing
the corslet, but hardly entering the flesh. As he neared the mouth, two
other knights crashed their horses through the brushwood from right
and left, and stood awaiting him, their spears ready to strike. He was
caught in a trap. A shield might have saved him; but he had none.

He did not flinch. Dropping his reins, and driving in the spurs once
more, he met them in full shock. With his left hand he hurled aside the
left-hand lance, with his right he hurled his own with all his force
at the right-hand foe, and saw it pass clean through the felon's chest,
while his lance-point dropped, and passed harmlessly behind his knee.

So much for lances in front. But the knight behind? Would not his sword
the next moment be through his brain?

There was a clatter, a crash, and looking back Hereward saw horse and
man rolling in the rut, and rolling with them Martin Lightfoot. He had
already pinned the felon knight's head against the steep bank, and, with
uplifted axe, was meditating a pick at his face which would have stopped
alike his love-making and his fighting.

"Hold thy hand," shouted Hereward. "Let us see who he is; and remember
that he is at least a knight."

"But one that will ride no more to-day. I finished his horse's going as
I rolled down the bank."

It was true. He had broken the poor beast's leg with a blow of the axe,
and they had to kill the horse out of pity ere they left.

Martin dragged his prisoner forward.

"You?" cried Hereward. "And I saved your life three days ago!"

The knight answered nothing.

"You will have to walk home. Let that be punishment enough for you," and
he turned.

"He will have to ride in a woodman's cart, if he have the luck to find
one."

The third knight had fled, and after him the dead man's horse. Hereward
and his man rode home in peace, and the third knight, after trying
vainly to walk a mile or two, fell and lay, and was fain to fulfil
Martin's prophecy, and be brought home in a cart, to carry for years
after, like Sir Lancelot, the nickname of the Chevalier de la Charette.

And so was Hereward avenged of his enemies. Judicial, even private,
inquiry into the matter there was none. That gentlemen should meet in
the forest and commit, or try to commit, murder on each other's bodies,
was far too common a mishap in the ages of faith to stir up more than an
extra gossiping and cackling among the women, and an extra cursing and
threatening among the men; and as the former were all but unanimously on
Hereward's side, his plain and honest story was taken as it stood.

"And now, fair lady," said Hereward to his hostess, "I must thank you
for all your hospitality, and bid you farewell forever and a day."

She wept, and entreated him only to stay till her lord came back; but
Hereward was firm.

"You, lady, and your good lord will I ever love; and at your service
my sword shall ever be: but not here. Ill blood I will not make. Among
traitors I will not dwell. I have killed two of them, and shall have
to kill two of their kinsmen next, and then two more, till you have no
knights left; and pity that would be. No; the world is wide, and there
are plenty of good fellows in it who will welcome me without forcing me
to wear mail under my coat out hunting."

And he armed himself _cap-a-pie_, and rode away. Great was the weeping
in the bower, and great the chuckling in the hall: but never saw they
Hereward again upon the Scottish shore.




CHAPTER III.

HOW HEREWARD SUCCORED A PRINCESS OF CORNWALL.


The next place in which Hereward appeared was far away on the southwest,
upon the Cornish shore. How he came there, or after how long, the
chronicles do not say. All that shall be told is, that he went into port
on board a merchant ship carrying wine, and intending to bring back tin.
The merchants had told him of one Alef, a valiant _regulus_ or kinglet
of those parts, who was indeed a distant connection of Hereward himself,
having married, as did so many of the Celtic princes, the daughter of a
Danish sea-rover, of Siward's blood. They told him also that the kinglet
increased his wealth, not only by the sale of tin and of red cattle,
but by a certain amount of autumnal piracy in company with his Danish
brothers-in-law from Dublin and Waterford; and Hereward, who believed,
with most Englishmen of the East Country, that Cornwall still produced
a fair crop of giants, some of them with two and even three heads, had
hopes that Alef might show him some adventure worthy of his sword. He
sailed in, therefore, over a rolling bar, between jagged points of black
rock, and up a tide river which wandered away inland, like a land-locked
lake, between high green walls of oak and ash, till they saw at the head
of the tide Alef's town, nestling in a glen which sloped towards the
southern sun. They discovered, besides, two ships drawn up upon the
beach, whose long lines and snake-heads, beside the stoat carved on the
beak-head of one and the adder on that of the other, bore witness to
the piratical habits of their owner. The merchants, it seemed, were
well known to the Cornishmen on shore, and Hereward went up with them
unopposed; past the ugly dikes and muddy leats, where Alef's slaves were
streaming the gravel for tin ore; through rich alluvial pastures
spotted with red cattle, and up to Alef's town. Earthworks and stockades
surrounded a little church of ancient stone, and a cluster of granite
cabins thatched with turf, in which the slaves abode, and in the centre
of all a vast stone barn, with low walls and high sloping roof, which
contained Alef's family, treasures, fighting tail, horses, cattle, and
pigs. They entered at one end between the pigsties, passed on through
the cow-stalls, then through the stables, and saw before them, dim
through the reek of thick peat-smoke, a long oaken table, at which sat
huge dark-haired Cornishmen, with here and there among them the yellow
head of a Norseman, who were Alef's following or fighting men. Boiled
meat was there in plenty, barley cakes, and ale. At the head of the
table, on a high-backed settle, was Alef himself, a jolly giant, who
was just setting to work to drink himself stupid with mead made from
narcotic heather honey. By his side sat a lovely dark-haired girl, with
great gold torcs upon her throat and wrists, and a great gold brooch
fastening a shawl which had plainly come from the looms of Spain or of
the East, and next to her again, feeding her with titbits cut off with
his own dagger, and laid on barley cake instead of a plate, sat a more
gigantic personage even than Alef, the biggest man that Hereward had
ever seen, with high cheek bones, and small ferret eyes, looking out
from a greasy mass of bright red hair and beard.

No questions were asked of the new-comers. They set themselves down
in silence in empty places, and, according to the laws of the good old
Cornish hospitality, were allowed to eat and drink their fill before
they spoke a word.

"Welcome here again, friend," said Alef at last, in good enough Danish,
calling the eldest merchant by name. "Do you bring wine?"

The merchant nodded.

"And you want tin?"

The merchant nodded again, and lifting his cup drank Alef's health,
following it up by a coarse joke in Cornish, which raised a laugh all
round.

The Norse trader of those days, it must be remembered, was none of the
cringing and effeminate chapmen who figure in the stories of the Middle
Ages. A free Norse or Dane, himself often of noble blood, he fought as
willingly as he bought; and held his own as an equal, whether at the
court of a Cornish kinglet or at that of the Great Kaiser of the Greeks.

"And you, fair sir," said Alef, looking keenly at Hereward, "by what
name shall I call you, and what service can I do for you? You look more
like an earl's son than a merchant, and are come here surely for other
things besides tin."

"Health to King Alef," said Hereward, raising the cup. "Who I am I will
tell to none but Alef's self; but an earl's son I am, though an outlaw
and a rover. My lands are the breadth of my boot-sole. My plough is my
sword. My treasure is my good right hand. Nothing I have, and nothing I
need, save to serve noble kings and earls, and win me a champion's fame.
If you have battles to fight, tell me, that I may fight them for you. If
you have none, thank God for his peace; and let me eat and drink, and go
in peace."

"King Alef needs neither man nor boy to fight his battle as long as
Ironhook sits in his hall."

It was the red-bearded giant who spoke in a broken tongue, part Scotch,
part Cornish, part Danish, which Hereward could hardly understand; but
that the ogre intended to insult him he understood well enough.

Hereward had hoped to find giants in Cornwall: and behold he had found
one at once; though rather, to judge from his looks, a Pictish than a
Cornish giant; and, true to his reckless determination to defy and fight
every man and beast who was willing to defy and fight him, he turned on
his elbow and stared at Ironhook in scorn, meditating some speech which
might provoke the hoped-for quarrel.

As he did so his eye happily caught that of the fair Princess. She was
watching him with a strange look, admiring, warning, imploring; and when
she saw that he noticed her, she laid her finger on her lip in token of
silence, crossed herself devoutly, and then laid her finger on her lips
again, as if beseeching him to be patient and silent in the name of Him
who answered not again.

Hereward, as is well seen, wanted not for quick wit, or for chivalrous
feeling. He had observed the rough devotion of the giant to the Lady.
He had observed, too, that she shrank from it; that she turned away with
loathing when he offered her his own cup, while he answered by a dark
and deadly scowl.

Was there an adventure here? Was she in duress either from this Ironhook
or from her father, or from both? Did she need Hereward's help? If so,
she was so lovely that he could not refuse it. And on the chance, he
swallowed down his high stomach, and answered blandly enough,--

"One could see without eyes, noble sir, that you were worth any ten
common men; but as every one has not like you the luck of so lovely a
lady by your side, I thought that perchance you might hand over some of
your lesser quarrels to one like me, who has not yet seen so much good
fighting as yourself, and enjoy yourself in pleasant company at home, as
I should surely do in your place."

The Princess shuddered and turned pale; then looked at Hereward and
smiled her thanks. Ironhook laughed a savage laugh.

Hereward's jest being translated into Cornish for the benefit of the
company, was highly approved by all; and good humor being restored,
every man got drunk save Hereward, who found the mead too sweet and
sickening.

After which those who could go to bed went to bed, not as in England,
[Footnote: Cornwall was not then considered part of England.] among the
rushes on the floor, but in the bunks or berths of wattle which stood
two or three tiers high along the wall.

The next morning as Hereward went out to wash his face and hands in
the brook below (he being the only man in the house who did so), Martin
Lightfoot followed him.

"What is it, Martin? Hast thou had too much of that sweet mead last
night that thou must come out to cool thy head too?"

"I came out for two reasons,--first, to see fair play, in case that
Ironhook should come to wash his ugly visage, and find you on all fours
over the brook--you understand? And next, to tell you what I heard last
night among the maids."

"And what did you hear?"

"Fine adventures, if we can but compass them. You saw that lady with the
carrot-headed fellow?--I saw that you saw. Well, if you will believe me,
that man has no more gentle blood than I have,--has no more right to sit
on the settle than I. He is a No-man's son, a Pict from Galloway, who
came down with a pirate crew and has made himself the master of this
drunken old Prince, and the darling of all his housecarles, and now will
needs be his son-in-law whether he will or not."

"I thought as much," said Hereward; "but how didst thou find out this?"

"I went out and sat with the knaves and the maids, and listened to their
harp-playing, and harp they can, these Cornish, like very elves; and
then I, too, sang songs and told them stories, for I can talk their
tongue somewhat, till they all blest me for a right good fellow. And
then I fell to praising up old Ironhook to the women."

"Praising him up, man?"

"Ay, just because I suspected him; for the women are so contrary, that
if you speak evil of a man they will surely speak good of him; but if
you will only speak good of him, then you will hear all the evil of him
he ever has done, and more beside. And this I heard; that the King's
daughter cannot abide him, and would as lief marry a seal."

"One did not need to be told that," said Hereward, "as long as one
has eyes in one's head. I will kill the fellow, and carry her off, ere
four-and-twenty hours be past."

"Softly, softly, my young master. You need to be told something that
your eyes would not tell you, and that is, that the poor lass is
betrothed already to a son of old King Ranald the Ostman, of Waterford,
son of old King Sigtryg, who ruled there when I was a boy."

"He is a kinsman of mine, then," said Hereward. "All the more reason
that I should kill this ruffian."

"If you can," said Martin Lightfoot.

"If I can?" retorted Hereward, fiercely.

"Well, well, wilful heart must have its way; only take my counsel: speak
to the poor young lady first, and see what she will tell you, lest you
only make bad worse, and bring down her father and his men on her as
well as you."

Hereward agreed, and resolved to watch his opportunity of speaking to
the princess.

As they went in to the morning meal they met Alef. He was in high good
humor with Hereward; and all the more so when Hereward told him his
name, and how he was the son of Leofric.

"I will warrant you are," he said, "by the gray head you carry on green
shoulders. No discreeter man, they say, in these isles than the old
earl."

"You speak truth, sir," said Hereward, "though he be no father of mine
now; for of Leofric it is said in King Edward's court, that if a man ask
counsel of him, it is as though he had asked it of the oracles of God."

"Then you are his true son, young man. I saw how you kept the peace with
Ironhook, and I owe you thanks for it; for though he is my good friend,
and will be my son-in-law erelong, yet a quarrel with him is more than
I can abide just now, and I should not like to have seen my guest and my
kinsman slain in my house."

Hereward would have said that he thought there was no fear of that;
but he prudently held his tongue, and having an end to gain, listened
instead of talking.

"Twenty years ago, of course, I could have thrashed him as easily as--;
but now I am getting old and shaky, and the man has been a great help
in need. Six kings of these parts has he killed for me, who drove off
my cattle, and stopped my tin works, and plundered my monks' cells too,
which is worse, while I was away sailing the seas; and he is a right
good fellow at heart, though he be a little rough. So be friends with
him as long as you stay here, and if I can do you a service I will."

They went in to their morning meal, at which Hereward resolved to
keep the peace which he longed to break, and therefore, as was to be
expected, broke.

For during the meal the fair lady, with no worse intention, perhaps,
than that of teasing her tyrant, fell to open praises of Hereward's
fair face and golden hair; and being insulted therefore by the Ironhook,
retaliated by observations about his personal appearance, which were
more common in the eleventh century than they happily are now. He,
to comfort himself, drank deep of the French wine which had just been
brought and broached, and then went out into the court-yard, where,
in the midst of his admiring fellow-ruffians, he enacted a scene as
ludicrous as it was pitiable. All the childish vanity of the savage
boiled over. He strutted, he shouted, he tossed about his huge limbs,
he called for a harper, and challenged all around to dance, sing,
leap, fight, do anything against him: meeting with nothing but admiring
silence, he danced himself out of breath, and then began boasting
once more of his fights, his cruelties, his butcheries, his impossible
escapes and victories; till at last, as luck would have it, he espied
Hereward, and poured out a stream of abuse against Englishmen and
English courage.

"Englishmen," he said, "were naught. Had he not slain three of them
himself with one blow?"

"Of your mouth, I suppose," quoth Hereward, who saw that the quarrel
must come, and was glad to have it done and over.

"Of my mouth?" roared Ironhook; "of my sword, man!"

"Of your mouth," said Hereward. "Of your brain were they begotten, of
the breath of your mouth they were born, and by the breath of your mouth
you can slay them again as often as you choose."

The joke, as it has been handed down to us by the old chroniclers,
seems clumsy enough; but it sent the princess, say they, into shrieks of
laughter.

"Were it not that my Lord Alef was here," shouted Ironhook, "I would
kill you out of hand."

"Promise to fight fair, and do your worst. The more fairly you fight,
the more honor you will win," said Hereward.

Whereupon the two were parted for the while.

Two hours afterwards, Hereward, completely armed with helmet and mail
shirt, sword and javelin, hurried across the great court-yard, with
Martin Lightfoot at his heels, towards the little church upon the knoll
above. The two wild men entered into the cool darkness, and saw before
them, by the light of a tiny lamp, the crucifix over the altar, and
beneath it that which was then believed to be the body of Him who
made heaven and earth. They stopped, trembling, for a moment, bowed
themselves before that, to them, perpetual miracle, and then hurried on
to a low doorway to the right, inside which dwelt Alef's chaplain,
one of those good Celtic priests who were supposed to represent a
Christianity more ancient than, and all but independent of, the then
all-absorbing Church of Rome.

The cell was such a one as a convict would now disdain to inhabit. A low
lean-to roof; the slates and rafters unceiled; the stone walls and floor
unplastered; ill-lighted by a hand-broad window, unglazed, and closed
with a shutter at night. A truss of straw and a rug, the priest's
bed, lay in a corner. The only other furniture was a large oak chest,
containing the holy vessels and vestments and a few old books. It stood
directly under the window for the sake of light, for it served the good
priest for both table and chair; and on it he was sitting reading in his
book at that minute, the sunshine and the wind streaming in behind his
head, doing no good to his rheumatism of thirty years' standing.

"Is there a priest here?" asked Hereward, hurriedly.

The old man looked up, shook his head, and answered in Cornish.

"Speak to him in Latin, Martin! Maybe he will understand that."

Martin spoke. "My lord, here, wants a priest to shrive him, and that
quickly. He is going to fight the great tyrant Ironhook, as you call
him."

"Ironhook?" answered the priest in good Latin enough. "And he so young!
God help him, he is a dead man! What is this,--a fresh soul sent to its
account by the hands of that man of Belial? Cannot he entreat him,--can
he not make peace, and save his young life? He is but a stripling, and
that man, like Goliath of old, a man of war from his youth up."

"And my master," said Martin Lightfoot, proudly, "is like young
David,--one that can face a giant and kill him; for he has slain, like
David, his lion and his bear ere now. At least, he is one that will
neither make peace, nor entreat the face of living man. So shrive him
quickly, Master Priest, and let him be gone to his work."

Poor Martin Lightfoot spoke thus bravely only to keep up his spirits and
his young lord's; for, in spite of his confidence in Hereward's prowess,
he had given him up for a lost man: and the tears ran down his rugged
cheeks, as the old priest, rising up and seizing Hereward's two hands
in his, besought him, with the passionate and graceful eloquence of his
race, to have mercy upon his own youth.

Hereward understood his meaning, though not his words.

"Tell him," he said to Martin, "that fight I must, and tell him that
shrive me he must, and that quickly. Tell him how the fellow met me in
the wood below just now, and would have slain me there, unarmed as I
was; and how, when I told him it was a shame to strike a naked man, he
told me he would give me but one hour's grace to go back, on the faith
of a gentleman, for my armor and weapons, and meet him there again, to
die by his hand. So shrive me quick, Sir Priest."

Hereward knelt down. Martin Lightfoot knelt down by him, and with a
trembling voice began to interpret for him.

"What does he say?" asked Hereward, as the priest murmured something to
himself.

"He said," quoth Martin, now fairly blubbering, "that, fair and young as
you are, your shrift should be as short and as clean as David's."

Hereward was touched. "Anything but that," said he, smiting on his
breast, "Mea culpa,--mea culpa,--mea maxima culpa."

"Tell him how I robbed my father."

The priest groaned as Martin did so.

"And how I mocked at my mother, and left her in a rage, without ever a
kind word between us. And how I have slain I know not how many men in
battle, though that, I trust, need not lay heavily on my soul, seeing
that I killed them all in fair fight."

Again the priest groaned.

"And how I robbed a certain priest of his money and gave it away to my
housecarles."

Here the priest groaned more bitterly still.

"O my son! my son! where hast thou found time to lay all these burdens
on thy young soul?"

"It will take less time," said Martin, bluntly, "for you to take the
burdens off again."

"But I dare not absolve him for robbing a priest. Heaven Help him! He
must go to the bishop for that. He is more fit to go on pilgrimage to
Jerusalem than to battle."

"He has no time," quoth Martin, "for bishops or Jerusalem."

"Tell him," says Hereward, "that in this purse is all I have, that in it
he will find sixty silver pennies, beside two strange coins of gold."

"Sir Priest," said Martin Lightfoot, taking the purse from Hereward, and
keeping it in his own hand, "there are in this bag moneys."
