"Ah, George," interposed the more pacable younger brother, "you ought to
forget and forgive."

"Forgive? Never, sir, as long as I remember. You can't order remembrance
out of a man's mind; and a wrong that was a wrong yesterday must be a
wrong to-morrow. I never, of my knowledge, did one to any man, and I
never will suffer one, if I can help it. I think very ill of Mr. Ward,
but I don't think so badly of him as to suppose he will ever forgive
thee that blow with the ruler. Colonel Washington is our enemy, mine
especially. He has advised one wrong against me, and he meditates a
greater. I tell you, brother, we must punish him."

The grandsire's old Bordeaux had set George's ordinarily pale
countenance into a flame. Harry, his brother's fondest worshipper,
could not but admire George's haughty bearing and rapid declamation, and
prepared himself, with his usual docility, to follow his chief. So the
boys went to their beds, the elder conveying special injunctions to his
junior to be civil to all the guests so long as they remained under the
maternal roof on the morrow.

Good manners and a repugnance to telling tales out of school, forbid us
from saying which of Madam Esmond's guests was the first to fall under
the weight of her hospitality. The respectable descendants of Messrs.
Talmadge and Danvers, aides-de-camp to his Excellency, might not care to
hear how their ancestors were intoxicated a hundred years ago; and yet
the gentlemen themselves took no shame in the fact, and there is little
doubt they or their comrades were tipsy twice or thrice in the week.
Let us fancy them reeling to bed, supported by sympathising negroes; and
their vinous General, too stout a toper to have surrendered himself to
a half-dozen bottles of Bordeaux, conducted to his chamber by the young
gentlemen of the house, and speedily sleeping the sleep which friendly
Bacchus gives. The good lady of Castlewood saw the condition of her
guests without the least surprise or horror; and was up early in the
morning, providing cooling drinks for their hot palates, which the
servants carried to their respective chambers. At breakfast, one of
the English officers rallied Mr. Franklin, who took no wine at all, and
therefore refused the morning cool draught of toddy, by showing how the
Philadelphia gentleman lost two pleasures, the drink and the toddy. The
young fellow said the disease was pleasant and the remedy delicious, and
laughingly proposed to continue repeating them both. The General's new
American aide-de-camp, Colonel Washington, was quite sober and serene.
The British officers vowed they must take him in hand, and teach him
what the ways of the English army were; but the Virginian gentleman
gravely said he did not care to learn that part of the English military
education.

The widow, occupied as she had been with the cares of a great dinner,
followed by a great breakfast on the morning ensuing, had scarce leisure
to remark the behaviour of her sons very closely, but at least saw that
George was scrupulously polite to her favourite, Colonel Washington, as
to all the other guests of the house.

Before Mr. Braddock took his leave, he had a private audience of Madam
Esmond, in which his Excellency formally offered to take her son into
his family; and when the arrangements for George's departure were
settled between his mother and future chief, Madam Esmond, though she
might feel them, did not show any squeamish terrors about the dangers
of the bottle, which she saw were amongst the severest and most certain
which her son would have to face. She knew her boy must take his part in
the world, and encounter his portion of evil and good. "Mr. Braddock
is a perfect fine gentleman in the morning," she said stoutly to her
aide-de-camp, Mrs. Mountain; "and though my papa did not drink, 'tis
certain that many of the best company in England do." The jolly General
good-naturedly shook hands with George, who presented himself to his
Excellency after the maternal interview was over, and bade George
welcome, and to be in attendance at Frederick three days hence; shortly
after which time the expedition would set forth.

And now the great coach was again called into requisition, the General's
escort pranced round it, the other guests and their servants went to
horse. The lady of Castlewood attended his Excellency to the steps of
the verandah in front of her house, the young gentlemen followed, and
stood on each side of his coach-door. The guard trumpeter blew a shrill
blast, the negroes shouted "Huzzay, and God sabe de King," as Mr.
Braddock most graciously took leave of his hospitable entertainers, and
rolled away on his road to headquarters.

As the boys went up the steps, there was the Colonel once more taking
leave of their mother. No doubt she had been once more recommending
George to his namesake's care; for Colonel Washington said: "With my
life. You may depend on me," as the lads returned to their mother and
the few guests still remaining in the porch. The Colonel was booted and
ready to depart. "Farewell, my dear Harry," he said. "With you, George,
'tis no adieu. We shall meet in three days at the camp."

Both the young men were going to danger, perhaps to death. Colonel
Washington was taking leave of her, and she was to see him no more
before the campaign. No wonder the widow was very much moved.

George Warrington watched his mother's emotion, and interpreted it with
a pang of malignant scorn. "Stay yet a moment, and console our mamma,"
he said with a steady countenance, "only the time to get ourselves
booted, and my brother and I will ride with you a little way, George."
George Warrington had already ordered his horses. The three young
men were speedily under way, their negro grooms behind them, and Mrs.
Mountain, who knew she had made mischief between them and trembled for
the result, felt a vast relief that Mr. Washington was gone without a
quarrel with the brothers, without, at any rate, an open declaration of
love to their mother.

No man could be more courteous in demeanour than George Warrington to
his neighbour and namesake, the Colonel. The latter was pleased and
surprised at his young friend's altered behaviour. The community of
danger, the necessity of future fellowship, the softening influence of
the long friendship which bound him to the Esmond family, the tender
adieux which had just passed between him and the mistress of Castlewood,
inclined the Colonel to forget the unpleasantness of the past days, and
made him more than usually friendly with his young companion. George
was quite gay and easy: it was Harry who was melancholy now: he rode
silently and wistfully by his brother, keeping away from Colonel
Washington, to whose side he used always to press eagerly before. If
the honest Colonel remarked his young friend's conduct, no doubt he
attributed it to Harry's known affection for his brother, and his
natural anxiety to be with George now the day of their parting was so
near.

They talked further about the war, and the probable end of the campaign:
none of the three doubted its successful termination. Two thousand
veteran British troops with their commander must get the better of any
force the French could bring against them, if only they moved in decent
time. The ardent young Virginian soldier had an immense respect for the
experienced valour and tactics of the regular troops. King George II.
had no more loyal subject than Mr. Braddock's new aide-de-camp.

So the party rode amicably together, until they reached a certain rude
log-house, called Benson's, of which the proprietor, according to the
custom of the day and country, did not disdain to accept money from
his guests in return for hospitalities provided. There was a recruiting
station here, and some officers and men of Halkett's regiment assembled,
and here Colonel Washington supposed that his young friends would take
leave of him.

Whilst their horses were baited, they entered the public room, and
found a rough meal prepared for such as were disposed to partake. George
Warrington entered the place with a particularly gay and lively air,
whereas poor Harry's face was quite white and woebegone.

"One would think, Squire Harry, 'twas you who was going to leave home
and fight the French and Indians, and not Mr. George," says Benson.

"I may be alarmed about danger to my brother," said Harry, "though I
might bear my own share pretty well. 'Tis not my fault that I stay at
home."

"No, indeed, brother," cries George.

"Harry Warrington's courage does not need any proof!" cries Mr.
Washington.

"You do the family honour by speaking so well of us, Colonel," says Mr.
George, with a low bow. "I dare say we can hold our own, if need be."

Whilst his friend was vaunting his courage, Harry looked, to say the
truth, by no means courageous. As his eyes met his brother's, he read in
George's look an announcement which alarmed the fond faithful lad. "You
are not going to do it now?" he whispered his brother.

"Yes, now," says Mr. George, very steadily.

"For God's sake, let me have the turn. You are going on the campaign,
you ought not to have everything--and there may be an explanation,
George. We may be all wrong."

"Psha, how can we? It must be done now--don't be alarmed. No names shall
be mentioned--I shall easily find a subject."

A couple of Halkett's officers, whom our young gentlemen knew, were
sitting under the porch, with the Virginian toddy-bowl before them.

"What are you conspiring, gentlemen?" cried one of them. "Is it a
drink?"

By the tone of their voices and their flushed cheeks, it was clear the
gentlemen had already been engaged in drinking that morning.

"The very thing, sir," George said gaily. "Fresh glasses, Mr. Benson!
What, no glasses? Then we must have at the bowl."

"Many a good man has drunk from it," says Mr. Benson; and the lads one
after another, and bowing first to their military acquaintance, touched
the bowl with their lips. The liquor did not seem to be much diminished
for the boys' drinking, though George especially gave himself a toper's
airs, and protested it was delicious after their ride. He called out
to Colonel Washington, who was at the porch, to join his friends, and
drink.

The lad's tone was offensive, and resembled the manner lately adopted by
him, and which had so much chafed Mr. Washington. He bowed, and said he
was not thirsty.

"Nay, the liquor is paid for," says George; "never fear, Colonel."

"I said I was not thirsty. I did not say the liquor was not paid for,"
said the young Colonel, drumming with his foot.

"When the King's health is proposed, an officer can hardly say no. I
drink the health of his Majesty, gentlemen," cried George. "Colonel
Washington can drink it or leave it. The King!"

This was a point of military honour. The two British officers of
Halkett's, Captain Grace and Mr. Waring, both drank "The King." Harry
Warrington drank "The King." Colonel Washington, with glaring eyes,
gulped, too, a slight draught from the bowl.

Then Captain Grace proposed "The Duke and the Army," which toast there
was likewise no gainsaying. Colonel Washington had to swallow "The Duke
and the Army."

"You don't seem to stomach the toast, Colonel," said George.

"I tell you again, I don't want to drink," replied the Colonel. "It
seems to me the Duke and the Army would be served all the better if
their healths were not drunk so often."

"You are not up to the ways of regular troops as yet," said Captain
Grace, with rather a thick voice.

"May be not, sir."

"A British officer," continues Captain Grace, with great energy but
doubtful articulation, "never neglects a toast of that sort, nor any
other duty. A man who refuses to drink the health of the Duke--hang me,
such a man should be tried by a court-martial!"

"What means this language to me? You are drunk, sir!" roared Colonel
Washington, jumping up, and striking the table with his fist.

"A cursed provincial officer say I'm drunk!" shrieks out Captain Grace.
"Waring, do you hear that?"

"I heard it, sir!" cried George Warrington. "We all heard it. He
entered at my invitation--the liquor called for was mine: the table was
mine--and I am shocked to hear such monstrous language used at it as
Colonel Washington has just employed towards my esteemed guest, Captain
Waring."

"Confound your impudence, you infernal young jackanapes!" bellowed out
Colonel Washington. "You dare to insult me before British officers, and
find fault with my language? For months past, I have borne with such
impudence from you, that if I had not loved your mother--yes, sir, and
your good grandfather and your brother--I would--I would--" Here his
words failed him, and the irate Colonel, with glaring eyes and purple
face, and every limb quivering with wrath, stood for a moment speechless
before his young enemy.

"You would what, sir?" says George, very quietly, "if you did not
love my grandfather, and my brother, and my mother. You are making her
petticoat a plea for some conduct of yours--you would do what, sir, may
I ask again?"

"I would put you across my knee and whip you, you snarling little puppy,
that's what I would do!" cried the Colonel, who had found breath by this
time, and vented another explosion of fury.

"Because you have known us all our lives, and made our house your own,
that is no reason you should insult either of us!" here cried Harry,
starting up. "What you have said, George Washington, is an insult to me
and my brother alike. You will ask pardon, sir!"

"Pardon?"

"Or give us the reparation that is due to gentlemen," continues Harry.

The stout Colonel's heart smote him to think that he should be at mortal
quarrel or called upon to shed the blood of one of the lads he loved.
As Harry stood facing him, with his fair hair, flushing cheeks, and
quivering voice, an immense tenderness and kindness filled the bosom of
the elder man. "I--I am bewildered," he said. "My words, perhaps, were
very hasty. What has been the meaning of George's behaviour to me for
months back? Only tell me, and, perhaps----"

The evil spirit was awake and victorious in young George Warrington:
his black eyes shot out scorn and hatred at the simple and guileless
gentleman before him. "You are shirking from the question, sir, as you
did from the toast just now," he said. "I am not a boy to suffer under
your arrogance. You have publicly insulted me in a public place, and I
demand a reparation."

"In Heaven's name, be it!" says Mr. Washington, with the deepest grief
in his face.

"And you have insulted me," continues Captain Grace, reeling towards
him. "What was it he said? Confound the militia captain--colonel, what
is he? You've insulted me! Oh, Waring! to think I should be insulted by
a captain of militia!" And tears bedewed the noble Captain's cheek as
this harrowing thought crossed his mind.

"I insult you, you hog!" the Colonel again yelled out, for he was little
affected by humour, and had no disposition to laugh as the others had at
the scene. And, behold, at this minute a fourth adversary was upon him.

"Great Powers, sir!" said Captain Waring, "are three affairs not enough
for you, and must I come into the quarrel, too? You have a quarrel with
these two young gentlemen."

"Hasty words, sir!" cries poor Harry once more.

"Hasty words, sir!" cries Captain Waring. "A gentleman tells another
gentleman that he will put him across his knees and whip him, and you
call those hasty words? Let me tell you if any man were to say to me,
'Charles Waring,' or 'Captain Waring, I'll put you across my knees and
whip you,' I'd say, 'I'll drive my cheese-toaster through his body,'
if he were as big as Goliath, I would. That's one affair with young Mr.
George Warrington. Mr. Harry, of course, as a young man of spirit, will
stand by his brother. That's two. Between Grace and the Colonel apology
is impossible. And, now--run me through the body!--you call an officer
of my regiment--of Halkett's, sir!--a hog before my face! Great heavens,
sir! Mr. Washington, are you all like this in Virginia? Excuse me, I
would use no offensive personality, as, by George! I will suffer none
from any man! but, by Gad, Colonel! give me leave to tell you that you
are the most quarrelsome man I ever saw in my life. Call a disabled
officer of my regiment--for he is disabled, ain't you, Grace?--call him
a hog before me! You withdraw it, sir--you withdraw it?"

"Is this some infernal conspiracy in which you are all leagued against
me?" shouted the Colonel. "It would seem as if I was drunk, and not you,
as you all are. I withdraw nothing. I apologise for nothing. By heavens!
I will meet one or half a dozen of you in your turn, young or old, drunk
or sober."

"I do not wish to hear myself called more names," cried Mr. George
Warrington. "This affair can proceed, sir, without any further insult on
your part. When will it please you to give me the meeting?"

"The sooner the better, sir!" said the Colonel, fuming with rage.

"The sooner the better," hiccupped Captain Grace, with many oaths
needless to print--(in those days, oaths were the customary garnish of
all gentlemen's conversation)--and he rose staggering from his seat, and
reeled towards his sword, which he had laid by the door, and fell as he
reached the weapon. "The sooner the better!" the poor tipsy wretch again
cried out from the ground, waving his weapon and knocking his own hat
over his eyes.

"At any rate, this gentleman's business will keep cool till to-morrow,"
the militia Colonel said, turning to the other king's officer. "You will
hardly bring your man out to-day, Captain Waring?"

"I confess that neither his hand nor mine are particularly steady," said
Waring.

"Mine is!" cried Mr. Warrington, glaring at his enemy.

His comrade of former days was as hot and as savage. "Be it so--with
what weapon, sir?" Washington said sternly.

"Not with small-swords, Colonel. We can beat you with them. You know
that from our old bouts. Pistols had better be the word."

"As you please, George Warrington--and God forgive you, George! God
pardon you, Harry! for bringing me into this quarrel," said the Colonel,
with a face full of sadness and gloom.

Harry hung his head, but George continued with perfect calmness: "I,
sir? It was not I who called names, who talked of a cane, who insulted a
gentleman in a public place before gentlemen of the army. It is not the
first time you have chosen to take me for a negro, and talked of the
whip for me."

The Colonel started back, turning very red, and as if struck by a sudden
remembrance.

"Great heavens, George! is it that boyish quarrel you are still
recalling?"

"Who made you the overseer of Castlewood?" said the boy, grinding his
teeth. "I am not your slave, George Washington, and I never will be. I
hated you then, and I hate you now. And you have insulted me, and I am a
gentleman, and so are you. Is that not enough?"

"Too much, only too much," said the Colonel, with a genuine grief on
his face, and at his heart. "Do you bear malice too, Harry? I had not
thought this of thee!"

"I stand by my brother," said Harry, turning away from the Colonel's
look, and grasping George's hand. The sadness on their adversary's face
did not depart. "Heaven be good to us! 'Tis all clear now," he muttered
to himself. "The time to write a few letters, and I am at your service,
Mr. Warrington," he said.

"You have your own pistols at your saddle. I did not ride out with
any; but will send Sady back for mine. That will give you time enough,
Colonel Washington?"

"Plenty of time, sir." And each gentleman made the other a low bow,
and, putting his arm in his brother's, George walked away. The Virginian
officer looked towards the two unlucky captains, who were by this time
helpless with liquor. Captain Benson, the master of the tavern, was
propping the hat of one of them over his head.

"It is not altogether their fault, Colonel," said my landlord, with a
grim look of humour. "Jack Firebrace and Tom Humbold of Spotsylvania was
here this morning, chanting horses with 'em. And Jack and Tom got 'em to
play cards; and they didn't win--the British Captains didn't. And Jack
and Tom challenged them to drink for the honour of Old England, and
they didn't win at that game, neither, much. They are kind, free-handed
fellows when they are sober, but they are a pretty pair of fools--they
are."

"Captain Benson, you are an old frontier man, and an officer of ours,
before you turned farmer and taverner. You will help me in this matter
with yonder young gentlemen?" said the Colonel.

"I'll stand by and see fair play, Colonel. I won't have no hand in it,
beyond seeing fair play. Madam Esmond has helped me many a time, tended
my poor wife in her lying-in, and doctored our Betty in the fever. You
ain't a-going to be very hard with them poor boys? Though I seen 'em
both shoot: the fair one hunts well, as you know, but the old one's a
wonder at an ace of spades."

"Will you be pleased to send my man with my valise, Captain, into any
private room which you can spare me? I must write a few letters before
this business comes on. God grant it were well over!" And the Captain
led the Colonel into almost the only other room of his house, calling,
with many oaths, to a pack of negro servants, to disperse thence, who
were chattering loudly among one another, and no doubt discussing the
quarrel which had just taken place. Edwin, the Colonel's man, returned
with his master's portmanteau, and as he looked from the window, he
saw Sady, George Warrington's negro, galloping away upon his errand,
doubtless, and in the direction of Castlewood. The Colonel, young and
naturally hot-headed, but the most courteous and scrupulous of men, and
ever keeping his strong passions under guard, could not but think with
amazement of the position in which he found, himself, and of the three,
perhaps four enemies, who appeared suddenly before him, menacing his
life. How had this strange series of quarrels been brought about? He
had ridden away a few hours since from Castlewood, with his young
companions, and, to all seeming, they were perfect friends. A shower of
rain sends them into a tavern, where there are a couple of recruiting
officers, and they are not seated for half an hour at a social table,
but he has quarrelled with the whole company, called this one names,
agreed to meet another in combat, and threatened chastisement to a
third, the son of his most intimate friend!




CHAPTER XI. Wherein the two Georges prepare for Blood


The Virginian Colonel remained in one chamber of the tavern, occupied
with gloomy preparations for the ensuing meeting; his adversary in the
other room thought fit to make his testamentary dispositions, too, and
dictated, by his obedient brother and secretary, a grandiloquent letter
to his mother, of whom, and by that writing, he took a solemn farewell.
She would hardly, he supposed, pursue the scheme which she had in view
(a peculiar satirical emphasis was laid upon the scheme which she had
in view), after the event of that morning, should he fall, as, probably,
would be the case.

"My dear, dear George, don't say that!" cried the affrighted secretary.

"'As probably will be the case,'" George persisted with great majesty.
"You know what a good shot Colonel George is, Harry. I, myself, am
pretty fair at a mark, and 'tis probable that one or both of us will
drop.--'I scarcely suppose you will carry out the intentions you have
at present in view.'" This was uttered in a tone of still greater
bitterness than George had used even in the previous phrase. Harry wept
as he took it down.

"You see I say nothing; Madame Esmond's name does not even appear in the
quarrel. Do you not remember in our grandfather's life of himself, how
he says that Lord Castlewood fought Lord Mohun on a pretext of a quarrel
at cards? and never so much as hinted at the lady's name, who was the
real cause of the duel? I took my hint, I confess, from that, Harry.
Our mother is not compromised in the--Why, child, what have you been
writing, and who taught thee to spell?" Harry had written the last
words "in view," in vew, and a great blot of salt water from his honest,
boyish eyes may have obliterated some other bad spelling.

"I can't think about the spelling now, Georgy," whimpered George's
clerk. "I'm too miserable for that. I begin to think, perhaps it's all
nonsense, perhaps Colonel George never----"

"Never meant to take possession of Castlewood; never gave himself airs,
and patronised us there; never advised my mother to have me flogged,
never intended to marry her; never insulted me, and was insulted before
the king's officers; never wrote to his brother to say we should be the
better for his parental authority? The paper is there," cried the young
man, slapping his breast-pocket, "and if anything happens to me, Harry
Warrington, you will find it on my corse!"

"Write yourself, Georgy, I can't write," says Harry, digging his fists
into his eyes, and smearing over the whole composition, bad spelling and
all, with his elbows.

On this, George, taking another sheet of paper, sate down at his
brother's place, and produced a composition in which he introduced the
longest words, the grandest Latin quotations, and the most profound
satire of which the youthful scribe was master. He desired that his
negro boy, Sady, should be set free; that his Horace, a choice of his
books, and, if possible, a suitable provision should be made for his
affectionate tutor, Mr. Dempster; that his silver fruit-knife, his
music-books, and harpsichord, should be given to little Fanny Mountain;
and that his brother should take a lock of his hair, and wear it in
memory of his ever fond and faithfully attached George. And he sealed
the document with the seal of arms that his grandfather had worn.

"The watch, of course, will be yours," said George, taking out his
grandfather's gold watch, and looking at it. "Why, two hours and a-half
are gone! 'Tis time that Sady should be back with the pistols. Take the
watch, Harry dear."

"It's no good!" cried out Harry, flinging his arms round his brother.
"If he fights you, I'll fight him, too. If he kills my Georgy, ---- him,
he shall have a shot at me!" and the poor lad uttered more than one of
those expressions, which are said peculiarly to affect recording angels,
who have to take them down at celestial chanceries.

Meanwhile, General Braddock's new aide-de-camp had written five letters
in his large resolute hand, and sealed them with his seal. One was to
his mother, at Mount Vernon; one to his brother; one was addressed M. C.
only; and one to his Excellency, Major-General Braddock. "And one, young
gentleman, is for your mother, Madam Esmond," said the boys' informant.

Again the recording angel had to fly off with a violent expression,
which parted from the lips of George Warrington. The chancery previously
mentioned was crowded with such cases, and the messengers must have been
for ever on the wing. But I fear for young George and his oath there was
no excuse; for it was an execration uttered from a heart full of hatred,
and rage, and jealousy.

It was the landlord of the tavern who communicated these facts to the
young men. The Captain had put on his old militia uniform to do honour
to the occasion, and informed the boys that the Colonel was walking up
and down the garden a-waiting for 'em, and that the Reg'lars was a'most
sober, too, by this time.

A plot of ground near the Captain's log-house had been enclosed with
shingles, and cleared for a kitchen-garden; there indeed paced Colonel
Washington, his hands behind his back, his head bowed down, a grave
sorrow on his handsome face. The negro servants were crowded at the
palings, and looking over. The officers under the porch had wakened
up also, as their host remarked. Captain Waring was walking, almost
steadily, under the balcony formed by the sloping porch and roof of the
wooden house; and Captain Grace was lolling over the railing, with eyes
which stared very much, though perhaps they did not see very clearly.
Benson's was a famous rendezvous for cock-fights, horse-matches, boxing,
and wrestling-matches, such as brought the Virginian country-folks
together. There had been many brawls at Benson's, and men who came
thither sound and sober, had gone thence with ribs broken and eyes
gouged out. And squires, and farmers, and negroes, all participated in
the sport.

There, then, stalked the tall young Colonel, plunged in dismal
meditation. There was no way out of his scrape, but the usual cruel one,
which the laws of honour and the practice of the country ordered. Goaded
into fury by the impertinence of a boy, he had used insulting words. The
young man had asked for reparation. He was shocked to think that George
Warrington's jealousy and revenge should have rankled in the young
fellow so long but the wrong had been the Colonel's, and he was bound to
pay the forfeit.

A great hallooing and shouting, such as negroes use, who love noise at
all times, and especially delight to yell and scream when galloping on
horseback, was now heard at a distance, and all the heads, woolly and
powdered, were turned in the direction of this outcry. It came from the
road over which our travellers had themselves passed three hours before,
and presently the clattering of a horse's hoofs was heard, and now Mr.
Sady made his appearance on his foaming horse, and actually fired a
pistol off in the midst of a prodigious uproar from his woolly brethren.
Then he fired another pistol off, to which noises Sady's horse, which
had carried Harry Warrington on many a hunt, was perfectly accustomed;
and now he was in the courtyard, surrounded by a score of his bawling
comrades, and was descending amidst fluttering fowls and turkeys,
kicking horses and shrieking frantic pigs; and brother-negroes crowded
round him, to whom he instantly began to talk and chatter.

"Sady, sir, come here!" roars out Master Harry.

"Sady, come here! Confound you!" shouts Master George. (Again the
recording angel is in requisition, and has to be off on one of his
endless errands to the register office.) "Come directly, mas'r," says
Sady, and resumes his conversation with his woolly brethren. He grins.
He takes the pistols out of the holster. He snaps the locks. He points
them at a grunter, which plunges through the farmyard. He points down
the road, over which he has just galloped, and towards which the woolly
heads again turn. He says again, "Comin', mas'r. Everybody a-comin'."
And now, the gallop of other horses is heard. And who is yonder? Little
Mr. Dempster, spurring and digging into his pony; and that lady in a
riding-habit on Madam Esmond's little horse, can it be Madam Esmond? No.
It is too stout. As I live it is Mrs. Mountain on Madam's grey!

"O Lor! O Golly! Hoop! Here dey come! Hurray!" A chorus of negroes rises
up. "Here dey are!" Dr. Dempster and Mrs. Mountain have clattered
into the yard, have jumped from their horses, have elbowed through the
negroes, have rushed into the house, have run through it and across the
porch, where the British officers are sitting in muzzy astonishment;
have run down the stairs to the garden where George and Harry are
walking, their tall enemy stalking opposite to them; and almost ere
George Warrington has had time sternly to say, "What do you do here,
madam?" Mrs. Mountain has flung her arms round his neck and cries:
"Oh, George, my darling! It's a mistake! It's a mistake, and is all my
fault!"

"What's a mistake?" asks George, majestically separating himself from
the embrace.

"What is it, Mounty?" cries Harry, all of a tremble.

"That paper I took out of his portfolio, that paper I picked up,
children; where the Colonel says he is going to marry a widow with two
children. Who should it be but you, children, and who should it be but
your mother?"

"Well?"

"Well, it's--it's not your mother. It's that little widow Custis whom
the Colonel is going to marry. He'd always take a rich one; I knew he
would. It's not Mrs. Rachel Warrington. He told Madam so to-day, just
before he was going away, and that the marriage was to come off after
the campaign. And--and your mother is furious, boys. And when Sady came
for the pistols, and told the whole house how you were going to fight,
I told him to fire the pistols off; and I galloped after him, and I've
nearly broken my poor old bones in coming to you."

"I have a mind to break Mr. Sady's," growled George. "I specially
enjoined the villain not to say a word."

"Thank God he did, brother!" said poor Harry. "Thank God he did!"

"What will Mr. Washington and those gentlemen think of my servant
telling my mother at home that I was going to fight a duel?" asks Mr.
George, still in wrath.

"You have shown your proofs before, George," says Harry, respectfully.
"And, thank Heaven, you are not going to fight our old friend,--our
grandfather's old friend. For it was a mistake and there is no quarrel
now, dear, is there? You were unkind to him under a wrong impression."

"I certainly acted under a wrong impression," owns George, "but----"

"George! George Washington!" Harry here cries out, springing over
the cabbage-garden towards the bowling-green, where the Colonel was
stalking, and though we cannot hear him, we see him, with both his hands
out, and with the eagerness of youth, and with a hundred blunders, and
with love and affection thrilling in his honest voice we imagine the lad
telling his tale to his friend.

There was a custom in those days which has disappeared from our manners
now, but which then lingered. When Harry had finished his artless story,
his friend the Colonel took him fairly to his arms, and held him to
his heart: and his voice faltered as he said, "Thank God, thank God for
this!"

"Oh, George," said Harry, who felt now how he loved his friend with all
his heart, "how I wish I was going with you on the campaign!" The other
pressed both the boy's hands, in a grasp of friendship, which each knew
never would slacken.

Then the Colonel advanced, gravely holding out his hand to Harry's elder
brother. Perhaps Harry wondered that the two did not embrace as he and
the Colonel had just done. But, though hands were joined, the salutation
was only formal and stern on both sides.

"I find I have done you a wrong, Colonel Washington," George said, "and
must apologise, not for the error, but for much of my late behaviour
which has resulted from it."

"The error was mine! It was I who found that paper in your room, and
showed it to George, and was jealous of you, Colonel. All women are
jealous," cried Mrs. Mountain.

"'Tis a pity you could not have kept your eyes off my paper, madam,"
said Mr. Washington. "You will permit me to say so. A great deal of
mischief has come because I chose to keep a secret which concerned only
myself and another person. For a long time George Warrington's heart has
been black with anger against me, and my feeling towards him has, I own,
scarce been more friendly. All this pain might have been spared to both
of us, had my private papers only been read by those for whom they were
written. I shall say no more now, lest my feelings again should betray
me into hasty words. Heaven bless thee, Harry! Farewell, George! And
take a true friend's advice, and try and be less ready to think evil of
your friends. We shall meet again at the camp, and will keep our weapons
for the enemy. Gentlemen! if you remember this scene to-morrow, you
will know where to find me." And with a very stately bow to the English
officers, the Colonel left the abashed company, and speedily rode away.




CHAPTER XII. News from the Camp


We must fancy that the parting between the brothers is over, that George
has taken his place in Mr. Braddock's family, and Harry has returned
home to Castlewood and his duty. His heart is with the army, and his
pursuits at home offer the boy no pleasure. He does not care to own how
deep his disappointment is, at being obliged to stay under the homely,
quiet roof, now more melancholy than ever since George is away. Harry
passes his brother's empty chamber with an averted face; takes George's
place at the head of the table, and sighs as he drinks from his silver
tankard. Madam Warrington calls the toast of "The King" stoutly every
day; and, on Sundays, when Harry reads the service, and prays for all
travellers by land and by water, she says, "We beseech Thee to hear
us," with a peculiar solemnity. She insists on talking about George
constantly, but quite cheerfully, and as if his return was certain. She
walks into his vacant room, with head upright, and no outward signs of
emotion. She sees that his books, linen, papers, etc., are arranged
with care; talking of him with a very special respect, and specially
appealing to the old servants at meals, and so forth, regarding things
which are to be done "when Mr. George comes home." Mrs. Mountain is
constantly on the whimper when George's name is mentioned, and Harry's
face wears a look of the most ghastly alarm; but his mother's is
invariably grave and sedate. She makes more blunders at piquet and
backgammon than you would expect from her; and the servants find her
awake and dressed, however early they may rise. She has prayed Mr.
Dempster to come back into residence at Castlewood. She is not severe or
haughty (as her wont certainly was) with any of the party, but quiet in
her talk with them, and gentle in assertion and reply. She is for ever
talking of her father and his campaigns, who came out of them all with
no very severe wounds to hurt him; and so she hopes and trusts will her
eldest son.

George writes frequent letters home to his brother, and, now the army
is on its march, compiles a rough journal, which he forwards as occasion
serves. This document is perused with great delight and eagerness by
the youth to whom it is addressed, and more than once read out in family
council, on the long summer nights, as Madam Esmond sits upright at her
tea-table--(she never condescends to use the back of a chair)--as
little Fanny Mountain is busy with her sewing, as Mr. Dempster and Mrs.
Mountain sit over their cards, as the hushed old servants of the house
move about silently in the gloaming, and listen to the words of the
young master. Hearken to Harry Warrington reading out his brother's
letter! As we look at the slim characters on the yellow page, fondly
kept and put aside, we can almost fancy him alive who wrote and who read
it--and yet, lo! they are as if they never had been; their portraits
faint images in frames of tarnished gold. Were they real once, or are
they mere phantasms? Did they live and die once? Did they love each
other as true brothers, and loyal gentlemen? Can we hear their voices
in the past? Sure I know Harry's, and yonder he sits in the warm summer
evening, and reads his young brother's simple story:

"It must be owned that the provinces are acting scurvily by his Majesty
King George II., and his representative here is in a flame of fury.
Virginia is bad enough, and poor Maryland not much better, but
Pennsylvania is worst of all. We pray them to send us troops from home
to fight the French; and we promise to maintain the troops when they
come. We not only don't keep our promise, and make scarce any provision
for our defenders, but our people insist upon the most exorbitant prices
for their cattle and stores, and actually cheat the soldiers who are
come to fight their battles. No wonder the General swears, and the
troops are sulky. The delays have been endless. Owing to the failure
of the several provinces to provide their promised stores and means of
locomotion, weeks and months have elapsed, during which time, no doubt,
the French have been strengthening themselves on our frontier and in the
forts they have turned us out of. Though there never will be any love
lost between me and Colonel Washington, it must be owned that your
favourite (I am not jealous, Hal) is a brave man and a good officer.
The family respect him very much, and the General is always asking his
opinion. Indeed, he is almost the only man who has seen the Indians in
their war-paint, and I own I think he was right in firing upon Mons.
Jumonville last year.

"There is to be no more suite to that other quarrel at Benson's Tavern
than there was to the proposed battle between Colonel W. and a certain
young gentleman who shall be nameless. Captain Waring wished to pursue
it on coming into camp, and brought the message from Captain Grace,
which your friend, who is as bold as Hector, was for taking up, and
employed a brother aide-de-camp, Colonel Wingfield, on his side. But
when Wingfield heard the circumstances of the quarrel, how it had arisen
from Grace being drunk, and was fomented by Waring being tipsy, and how
the two 44th gentlemen had chosen to insult a militia officer, he swore
that Colonel Washington should not meet the 44th men; that he would
carry the matter straightway to his Excellency, who would bring the
two captains to a court-martial for brawling with the militia, and
drunkenness, and indecent behaviour, and the captains were fain to put
up their toasting-irons, and swallow their wrath. They were good-natured
enough out of their cups, and ate their humble-pie with very good
appetites at a reconciliation dinner which Colonel W. had with the 44th,
and where he was as perfectly stupid and correct as Prince Prettyman
need be. Hang him! He has no faults, and that's why I dislike him. When
he marries that widow--ah me! what a dreary life she will have of it."

"I wonder at the taste of some men, and the effrontery of some women,"
says Madam Esmond, laying her teacup down. "I wonder at any woman who
has been married once, so forgetting herself as to marry again! Don't
you, Mountain?"

"Monstrous!" says Mountain, with a queer look.

Dempster keeps his eyes steadily fixed on his glass of punch. Harry
looks as if he was choking with laughter, or with some other concealed
emotion, but his mother says, "Go on, Harry! Continue with your
brother's journal. He writes well: but, ah, will he ever be able to
write like my papa?"

Harry resumes: "We keep the strictest order here in camp, and the orders
against drunkenness and ill-behaviour on the part of the men are very
severe. The roll of each company is called at morning, noon, and night,
and a return of the absent and disorderly is given in by the officer
to the commanding officer of the regiment, who has to see that they are
properly punished. The men are punished, and the drummers are always at
work. Oh, Harry, but it made one sick to see the first blood drawn from
a great strong white back, and to hear the piteous yell of the poor
fellow."

"Oh, horrid!" says Madam Esmond.

"I think I should have murdered Ward if he had flogged me. Thank Heaven
he got off with only a crack of the ruler! The men, I say, are looked
after carefully enough. I wish the officers were. The Indians have just
broken up their camp, and retired in dudgeon, because the young officers
were for ever drinking with the squaws--and--and--hum--ha." Here Mr.
Harry pauses, as not caring to proceed with the narrative, in the
presence of little Fanny, very likely, who sits primly in her chair by
her mother's side, working her little sampler.

"Pass over that about the odious tipsy creatures," says Madam. And Harry
commences, in a loud tone, a much more satisfactory statement: "Each
regiment has Divine Service performed at the head of its colours every
Sunday. The General does everything in the power of mortal man to
prevent plundering, and to encourage the people round about to bring in
provisions. He has declared soldiers shall be shot who dare to interrupt
or molest the market-people. He has ordered the price of provisions to
be raised a penny a pound, and has lent money out of his own pocket to
provide the camp. Altogether, he is a strange compound, this General. He
flogs his men without mercy, but he gives without stint. He swears most
tremendous oaths in conversation, and tells stories which Mountain would
be shocked to hear--"

"Why me?" asks Mountain; "and what have I to do with the General's silly
stories?"

"Never mind the stories; and go on, Harry," cries the mistress of the
house.

"--would be shocked to hear after dinner; but he never misses service.
He adores his Great Duke, and has his name constantly on his lips. Our
two regiments both served in Scotland, where I dare say Mr. Dempster
knew the colour of their facings."

"We saw the tails of their coats, as well as their facings," growls the
little Jacobite tutor.

"Colonel Washington has had the fever very smartly, and has hardly been
well enough to keep up with the march. Had he not better go home and
be nursed by his widow? When either of us is ill, we are almost as good
friends again as ever. But I feel somehow as if I can't forgive him for
having wronged him. Good Powers! How I have been hating him for these
months past! Oh, Harry! I was in a fury at the tavern the other day,
because Mountain came up so soon, and put an end to our difference. We
ought to have burned a little gunpowder between us, and cleared the air.
But though I don't love him, as you do, I know he is a good soldier, a
good officer, and a brave, honest man; and, at any rate, shall love him
none the worse for not wanting to be our stepfather."

"A stepfather, indeed!" cries Harry's mother. "Why, jealousy and
prejudice have perfectly maddened the poor child! Do you suppose the
Marquis of Esmond's daughter and heiress could not have found other
stepfathers for her sons than a mere provincial surveyor? If there are
any more such allusions in George's journal, I beg you skip 'em, Harry,
my dear. About this piece of folly and blundering, there hath been quite
talk enough already."

"'Tis a pretty sight," Harry continued, reading from his brother's
journal, "to see a long line of redcoats, threading through the woods
or taking their ground after the march. The care against surprise is so
great and constant, that we defy prowling Indians to come unawares upon
us, and our advanced sentries and savages have on the contrary fallen in
with the enemy and taken a scalp or two from them. They are such cruel
villains, these French and their painted allies, that we do not think
of showing them mercy. Only think, we found but yesterday a little
boy scalped but yet alive in a lone house, where his parents had been
attacked and murdered by the savage enemy, of whom--so great is his
indignation at their cruelty--our General has offered a reward of five
pounds for all the Indian scalps brought in.

"When our march is over, you should see our camp, and all the care
bestowed on it. Our baggage and our General's tents and guard are placed
quite in the centre of the camp. We have outlying sentries by twos, by
threes, by tens, by whole companies. At the least surprise, they are
instructed to run in on the main body and rally round the tents
and baggage, which are so arranged themselves as to be a strong
fortification. Sady and I, you must know, are marching on foot now, and
my horses are carrying baggage. The Pennsylvanians sent such rascally
animals into camp that they speedily gave in. What good horses were
left, 'twas our duty to give up: and Roxana has a couple of packs upon
her back instead of her young master. She knows me right well, and
whinnies when she sees me, and I walk by her side, and we have many a
talk together on the march.

"July 4. To guard against surprises, we are all warned to pay especial
attention to the beat of the drum; always halting when they hear the
long roll beat, and marching at the beat of the long march. We are
more on the alert regarding the enemy now. We have our advanced pickets
doubled, and two sentries at every post. The men on the advanced pickets
are constantly under arms, with fixed bayonets, all through the night,
and relieved every two hours. The half that are relieved lie down by
their arms, but are not suffered to leave their pickets. 'Tis evident
that we are drawing very near to the enemy now. This packet goes out
with the General's to Colonel Dunbar's camp, who is thirty miles behind
us; and will be carried thence to Frederick, and thence to my honoured
mother's house at Castlewood, to whom I send my duty, with kindest
remembrances, as to all friends there, and bow much love I need not say
to my dearest brother from his affectionate--GEORGE E. WARRINGTON."

The whole land was now lying parched and scorching in the July heat. For
ten days no news had come from the column advancing on the Ohio. Their
march, though it toiled but slowly through the painful forest, must
bring them ere long up with the enemy; the troops, led by consummate
captains, were accustomed now to the wilderness, and not afraid of
surprise. Every precaution had been taken against ambush. It was the
outlying enemy who were discovered, pursued, destroyed, by the vigilant
scouts and skirmishers of the British force. The last news heard
was that the army had advanced considerably beyond the ground of Mr.
Washington's discomfiture on the previous year, and two days after must
be within a day's march of the French fort. About taking it no fears
were entertained; the amount of the French reinforcements from Montreal
was known. Mr. Braddock, with his two veteran regiments from Britain,
and their allies of Virginia and Pennsylvania, were more than a match
for any troops that could be collected under the white flag.

Such continued to be the talk, in the sparse towns of our Virginian
province, at the gentry's houses, and the rough roadside taverns, where
people met and canvassed the war. The few messengers who were sent back
by the General reported well of the main force. 'Twas thought the enemy
would not stand or defend himself at all. Had he intended to attack, he
might have seized a dozen occasions for assaulting our troops at passes
through which they had been allowed to go entirely free. So George had
given up his favourite mare, like a hero as he was, and was marching
afoot with the line? Madam Esmond vowed that he should have the best
horse in Virginia or Carolina in place of Roxana. There were horses
enough to be had in the provinces, and for money. It was only for the
King's service that they were not forthcoming.

Although at their family meetings and repasts the inmates of Castlewood
always talked cheerfully, never anticipating any but a triumphant issue
to the campaign, or acknowledging any feeling of disquiet, yet, it must
be owned they were mighty uneasy when at home, quitting it ceaselessly,
and for ever on the trot from one neighbour's house to another in quest
of news. It was prodigious how quickly reports ran and spread. When,
for instance, a certain noted border warrior, called Colonel Jack, had
offered himself and his huntsmen to the General, who had declined the
ruffian's terms or his proffered service, the defection of Jack and his
men was the talk of thousands of tongues immediately. The house negroes,
in their midnight gallops about the country, in search of junketing or
sweethearts, brought and spread news over amazingly wide districts. They
had a curious knowledge of the incidents of the march for a fortnight
at least after its commencement. They knew and laughed at the cheats
practised on the army, for horses, provisions, and the like; for a good
bargain over the foreigner was not an unfrequent or unpleasant practice
among New Yorkers, Pennsylvanians, or Marylanders; though 'tis known
that American folks have become perfectly artless and simple in later
times, and never grasp, and never overreach, and are never selfish
now. For three weeks after the army's departure, the thousand reports
regarding it were cheerful; and when our Castlewood friends met at their
supper, their tone was confident and their news pleasant.

But on the 10th of July a vast and sudden gloom spread over the
province. A look of terror and doubt seemed to fall upon every face.
Affrighted negroes wistfully eyed their masters and retired, and hummed
and whispered with one another. The fiddles ceased in the quarters: the
song and laugh of those cheery black folk were hushed. Right and left,
everybody's servants were on the gallop for news. The country taverns
were thronged with horsemen, who drank and cursed and brawled at the
bars, each bringing his gloomy story. The army had been surprised. The
troops had fallen into an ambuscade, and had been cut up almost to a
man. All the officers were taken down by the French marksmen and the
savages. The General had been wounded, and carried off the field in his
sash. Four days afterwards the report was that the General was dead, and
scalped by a French Indian.

Ah, what a scream poor Mrs. Mountain gave, when Gumbo brought this
news from across the James River, and little Fanny sprang crying to her
mother's arms! "Lord God Almighty, watch over us, and defend my boy!"
said Mrs. Esmond, sinking down on her knees, and lifting her rigid hands
to Heaven. The gentlemen were not at home when this rumour arrived, but
they came in an hour or two afterwards, each from his hunt for news.
The Scots tutor did not dare to look up and meet the widow's agonising
looks. Harry Warrington was as pale as his mother. It might not be true
about the manner of the General's death--but he was dead. The army had
been surprised by Indians, and had fled, and been killed without seeing
the enemy. An express had arrived from Dunbar's camp. Fugitives were
pouring in there. Should he go and see? He must go and see. He and stout
little Dempster armed themselves and mounted, taking a couple of mounted
servants with them.

They followed the northward track which the expeditionary army had hewed
out for itself, and at every step which brought them nearer to the scene
of action, the disaster of the fearful day seemed to magnify. The day
after the defeat a number of the miserable fugitives from the fatal
battle of the 9th July had reached Dunbar's camp, fifty miles from the
field. Thither poor Harry and his companions rode, stopping stragglers,
asking news, giving money, getting from one and all the same gloomy
tale--a thousand men were slain--two-thirds of the officers were
down--all the General's aides-de-camp were hit. Were hit?--but were they
killed? Those who fell never rose again. The tomahawk did its work upon
them. O brother, brother! All the fond memories of their youth, all the
dear remembrances of their childhood, the love and the laughter, the
tender romantic vows which they had pledged to each other as lads, were
recalled by Harry with pangs inexpressibly keen. Wounded men looked up
and were softened by his grief: rough women melted as they saw the woe
written on the handsome young face: the hardy old tutor could scarcely
look at him for tears, and grieved for him even more than for his dear
pupil who lay dead under the savage Indian knife.




CHAPTER XIII. Profitless Quest


At every step which Harry Warrington took towards Pennsylvania, the
reports of the British disaster were magnified and confirmed. Those two
famous regiments which had fought in the Scottish and Continental wars,
had fled from an enemy almost unseen, and their boasted discipline and
valour had not enabled them to face a band of savages and a few French
infantry. The unfortunate commander of the expedition had shown the
utmost bravery and resolution. Four times his horse had been shot under
him. Twice he had been wounded, and the last time of the mortal hurt
which ended his life three days after the battle. More than one of
Harry's informants described the action to the poor lad,--the passage of
the river, the long line of advance through the wilderness, the firing
in front, the vain struggle of the men to advance, and the artillery
to clear the way of the enemy; then the ambushed fire from behind every
bush and tree, and the murderous fusillade, by which at least half of
the expeditionary force had been shot down. But not all the General's
suite were killed, Harry heard. One of his aides-de-camp, a Virginian
gentleman, was ill of fever and exhaustion at Dunbar's camp.

One of them--but which? To the camp Harry hurried, and reached it at
length. It was George Washington Harry found stretched in a tent
there, and not his brother. A sharper pain than that of the fever Mr.
Washington declared he felt, when he saw Harry Warrington, and could
give him no news of George.

Mr. Washington did not dare to tell Harry all. For three days after
the fight his duty had been to be near the General. On the fatal 9th of
July, he had seen George go to the front with orders from the chief,
to whose side he never returned. After Braddock himself died, the
aide-de-camp had found means to retrace his course to the field. The
corpses which remained there were stripped and horribly mutilated.
One body he buried which he thought to be George Warrington's. His
own illness was increased, perhaps occasioned, by the anguish which he
underwent in his search for the unhappy young volunteer.

"Ah, George! If you had loved him you would have found him dead or
alive," Harry cried out. Nothing would satisfy him but that he, too,
should go to the ground and examine it. With money he procured a guide
or two. He forded the river at the place where the army had passed
over: he went from one end to the other of the dreadful field. It was
no longer haunted by Indians now. The birds of prey were feeding on
the mangled festering carcases. Save in his own grandfather, lying very
calm, with a sweet smile on his lip, Harry had never yet seen the face
of Death. The horrible spectacle of mutilation caused him to turn away
with shudder and loathing. What news could the vacant woods, or those
festering corpses lying under the trees, give the lad of his lost
brother? He was for going, unarmed and with a white flag, to the French
fort, whither, after their victory, the enemy had returned; but his
guides refused to advance with him. The French might possibly respect
them, but the Indians would not. "Keep your hair for your lady mother,
my young gentleman," said the guide. "'Tis enough that she loses one son
in this campaign."

When Harry returned to the English encampment at Dunbar's, it was his
turn to be down with the fever. Delirium set in upon him, and he lay
some time in the tent and on the bed from which his friend had just
risen convalescent. For some days he did not know who watched him; and
poor Dempster, who had tended him in more than one of these maladies,
thought the widow must lose both her children; but the fever was so
far subdued that the boy was enabled to rally somewhat, and get to
horseback. Mr. Washington and Dempster both escorted him home. It was
with a heavy heart, no doubt, that all three beheld once more the gates
of Castlewood.

A servant in advance had been sent to announce their coming. First came
Mrs. Mountain and her little daughter, welcoming Harry with many
tears and embraces, but she scarce gave a nod of recognition to Mr.
Washington; and the little girl caused the young officer to start, and
turn deadly pale, by coming up to him with her hands behind her, and
asking, "Why have you not brought George back too?" Harry did not hear.
The sobs and caresses of his good friend and nurse luckily kept him from
listening to little Fanny.

Dempster was graciously received by the two ladies. "Whatever could be
done, we know you would do, Mr. Dempster," says Mrs. Mountain, giving
him her hand. "Make a curtsey to Mr. Dempster, Fanny, and remember,
child, to be grateful to all who have been friendly to our benefactors.
Will it please you to take any refreshment before you ride, Colonel
Washington?"

Mr. Washington had had a sufficient ride already, and counted as
certainly upon the hospitality of Castlewood, as he would upon the
shelter of his own house.

"The time to feed my horse, and a glass of water for myself, and I will
trouble Castlewood hospitality no further," Mr. Washington said.

"Sure, George, you have your room here, and my mother is above-stairs
getting it ready!" cries Harry. "That poor horse of yours stumbled with
you, and can't go farther this evening."

"Hush! Your mother won't see him, child," whispered Mrs. Mountain.

"Not see George? Why, he is like a son of the house," cries Harry.

"She had best not see him. I don't meddle any more in family matters,
child: but when the Colonel's servant rode in, and said you were coming,
Madam Esmond left this room, my dear, where she was sitting reading
Drelincourt, and said she felt she could not see Mr. Washington. Will
you go to her?" Harry took his friend's arm, and excusing himself to the
Colonel, to whom he said he would return in a few minutes, he left the
parlour in which they had assembled, and went to the upper rooms, where
Madam Esmond was.

He was hastening across the corridor, and, with an averted head, passing
by one especial door, which he did not like to look at, for it was that
of his brother's room; but as he came to it, Madam Esmond issued from
it, and folded him to her heart, and led him in. A settee was by the
bed, and a book of psalms lay on the coverlet. All the rest of the room
was exactly as George had left it.

"My poor child! How thin thou art grown--how haggard you look! Never
mind. A mother's care will make thee well again. 'Twas nobly done to go
and brave sickness and danger in search of your brother. Had others been
as faithful, he might be here now. Never mind, my Harry; our hero will
come back to us,--I know he is not dead. One so good, and so brave,
and so gentle, and so clever as he was, I know is not lost to us
altogether." (Perhaps Harry thought within himself that his mother had
not always been accustomed so to speak of her eldest son.) "Dry up thy
tears, my dear! He will come back to us, I know he will come." And when
Harry pressed her to give a reason for her belief, she said she had seen
her father two nights running in a dream, and he had told her that her
boy was a prisoner among the Indians.

Madam Esmond's grief had not prostrated her as Harry's had when first
it fell upon him; it had rather stirred and animated her: her eyes were
eager, her countenance angry and revengeful. The lad wondered almost at
the condition in which he found his mother.

But when he besought her to go downstairs, and give a hand of welcome
to George Washington, who had accompanied him, the lady's excitement
painfully increased. She said she should shudder at touching his hand.
She declared Mr. Washington had taken her son from her, she could not
sleep under the same roof with him.

"He gave me his bed when I was ill, mother; and if our George is alive,
how has George Washington a hand in his death? Ah! please God it be only
as you say," cried Harry, in bewilderment.

"If your brother returns, as return he will, it will not be through Mr.
Washington's help," said Madam Esmond. "He neither defended George on
the field, nor would he bring him out of it."

"But he tended me most kindly in my fever," interposed Harry. "He was
yet ill when he gave up his bed to me, and was thinking only of his
friend, when any other man would have thought only of himself."

"A friend! A pretty friend!" sneers the lady. "Of all his Excellency's
aides-de-camp, my gentleman is the only one who comes back unwounded.
The brave and noble fall, but he, to be sure, is unhurt. I confide
my boy to him, the pride of my life, whom he will defend with his,
forsooth! And he leaves my George in the forest, and brings me back
himself! Oh, a pretty welcome I must give him!"

"No gentleman," cried Harry, warmly, "was ever refused shelter under my
grandfather's roof."

"Oh no--no gentleman!" exclaims the little widow; "let us go down, if
you like, son, and pay our respects to this one. Will you please to give
me your arm?" And taking an arm which was very little able to give her
support, she walked down the broad stairs, and into the apartment where
the Colonel sate.

She made him a ceremonious curtsey, and extended one of the little
hands, which she allowed for a moment to rest in his. "I wish that our
meeting had been happier, Colonel Washington," she said.

"You do not grieve more than I do that it is otherwise, madam," said the
Colonel.

"I might have wished that the meeting had been spared, that I might not
have kept you from friends whom you are naturally anxious to see,--that
my boy's indisposition had not detained you. Home and his good nurse
Mountain, and his mother and our good Doctor Dempster, will soon restore
him. 'Twas scarce necessary, Colonel, that you, who have so many affairs
on your hands, military and domestic, should turn doctor too."

"Harry was ill and weak, and I thought it was my duty to ride by him,"
faltered the Colonel.

"You yourself, sir, have gone through the fatigues and dangers of the
campaign in the most wonderful manner," said the widow, curtseying
again, and looking at him with her impenetrable black eyes.

"I wish to Heaven, madam, some one else had come back in my place!"
