
CHORUS

  Know, then, with these a fair device there is--

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Speak, then: what utterance doth this foretell?

CHORUS

  Unless to us thou givest pledge secure--

THE KING OF ARGOS

  What can thy girdles' craft achieve for thee?

CHORUS

  Strange votive tablets shall these statues deck.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Mysterious thy resolve--avow it clear.

CHORUS

  Swiftly to hang me on these sculptured gods!

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Thy word is as a lash to urge my heart.

CHORUS

  Thou seest truth, for I have cleared thine eye

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Yea, and woes manifold, invincible,
  A crowd of ills, sweep on me torrent-like.
  My bark goes forth upon a sea of troubles
  Unfathomed, ill to traverse, harbourless.
  For if my deed shall match not your demand,
  Dire, beyond shot of speech, shall be the bane
  Your death's pollution leaves unto this land.
  Yet if against your kin, Aegyptus' race,
  Before our gates I front the doom of war,
  Will not the city's loss be sore? Shall men
  For women's sake incarnadine the ground?
  But yet the wrath of Zeus, the suppliants' lord
  I needs must fear: most awful unto man
  The terror of his anger. Thou, old man,
  The father of these maidens, gather up
  Within your arms these wands of suppliance,
  And lay them at the altars manifold
  Of all our country's gods, that all the town
  Know, by this sign, that ye come here to sue.
  Nor, in thy haste, do thou say aught of me.
  Swift is this folk to censure those who rule;
  But, if they see these signs of suppliance,
  It well may chance that each will pity you,
  And loathe the young men's violent pursuit;
  And thus a fairer favour you may find:
  For, to the helpless, each man's heart is kind.

DANAUS

  To us, beyond gifts manifold it is
  To find a champion thus compassionate;
  Yet send with me attendants, of thy folk,
  Rightly to guide me, that I duly find
  Each altar of your city's gods that stands
  Before the fane, each dedicated shrine;
  And that in safety through the city's ways
  I may pass onwards: all unlike to yours
  The outward semblance that I wear--the race
  that Nilus rears is all dissimilar
   That of Inachus. Keep watch and ward
   Lest heedlessness bring death: full oft, I ween,
   Friend hath slain friend, not knowing whom he slew.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Go at his side, attendants,--he saith well.
  On to the city's consecrated shrines!
  Nor be of many words to those ye meet,
  The while this suppliant voyager ye lead.
                          [_Exit_ DANAUS _with attendants_.

CHORUS

  Let him go forward, thy command obeying.
  But me how biddest, how assurest thou?

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Leave there the new-plucked boughs, thy sorrow's sign.

CHORUS

  Thus beckoned forth, at thy behest I leave them.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Now to this level precinct turn thyself.

CHORUS

  Unconsecrate it is, and cannot shield me.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  We will not yield thee to those falcons' greed.

CHORUS

  What help? more fierce they are than serpents fell

THE KING OF ARGOS

  We spake thee fair--speak thou them fair in turn.

CHORUS

  What marvel that we loathe them, scared in soul?

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Awe towards a king should other fears transcend.

CHORUS

  Thus speak, thus act, and reassure my mind.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Not long thy sire shall leave thee desolate.
  But I will call the country's indwellers,
  And with soft words th' assembly will persuade,
  And warn your sire what pleadings will avail.
  Therefore abide ye, and with prayer entreat
  The country's gods to compass your desire;
  The while I go, this matter to provide,
  Persuasion and fair fortune at my side.
                                      [_Exit the_ KING OF ARGOS.

CHORUS

    O King of Kings, among the blest
    Thou highest and thou happiest,
        Listen and grant our prayer,
    And, deeply loathing, thrust
    Away from us the young men's lust,
          And deeply drown
  In azure waters, down and ever down,
    Benches and rowers dark,
    The fatal and perfidious bark!
  Unto the maidens turn thy gracious care;
  Think yet again upon the tale of fame,
  How from the maiden loved of thee there sprung
  Mine ancient line, long since in many a legend sung!
    Remember, O remember, thou whose hand
  Did Io by a touch to human shape reclaim.
 For from this Argos erst our mother came
        Driven hence to Egypt's land,
 Yet sprung of Zeus we were, and hence our birth we claim.
        And now have I roamed back
        Unto the ancient track
  Where Io roamed and pastured among flowers,
        Watched o'er by Argus' eyes,
  Through the lush grasses and the meadow bowers.
    Thence, by the gadfly maddened, forth she flies
    Unto far lands and alien peoples driven
    And, following fate, through paths of foam and surge,
    Sees, as she goes, the cleaving strait divide
        Greece, from the Eastland riven.
  And swift through Asian borders doth she urge
  Her course, o'er Phrygian mountains' sheep-clipt side;
  Thence, where the Mysian realm of Teuthras lies
    Towards Lydian lowlands hies,
  And o'er Cilician and Pamphylian hills
    And ever-flowing rills,
  And thence to Aphrodite's fertile shore, [5]
          [Footnote:   5: Cyprus.]
  The land of garnered wheat and wealthy store
  And thence, deep-stung by wild unrest,
  By the winged fly that goaded her and drave,
  Unto the fertile land, the god-possest,
      (Where, fed from far-off snows,
      Life-giving Nilus flows,
  Urged on by Typho's strength, a fertilizing wave)
  She roves, in harassed and dishonoured flight
  Scathed by the  blasting pangs of Hera's dread despite.
      And they within the land
      With terror shook and wanned,
  So strange the sight they saw, and were afraid--
  A wild twy-natured thing, half heifer and half maid.
  Whose hand was laid at last on Io, thus forlorn,
    With many roamings worn?
  Who bade the harassed maiden's peace return?
    Zeus, lord of time eterne.
  Yea, by his breath divine, by his unscathing strength,
      She lays aside her bane,
  And softened back to womanhood at length
      Sheds human tears again.
  Then, quickened with Zeus' veritable seed,
      A progeny she bare,
  A stainless babe, a child of heavenly breed.
      Of life and fortune fair.
  _His is the life of life_--so all men say,--
    _His is the seed of Zeus.
  Who else had power stern Hera's craft to stay,
    Her vengeful curse to loose_?

   Yea, all from Zeus befell!
   And rightly wouldst thou tell
 That we from Epaphus, his child, were born:
      Justly his deed was done;
      Unto what other one,
 Of all the gods, should I for justice turn?
      From him our race did spring;
      Creator he and King,
 Ancient of days and wisdom he, and might.
      As bark before the wind,
      So, wafted by his mind,
 Moves every counsel, each device aright.
      Beneath no stronger hand
      Holds he a weak command,
 No throne doth he abase him to adore;
      Swift as a word, his deed
      Acts out what stands decreed
 In counsels of his heart, for evermore.
                                             [_Re-enter_ DANAUS.

DANAUS

  Take heart, my children:  the land's heart is kind,
  And to full issue has their voting come.

CHORUS

  All hail, my sire; thy word brings utmost joy.
  Say, to what issue is the vote made sure,
  And how prevailed the people's crowding hands?

DANAUS

  With one assent the Argives spake their will,
  And, hearing, my old heart took youthful cheer,
  The very sky was thrilled when high in air
  The concourse raised right hands and swore their oath:--
  _Free shall the maidens sojourn in this land.
  Unharried, undespoiled by mortal wight:
  No native hand, no hand of foreigner
  Shall drag them hence; if any man use force--
  Whoe'er of all our countrymen shall fail
  To come unto their aid, let him go forth,
  Beneath the people's curse, to banishment_.
  So did the king of this Pelasgian folk
  Plead on behalf of us, and bade them heed
  That never, in the after-time, this realm
  Should feed to fulness the great enmity
  Of Zeus, the suppliants' guard, against itself!
  A twofold curse, for wronging stranger-guests
  Who are akin withal, confrontingly
  Should rise before this city and be shown
  A ruthless monster, fed on human doom.
  Such things the Argive people heard, and straight,
  Without proclaim of herald, gave assent:
  Yea, in full conclave, the Pelasgian folk
  Heard suasive pleas, and Zeus through them resolved.

CHORUS

  Arouse we now to chant our prayer
  For fair return of service fair
    And Argos' kindly will.
  Zeus, lord of guestright, look upon
  The grace our stranger lips have won.
  In right and truth, as they begun,
  Guide them, with favouring hand, until
  Thou dost their blameless wish fulfil!

    Now may the Zeus-born gods on high
      Hear us pour forth
    A votive prayer for Argos' clan!--
    Never may this Pelasgian earth,
  Amid the fire-wrack, shrill the dismal cry
    On Ares, ravening lord of fight,
  Who in an alien harvest mows down man!
    For lo, this land had pity on our plight,
  And unto us were merciful and leal,
  To us, the piteous flock, who at Zeus' altar kneel!
  They scorned not the pleas of maidenhood,
  Nor with the young men's will hath their will stood.
      They knew right well.

  Th' unearthly watching fiend invincible,
  The foul avenger--let him not draw near!
  For he, on roofs ill-starred,
  Defiling and polluting, keeps a ghastly ward!
  They knew his vengeance, and took holy heed
  To us, the sister suppliants, who cry
    To Zeus, the lord of purity:
  Therefore with altars pure they shall the gods revere.

  Thus, through the boughs that shade our lips, fly forth in air,
      Fly forth, O eager prayer!
    May never pestilence efface
      This city's race,
    Nor be the land with corpses strewed,
      Nor stained with civic blood!
    The stem of youth, unpluckt, to manhood come,
    Nor Ares rise from Aphrodite's bower,
  The lord of death and bane, to waste our youthful flower.
        Long may the old
    Crowd to the altars kindled to consume
        Gifts rich and manifold--
    Offered to win from powers divine
    A benison on city and on shrine:
      Let all the sacred might adore
        Of Zeus most high, the lord
      Of guestright and the hospitable board,
  Whose immemorial law doth rule Fate's scales aright:
        The garners of earth's store
        Be full for evermore,
  And grace of Artemis make women's travail light;
    No devastating curse of fell disease
        This city seize;
    No clamour of the State arouse to war
        Ares, from whom afar
    Shrinketh the lute, by whom the dances fail--
        Ares, the lord of wail.
    Swarm far aloof from Argos' citizens
        All plague and pestilence,
    And may the Archer-God our children spare!
    May Zeus with foison and with fruitfulness
        The land's each season bless,
    And, quickened with Heaven's bounty manifold,
        Teem grazing flock and fold.
    Beside the altars of Heaven's hallowing
        Loud let the minstrels sing,
  And from pure lips float forth the harp-led strain in air!
    And let the people's voice, the power
    That sways the State, in danger's hour
      Be wary, wise for all;
    Nor honour in dishonour hold,
    But--ere the voice of war be bold--
    Let them to stranger peoples grant
    Fair and unbloody covenant--
      Justice and peace withal;
    And to the Argive powers divine
    The sacrifice of laurelled kine,
      By rite ancestral, pay.
    Among three words of power and awe,
    Stands this, the third, the mighty law--
    _Your gods, your fathers deified,
    Ye shall adore_. Let this abide
      For ever and for aye.

DANAUS

  Dear children, well and wisely have ye prayed;
  I bid you now not shudder, though ye hear
  New and alarming tidings from your sire.
  From this high place beside the suppliants' shrine
  The bark of our pursuers I behold,
  By divers tokens recognized too well.
  Lo, the spread canvas and the hides that screen
  The gunwale; lo, the prow, with painted eyes
  That seem her onward pathway to descry,
  Heeding too well the rudder at the stern
  That rules her, coming for no friendly end.
  And look, the seamen--all too plain their race--
  Their dark limbs gleam from out their snow-white garb;
  Plain too the other barks, a fleet that comes
  All swift to aid the purpose of the first,
  That now, with furled sail and with pulse of oars
  Which smite the wave together, comes aland.
  But ye, be calm, and, schooled not scared by fear,
  Confront this chance, be mindful of your trust
  In these protecting gods. And I will hence,
  And champions who shall plead your cause aright
  Will bring unto your side. There come perchance
  Heralds or envoys, eager to lay hand
  And drag you captive hence; yet fear them not;
  Foiled shall they be. Yet well it were for you
  (If, ere with aid I come, I tarry long),
  Not by one step this sanctuary to leave.
  Farewell, fear nought: soon shall the hour be born
  When he that scorns the gods shall rue his scorn
