'It has now come to pass, however, that Monmouth, who has long lived in
dalliance with the Midianitish woman known by the name of Wentworth, has
at last turned him to higher things, and has consented to make a bid for
the crown. It was found that the Scots preferred to follow a chieftain
of their own, and it has therefore been determined that Argyle--M'Callum
More, as the breechless savages of Inverary call him--shall command a
separate expedition landing upon the western coast of Scotland. There
he hopes to raise five thousand Campbells, and to be joined by all the
Covenanters and Western Whigs, men who would make troops of the old
breed had they but God-fearing officers with an experience of the chance
of fields and the usages of war. With such a following he should be able
to hold Glasgow, and to draw away the King's force to the north. Ayloffe
and I go with Argyle. It is likely that our feet may be upon Scottish
ground before thy eyes read these words.

'The stronger expedition starts with Monmouth, and lands at a fitting
place in the West, where we are assured that we have many friends. I
cannot name the spot lest this letter miscarry, but thou shalt hear
anon. I have written to all good men along the coast, bidding them to
be prepared to support the rising. The King is weak, and hated by the
greater part of his subjects. It doth but need one good stroke to bring
his crown in the dust. Monmouth will start in a few weeks, when his
equipment is finished and the weather favourable. If thou canst come,
mine old comrade, I know well that thou wilt need no bidding of mine to
bring thee to our banner. Should perchance a peaceful life and waning
strength forbid thy attendance, I trust that thou wilt wrestle for us
in prayer, even as the holy prophet of old; and perchance, since I hear
that thou hast prospered according to the things of this world, thou
mayst be able to fit out a pikeman or two, or to send a gift towards the
military chest, which will be none too plentifully lined. We trust
not to gold, but to steel and to our own good cause, yet gold will be
welcome none the less. Should we fall, we fall like men and Christians.
Should we succeed, we shall see how the perjured James, the persecutor
of the saints with the heart like a nether millstone, the man who smiled
when the thumbs of the faithful were wrenched out of their sockets at
Edinburgh--we shall see how manfully he can bear adversity when it falls
to his lot. May the hand of the Almighty be over us!

'I know little of the bearer of this, save that he professes to be of
the elect. Shouldst thou go to Monmouth's camp, see that thou take him
with thee, for I hear that he hath had good experience in the German,
Swedish, and Otttoman wars.--Yours in the faith of Christ, Richard
Rumbold.

'Present my services to thy spouse. Let her read Timothy chapter two,
ninth to fifteenth verses.'


This long letter I read very carefully, and then putting it in my pocket
returned indoors to my breakfast. My father looked at me, as I entered,
with questioning eyes, but I had no answer to return him, for my own
mind was clouded and uncertain.

That day Decimus Saxon left us, intending to make a round of the country
and to deliver his letters, but promising to be back again ere long. We
had a small mishap ere he went, for as we were talking of his journey
my brother Hosea must needs start playing with my father's powder-flask,
which in some way went off with a sudden fluff, spattering the walls
with fragments of metal. So unexpected and loud was the explosion,
that both my father and I sprang to our feet; but Saxon, whose back
was turned to my brother, sat four-square in his chair without a glance
behind him or a shade of change in his rugged face. As luck would have
it, no one was injured, not even Hosea, but the incident made me think
more highly of our new acquaintance. As he started off down the village
street, his long stringy figure and strange gnarled visage, with my
father's silver-braided hat cocked over his eye, attracted rather
more attention than I cared to see, considering the importance of the
missives which he bore, and the certainty of their discovery should he
be arrested as a masterless man. Fortunately, however, the curiosity
of the country folk did but lead them to cluster round their doors and
windows, staring open-eyed, while he, pleased at the attention which
he excited, strode along with his head in the air and a cudgel of
mine twirling in his hand. He had left golden opinions behind him. My
father's good wishes had been won by his piety and by the sacrifices
which he claimed to have made for the faith. My mother he had taught how
wimples are worn amongst the Serbs, and had also demonstrated to her a
new method of curing marigolds in use in some parts of Lithuania. For
myself, I confess that I retained a vague distrust of the man, and
was determined to avoid putting faith in him more than was needful. At
present, however, we had no choice hut to treat him as an ambassador
from friends.

And I? What was I to do? Should I follow my father's wishes, and draw
my maiden sword on behalf of the insurgents, or should I stand aside and
see how events shaped themselves? It was more fitting that I should
go than he. But, on the other hand, I was no keen religious zealot.
Papistry, Church, Dissent, I believed that there was good in all of
them, but that not one was worth the spilling of human blood. James
might be a perjurer and a villain, but he was, as far as I could see,
the rightful king of England, and no tales of secret marriages or black
boxes could alter the fact that his rival was apparently an illegitimate
son, and as such ineligible to the throne. Who could say what evil act
upon the part of a monarch justified his people in setting him aside?
Who was the judge in such a case? Yet, on the other hand, the man had
notoriously broken his own pledges, and that surely should absolve
his subjects from their allegiance. It was a weighty question for a
country-bred lad to have to settle, and yet settled it must be, and that
speedily. I took up my hat and wandered away down the village street,
turning the matter over in my head.

But it was no easy thing for me to think seriously of anything in the
hamlet; for I was in some way, my dear children, though I say it myself,
a favourite with the young and with the old, so that I could not walk
ten paces without some greeting or address. There were my own brothers
trailing behind me, Baker Mitford's children tugging at my skirts, and
the millwright's two little maidens one on either hand. Then, when I had
persuaded these young rompers to leave me, out came Dame Fullarton the
widow, with a sad tale about how her grindstone had fallen out of its
frame, and neither she nor her household could lift it in again. That
matter I set straight and proceeded on my way; but I could not pass the
sign of the Wheatsheaf without John Lockarby, Reuben's father, plunging
out at me and insisting upon my coming in with him for a morning cup.

'The best glass of mead in the countryside, and brewed under my own
roof,' said he proudly, as he poured it into the flagon. 'Why, bless
you, master Micah, a man with a frame like yours wants store o' good
malt to keep it up wi'.'

'And malt like this is worthy of a good frame to contain it,' quoth
Reuben, who was at work among the flasks.

'What think ye, Micah?' said the landlord. 'There was the Squire o'
Milton over here yester morning wi' Johnny Ferneley o' the Bank side,
and they will have it that there's a man in Fareham who could wrestle
you, the best of three, and find your own grip, for a good round stake.'

'Tut! tut!' I answered; 'you would have me like a prize mastiff, showing
my teeth to the whole countryside. What matter if the man can throw me,
or I him?'

'What matter? Why, the honour of Havant,' quoth he. 'Is that no matter?
But you are right,' he continued, draining off his horn. 'What is all
this village life with its small successes to such as you? You are as
much out of your place as a vintage wine at a harvest supper. The whole
of broad England, and not the streets of Havant, is the fit stage for
a man of your kidney. What have you to do with the beating of skins and
the tanning of leather?'

'My father would have you go forth as a knight-errant, Micah,' said
Reuben, laughing. 'You might chance to get your own skin beaten and your
own leather tanned.'

'Who ever knew so long a tongue in so short a body?' cried the
innkeeper. 'But in good sooth, Master Micah, I am in sober earnest when
I say that you are indeed wasting the years of your youth, when life is
sparkling and clear, and that you will regret it when you have come to
the flat and flavourless dregs of old age.'

'There spoke the brewer,' said Reuben; 'but indeed, Micah, my father is
right, for all that he hath such a hops-and-water manner of putting it.'

'I will think over it,' I answered, and with a nod to the kindly couple
proceeded on my way.

Zachariah Palmer was planing a plank as I passed. Looking up he bade me
good-morrow.

'I have a book for you, lad,' he said.

'I have but now finished the "Comus,"' I answered, for he had lent me
John Milton's poem. 'But what is this new book, daddy?'

'It is by the learned Locke, and treateth of states and statecraft. It
is but a small thing, but if wisdom could show in the scales it would
weigh down many a library. You shall have it when I have finished it,
to-morrow mayhap or the day after. A good man is Master Locke. Is he not
at this moment a wanderer in the Lowlands, rather than bow his knee to
what his conscience approved not of?'

'There are many good men among the exiles, are there not?' said I.

'The pick of the country,' he answered. 'Ill fares the land that drives
the highest and bravest of its citizens away from it. The day is coming,
I fear, when every man will have to choose betwixt his beliefs and his
freedom. I am an old man, Micah boy, but I may live long enough to see
strange things in this once Protestant kingdom.'

'But if these exiles had their way,' I objected, 'they would place
Monmouth upon the throne, and so unjustly alter the succession.'

'Nay, nay,' old Zachary answered, laying down his plane. 'If they use
Monmouth's name, it is but to strengthen their cause, and to show that
they have a leader of repute. Were James driven from the throne, the
Commons of England in Parliament assembled would be called upon to
name his successor. There are men at Monmouth's back who would not stir
unless this were so.'

'Then, daddy,' said I, 'since I can trust you, and since you will tell
me what you do really think, would it be well, if Monmouth's standard be
raised, that I should join it?'

The carpenter stroked his white beard and pondered for a while. 'It is a
pregnant question,' he said at last, 'and yet methinks that there is but
one answer to it, especially for your father's son. Should an end be put
to James's rule, it is not too late to preserve the nation in its old
faith; but if the disease is allowed to spread, it may be that even the
tyrant's removal would not prevent his evil seed from sprouting. I hold,
therefore, that should the exiles make such an attempt, it is the duty
of every man who values liberty of conscience to rally round them. And
you, my son, the pride of the village, what better use could you make
of your strength than to devote it to helping to relieve your country
of this insupportable yoke? It is treasonable and dangerous
counsel--counsel which might lead to a short shrift and a bloody
death--but, as the Lord liveth, if you were child of mine I should say
the same.'

So spoke the old carpenter with a voice which trembled with earnestness,
and went to work upon his plank once more, while I, with a few words of
gratitude, went on my way pondering over what he had said to me. I had
not gone far, however, before the hoarse voice of Solomon Sprent broke
in upon my meditations.

'Hoy there! Ahoy!' he bellowed, though his mouth was but a few yards
from my ear. 'Would ye come across my hawse without slacking weigh? Clew
up, d'ye see, clew up!'

'Why, Captain,' I said, 'I did not see you. I was lost in thought.'

'All adrift and without look-outs,' quoth he, pushing his way through
the break in the garden hedge. 'Odd's niggars, man! friends are not
so plentiful, d'ye see, that ye need pass 'em by without a dip o' the
ensign. So help me, if I had had a barker I'd have fired a shot across
your bows.'

'No offence, Captain,' said I, for the veteran appeared to be nettled;
'I have much to think of this morning.'

'And so have I, mate,' he answered, in a softer voice. 'What think ye of
my rig, eh?' He turned himself slowly round in the sunlight as he spoke,
and I perceived that he was dressed with unusual care. He had a blue
suit of broadcloth trimmed with eight rows of buttons, and breeches of
the same material with great bunches of ribbon at the knee. His vest
was of lighter blue picked out with anchors in silver, and edged with
a finger's-breadth of lace. His boot was so wide that he might have had
his foot in a bucket, and he wore a cutlass at his side suspended from a
buff belt, which passed over his right shoulder.

'I've had a new coat o' paint all over,' said he, with a wink.
'Carramba! the old ship is water-tight yet. What would ye say, now, were
I about to sling my hawser over a little scow, and take her in tow?'

'A cow!' I cried.

'A cow! what d'ye take me for? A wench, man, and as tight a little craft
as ever sailed into the port of wedlock.'

'I have heard no better news for many a long day,' said I; 'I did not
even know that you were betrothed. When thou is the wedding to be?'

'Go slow, friend--go slow, and heave your lead-line! You have got out
of your channel, and are in shoal water. I never said as how I was
betrothed.'

'What then?' I asked.

'I am getting up anchor now, to run down to her and summon her. Look
ye, lad,' he continued, plucking off his cap and scratching his
ragged locks; 'I've had to do wi' wenches enow from the Levant to the
Antilles--wenches such as a sailorman meets, who are all paint and
pocket. It's but the heaving of a hand grenade, and they strike their
colours. This is a craft of another guess build, and unless I steer wi'
care she may put one in between wind and water before I so much as
know that I am engaged. What think ye, heh? Should I lay myself boldly
alongside, d'ye see, and ply her with small arms, or should I work
myself clear and try a long range action? I am none of your slippery,
grease-tongued, long-shore lawyers, but if so be as she's willing for a
mate, I'll stand by her in wind and weather while my planks hold out.'

'I can scarce give advice in such a case,' said I, 'for my experience is
less than yours. I should say though that you had best speak to her from
your heart, in plain sailor language.'

'Aye, aye, she can take it or leave it. Phoebe Dawson it is, the sister
of the blacksmith. Let us work back and have a drop of the right Nants
before we go. I have an anker newly come, which never paid the King a
groat.'

'Nay, you had best leave it alone,' I answered.

'Say you so? Well, mayhap you are right. Throw off your moorings, then,
and clap on sail, for we must go.'

'But I am not concerned,' said I.

'Not concerned! Not--' he was too much overcome to go on, and could
but look at me with a face full of reproach. 'I thought better of you,
Micah. Would you let this crazy old hulk go into action, and not stand
by to fire a broadside?'

'What would you have me do then?'

'Why, I would have you help me as the occasion may arise. If I start
to board her, I would have you work across the bows so as to rake
her. Should I range, up on the larboard quarter, do you lie, on the
starboard. If I get crippled, do you draw her fire until I refit. What,
man, you would not desert me!'

The old seaman's tropes and maritime conceits were not always
intelligible to me, but it was clear that he had set his heart upon my
accompanying him, which I was equally determined not to do. At last
by much reasoning I made him understand that my presence would be more
hindrance than help, and would probably be fatal to his chances of
success.

'Well, well,' he grumbled at last, 'I've been concerned in no such
expedition before. An' it be the custom for single ships to engage, I'll
stand to it alone. You shall come with me as consort, though, and stand
to and fro in the offing, or sink me if I stir a step.'

My mind was full of my father's plans and of the courses which lay
before me. There seemed to be no choice, however, as old Solomon was
in dead earnest, but to lay the matter aside for the moment and see the
upshot of this adventure.

'Mind, Solomon,' said I, 'I don't cross the threshold.'

'Aye, aye, mate. You can please yourself. We have to beat up against the
wind all the way. She's on the look-out, for I hailed her yesternight,
and let her know as how I should bear down on her about seven bells of
the morning watch.'

I was thinking as we trudged down the road that Phoebe would need to be
learned in sea terms to make out the old man's meaning, when he pulled
up short and clapped his hands to his pockets.

'Zounds!' he cried, 'I have forgot to bring a pistol.'

'In Heaven's name!' I said in amazement, 'what could you want with a
pistol?'

'Why, to make signals with,' said he. 'Odds me that I should have forgot
it! How is one's consort to know what is going forward when the flagship
carries no artillery? Had the lass been kind I should have fired one
gun, that you might know it.'

'Why,' I answered, 'if you come not out I shall judge that all is well.
If things go amiss I shall see you soon.'

'Aye--or stay! I'll hoist a white jack at the port-hole. A white jack
means that she hath hauled down her colours. Nombre de Dios, when I
was a powder-boy in the old ship _Lion_, the day that we engaged the
_Spiritus Sanctus_ of two tier o' guns--the first time that ever I heard
the screech of ball--my heart never thumped as it does now. What say ye
if we run back with a fair wind and broach that anker of Nants?'

'Nay, stand to it, man,' said I; for by this time, we had come to the
ivy-clad cottage behind which was the village smithy. 'What, Solomon!
an English seaman never feared a foe, either with petticoats or without
them.'

'No, curse me if he did!' quoth Solomon, squaring his shoulders, 'never
a one, Don, Devil, or Dutchman; so here goes for her!' So saying he made
his way into the cottage, leaving me standing by the garden wicket, half
amused and half annoyed at this interruption to my musings.

As it proved, the sailor had no very great difficulty with his suit, and
soon managed to capture his prize, to use his own language. I heard from
the garden the growling of his gruff voice, and a good deal of shrill
laughter ending in a small squeak, which meant, I suppose, that he was
coming to close quarters. Then there was silence for a little while, and
at last I saw a white kerchief waving from the window, and perceived,
moreover, that it was Phoebe herself who was fluttering it. Well, she
was a smart, kindly-hearted lass, and I was glad in my heart that the
old seaman should have such a one to look after him.

Here, then, was one good friend settled down finally for life. Another
warned me that I was wasting my best years in the hamlet. A third, the
most respected of all, advised me openly to throw in my lot with the
insurgents, should the occasion arise. If I refused, I should have
the shame of seeing my aged father setting off for the wars, whilst
I lingered at home. And why should I refuse? Had it not long been the
secret wish of my heart to see something of the great world, and what
fairer chance could present itself? My wishes, my friend's advice, and
my father's hopes all pointed in the one direction.

'Father,' said I, when I returned home, 'I am ready to go where you
will.'

'May the Lord be glorified!' he cried solemnly. 'May He watch over
your young life, and keep your heart steadfast to the cause which is
assuredly His!'

And so, my dear grandsons, the great resolution was taken, and I found
myself committed to one side in the national quarrel.



Chapter VII. Of the Horseman who rode from the West

My father set to work forthwith preparing for our equipment, furnishing
Saxon out as well as myself on the most liberal scale, for he was
determined that the wealth of his age should be as devoted to the cause
as was the strength of his youth. These arrangements had to be carried
out with the most extreme caution, for there were many Prelatists in
the village, and in the present disturbed state of the public mind any
activity on the part of so well known a man would have at once attracted
attention. So carefully did the wary old soldier manage matters,
however, that we soon found ourselves in a position to start at an
hour's notice, without any of our neighbours being a whit the wiser.

His first move was to purchase through an agent two suitable horses at
Chichester fair, which were conveyed to the stables of a trusty Whig
farmer living near Portchester, who was ordered to keep them until
they were called for. Of these animals one was a mottled grey, of great
mettle and power, standing seventeen and a half hands high, and well up
to my weight, for in those days, my dears, I had not laid on flesh, and
weighed a little under sixteen stone for all my height and strength.
A critic might have said that Covenant, for so I named my steed, was a
trifle heavy about the head and neck, but I found him a trusty, willing
brute, with great power and endurance. Saxon, who when fully accoutred
could scarce have weighed more than twelve stone, had a light bay
Spanish jennet, of great speed and spirit. This mare he named Chloe,
'after a godly maiden of his acquaintance,' though, as my father
remarked, there was a somewhat ungodly and heathenish smack about the
appellation. These horses and their harness were bought and held ready
without my father appearing in the matter in any way.

This important point having been settled, there was the further question
of arms to be discussed, which gave rise to much weighty controversy
between Decimus Saxon and my father, each citing many instances from
their own experiences where the presence or absence of some taslet
or arm-guard had been of the deepest import to the wearer. Your
great-grandfather had set his heart upon my wearing the breastplate
which still bore the dints of the Scottish spears at Dunbar, but on
trying it on we found it was too small for me. I confess that this was a
surprise, for when I looked back at the awe with which I had regarded
my father's huge proportions, it was marvellous to me to have
this convincing proof that I had outgrown him. By ripping down the
side-leather and piercing holes through which a lace could be passed, my
mother managed to arrange it so that I could wear it without discomfort.
A pair of taslets or thigh-pieces, with guards for the upper arm and
gauntlets, were all borrowed from the old Parliamentary equipment,
together with the heavy straight sword and pair of horse pistols which
formed the usual weapons of a cavalier. My father had chosen me a
head-piece in Portsmouth, fluted, with good barrets, padded inside with
soft leather, very light and yet very strong. When fully equipped,
both Saxon and my father agreed that I had all that was requisite for
a well-appointed soldier. Saxon had purchased a buff-coat, a steel cap,
and a pair of jack-boots, so that with the rapier and pistols which my
father had presented him with, he was ready to take the field at any
time.

There would, we hoped, be no great difficulty in our reaching Monmouth's
forces when the hour came. In those troublous times the main roads were
so infested by highwaymen and footpads, that it was usual for travellers
to carry weapons and even armour for their protection. There was no
reason therefore why our appearance should excite suspicion. Should
questions be asked, Saxon had a long story prepared, to the effect that
we were travelling to join Henry Somerset, Duke of Beaufort, to whose
household we belonged. This invention he explained to me, with many
points of corroboration which I was to furnish, but when I said
positively that I should rather be hanged as a rebel than speak a
falsehood, he looked at me open-eyed, and shook his head as one much
shocked. A few weeks of campaigning, he said, would soon cure me of my
squeamishness. For himself, no more truthful child had ever carried a
horn-book, but he had learned to lie upon the Danube, and looked upon
it as a necessary part of the soldier's upbringing. 'For what are all
stratagems, ambuscades, and outfalls but lying upon a large scale?' he
argued. 'What is an adroit commander but one who hath a facility for
disguising the truth? When, at the battle of Senlac, William the Norman
ordered his men to feign flight in order that they might break his
enemy's array, a wile much practised both by the Scythians of old and by
the Croats of our own day, pray what is it but the acting of a lie? Or
when Hannibal, having tied torches to the horns of great droves of oxen,
caused the Roman Consuls to imagine that his army was in retreat, was it
not a deception or infraction of the truth?--a point well brought out
by a soldier of repute in the treatise "An in bello dolo uti liceat;
an apud hostes falsiloquio uti liceat." And so if, after these great
models, I in order to gain mine ends do announce that we are bound to
Beaufort when we are in truth making for Monmouth, is it not in accord
with the usages of war and the customs of great commanders?' All which
specious argument I made no attempt to answer, beyond repeating that he
might avail himself of the usage, but that he must not look to me for
corroboration. On the other hand, I promised to hold my speech and to
say nothing which might hamper him, with which pledge he was forced to
be contented.

And now at last, my patient listeners, I shall be able to carry you out
of the humble life of the village, and to cease my gossip of the men who
were old when I was young, and who are now lying this many a year in
the Bedhampton churchyard. You shall come with me now, and you shall see
England as it was in those days, and you shall hear of how we set forth
to the wars, and of all the adventures which overtook us. And if what
I tell you should ever chance to differ from what you have read in the
book of Mr. Coke or of Mr. Oldmixon, or of any one else who has set
these matters down in print, do ye bear in mind that I am telling of
what I saw with these very eyes, and that I have helped to make history,
which is a higher thing than to write it.

It was, then, towards nightfall upon the twelfth day of June 1685 that
the news reached our part of the country that Monmouth had landed the
day before at Lyme, a small seaport on the boundary between Dorsetshire
and Devonshire. A great beacon blaze upon Portsdown Hill was the first
news that we had of it, and then came a rattling and a drumming
from Portsmouth, where the troops were assembled under arms. Mounted
messengers clattered through the village street with their heads low on
their horses' necks, for the great tidings must be carried to London,
that the Governor of Portsmouth might know how to act. (Note B,
Appendix.) We were standing at our doorway in the gloaming, watching
the coming and the going, and the line of beacon fires which were
lengthening away to the eastward, when a little man galloped up to the
door and pulled his panting horse up.

'Is Joseph Clarke here?' he asked.

'I am he,' said my father.

'Are these men true?' he whispered, pointing with his whip at Saxon and
myself. 'Then the trysting-place is Taunton. Pass it on to all whom ye
know. Give my horse a bait and a drink, I beg of ye, for I must get on
my way.'

My young brother Hosea looked to the tired creature, while we brought
the rider inside and drew him a stoup of beer. A wiry, sharp-faced man
he was, with a birth-mark upon his temple. His face and clothes were
caked with dust, and his limbs were so stiff from the saddle that he
could scarce put one foot before another.

'One horse hath died under me,' he said, 'and this can scarce last
another twenty miles. I must be in London by morning, for we hope that
Danvers and Wildman may be able to raise the city. Yester-evening I left
Monmouth's camp. His blue flag floats over Lyme.'

'What force hath he?' my father asked anxiously.

'He hath but brought over leaders. The force must come from you folk at
home. He has with him Lord Grey of Wark, with Wade, the German Buyse,
and eighty or a hundred more. Alas! that two who came are already lost
to us. It is an evil, evil omen.'

'What is amiss, then?'

'Dare, the goldsmith of Taunton, hath been slain by Fletcher of Saltoun
in some child's quarrel about a horse. The peasants cried out for the
blood of the Scot, and he was forced to fly aboard the ships. A sad
mishap it is, for he was a skilful leader and a veteran soldier.'

'Aye, aye,' cried Saxon impatiently, 'there will be some more skilful
leaders and veteran soldiers in the West presently to take his place.
But if he knew the usages of war, how came it that he should fight upon
a private quarrel at such a time?' He drew a flat brown book from
his bosom, and ran his long thin finger down the table of contents.
'Subisectio nona'--'here is the very case set forth, "An in hello
publico provocatus ad duellum privatae amicitiae causa declinare
possit," in which the learned Fleming layeth it down that a man's
private honour must give way to the good of the cause. Did it not happen
in my own case that, on the eve of the raising of the Anlagerung of
Vienna, we stranger officers having been invited to the tent of the
General, it chanced that a red-headed Irisher, one O'Daffy, an ancient
in the regiment of Pappenheimer, did claim precedence of me on the
ground of superiority of blood? On this I drew my glove across his face,
not, mark ye, in anger, but as showing that I differed in some degree
from his opinion. At which dissent he did at once offer to sustain his
contention, but I, having read this subsection to him, did make it clear
to him that we could not in honour settle the point until the Turk was
chased from the city. So after the onfall--'

'Nay, sir, I may hear the narrative some future day,' said the
messenger, staggering to his feet. 'I hope to find a relay at
Chichester, and time presses. Work for the cause now, or be slaves for
ever. Farewell!' He clambered into his saddle, and we heard the clatter
of his hoofs dying away down the London road.

'The time hath come for you to go, Micah,' said my father solemnly.'
Nay, wife, do not weep, but rather hearten the lad on his way by a
blithe word and a merry face. I need not tell you to fight manfully
and fearlessly in this quarrel. Should the tide of war set in this
direction, you may find your old father riding by your side. Let us now
bow down and implore the favour of the Almighty upon this expedition.'

We all knelt down in the low-roofed, heavy-raftered room while the old
man offered up an earnest, strenuous prayer for our success. Even now,
as I speak to ye, that group rises up before mine eyes. I see once
again your ancestor's stern, rugged face, with his brows knitted and
his corded hands writhed together in the fervour of his supplication. My
mother kneels beside him with the tears trickling down her sweet, placid
face, stifling her sobs lest the sound of them make my leave-taking more
bitter. The children are in the sleeping-room upstairs, and we hear the
patter of their bare feet upon the floor. The man Saxon sprawls across
one of the oaken chairs, half kneeling, half reclining, with his long
legs trailing out behind, and his face buried in his hands. All round
in the flickering light of the hanging lamp I see the objects which have
been so familiar to me from childhood--the settle by the fireplace,
the high-back stiff-elbowed chairs, the stuffed fox above the door, the
picture of Christian viewing the Promised Land from the summit of the
Delectable Mountains--all small trifles in themselves, but making up
among them the marvellous thing we call home, the all-powerful lodestone
which draws the wanderer's heart from the farther end of the earth.
Should I ever see it again save in my dreams--I, who was leaving this
sheltered cove to plunge into the heart of the storm?

The prayer finished, we all rose with the exception of Saxon, who
remained with his face buried in his hands for a minute or so before
starting to his feet. I shrewdly suspect that he had been fast asleep,
though he explained that he had paused to offer up an additional
supplication. My father placed his hands upon my head and invoked the
