
"Robin, I believe," said young Gamwell carelessly; "I think they call
him Robin."

"Is that all you know of him?" said Sir Ralph.

"What more should I know of him?" said young Gamwell.

"Then I can tell you," said Sir Ralph, "he is the outlawed Earl of
Huntingdon, on whose head is set so large a price."

"Ay, is he?" said young Gamwell, in the same careless manner.

"He were a prize worth the taking," said Sir Ralph.

"No doubt," said young Gamwell.

"How think you?" said Sir Ralph: "are the foresters his adherents?"

"I cannot say," said young Gamwell.

"Is your peasantry loyal and well-disposed?" said Sir Ralph.

"Passing loyal," said young Gamwell.

"If I should call on them in the king's name," said Sir Ralph, "think
you they would aid and assist?"

"Most likely they would," said young Gamwell, "one side or the other."

"Ay, but which side?" said the knight.

"That remains to be tried," said young Gamwell.

"I have King Henry's commission," said the knight, "to apprehend this
earl that was. How would you advise me to act, being, as you see,
without attendant force?"

"I would advise you," said young Gamwell, "to take yourself off without
delay, unless you would relish the taste of a volley of arrows, a shower
of stones, and a hailstorm of cudgel-blows, which would not be turned
aside by a God save King Henry."

Sir Ralph's squire no sooner heard this, and saw by the looks of the
speaker that he was not likely to prove a false prophet, than he clapped
spurs to his horse and galloped off with might and main. This gave the
knight a good excuse to pursue him, which he did with great celerity,
calling, "Stop, you rascal." When the squire fancied himself safe out
of the reach of pursuit, he checked his speed, and allowed the knight
to come up with him. They rode on several miles in silence, till
they discovered the towers and spires of Nottingham, where the knight
introduced himself to the sheriff, and demanded an armed force to assist
in the apprehension of the outlawed Earl of Huntingdon. The sheriff, who
was willing to have his share of the prize, determined to accompany the
knight in person, and regaled him and his man with good store of the
best; after which, they, with a stout retinue of fifty men, took the way
to Gamwell feast.

"God's my life," said the sheriff, as they rode along, "I had as lief
you would tell me of a service of plate. I much doubt if this outlawed
earl, this forester Robin, be not the man they call Robin Hood, who
has quartered himself in Sherwood Forest, and whom in endeavouring
to apprehend I have fallen divers times into disasters. He has
gotten together a band of disinherited prodigals, outlawed debtors,
excommunicated heretics, elder sons that have spent all they had, and
younger sons that never had any thing to spend; and with these he kills
the king's deer, and plunders wealthy travellers of five-sixths of their
money; but if they be abbots or bishops, them he despoils utterly."

The sheriff then proceeded to relate to his companion the adventure of
the abbot of Doubleflask (which some grave historians have related of
the abbot of Saint Mary's, and others of the bishop of Hereford): how
the abbot, returning to his abbey in company with his high selerer,
who carried in his portmanteau the rents of the abbey-lands, and with a
numerous train of attendants, came upon four seeming peasants, who
were roasting the king's venison by the king's highway: how, in just
indignation at this flagrant infringement of the forest laws, he asked
them what they meant, and they answered that they meant to dine: how he
ordered them to be seized and bound, and led captive to Nottingham,
that they might know wild-flesh to have been destined by Providence
for licensed and privileged appetites, and not for the base hunger of
unqualified knaves: how they prayed for mercy, and how the abbot swore
by Saint Charity that he would show them none: how one of them thereupon
drew a bugle horn from under his smock-frock and blew three blasts, on
which the abbot and his train were instantly surrounded by sixty bowmen
in green: how they tied him to a tree, and made him say mass for their
sins: how they unbound him, and sate him down with them to dinner, and
gave him venison and wild-fowl and wine, and made him pay for his fare
all the money in his high selerer's portmanteau, and enforced him to
sleep all night under a tree in his cloak, and to leave the cloak behind
him in the morning: how the abbot, light in pocket and heavy in heart,
raised the country upon Robin Hood, for so he had heard the chief
forester called by his men, and hunted him into an old woman's cottage:
how Robin changed dresses with the old woman, and how the abbot rode in
great triumph to Nottingham, having in custody an old woman in a green
doublet and breeches: how the old woman discovered herself: how the
merrymen of Nottingham laughed at the abbot: how the abbot railed at the
old woman, and how the old woman out-railed the abbot, telling him that
Robin had given her food and fire through the winter, which no abbot
would ever do, but would rather take it from her for what he called the
good of the church, by which he meant his own laziness and gluttony; and
that she knew a true man from a false thief, and a free forester from a
greedy abbot.

"Thus you see," added the sheriff, "how this villain perverts the
deluded people by making them believe that those who tithe and toll upon
them for their spiritual and temporal benefit are not their best friends
and fatherly guardians; for he holds that in giving to boors and old
women what he takes from priests and peers, he does but restore to the
former what the latter had taken from them; and this the impudent varlet
calls distributive justice. Judge now if any loyal subject can be safe
in such neighbourhood."

While the sheriff was thus enlightening his companion concerning the
offenders, and whetting his own indignation against them, the sun was
fast sinking to the west. They rode on till they came in view of a
bridge, which they saw a party approaching from the opposite side, and
the knight presently discovered that the party consisted of the lady
Matilda and friar Michael, young Gamwell, cousin Robin, and about
half-a-dozen foresters. The knight pointed out the earl to the sheriff,
who exclaimed, "Here, then, we have him an easy prey;" and they rode on
manfully towards the bridge, on which the other party made halt.

"Who be these," said the friar, "that come riding so fast this way? Now,
as God shall judge me, it is that false knight Sir Ralph Montfaucon, and
the sheriff of Nottingham, with a posse of men. We must make good our
post, and let them dislodge us if they may."

The two parties were now near enough to parley; and the sheriff and the
knight, advancing in the front of the cavalcade, called on the lady,
the friar, young Gamwell, and the foresters, to deliver up that
false-traitor, Robert, formerly Earl of Huntingdon. Robert himself made
answer by letting fly an arrow that struck the ground between the fore
feet of the sheriff's horse. The horse reared up from the whizzing, and
lodged the sheriff in the dust; and, at the same time, the fair Matilda
favoured the knight with an arrow in his right arm, that compelled him
to withdraw from the affray. His men lifted the sheriff carefully up,
and replaced him on his horse, whom he immediately with great rage and
zeal urged on to the assault with his fifty men at his heels, some of
whom were intercepted in their advance by the arrows of the foresters
and Matilda; while the friar, with an eight-foot staff, dislodged the
sheriff a second time, and laid on him with all the vigour of the church
militant on earth, in spite of his ejaculations of "Hey, friar
Michael! What means this, honest friar? Hold, ghostly friar! Hold, holy
friar!"--till Matilda interposed, and delivered the battered sheriff
to the care of the foresters. The friar continued flourishing his
staff among the sheriff's men, knocking down one, breaking the ribs of
another, dislocating the shoulder of a third, flattening the nose of
a fourth, cracking the skull of a fifth, and pitching a sixth into the
river, till the few, who were lucky enough to escape with whole bones,
clapped spurs to their horses and fled for their lives, under a farewell
volley of arrows.

Sir Ralph's squire, meanwhile, was glad of the excuse of attending
his master's wound to absent himself from the battle; and put the poor
knight to a great deal of unnecessary pain by making as long a business
as possible of extracting the arrow, which he had not accomplished when
Matilda, approaching, extracted it with great facility, and bound up
the wound with her scarf, saying, "I reclaim my arrow, sir knight, which
struck where I aimed it, to admonish you to desist from your enterprise.
I could as easily have lodged it in your heart."

"It did not need," said the knight, with rueful gallantry; "you have
lodged one there already."

"If you mean to say that you love me," said Matilda, "it is more than I
ever shall you: but if you will show your love by no further interfering
with mine, you will at least merit my gratitude."

The knight made a wry face under the double pain of heart and
body caused at the same moment by the material or martial, and the
metaphorical or erotic arrow, of which the latter was thus barbed by a
declaration more candid than flattering; but he did not choose to put
in any such claim to the lady's gratitude as would bar all hopes of her
love: he therefore remained silent; and the lady and her escort, leaving
him and the sheriff to the care of the squire, rode on till they came in
sight of Arlingford Castle, when they parted in several directions. The
friar rode off alone; and after the foresters had lost sight of him they
heard his voice through the twilight, singing,--

 A staff, a staff, of a young oak graff,
     That is both stoure and stiff,
 Is all a good friar can needs desire
     To shrive a proud sheriffe.
 And thou, fine fellowe, who hast tasted so
     Of the forester's greenwood game,
 Wilt be in no haste thy time to waste
     In seeking more taste of the same:
 Or this can I read thee, and riddle thee well,
 Thou hadst better by far be the devil in hell,
     Than the sheriff of Nottinghame.




CHAPTER VII

     Now, master sheriff, what's your will with me?
     --Henry IV.


Matilda had carried her point with the baron of ranging at liberty
whithersoever she would, under her positive promise to return home; she
was a sort of prisoner on parole: she had obtained this indulgence by
means of an obsolete habit of always telling the truth and keeping her
word, which our enlightened age has discarded with other barbarisms,
but which had the effect of giving her father so much confidence in her,
that he could not help considering her word a better security than locks
and bars.

The baron had been one of the last to hear of the rumours of the new
outlaws of Sherwood, as Matilda had taken all possible precautions to
keep those rumours from his knowledge, fearing that they might cause
the interruption of her greenwood liberty; and it was only during her
absence at Gamwell feast, that the butler, being thrown off his guard by
liquor, forgot her injunctions, and regaled the baron with a long story
of the right merry adventure of Robin Hood and the abbot of Doubleflask.

The baron was one morning, as usual, cutting his way valorously through
a rampart of cold provision, when his ears were suddenly assailed by a
tremendous alarum, and sallying forth, and looking from his castle wall,
he perceived a large party of armed men on the other side of the
moat, who were calling on the warder in the king's name to lower the
drawbridge and raise the portcullis, which had both been secured by
Matilda's order. The baron walked along the battlement till he came
opposite to these unexpected visitors, who, as soon as they saw him,
called out, "Lower the drawbridge, in the king's name."

"For what, in the devil's name?" said the baron.

"The sheriff of Nottingham," said one, "lies in bed grievously bruised,
and many of his men are wounded, and several of them slain; and Sir
Ralph Montfaucon, knight, is sore wounded in the arm; and we are charged
to apprehend William Gamwell the younger, of Gamwell Hall, and father
Michael of Rubygill Abbey, and Matilda Fitzwater of Arlingford Castle,
as agents and accomplices in the said breach of the king's peace."

"Breach of the king's fiddlestick!" answered the baron. "What do you
mean by coming here with your cock and bull, stories of my daughter
grievously bruising the sheriff of Nottingham? You are a set of vagabond
rascals in disguise; and I hear, by the bye, there is a gang of thieves
that has just set up business in Sherwood Forest: a pretty presence,
indeed, to get into my castle with force and arms, and make a famine in
my buttery, and a drought in my cellar, and a void in my strong box, and
a vacuum in my silver scullery."

"Lord Fitzwater," cried one, "take heed how you resist lawful authority:
we will prove ourselves----"

"You will prove yourselves arrant knaves, I doubt not," answered the
baron; "but, villains, you shall be more grievously bruised by me than
ever was the sheriff by my daughter (a pretty tale truly!), if you do
not forthwith avoid my territory."

By this time the baron's men had flocked to the battlements, with
long-bows and cross-bows, slings and stones, and Matilda with her bow
and quiver at their head. The assailants, finding the castle so well
defended, deemed it expedient to withdraw till they could return in
greater force, and rode off to Rubygill Abbey, where they made known
their errand to the father abbot, who, having satisfied himself of their
legitimacy, and conned over the allegations, said that doubtless brother
Michael had heinously offended; but it was not for the civil law to
take cognizance of the misdoings of a holy friar; that he would summon
a chapter of monks, and pass on the offender a sentence proportionate to
his offence. The ministers of civil justice said that would not do.
The abbot said it would do and should; and bade them not provoke the
meekness of his catholic charity to lay them under the curse of Rome.
This threat had its effect, and the party rode off to Gamwell-Hall,
where they found the Gamwells and their men just sitting down to dinner,
which they saved them the trouble of eating by consuming it in the
king's name themselves, having first seized and bound young Gamwell;
all which they accomplished by dint of superior numbers, in despite of
a most vigorous stand made by the Gamwellites in defence of their young
master and their provisions.

The baron, meanwhile, after the ministers of justice had departed,
interrogated Matilda concerning the alleged fact of the grievous
bruising of the sheriff of Nottingham. Matilda told him the whole
history of Gamwell feast, and of their battle on the bridge, which had
its origin in a design of the sheriff of Nottingham to take one of the
foresters into custody.

"Ay! ay!" said the baron, "and I guess who that forester was; but truly
this friar is a desperate fellow. I did not think there could have been
so much valour under a grey frock. And so you wounded the knight in the
arm. You are a wild girl, Mawd,--a chip of the old block, Mawd. A wild
girl, and a wild friar, and three or four foresters, wild lads all, to
keep a bridge against a tame knight, and a tame sheriff, and fifty tame
varlets; by this light, the like was never heard! But do you know, Mawd,
you must not go about so any more, sweet Mawd: you must stay at home,
you must ensconce; for there is your tame sheriff on the one hand, that
will take you perforce; and there is your wild forester on the other
hand, that will take you without any force at all, Mawd: your wild
forester, Robin, cousin Robin, Robin Hood of Sherwood Forest, that beats
and binds bishops, spreads nets for archbishops, and hunts a fat abbot
as if he were a buck: excellent game, no doubt, but you must hunt no
more in such company. I see it now: truly I might have guessed before
that the bold outlaw Robin, the most courteous Robin, the new thief of
Sherwood Forest, was your lover, the earl that has been: I might have
guessed it before, and what led you so much to the woods; but you hunt
no more in such company. No more May games and Gamwell feasts. My lands
and castle would be the forfeit of a few more such pranks; and I think
they are as well in my hands as the king's, quite as well."

"You know, father," said Matilda, "the condition of keeping me at home:
I get out if I can, and not on parole."

"Ay! ay!" said the baron, "if you can; very true: watch and ward, Mawd,
watch and ward is my word: if you can, is yours. The mark is set, and so
start fair."

The baron would have gone on in this way for an hour; but the friar made
his appearance with a long oak staff in his hand, singing,--

 Drink and sing, and eat and laugh,
     And so go forth to battle:
 For the top of a skull and the end of a staff
     Do make a ghostly rattle.


"Ho! ho! friar!" said the baron--"singing friar, laughing friar,
roaring friar, fighting friar, hacking friar, thwacking friar; cracking,
cracking, cracking friar; joke-cracking, bottle-cracking, skull-cracking
friar!"

"And ho! ho!" said the friar,--"bold baron, old baron, sturdy baron,
wordy baron, long baron, strong baron, mighty baron, flighty baron,
mazed baron, crazed baron, hacked baron, thwacked baron; cracked,
cracked, cracked baron; bone-cracked, sconce-cracked, brain-cracked
baron!"

"What do you mean," said the baron, "bully friar, by calling me hacked
and thwacked?"

"Were you not in the wars?" said the friar, "where he who escapes
untracked does more credit to his heels than his arms. I pay tribute to
your valour in calling you hacked and thwacked."

"I never was thwacked in my life," said the baron; "I stood my ground
manfully, and covered my body with my sword. If I had had the luck
to meet with a fighting friar indeed, I might have been thwacked, and
soundly too; but I hold myself a match for any two laymen; it takes nine
fighting laymen to make a fighting friar."

"Whence come you now, holy father?" asked Matilda.

"From Rubygill Abbey," said the friar, "whither I never return:

 For I must seek some hermit cell,
 Where I alone my beads may tell,
 And on the wight who that way fares
 Levy a toll for my ghostly pray'rs,
     Levy a toll, levy a toll,
     Levy a toll for my ghostly pray'rs."


"What is the matter then, father?" said Matilda.

"This is the matter," said the friar: "my holy brethren have held a
chapter on me, and sentenced me to seven years' privation of wine. I
therefore deemed it fitting to take my departure, which they would fain
have prohibited. I was enforced to clear the way with my staff. I have
grievously beaten my dearly beloved brethren: I grieve thereat; but they
enforced me thereto. I have beaten them much; I mowed them down to the
right and to the left, and left them like an ill-reaped field of wheat,
ear and straw pointing all ways, scattered in singleness and jumbled in
masses; and so bade them farewell, saying, Peace be with you. But I
must not tarry, lest danger be in my rear: therefore, farewell, sweet
Matilda; and farewell, noble baron; and farewell, sweet Matilda again,
the alpha and omega of father Michael, the first and the last."

"Farewell, father," said the baron, a little softened; "and God send you
be never assailed by more than fifty men at a time."

"Amen," said the friar, "to that good wish."

"And we shall meet again, father, I trust," said Matilda.

"When the storm is blown over," said the baron.

"Doubt it not," said the friar, "though flooded Trent were between us,
and fifty devils guarded the bridge."

He kissed Matilda's forehead, and walked away without a song.




CHAPTER VIII

     Let gallows gape for dog:  let man go free.
     --Henry V.


A page had been brought up in Gamwell-Hall, who, while he was little,
had been called Little John, and continued to be so called after he had
grown to be a foot taller than any other man in the house. He was full
seven feet high. His latitude was worthy of his longitude, and his
strength was worthy of both; and though an honest man by profession, he
had practiced archery on the king's deer for the benefit of his master's
household, and for the improvement of his own eye and hand, till his
aim had become infallible within the range of two miles. He had fought
manfully in defence of his young master, took his captivity exceedingly
to heart, and fell into bitter grief and boundless rage when he heard
that he had been tried in Nottingham and sentenced to die. Alice
Gamwell, at Little John's request, wrote three letters of one tenour;
and Little John, having attached them to three blunt arrows, saddled the
fleetest steed in old Sir Guy of Gamwell's stables, mounted, and rode
first to Arlingford Castle, where he shot one of the three arrows over
the battlements; then to Rubygill Abbey, where he shot the second into
the abbey-garden; then back past Gamwell-Hall to the borders of Sherwood
Forest, where he shot the third into the wood. Now the first of these
arrows lighted in the nape of the neck of Lord Fitzwater, and lodged
itself firmly between his skin and his collar; the second rebounded with
the hollow vibration of a drumstick from the shaven sconce of the abbot
of Rubygill; and the third pitched perpendicularly into the centre of a
venison pasty in which Robin Hood was making incision.

Matilda ran up to her father in the court of Arlingford Castle, seized
the arrow, drew off the letter, and concealed it in her bosom before the
baron had time to look round, which he did with many expressions of rage
against the impudent villain who had shot a blunt arrow into the nape of
his neck.

"But you know, father," said Matilda, "a sharp arrow in the same place
would have killed you; therefore the sending a blunt one was very
considerate."

"Considerate, with a vengeance!" said the baron. "Where was the
consideration of sending it at all? This is some of your forester's
pranks. He has missed you in the forest, since I have kept watch and
ward over you, and by way of a love-token and a remembrance to you takes
a random shot at me."

The abbot of Rubygill picked up the missile-missive or messenger
arrow, which had rebounded from his shaven crown, with a very unghostly
malediction on the sender, which he suddenly checked with a pious and
consolatory reflection on the goodness of Providence in having blessed
him with such a thickness of skull, to which he was now indebted for
temporal preservation, as he had before been for spiritual promotion. He
opened the letter, which was addressed to father Michael; and found it
to contain an intimation that William Gamwell was to be hanged on Monday
at Nottingham.

"And I wish," said the abbot, "father Michael were to be hanged with
him: an ungrateful monster, after I had rescued him from the fangs of
civil justice, to reward my lenity by not leaving a bone unbruised among
the holy brotherhood of Rubygill."

Robin Hood extracted from his venison pasty a similar intimation of the
evil destiny of his cousin, whom he determined, if possible, to rescue
from the jaws of Cerberus.

The sheriff of Nottingham, though still sore with his bruises, was so
