feel that I could not have resisted him."  With that thought she knelt
down, in humble and penitent self-reproach, and prayed for strength.

Ere she had risen from her supplications, her solitude was again invaded
by Torquemada, the Dominican.

This strange man, though the author of cruelties at which nature recoils,
had some veins of warm and gentle feeling streaking, as it were, the
marble of his hard character; and when he had thoroughly convinced
himself of the pure and earnest zeal of the young convert, he relaxed
from the grim sternness he had at first exhibited towards her.  He loved
to exert the eloquence he possessed, in raising her spirit, in
reconciling her doubts.  He prayed for her, and he prayed beside her,
with passion and with tears.

He stayed long with the novice; and, when he left her, she was, if not
happy, at least contented.  Her warmest wish now was to abridge the
period of her novitiate, which, at her desire, the Church had already
rendered merely a nominal probation.  She longed to put irresolution out
of her power, and to enter at once upon the narrow road through the
strait gate.

The gentle and modest piety of the young novice touched the sisterhood;
she was endeared to all of them.  Her conversion was an event that broke
the lethargy of their stagnant life.  She became an object of general
interest, of avowed pride, of kindly compassion; and their kindness to
her, who from her cradle had seen little of her own sex, had a great
effect towards calming and soothing her mind.  But, at night, her dreams
brought before her the dark and menacing countenance of her father.
Sometimes he seemed to pluck her from the gates of heaven, and to sink
with her into the yawning abyss below.  Sometimes she saw him with her
beside the altar, but imploring her to forswear the Saviour, before
whose crucifix she knelt.  Occasionally her visions were haunted, also,
with Muza--but in less terrible guise She saw his calm and melancholy
eyes fixed upon her; and his voice asked, "Canst thou take a vow that
makes it sinful to remember me?"

The night, that usually brings balm and oblivion to the sad, was thus
made more dreadful to Leila than the day.

Her health grew feebler, and feebler, but her mind still was firm.  In
happier time and circumstance that poor novice would have been a great
character; but she was one of the countless victims the world knows not
of, whose virtues are in silent motives, whose struggles are in the
solitary heart.

Of the prince she heard and saw no more.  There were times when she
fancied, from oblique and obscure hints, that the Dominican had been
aware of Don Juan's disguise and visit.  But, if so, that knowledge
appeared only to increase the gentleness, almost the respect, which
Torquemada manifested towards her.  Certainly, since that day, from some
cause or other the priest's manner had been softened when he addressed
her; and he who seldom had recourse to other arts than those of censure
and of menace, often uttered sentiments half of pity and half of praise.

Thus consoled and supported in the day,--thus haunted and terrified by
night, but still not repenting her resolve, Leila saw the time glide on
to that eventful day when her lips were to pronounce that irrevocable vow
which is the epitaph of life.  While in this obscure and remote convent
progressed the history of an individual, we are summoned back to witness
the crowning fate of an expiring dynasty.




CHAPTER III.

THE PAUSE BETWEEN DEFEAT AND SURRENDER.

The unfortunate Boabdil plunged once more amidst the recesses of the
Alhambra.  Whatever his anguish or his despondency, none were permitted
to share, or even to witness, his emotions.  But he especially resisted
the admission to his solitude, demanded by his mother, implored by his
faithful Amine, and sorrowfully urged by Muza: those most loved, or most
respected, were, above all, the persons from whom he most shrank.

Almamen was heard of no more.  It was believed that he had perished in
the battle.  But he was one of those who, precisely as they are effective
when present, are forgotten in absence.  And, in the meanwhile, as the
Vega was utterly desolated, and all supplies were cut off, famine, daily
made more terrifically severe, diverted the attention of each humbler
Moor from the fall of the city to his individual sufferings.

New persecutions fell upon the miserable Jews.  Not having taken any
share in the conflict (as was to be expected from men who had no stake in
the country which they dwelt in, and whose brethren had been taught so
severe a lesson upon the folly of interference), no sentiment of
fellowship in danger mitigated the hatred and loathing with which they
were held; and as, in their lust of gain, many of them continued, amidst
the agony and starvation of the citizens, to sell food at enormous
prices, the excitement of the multitude against them--released by the
state of the city from all restraint and law--made itself felt by the
most barbarous excesses.  Many of the houses of the Israelites were
attacked by the mob, plundered, razed to the ground, and the owner
tortured to death, to extort confession of imaginary wealth.  Not to sell
what was demanded was a crime; to sell it was a crime also.  These
miserable outcasts fled to whatever secret places the vaults of their
houses or the caverns in the hills within the city could yet afford them,
cursing their fate, and almost longing even for the yoke of the Christian
bigots.

Thus passed several days; the defence of the city abandoned to its naked
walls and mighty gates.  The glaring sun looked down upon closed shops
and depopulated streets, save when some ghostly and skeleton band of the
famished poor collected, in a sudden paroxysm of revenge or despair,
around the stormed and fired mansion of a detested Israelite.

At length Boabdil aroused himself from his seclusion; and Muza, to his
own surprise, was summoned to the presence of the king.  He found Boabdil
in one of the most gorgeous halls of his gorgeous palace.

Within the Tower of Comares is a vast chamber, still called the hall of
the Ambassadors.  Here it was that Boabdil now held his court.  On the
glowing walls hung trophies and banners, and here and there an Arabian
portrait of some bearded king.  By the windows, which overlooked the most
lovely banks of the Llarro, gathered the santons and alfaquis, a little
apart from the main crowd.  Beyond, through half-veiling draperies, might
be seen the great court of the Alberca, whose peristyles were hung with
flowers; while, in the centre, the gigantic basin, which gives its name
to the court, caught the sunlight obliquely, and its waves glittered on
the eye from amidst the roses that then clustered over it.

In the audience hall itself, a canopy, over the royal cushions on which
Boabdil reclined, was blazoned with the heraldic insignia of Granada's
monarchs.  His guard, and his mutes, and his eunuchs, and his courtiers,
and his counsellors, and his captains, were ranged in long files on
either side the canopy.  It seemed the last flicker of the lamp of the
Moorish empire, that hollow and unreal pomp!  As Muza approached the
monarch, he was startled by the change of his countenance: the young and
beautiful Boabdil seemed to have grown suddenly old; his eyes were
sunken, his countenance sown with wrinkles, and his voice sounded broken
and hollow on the ears of his kinsman.

"Come hither, Muza," said he; "seat thyself beside me, and listen as thou
best canst to the tidings we are about to hear."

As Muza placed himself on a cushion, a little below the king, Boabdil
motioned to one amongst the crowd.  "Hamet," said he, "thou hast examined
the state of the Christian camp; what news dost thou bring?"

"Light of the Faithful," answered the Moor, "it is a camp no longer--it
has already become a city.  Nine towns of Spain were charged with the
task; stone has taken the place of canvas; towers and streets arise like
the buildings of a genius; and the misbelieving king hath sworn that this
new city shall not be left until Granada sees his standard on its walls."

"Go on," said Boabdil, calmly.

"Traders and men of merchandise flock thither daily; the spot is one
bazaar; all that should supply our famishing country pours its plenty
into their mart."

Boabdil motioned to the Moor to withdraw, and an alfaqui advanced in his
stead.

"Successor of the Prophet, and darling of the world!" said the reverend
man, "the alfaquis and seers of Granada implore thee on their knees to
listen to their voice.  They have consulted the Books of Fate; thy have
implored a sign from the Prophet; and they find that the glory has left
thy people and thy crown.  The fall of Granada is predestined; God is
great!"

"You shall have my answer forthwith," said Boabdil.  "Abdelemic,
approach."

From the crowd came an aged and white-bearded man, the governor of the
city.

"Speak, old man," said the king.

"Oh, Boabdil!" said the veteran, with faltering tones, while the tears
rolled down his cheeks; "son of a race of kings and heroes! would that
thy servant had fallen dead on thy threshold this day, and that the lips
of a Moorish noble had never been polluted by the words that I now utter!
Our state is hopeless; our granaries are as the sands of the desert:
there is in them life neither for beast nor man.  The war-horse that bore
the hero is now consumed for his food; the population of thy city, with
one voice, cry for chains and--bread!  I have spoken."

"Admit the Ambassador of Egypt," said Boabdil, as Abdelmelic retired.
There was a pause: one of the draperies at the end of the hall was drawn
aside; and with the slow and sedate majesty of their tribe and land,
paced forth a dark and swarthy train, the envoys of the Egyptian soldan.
Six of the band bore costly presents of gems and weapons, and the
procession closed with four veiled slaves, whose beauty had been the
boast of the ancient valley of the Nile.

"Sun of Granada and day--star of the faithful!" said the chief of the
Egyptians, "my lord, the Soldan of Egypt, delight of the world, and rose-
tree of the East, thus answers to the letters of Boabdil.  He grieves
that be cannot send the succour thou demandest; and informing himself of
the condition of thy territories, he finds that Granada no longer holds a
seaport by which his forces (could he send them) might find an entrance
into Spain.  He implores thee to put thy trust in Allah, who will not
desert his chosen ones, and lays these gifts, in pledge of amity and
love, at the feet of my lord the king."

"It is a gracious and well-timed offering," said Boabdil, with a writhing
lip; "we thank him."  There was now a long and dead silence as the
ambassadors swept from the hall of audience, when Boabdil suddenly raised
his head from his breast and looked around his hall with a kingly and
majestic look: "Let the heralds of Ferdinand of Spain approach."

A groan involuntarily broke from the breast of Muza: it was echoed by a
murmur of abhorrence and despair from the gallant captains who stood
around; but to that momentary burst succeeded a breathless silence, as
from another drapery, opposite the royal couch, gleamed the burnished
mail of the knights of Spain.  Foremost of these haughty visitors, whose
iron heels clanked loudly on the tesselated floor, came a noble and
stately form, in full armour, save the helmet, and with a mantle of azure
velvet, wrought with the silver cross that made the badge of the
Christian war.  Upon his manly countenance was visible no sign of undue
arrogance or exultation; but something of that generous pity which brave
men feel for conquered foes dimmed the lustre of his commanding eye, and
softened the wonted sternness of his martial bearing.  He and his train
approached the king with a profound salutation of respect; and falling
back, motioned to the herald that accompanied him, and whose garb, breast
and back, was wrought with the arms of Spain, to deliver himself of his
mission.
