
    He scoured far fields--what hill or oaken glen
      Remembers not that pilgrimage of pain?
    His troth to Jason was forgotten then.
      Long time the good ship tarried for those twain
    With hoisted sails; night came and still they cleared
    The hatches, but no Heracles appeared.

    On he was wandering, reckless where he trod,
      So mad a passion on his vitals preyed:
    While Hylas had become a blessed god.
      But the crew cursed the runaway who had stayed
    Sixty good oars, and left him there to reach
    Afoot bleak Phasis and the Colchian beach.




IDYLL XIV.


The Love of AEschines.

_THYONICHUS. AESCHINES._

    AESCHINES.
    Hail, sir Thyonichus.

    THYONICHUS.
                AEschines, to you.

    AESCHINES.
    I have missed thee.

    THYONICHUS.
            Missed me! Why what ails him now?

    AESCHINES.
    My friend, I am ill at ease.

    THYONICHUS.
                Then this explains
    Thy leanness, and thy prodigal moustache
    And dried-up curls. Thy counterpart I saw,
    A wan Pythagorean, yesterday.
    He said he came from Athens: shoes he had none:
    He pined, I'll warrant,--for a quartern loaf.

    AESCHINES.
    Sir, you will joke--But I've been outraged, sore,
    And by Cynisca. I shall go stark mad
    Ere you suspect--a hair would turn the scale.

    THYONICHUS.
    Such thou wert always, AEschines my friend.
    In lazy mood or trenchant, at thy whim
    The world must wag. But what's thy grievance now?

    AESCHINES.
    That Argive, Apis the Thessalian Knight,
    Myself, and gallant Cleonicus, supped
    Within my grounds. Two pullets I had slain,
    And a prime pig: and broached my Biblian wine;
    'Twas four years old, but fragrant as when new.
    Truffles were served to us: and the drink was good.
    Well, we got on, and each must drain a cup
    To whom he fancied; only each must name.
    We named, and took our liquor as ordained;
    But she sate silent--this before my face.
    Fancy my feelings! "Wilt not speak? Hast seen
    A wolf?" some wag said. "Shrewdly guessed," quoth she,
    And blushed--her blushes might have fired a torch.
    A wolf _had_ charmed her: Wolf her neighbour's son,
    Goodly and tall, and fair in divers eyes:
    For his illustrious sake it was she pined.
    This had been breathed, just idly, in my ear:
    Shame on my beard, I ne'er pursued the hint.
    Well, when we four were deep amid our cups,
    The Knight must sing 'The Wolf' (a local song)
    Right through for mischief. All at once she wept
    Hot tears as girls of six years old might weep,
    Clinging and clamouring round their mother's lap.
    And I, (you know my humour, friend of mine,)
    Drove at his face, one, two! She gathered up
    Her robes and vanished straightway through the door.
    "And so I fail to please, false lady mine?
    Another lies more welcome in thy lap?
    Go warm that other's heart: he'll say thy tears
    Are liquid pearls." And as a swallow flies
    Forth in a hurry, here or there to find
    A mouthful for her brood among the eaves:
    From her soft sofa passing-swift she fled
    Through folding-doors and hall, with random feet:
    _'The stag had gained his heath':_ you know the rest.
    Three weeks, a month, nine days and ten to that,
    To-day's the eleventh: and 'tis just two months
    All but two days, since she and I were two.
    Hence is my beard of more than Thracian growth.
    Now Wolf is all to her: Wolf enters in
    At midnight; I am a cypher in her eyes;
    The poor Megarian, nowhere in the race.
    All would go right, if I could once _unlove_:
    But now, you wot, the rat hath tasted tar.
    And what may cure a swain at his wit's end
    I know not: Simus, (true,) a mate of mine,
    Loved Epichalcus' daughter, and took ship
    And came home cured. I too will sail the seas.
    Worse men, it may be better, are afloat,
    I shall still prove an average man-at-arms.

    THYONICHUS.
    Now may thy love run smoothly, AEschines!
    But should'st thou really mean a voyage out,
    The freeman's best paymaster's Ptolemy.

    AESCHINES.
    What is he else?

    THYONICHUS.
            A gentleman: a man
    Of wit and taste; the top of company;
    Loyal to ladies; one whose eye is keen
    For friends, and keener still for enemies.
    Large in his bounties, he, in kingly sort,
    Denies a boon to none: but, AEschines,
    One should not ask too often. This premised,
    If thou wilt clasp the military cloak
    O'er thy right shoulder, and with legs astride
    Await the onward rush of shielded men:
    Hie thee to Egypt. Age overtakes us all;
    Our temples first; then on o'er cheek and chin,
    Slowly and surely, creep the frosts of Time.
    Up and do somewhat, ere thy limbs are sere.




IDYLL XV.


The Festival of Adonis.

_GORGO. PRAXINOAe._

    GORGO.
    Praxinoae in?

    PRAXINOAe.
          Yes, Gorgo dear! At last!
    That you're here now's a marvel! See to a chair,
    A cushion, Eunoae!

    GORGO.
              I lack naught.

    PRAXINOAe.
                              Sit down.

    GORGO.
    Oh, what a thing is spirit! Here I am,
    Praxinoae, safe at last from all that crowd
    And all those chariots--every street a mass
    Of boots and uniforms! And the road, my dear,
    Seemed endless--you live now so far away!

    PRAXINOAe.
    This land's-end den--I cannot call it house--
    My madcap hired to keep us twain apart
    And stir up strife. 'Twas like him, odious pest!

    GORGO.
    Nay call not, dear, your lord, your Deinon, names
    To the babe's face. Look how it stares at you!
    There, baby dear, she never meant Papa!
    It understands, by'r lady! Dear Papa!

    PRAXINOAe.
    Well, yesterday (that means what day you like)
    'Papa' had rouge and hair-powder to buy;
    He brought back salt! this oaf of six-foot-one!

    GORGO.
    Just such another is that pickpocket
    My Diocleides. He bought t'other day
    Six fleeces at seven drachms, his last exploit.
    What were they? scraps of worn-out pedlar's-bags,
    Sheer trash.--But put your cloak and mantle on;
    And we'll to Ptolemy's, the sumptuous king,
    To see the _Adonis_. As I hear, the queen
    Provides us something gorgeous.

    PRAXINOAe.
                              Ay, the grand
    Can do things grandly.

    GORGO.
                  When you've seen yourself,
    What tales you'll have to tell to those who've not.
    'Twere time we started!

    PRAXINOAe.
                        All time's holiday
    With idlers! Eunoae, pampered minx, the jug!
    Set it down here--you cats would sleep all day
    On cushions--Stir yourself, fetch water, quick!
    Water's our first want. How she holds the jug!
    Now, pour--not, cormorant, in that wasteful way--
    You've drenched my dress, bad luck t'you! There, enough:
    I have made such toilet as my fates allowed.
    Now for the key o' the plate-chest. Bring it, quick!

    GORGO.
    My dear, that full pelisse becomes you well.
    What did it stand you in, straight off the loom?

    PRAXINOAe.
    Don't ask me, Gorgo: two good pounds and more.
    Then I gave all my mind to trimming it.

    GORGO.
    Well, 'tis a great success.

    PRAXINOAe.
                              I think it is.
    My mantle, Eunoae, and my parasol!
    Arrange me nicely. Babe, you'll bide at home!
    Horses would bite you--Boo!--Yes, cry your fill,
    But we won't have you maimed. Now let's be off.
    You, Phrygia, take and nurse the tiny thing:
    Call the dog in: make fast the outer door!

                                        [_Exeunt_.

    Gods! what a crowd! How, when shall we get past
    This nuisance, these unending ant-like swarms?
    Yet, Ptolemy, we owe thee thanks for much
    Since heaven received thy sire! No miscreant now
    Creeps Thug-like up, to maul the passer-by.
    What games men played erewhile--men shaped in crime,
    Birds of a feather, rascals every one!
    --We're done for, Gorgo darling--here they are,
    The Royal horse! Sweet sir, don't trample me!
    That bay--the savage!--reared up straight on end!
    Fly, Eunoae, can't you? Doggedly she stands.
    He'll be his rider's death!--How glad I am
    My babe's at home.

    GORGO.
                    Praxinoae, never mind!
    See, we're before them now, and they're in line.

    PRAXINOAe.
    There, I'm myself. But from a child I feared
    Horses, and slimy snakes. But haste we on:
    A surging multitude is close behind.

    GORGO [_to Old Lady_].
    From the palace, mother?

    OLD LADY.
                        Ay, child.

    GORGO.
                              Is it fair
    Of access?

    OLD LADY.
                Trying brought the Greeks to Troy.
    Young ladies, they must try who would succeed.

    GORGO.
    The crone hath said her oracle and gone.
    Women know all--how Adam married Eve.
    --Praxinoae, look what crowds are round the door!

    PRAXINOAe.
    Fearful! Your hand, please, Gorgo. Eunoae, you
    Hold Eutychis--hold tight or you'll be lost.
    We'll enter in a body--hold us fast!
    Oh dear, my muslin dress is torn in two,
    Gorgo, already! Pray, good gentleman,
    (And happiness be yours) respect my robe!

    STRANGER.
    I could not if I would--nathless I will.

    PRAXINOAe.
    They come in hundreds, and they push like swine.

    STRANGER.
    Lady, take courage: it is all well now.

    PRAXINOAe.
    And now and ever be it well with thee,
    Sweet man, for shielding us! An honest soul
    And kindly. Oh! they're smothering Eunoae:
    Push, coward! That's right! 'All in,' the bridegroom said
    And locked the door upon himself and bride.

    GORGO.
    Praxinoae, look! Note well this broidery first.
    How exquisitely fine--too good for earth!
    Empress Athene, what strange sempstress wrought
    Such work? What painter painted, realized
    Such pictures? Just like life they stand or move,
    Facts and not fancies! What a thing is man!
    How bright, how lifelike on his silvern couch
    Lies, with youth's bloom scarce shadowing his cheek,
    That dear Adonis, lovely e'en in death!

    A STRANGER.
    Bad luck t'you, cease your senseless pigeon's prate!
    Their brogue is killing--every word a drawl!

    GORGO.
    Where did he spring from? Is our prattle aught
    To you, Sir? Order your own slaves about:
    You're ordering Syracusan ladies now!

    Corinthians bred (to tell you one fact more)
    As was Bellerophon: islanders in speech,
    For Dorians may talk Doric, I presume?

    PRAXINOAe.
    Persephone! none lords it over me,
    Save one! No scullion's-wage for us from _you_!

    GORGO.
    Hush, dear. The Argive's daughter's going to sing
    _The Adonis_: that accomplished vocalist
    Who has no rival in "_The Sailor's Grave_."
    Observe her attitudinizing now.

    _Song_.
    Queen, who lov'st Golgi and the Sicel hill
      And Ida; Aphrodite radiant-eyed;
    The stealthy-footed Hours from Acheron's rill
      Brought once again Adonis to thy side
    How changed in twelve short months! They travel slow,
      Those precious Hours: we hail their advent still,
    For blessings do they bring to all below.
      O Sea-born! thou didst erst, or legend lies,
    Shed on a woman's soul thy grace benign,
      And Berenice's dust immortalize.
    O called by many names, at many a shrine!
      For thy sweet sake doth Berenice's child
    (Herself a second Helen) deck with all
      That's fair, Adonis. On his right are piled
    Ripe apples fallen from the oak-tree tall;
      And silver caskets at his left support
    Toy-gardens, Syrian scents enshrined in gold
      And alabaster, cakes of every sort
    That in their ovens the pastrywomen mould,
      When with white meal they mix all flowers that bloom,
    Oil-cakes and honey-cakes. There stand portrayed
      Each bird, each butterfly; and in the gloom
    Of foliage climbing high, and downward weighed
      By graceful blossoms, do the young Loves play
    Like nightingales, and perch on every tree,
      And flit, to try their wings, from spray to spray.
    Then see the gold, the ebony! Only see
      The ivory-carven eagles, bearing up
      To Zeus the boy who fills his royal cup!
    Soft as a dream, such tapestry gleams o'erhead
      As the Milesian's self would gaze on, charmed.
    But sweet Adonis hath his own sweet bed:
      Next Aphrodite sleeps the roseate-armed,
    A bridegroom of eighteen or nineteen years.
      Kiss the smooth boyish lip--there's no sting there!
    The bride hath found her own: all bliss be hers!
      And him at dewy dawn we'll troop to bear
    Down where the breakers hiss against the shore:
      There, with dishevelled dress and unbound hair,
    Bare-bosomed all, our descant wild we'll pour:

    "Thou haunt'st, Adonis, earth and heaven in turn,
      Alone of heroes. Agamemnon ne'er
    Could compass this, nor Aias stout and stern:
      Not Hector, eldest-born of her who bare
    Ten sons, not Patrocles, nor safe-returned
    From Ilion Pyrrhus, such distinction earned:
      Nor, elder yet, the Lapithae, the sons
    Of Pelops and Deucalion; or the crown
      Of Greece, Pelasgians. Gracious may'st thou be,
    Adonis, now: pour new-year's blessings down!
      Right welcome dost thou come, Adonis dear:
      Come when thou wilt, thou'lt find a welcome here."

    GORGO.
    'Tis fine, Praxinoae! How I envy her
    Her learning, and still more her luscious voice!
    We must go home: my husband's supperless:
    And, in that state, the man's just vinegar.
    Don't cross his path when hungry! So farewell,
    Adonis, and be housed 'mid welfare aye!




IDYLL XVI.


The Value of Song.

    What fires the Muse's, what the minstrel's lays?
    Hers some immortal's, ours some hero's praise,
    Heaven is her theme, as heavenly was her birth:
    We, of earth earthy, sing the sons of earth.
    Yet who, of all that see the gray morn rise,
    Lifts not his latch and hails with eager eyes
    My Songs, yet sends them guerdonless away?
    Barefoot and angry homeward journey they,
    Taunt him who sent them on that idle quest,
    Then crouch them deep within their empty chest,
    (When wageless they return, their dismal bed)
    And hide on their chill knees once more their patient head.
    Where are those good old times? Who thanks us, who,
    For our good word? Men list not now to do
    Great deeds and worthy of the minstrel's verse:
    Vassals of gain, their hand is on their purse,
    Their eyes on lucre: ne'er a rusty nail
    They'll give in kindness; this being aye their tale:--

    "Kin before kith; to prosper is my prayer;
    Poets, we know, are heaven's peculiar care.
    We've Homer; and what other's worth a thought?
    I call him chief of bards who costs me naught."

      Yet what if all your chests with gold are lined?
    Is this enjoying wealth? Oh fools and blind!
    Part on your heart's desire, on minstrels spend
    Part; and your kindred and your kind befriend:
    And daily to the gods bid altar-fires ascend.
    Nor be ye churlish hosts, but glad the heart
    Of guests with wine, when they must needs depart:
    And reverence most the priests of sacred song:
    So, when hell hides you, shall your names live long;
    Not doomed to wail on Acheron's sunless sands,
    Like some poor hind, the inward of whose hands
    The spade hath gnarled and knotted, born to groan,
    Poor sire's poor offspring, hapless Penury's own!

    Their monthly dole erewhile unnumbered thralls
    Sought in Antiochus', in Aleuas' halls;
    On to the Scopadae's byres in endless line
    The calves ran lowing with the horned kine;
    And, marshalled by the good Creondae's swains
    Myriads of choice sheep basked on Cranron's plains.
    Yet had their joyaunce ended, on the day
    When their sweet spirit dispossessed its clay,
    To hated Acheron's ample barge resigned.
    Nameless, their stored-up luxury left behind,
    With the lorn dead through ages had they lain,
    Had not a minstrel bade them live again:--
    Had not in woven words the Ceian sire
    Holding sweet converse with his full-toned lyre
    Made even their swift steeds for aye renowned,
    When from the sacred lists they came home crowned.
    Forgot were Lycia's chiefs, and Hector's hair
    Of gold, and Cycnus femininely fair;
    But that bards bring old battles back to mind.
    Odysseus--he who roamed amongst mankind
    A hundred years and more, reached utmost hell
    Alive, and 'scaped the giant's hideous cell--
    Had lived and died: Eumaeus and his swine;
    Philoetius, busy with his herded kine;
    And great Laertes' self, had passed away,
    Were not their names preserved in Homer's lay.
    Through song alone may man true glory taste;
    The dead man's riches his survivors waste.

      But count the waves, with yon gray wind-swept main
    Borne shoreward: from a red brick wash his stain
    In some pool's violet depths: 'twill task thee yet
    To reach the heart on baleful avarice set.
    To such I say 'Fare well': let theirs be store
    Of wealth; but let them always crave for more:
    Horses and mules inferior things _I_ find
    To the esteem and love of all mankind.

      But to what mortal's roof may I repair,
    I and my Muse, and find a welcome there?
    I and my Muse: for minstrels fare but ill,
    Reft of those maids, who know the mightiest's will.
    The cycle of the years, it flags not yet;
    In many a chariot many a steed shall sweat:
    And one, to manhood grown, my lays shall claim,
    Whose deeds shall rival great Achilles' fame,
    Who from stout Aias might have won the prize
    On Simois' plain, where Phrygian Ilus lies.
    Now, in their sunset home on Libya's heel,
    Phoenicia's sons unwonted chillness feel:
    Now, with his targe of willow at his breast,
    The Syracusan bears his spear in rest,
    Amongst these Hiero arms him for the war,
    Eager to fight as warriors fought of yore;
    The plumes float darkling o'er his helmed brow.
    O Zeus, the sire most glorious; and O thou,
    Empress Athene; and thou, damsel fair,
    Who with thy mother wast decreed to bear
    Rule o'er rich Corinth, o'er that city of pride
    Beside whose walls Anapus' waters glide:--
