But straightway the morning star rose above the topmost peaks and the
breeze swept down; and quickly did Tiphys urge them to go aboard and
avail themselves of the wind. And they embarked eagerly forthwith; and
they drew up the ship's anchors and hauled the ropes astern. And the
sails were bellied out by the wind, and far from the coast were they
joyfully borne past the Posideian headland. But at the hour when
gladsome dawn shines from heaven, rising from the east, and the paths
stand out clearly, and the dewy plains shine with a bright gleam, then
at length they were aware that unwittingly they had abandoned those men.
And a fierce quarrel fell upon them, and violent tumult, for that they
had sailed and left behind the bravest of their comrades. And Aeson's
son, bewildered by their hapless plight, said never a word, good or bad;
but sat with his heavy load of grief, eating out his heart. And wrath
seized Telamon, and thus he spake:

"Sit there at thy ease, for it was fitting for thee to leave Heracles
behind; from thee the project arose, so that his glory throughout Hellas
should not overshadow thee, if so be that heaven grants us a return
home. But what pleasure is there in words? For I will go, I only, with
none of thy comrades, who have helped thee to plan this treachery."

He spake, and rushed upon Tiphys son of Hagnias; and his eyes sparkled
like flashes of ravening flame. And they would quickly have turned back
to the land of the Mysians, forcing their way through the deep sea and
the unceasing blasts of the wind, had not the two sons of Thracian
Boreas held back the son of Aeacus with harsh words. Hapless ones,
assuredly a bitter vengeance came upon them thereafter at the hands of
Heracles, because they stayed the search for him. For when they were
returning from the games over Pelias dead he slew them in sea-girt Tenos
and heaped the earth round them, and placed two columns above, one of
which, a great marvel for men to see, moves at the breath of the
blustering north wind. These things were thus to be accomplished in
after times. But to them appeared Glaucus from the depths of the sea,
the wise interpreter of divine Nereus, and raising aloft his shaggy head
and chest from his waist below, with sturdy hand he seized the ship's
keel, and then cried to the eager crew:

"Why against the counsel of mighty Zeus do ye purpose to lead bold
Heracles to the city of Aeetes? At Argos it is his fate to labour for
insolent Eurystheus and to accomplish full twelve toils and dwell with
the immortals, if so be that he bring to fulfilment a few more yet;
wherefore let there be no vain regret for him. Likewise it is destined
for Polyphemus to found a glorious city at the mouth of Cius among the
Mysians and to fill up the measure of his fate in the vast land of the
Chalybes. But a goddess-nymph through love has made Hylas her husband,
on whose account those two wandered and were left behind."

He spake, and with a plunge wrapped him about with the restless wave;
and round him the dark water foamed in seething eddies and dashed
against the hollow ship as it moved through the sea. And the heroes
rejoiced, and Telamon son of Aeacus came in haste to Jason, and grasping
his hand in his own embraced him with these words:

"Son of Aeson, be not wroth with me, if in my folly I have erred, for
grief wrought upon me to utter a word arrogant and intolerable. But let
me give my fault to the winds and let our hearts be joined as before."

Him the son of Aeson with prudence addressed: "Good friend, assuredly
with an evil word didst thou revile me, saying before them all that I
was the wronger of a kindly man. But not for long will I nurse bitter
wrath, though indeed before I was grieved. For it was not for flocks of
sheep, no, nor for possessions that thou wast angered to fury, but for a
man, thy comrade. And I were fain thou wouldst even champion me against
another man if a like thing should ever befall me."

He spake, and they sat down, united as of old. But of those two, by the
counsel of Zeus, one, Polyphemus son of Eilatus, was destined to found
and build a city among the Mysians bearing the river's name, and the
other, Heracles, to return and toil at the labours of Eurystheus. And he
threatened to lay waste the Mysian land at once, should they not
discover for him the doom of Hylas, whether living or dead. And for him
they gave pledges choosing out the noblest sons of the people and took
an oath that they would never cease from their labour of search.
Therefore to this day the people of Cius enquire for Hylas the son of
Theiodamas; and take thought for the well-built Trachis. For there did
Heracles settle the youths whom they sent from Cius as pledges.

And all day long and all night the wind bore the ship on, blowing fresh
and strong; but when dawn rose there was not even a breath of air. And
they marked a beach jutting forth from a bend of the coast, very broad
to behold, and by dint of rowing came to land at sunrise.




BOOK II


SUMMARY OF BOOK II

     Fight between Polydeuces and Amycus, King of the Bebrycians; defeat
     and death of Amycus (1-97).--Victory of the Argonauts over the
     Bebrycians; arrival at the abode of Phineus (98-177).--History of
     Phineus and the Harpies, who are chased by Zetes and Calais, sons
     of Boreas (178-300).--Prediction of Phineus and return of the sons
     of Boreas (301-447).--Episode of Paraebius (448-499).--Origin of
     the Etesian winds (500-527).--Argo passes between the Symplegades
     by the aid of Athena (528-647).--Arrival at the isle Thynias;
     apparition of Apollo, to whom they pay honour (648-719).--Arrival
     among the Mariandyni, where King Lycus welcomes them
     (720-814).--Deaths of Idmon and Tiphys: Ancaeus chosen pilot
     (815-910).--The Argonauts pass Sinope and the Cape of the Amazons,
     and reach the Chalybes (911-1008).--Customs of the Tibareni and
     Mossynoeci (1009-1029).--Contest with the birds of the isle
     Aretias, where they meet with the sons of Phrixus, shipwrecked on
     their way to Hellas (1030-1225).--Arrival in Colchis (1226-1285).



BOOK II


Here were the oxstalls and farm of Amycus, the haughty king of the
Bebrycians, whom once a nymph, Bithynian Melie, united to Poseidon
Genethlius, bare--the most arrogant of men; for even for strangers he
laid down an insulting ordinance, that none should depart till they had
made trial of him in boxing; and he had slain many of the neighbours.
And at that time too he went down to the ship and in his insolence
scorned to ask them the occasion of their voyage, and who they were, but
at once spake out among them all:

"Listen, ye wanderers by sea, to what it befits you to know. It is the
rule that no stranger who comes to the Bebrycians should depart till he
has raised his hands in battle against mine. Wherefore select your
bravest warrior from the host and set him here on the spot to contend
with me in boxing. But if ye pay no heed and trample my decrees under
foot, assuredly to your sorrow will stern necessity come upon you."

Thus he spake in his pride, but fierce anger seized them when they heard
it, and the challenge smote Polydeuces most of all. And quickly he stood
forth his comrades' champion, and cried:

"Hold now, and display not to us thy brutal violence, whoever thou art;
for we will obey thy rules, as thou sayest. Willingly now do I myself
undertake to meet thee."

Thus he spake outright; but the other with rolling eyes glared on him,
like to a lion struck by a javelin when hunters in the mountains are
hemming him round, and, though pressed by the throng, he recks no more
of them, but keeps his eyes fixed, singling out that man only who struck
him first and slew him not. Hereupon the son of Tyndareus laid aside his
mantle, closely-woven, delicately-wrought, which one of the Lemnian
maidens had given him as a pledge of hospitality; and the king threw
down his dark cloak of double fold with its clasps and the knotted crook
of mountain olive which he carried. Then straightway they looked and
chose close by a spot that pleased them and bade their comrades sit upon
the sand in two lines; nor were they alike to behold in form or in
stature. The one seemed to be a monstrous son of baleful Typhoeus or of
Earth herself, such as she brought forth aforetime, in her wrath against
Zeus; but the other, the son of Tyndareus, was like a star of heaven,
whose beams are fairest as it shines through the nightly sky at
eventide. Such was the son of Zeus, the bloom of the first down still on
his cheeks, still with the look of gladness in his eyes. But his might
and fury waxed like a wild beast's; and he poised his hands to see if
they were pliant as before and were not altogether numbed by toil and
rowing. But Amycus on his side made no trial; but standing apart in
silence he kept his eyes upon his foe, and his spirit surged within him
all eager to dash the life-blood from his breast. And between them
Lycoreus, the henchman of Amycus, placed at their feet on each side two
pairs of gauntlets made of raw hide, dry, exceeding tough. And the king
addressed the hero with arrogant words:

"Whichever of these thou wilt, without casting lots, I grant thee
freely, that thou mayst not blame me hereafter. Bind them about thy
hands; thou shalt learn and tell another how skilled I am to carve the
dry oxhides and to spatter men's cheeks with blood."

Thus he spake; but the other gave back no taunt in answer, but with a
light smile readily took up the gauntlets that lay at his feet; and to
him came Castor and mighty Talaus, son of Bias, and they quickly bound
the gauntlets about his hands, often bidding him be of good courage. And
to Amycus came Aretus and Ornytus, but little they knew, poor fools,
that they had bound them for the last time on their champion, a victim
of evil fate.

Now when they stood apart and were ready with their gauntlets,
straightway in front of their faces they raised their heavy hands and
matched their might in deadly strife. Hereupon the Bebrycian king--even
as a fierce wave of the sea rises in a crest against a swift ship, but
she by the skill of the crafty pilot just escapes the shock when the
billow is eager to break over the bulwark--so he followed up the son of
Tyndareus, trying to daunt him, and gave him no respite. But the hero,
ever unwounded, by his skill baffled the rush of his foe, and he quickly
noted the brutal play of his fists to see where he was invincible in
strength, and where inferior, and stood unceasingly and returned blow
for blow. And as when shipwrights with their hammers smite ships'
timbers to meet the sharp clamps, fixing layer upon layer; and the blows
resound one after another; so cheeks and jaws crashed on both sides, and
a huge clattering of teeth arose, nor did they cease ever from striking
their blows until laboured gasping overcame both. And standing a little
apart they wiped from their foreheads sweat in abundance, wearily
panting for breath. Then back they rushed together again, as two bulls
fight in furious rivalry for a grazing heifer. Next Amycus rising on
tiptoe, like one who slays an ox, sprung to his full height and swung
his heavy hand down upon his rival; but the hero swerved aside from the
rush, turning his head, and just received the arm on his shoulder; and
coming near and slipping his knee past the king's, with a rush he struck
him above the ear, and broke the bones inside, and the king in agony
fell upon his knees; and the Minyan heroes shouted for joy; and his life
was poured forth all at once.

Nor were the Bebrycians reckless of their king; but all together took up
rough clubs and spears and rushed straight on Polydeuces. But in front
of him stood his comrades, their keen swords drawn from the sheath.
First Castor struck upon the head a man as he rushed at him: and it was
cleft in twain and fell on each side upon his shoulders. And Polydeuces
slew huge Itymoneus and Mimas. The one, with a sudden leap, he smote
beneath the breast with his swift foot and threw him in the dust; and as
the other drew near he struck him with his right hand above the left
eyebrow, and tore away his eyelid and the eyeball was left bare. But
Oreides, insolent henchman of Amycus, wounded Talaus son of Bias in the
side, but did not slay him, but only grazing the skin the bronze sped
under his belt and touched not the flesh. Likewise Aretus with
well-seasoned club smote Iphitus, the steadfast son of Eurytus, not yet
destined to an evil death; assuredly soon was he himself to be slain by
the sword of Clytius. Then Ancaeus, the dauntless son of Lycurgus,
quickly seized his huge axe, and in his left hand holding a bear's dark
hide, plunged into the midst of the Bebrycians with furious onset; and
with him charged the sons of Aeacus, and with them started warlike
Jason. And as when amid the folds grey wolves rush down on a winter's
day and scare countless sheep, unmarked by the keen-scented dogs and the
shepherds too, and they seek what first to attack and carry off, often
glaring around, but the sheep are just huddled together and trample on
one another; so the heroes grievously scared the arrogant Bebrycians.
And as shepherds or beekeepers smoke out a huge swarm of bees in a rock,
and they meanwhile, pent up in their hive, murmur with droning hum,
till, stupefied by the murky smoke, they fly forth far from the rock; so
they stayed steadfast no longer, but scattered themselves inland through
Bebrycia, proclaiming the death of Amycus; fools, not to perceive that
another woe all unforeseen was hard upon them. For at that hour their
vineyards and villages were being ravaged by the hostile spear of Lycus
and the Mariandyni, now that their king was gone. For they were ever at
strife about the ironbearing land. And now the foe was destroying their
steadings and farms, and now the heroes from all sides were driving off
their countless sheep, and one spake among his fellows thus:

"Bethink ye what they would have done in their cowardice if haply some
god had brought Heracles hither. Assuredly, if he had been here, no
trial would there have been of fists, I ween, but when the king drew
near to proclaim his rules, the club would have made him forget his
pride and the rules to boot. Yea, we left him uncared for on the strand
and we sailed oversea; and full well each one of us shall know our
baneful folly, now that he is far away."

Thus he spake, but all these things had been wrought by the counsels of
Zeus. Then they remained there through the night and tended the hurts of
the wounded men, and offered sacrifice to the immortals, and made ready
a mighty meal; and sleep fell upon no man beside the bowl and the
blazing sacrifice. They wreathed their fair brows with the bay that grew
by the shore, whereto their hawsers were bound, and chanted a song to
the lyre of Orpheus in sweet harmony; and the windless shore was charmed
by their song; and they celebrated the Therapnaean son of Zeus.[1]

[Footnote 1: i.e. Polydeuces.]

But when the sun rising from far lands lighted up the dewy hills and
wakened the shepherds, then they loosed their hawsers from the stem of
the bay-tree and put on board all the spoil they had need to take; and
with a favouring wind they steered through the eddying Bosporus.
Hereupon a wave like a steep mountain rose aloft in front as though
rushing upon them, ever upheaved above the clouds; nor would you say
that they could escape grim death, for in its fury it hangs over the
middle of the ship, like a cloud, yet it sinks away into calm if it
meets with a skilful helmsman. So they by the steering-craft of Tiphys
escaped, unhurt but sore dismayed. And on the next day they fastened the
hawsers to the coast opposite the Bithynian land.

There Phineus, son of Agenor, had his home by the sea, Phineus who above
all men endured most bitter woes because of the gift of prophecy which
Leto's son had granted him aforetime. And he reverenced not a whit even
Zeus himself, for he foretold unerringly to men his sacred will.
Wherefore Zeus sent upon him a lingering old age, and took from his eyes
the pleasant light, and suffered him not to have joy of the dainties
untold that the dwellers around ever brought to his house, when they
came to enquire the will of heaven. But on a sudden, swooping through
the clouds, the Harpies with their crooked beaks incessantly snatched
the food away from his mouth and hands. And at times not a morsel of
food was left, at others but a little, in order that he might live and
be tormented. And they poured forth over all a loathsome stench; and no
one dared not merely to carry food to his mouth but even to stand at a
distance; so foully reeked the remnants of the meal. But straightway
when he heard the voice and the tramp of the band he knew that they were
the men passing by, at whose coming Zeus' oracle had declared to him
that he should have joy of his food. And he rose from his couch, like a
lifeless dream, bowed over his staff, and crept to the door on his
withered feet, feeling the walls; and as he moved, his limbs trembled
for weakness and age; and his parched skin was caked with dirt, and
naught but the skin held his bones together. And he came forth from the
hall with wearied knees and sat on the threshold of the courtyard; and a
dark stupor covered him, and it seemed that the earth reeled round
beneath his feet, and he lay in a strengthless trance, speechless. But
when they saw him they gathered round and marvelled. And he at last drew
laboured breath from the depths of his chest and spoke among them with
prophetic utterance:

"Listen, bravest of all the Hellenes, if it be truly ye, whom by a
king's ruthless command Jason is leading on the ship Argo in quest of
the fleece. It is ye truly. Even yet my soul by its divination knows
everything. Thanks I render to thee, O king, son of Leto, plunged in
bitter affliction though I be. I beseech you by Zeus the god of
suppliants, the sternest foe to sinful men, and for the sake of Phoebus
and Hera herself, under whose especial care ye have come hither, help
me, save an ill-fated man from misery, and depart not uncaring and
leaving me thus as ye see. For not only has the Fury set her foot on my
eyes and I drag on to the end a weary old age; but besides my other woes
a woe hangs over me--the bitterest of all. The Harpies, swooping down
from some unseen den of destruction ever snatch the food from my mouth.
And I have no device to aid me. But it were easier, when I long for a
meal, to escape my own thoughts than them, so swiftly do they fly
through the air. But if haply they _do_ leave me a morsel of food it
reeks of decay and the stench is unendurable, nor could any mortal bear
to draw near even for a moment, no, not if his heart were wrought of
adamant. But necessity, bitter and insatiate, compels me to abide and
abiding to put food in my cursed belly. These pests, the oracle
declares, the sons of Boreas shall restrain. And no strangers are they
that shall ward them off if indeed I am Phineus who was once renowned
among men for wealth and the gift of prophecy, and if I am the son of my
father Agenor; and, when I ruled among the Thracians, by my bridal gifts
I brought home their sister Cleopatra to be my wife."

So spake Agenor's son; and deep sorrow seized each of the heroes, and
especially the two sons of Boreas. And brushing away a tear they drew
nigh, and Zetes spake as follows, taking in his own the hand of the
grief-worn sire:

"Unhappy one, none other of men is more wretched than thou, methinks.
Why upon thee is laid the burden of so many sorrows? Hast thou with
baneful folly sinned against the gods through thy skill in prophecy? For
this are they greatly wroth with thee? Yet our spirit is dismayed within
us for all our desire to aid thee, if indeed the god has granted this
privilege to us two. For plain to discern to men of earth are the
reproofs of the immortals. And we will never check the Harpies when they
come, for all our desire, until thou hast sworn that for this we shall
not lose the favour of heaven."

Thus he spake; and towards him the aged sire opened his sightless eyes,
and lifted them up and replied with these words:

"Be silent, store not up such thoughts in thy heart, my child. Let the
son of Leto be my witness, he who of his gracious will taught me the
lore of prophecy, and be witness the ill-starred doom which possesses me
and this dark cloud upon my eyes, and the gods of the underworld--and
may their curse be upon me if I die perjured thus--no wrath from heaven
will fall upon you two for your help to me."

Then were those two eager to help him because of the oath. And quickly
the younger heroes prepared a feast for the aged man, a last prey for
the Harpies; and both stood near him, to smite with the sword those
pests when they swooped down. Scarcely had the aged man touched the food
when they forthwith, like bitter blasts or flashes of lightning,
suddenly darted from the clouds, and swooped down with a yell, fiercely
craving for food; and the heroes beheld them and shouted in the midst of
their onrush; but they at the cry devoured everything and sped away over
the sea afar; and an intolerable stench remained. And behind them the
two sons of Boreas raising their swords rushed in pursuit. For Zeus
imparted to them tireless strength; but without Zeus they could not have
followed, for the Harpies used ever to outstrip the blasts of the west
wind when they came to Phineus and when they left him. And as when, upon
the mountain-side, hounds, cunning in the chase, run in the track of
horned goats or deer, and as they strain a little behind gnash their
teeth upon the edge of their jaws in vain; so Zetes and Calais rushing
very near just grazed the Harpies in vain with their finger-tips. And
assuredly they would have torn them to pieces, despite heaven's will,
when they had overtaken them far off at the Floating Islands, had not
swift Iris seen them and leapt down from the sky from heaven above, and
checked them with these words:

"It is not lawful, O sons of Boreas, to strike with your swords the
Harpies, the hounds of mighty Zeus; but I myself will give you a pledge,
that hereafter they shall not draw near to Phineus."

With these words she took an oath by the waters of Styx, which to all
the gods is most dread and most awful, that the Harpies would never
thereafter again approach the home of Phineus, son of Agenor, for so it
was fated. And the heroes yielding to the oath, turned back their flight
to the ship. And on account of this men call them the Islands of Turning
though aforetime they called them the Floating Islands. And the Harpies
and Iris parted. They entered their den in Minoan Crete; but she sped up
to Olympus, soaring aloft on her swift wings.

Meanwhile the chiefs carefully cleansed the old man's squalid skin and
with due selection sacrificed sheep which they had borne away from the
spoil of Amycus. And when they had laid a huge supper in the hall, they
sat down and feasted, and with them feasted Phineus ravenously,
