my folk. It was Harek the scald, with his head broken.

"Here are fine doings," said Kolgrim, as the men swarmed on board.
"What is on hand now?"

"It is not done with yet," said a man: "look at yon ship."

Then came Harek, out of breath, and pale.

"Let me on board, King Ranald, or I am a dead man," he cried.

"Come, then!" I answered; and he ran across the plank, and Kolgrim
pulled it in after him. All my men were come.

Then I looked at the ship spoken of. Men were swarming into her,
and were making ready to sail. But if she meant to stay our going,
she was too far up the harbour, and we were already casting off the
shore ropes.

"Hold on," said Thord; "here come the other scald and two men."

The crowd that was yet round the fallen men had parted to let
Thiodolf pass, and he came quickly. One of the men bore a chest,
and the other a bale of somewhat. They gave these over the gunwale
to my people, and Thiodolf spoke to me from the wharf.

"These are gifts from Harald to Einar's foster son," he said. "He
bids me say that you have done your errand well, and that this is
to prove it. Also he says that Ranald, son of Vemund, may need mail
to keep his kingship withal, and so he has sent you a suit."

"That is a hard saying," I answered; "is it insult?"

"Nay, but a broad hint only. The gift is most goodly."

"Well," said I, "it is plain that he will warn me from Norway. I
will leave you, good friend, to say for me what should be said.
Maybe if I sent a message it would go wrongly from my lips."

Thiodolf laughed, and bade me farewell. He paid no heed to Harek,
who sat on the deck with his back to him.

Then Kolgrim whistled shrill to his men, and we began to move down
to the harbour mouth. I heard a sharp voice hurrying the men in the
other ship; but they could not be ready in time to catch us.

When we were well out to sea, I asked Harek what all this was
about.

"Your going has spoiled a plan that Eric, the king's son, had made.
He wanted your sword, and thought also that to rid himself now of
Vemund's son might save him trouble when the crown came to him, as
it will. You were to be set on as you came from the feast tonight
to the guest quarters, as if in a common broil between your men and
his. Then he found you were going, and tried to stay your men, and
next to take these gifts from Thiodolf and me, being very angry,
even to trying to cut me down. Lucky for me that his sword turned
in his hand. But he would have had me slain tonight, certainly, for
he says that it was our fault that you are getting away. He fears
Thiodolf, however. Now I must take service with you, if you will
have me."

It seemed to me that I was making friends with one hand and enemies
with the other, and that last rather more quickly than was well. So
I laughed, and answered:

"I suppose that if I have a scald of my own, King Harald will blame
me for overmuch kingship. However, he is angry enough already, and
maybe a good friend will balance that to me. So if you will indeed
cast in your lot with me, I am glad!"

So I took his hand, and more than friends have he and I been from
that day forward.

Now, when I looked at Harald's strangely-given gifts, I had reason
to say that he was open handed. The chest held two mail shirts, one
of steel rings, gold ornamented and fastened, and the other of
scales on deerskin, both fit for a king. There were two helms also,
one to match either byrnie {iv}, and a seax that was fit to
hang with Sigurd's sword. As for the bale, that held furs of the
best, and blue cloth and scarlet. If Harald banished me, it was for
no ill will; and it was handsomely done, as though he would fit me
out for the viking's path in all honour, that men might not deem me
outlawed for wrongdoing. So I have no ill word to say against him.
Five years later he would have troubled about me and my kingship
not at all; now he must be careful, for his power was not at its
full.

As for young Eric, I suppose that he boasted ever after that he had
put me to flight; but I do not know that it matters if he did.

So I came back to Durness, where I was to meet with Einar; and
peace was made between him and the king, and he thought it well to
go and speak with him. Then he and I must part, and that was hard.

"Now must you go your own way, son Ranald, for Harald is too strong
for us. Maybe that is best for you, for here shall I bide in peace
in Orkney; and that is not a life for a king's son--to sit at a
jarl's table in idleness, or fight petty fights for scatt
withholden and the like. Better for you the wide seas and the lands
where you may make a name, and maybe a kingdom, for yourself. Yet I
shall miss you sorely."

So he said, and I knew that he was right. Maybe the spirit of the
sword I had won got hold of me, as they say will happen; for I had
waxed restless of late, and I had tried to keep it from Einar. Now
I hated myself for it, seeing at hand what I had longed for.

So he went north to meet Harald, and of our parting I will not say
more. I could not then tell that I should not see him again, and
that was well: but I know that when I saw the last flicker of his
sails against the sky, I felt more lonely even than at the
graveside in Southmere.

Yet I was in no worse case than were many nobly-born men at that
time; for whosoever would not bow to Harald and his new laws must
leave Norway, and her bravest were seeking new homes everywhere.
Some had gone to far-off Iceland, and some to East Anglia; some to
the Greek emperor, or Gardariki, and more yet to Ireland. But the
greatest viking of all, Rolf, the son of Rognvald, Einar's young
brother, had gone to France or England, with a mighty following;
for Harald had outlawed him among the first who broke his law by
plundering on the Norway coasts. A good law it was, but it was new,
and so went against the grain at first. Rolf had sworn to make a
new kingdom for himself, and why should not I do the same?

So when I was in the open sea again, with all the world before me,
as the long sea-miles passed I grew lighthearted, and many were the
thoughts of great deeds to come that filled my mind.



Chapter III. Odda, the Ealdorman of Devon.


Now I steered eastward from Sutherland, and sailed down the east
coasts of Scotland and England; and there is nothing to say about
such a cruise, that had nought more wonderful in it than the
scaring of the folk when we put in for food. I had made up my mind
to go to Ireland for the winter, where, as every Northman knew,
there were kingdoms to be won--having no wish to be Rolf's
follower, seeing he was but a jarl's son; and finding that England
had no overlord, seeing that even now Alfred of Wessex and Guthrum
of East Anglia were fighting for mastery, so that the whole land
was racked and torn with strife.

Maybe I thought too much of myself at that time, but I was in no
haste to do aught but cruise about and find where I might best make
a name. I had but my one ship and crew, and I would not throw them
away on some useless business for want of care in choosing.

Now, when we came into the English Channel, a gale began to blow up
from the southwest; and we held over to the French shore, and there
put into a haven that was sheltered enough. The gale strengthened,
and lasted three days; but the people were kindly enough, being of
Saxon kin, who had settled there under the headland they call
Greynose, since Hengist's times of the winning of England across
the water. And when the gale was over, we waited for the sea to go
down, and then came a fair wind from the eastward, as we expected.
So we got provisions on board, and sailed westward again, taking a
long slant over to the English coast, until we sighted the great
rock of Portland; and then the wind came off the land, and in the
early morning veered to the northwest.

The tide was still with us as the light strengthened; then as the
day broke, with the haze of late summer over the land, we found
that we were right in the track of a strange fleet that was coming
up fast from the westward--great ships and small, in a strange
medley and in no sort of order, so that we wondered what they would
be.

"Here comes Rolf Ganger back from Valland," said Kolgrim. "He has
gathered any vessels he could get together, and is going to land in
England."

"We will even head out to sea from across their course," I said.
"Maybe they are Danes from Exeter, flying from the Saxons."

So we headed away for the open channel until at least we knew more.
The fleet drew up steadily, bringing the tide with them; and
presently we fell to wondering at the gathering. For there were
some half-dozen ships that were plainly Norse like ourselves, maybe
twenty Danish-built longships, and about the same number of heavy
trading vessels. There were a few large fishing boats also; but
leading the crowd were five great vessels the like of which none of
us had ever seen or heard of before. And even as we spoke of them,
two of these shook out reefs in their sails, and drew away from the
rest across channel, as if to cut us off.

"Ho, men," I said, when I saw that, "get to arms; for here they
come to speak with us. Maybe we shall have to fight--and these are
no easy nuts to crack!"

Whereat the men laughed; and straightway there was the pleasant
hustle and talk of those who donned mail shirt and helm and set the
throwing weapons to hand with all good will.

"Let us keep on our course," I said to Kolgrim. "We will see if we
cannot weather on these ships, and anyway shall fight them better
apart from the rest. It is a fine breeze for a sailing match."

So we held on; and the two great ships to windward of us began to
gain on us slowly, which was a thing that had never been done by
any ship before. I do not know that even Harald Fairhair had any
swifter ship than this that Halfdan had taken in his flight from
home. Kolgrim waxed very wroth when it became plain that these
could outsail us.

"There is witchcraft about those great hulks," he growled. "They
are neither Norse, nor Frisian, nor Danish, but better than all
three put together."

"I have sailed in ships, and talked of ships, and dreamed of them
moreover, since I could stand alone," said Thord, "but I never so
much as thought of the like of these. If they belong to some new
kind of viking, there are hard times in store for some of us."

"Faith," said I, "I believe they have swept up and made prizes of
all that medley astern of them."

So we held on for half an hour, and all that time they gained
steadily on us; and we neared them quickly at last, for we tried to
hold across their bows and weather on them. That was no good, for
they were as weatherly as we.

Now we could see that their decks were covered with armed men, and
it seemed certain that they meant to make prize of us. The leading
ship was maybe half a mile ahead of the other, and that a mile from
us--all three close-hauled as we strove to gain a weather berth.
Then the leading ship put her helm up and stood across our course,
and the second followed her.

"We must out oars now if we are to weather on them," said Kolgrim
at last.

Then the men shouted; and I looked at the second ship, to which
they were pointing. Her great sail was overboard, for the halliards
had gone--chafed through maybe, or snapped with the strain as she
paid off quickly. Then a new hope came to me.

"Men," I said, "let us take the other vessel, and then come back on
this; they are worth winning."

They cheered. And now the fight seemed to be even--ship to ship at
least, if our foe was larger and higher and swifter than ours; for
I thought that he would hardly have a crew like mine.

We up helm and stood away on the new course the foe had taken,
leaving the crippled ship astern very fast. And now we began to
edge up towards the other vessel, meaning to go about under her
stern, and so shoot to windward of her on the other tack. But then
I thought of a plan which might help us in the fighting. There had
seemed little order and much shouting on board the ship we had left
when her sail fell, and maybe there was the same want of discipline
here.

"Out oars, men! Keep them swinging, but put no weight on them. Let
them pull after us and tire themselves. I have a mind to see how
our dragon looks on yonder high stem head."

The men laughed grimly, and the oars were run out. One called to
me:

"Maybe they beat us in sailing, king; we can teach them somewhat in
weapon play."

"See how they get their oars out," said Kolgrim, with a sour grin;
"a set of lubbers they are."

One by one, and in no order, the long oars were being got to work.
The great ship was half as long again as ours, pulling twenty-eight
oars a side to our twenty. But while ours rose and fell as if
worked by one man, theirs were pulled anyhow, as one might say.

"Better are they at sailing than rowing," said Thord.

Nevertheless they flew down on us, and that because we only made a
show of rowing.

Then we laid on the oars, and came head to wind. The sail rattled
down, and was stowed on deck; and silently we waited, arrows on
string, for the fight that was now close at hand.

Then the great ship hove up, head to wind, right ahead of us, and a
loud hail came from her.

"Who knows what tongue he talks?" I said. "I cannot make him out
rightly."

"'Tis West Saxon," said an old warrior from the waist. "He asks who
we are and what is our business."

"Tell him therefore, if you can speak in his way," I answered; "and
ask the same of him."

So a hail or two went backwards and forwards, and then:

"Says he is Odda, jarl or somewhat of Devon in Wessex, and bids us
yield to Alfred the king."

"In truth," said I, "if he had not spoken of yielding, I had had
more to say to a king who can build ships like these. Now we will
speak with him on his own deck. Tell him he will have to fight us
first."

The old warrior sent a mighty curt hail back in answer to Odda's
summons; then our war horns blew, and the oars rose and fell, and
we were grinding our bows alongside the great ship's quarter before
they knew we were there. Alfred's men had yet somewhat to learn of
fighting in a sea way, as it seemed, for we were on their deck aft
before they had risen from their oar benches. There were but one or
two men on the quarter deck, besides the steersman, to oppose us.
Odda thought we should lay our ship alongside his towering sides if
we fought, as I suppose, for he was amidships.

