of the young soldiers turned upon his elbow, and whispered
contemptuously to his neighbor: "Always _olives_, always _peace_: that's
all your music's good for!"

The boy spoke too loud, and Homer caught the discontented tone and words
with an ear quicker than the speaker had given him credit for. He ended
the prelude with a sudden crash on the strings, and said shortly, "And
what is better to sing of than the olive?"

The more courteous Philistines looked sternly on the young soldier; but
he had gone too far to be frightened, and he flashed back: "War is
better. My broadsword is better. If I could sing, I would sing to your
Ares; we call him Mars!"

Homer smiled gravely. "Let it be so," said he; and, in a lower tone, to
the captain, who was troubled at the breach of courtesy, he added, "Let
the boy see what war and Mars are for."

He struck another prelude and began. Then was it that Homer composed his
"Hymn to Mars." In wild measure, and impetuous, he swept along through
the list of Mars's titles and attributes; then his key changed, and his
hearers listened more intently, more solemnly, as in a graver strain,
with slower music, and an almost awed dignity of voice, the bard went
on.--

            "Helper of mortals, hear!
             As thy fires give
        The present boldnesses that strive
             In youth for honor;
    So would I likewise wish to have the power
      To keep off from my head thy bitter hour,
    And quench the false fire of my soul's low kind,
    By the fit ruling of my highest mind I
          Control that sting of wealth
    That stirs me on still to the horrid scath
          Of hideous battle!

    "Do thou, O ever blessed! give me still
    Presence of mind to put in act my will,
          Whate'er the occasion be;
    And so to live, unforced by any fear,
    Beneath those laws of peace, that never are
    Affected with pollutions popular
          Of unjust injury,
    As to bear safe the burden of hard fates,
    Of foes inflexive, and inhuman hates!"

The tones died away; the company was hushed for a moment; and the old
chief then said gravely to his petulant follower, "That is what _men_
fight for, boy." But the boy did not need the counsel. Homer's manner,
his voice, the music itself, the spirit of the song, as much as the
words, had overcome him; and the boasting soldier was covering his tears
with his hands.

Homer felt at once (the prince of gentlemen he) that the little
outbreak, and the rebuke of it, had jarred the ease of their unexpected
meeting. How blessed is the presence of mind with which the musician of
real genius passes from song to song, "whate'er the occasion be!" With
the ease of genius he changed the tone of his melody again, and sang his
own hymn, "To Earth, the Mother of all."

The triumphant strain is one which harmonizes with every sentiment; and
he commanded instantly the rapt attention of the circle. So engrossed
was he, that he did not seem to observe, as he sang, an addition to
their company of some soldiers from above in the valley, just _as_ he
entered on the passage:--

             "Happy, then, are they
        Whom thou, O great in reverence!
    Are bent to honor. They shall all things find
    In all abundance! All their pastures yield
    Herds in all plenty. All their roofs are filled
               With rich possessions.
      High happiness and wealth attend them,
      While, with laws well-ordered, they
      Cities of happy households sway;
    And their sons exult in the pleasure of youth,
    And their daughters dance with the flower-decked girls,
    Who play among the flowers of summer!
    Such are the honors thy full hands divide;
    Mother of Gods and starry Heaven's bride!"[A]

A buzz of pleasure and a smile ran round the circle, in which the
new-comers joined. They were the soldiers who had been to hear and join
the music at the Carmel-men's post. The tones of Homer's harp had
tempted them to return; and they had brought with them the Hebrew
minstrel, to whom they had been listening. It was the outlaw David, of
Bethlehem Ephrata.

David had listened to Homer more intently than any one; and, as the
pleased applause subsided, the eyes of the circle gathered upon him, and
the manner of all showed that they expected him, in minstrel-fashion, to
take up the same strain.

He accepted the implied invitation, played a short prelude, and taking
Homer's suggestion of topic, sang in parallel with it:--

    "I will sing a new song unto thee, O God!
    Upon psaltery and harp will I sing praise to thee.
    Thou art He that giveth salvation to kings,
    That delivereth David, thy servant, from the sword.
    Rid me and save me from those who speak vanity,
    Whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood,--
    That our sons may be as plants in fresh youth;
    That our daughters may be as corner-stones,--
    The polished stones of our palaces;
    That our garners may be full with all manner of store;
    That our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in the
        way;
    That there may be no cry nor complaint in our streets
    Happy is the people that is in such a case;
    Yea, happy is the people whose God is the Lord!"

The melody was triumphant; and the enthusiastic manner yet more so. The
Philistines listened delighted,--too careless of religion, they, indeed
not to be catholic in presence of religious enthusiasm; and Homer wore
the exalted expression which his face seldom wore. For the first time
since his childhood, Homer felt that he was not alone in the world!

Who shall venture to tell what passed between the two minstrels, when
Homer, leaving his couch, crossed the circle at once, flung himself on
the ground by David's side, gave him his hand; when they looked each
other in the face, and sank down into the rapid murmuring of talk, which
constant gesture illustrated, but did not fully explain to the rough men
around them? They respected the poets' colloquy for a while; but then,
eager again to hear one harp or the other, they persuaded one of the
Ionian sailors to ask Homer again to sing to them.

It was hard to persuade Homer. He shook his head, and turned back to the
soldier-poet.

"What should _I_ sing?" he said.

They did not enter into his notion: hearers will not always. And so,
taking his question literally, they replied, "Sing? Sing us of the
snow-storm, the storm of stones, of which you sang at noon."

Poor Homer! It was easier to do it than to be pressed to do it; and he
struck his harp again:--

    "It was as when, some wintry day, to men
      Jove would, in might, his sharp artillery show;
    He wills his winds to sleep, and over plain
      And mountains pours, in countless flakes, his snow,
    Deep it conceals the rocky cliffs and hills,
      Then covers all the blooming meadows o'er,
    All the rich monuments of mortals' skill,
      All ports and rocks that break the ocean-shore
    Rock, haven, plain, are buried by its fall;
    But the near wave, unchanging, drinks it all.
    So while these stony tempests veil the skies,
    While this on Greeks, and that on Trojans flies,
    The walls unchanged above the clamor rise."[B]

The men looked round upon David, whose expression, as he returned the
glance, showed that he had enjoyed the fragment as well as they. But
when they still looked expectant, he did not decline the unspoken
invitation; but, taking Homer's harp, sang, as if the words were
familiar to him:--

    "He giveth snow like wool;
    He scattereth the hoar-frost like ashes;
    He casteth forth his ice like morsels;
    Who can stand before his cold?
    He sendeth forth his word, and melteth them;
    He causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow."

"Always this '_He_,'" said one of the young soldiers to another.

"Yes," he replied; "and it was so in the beginning of the evening, when
we were above there."

"There is a strange difference between the two men, though the one plays
as well as the other, and the Greek speaks with quite as little foreign
accent as the Jew, and their subjects are the same."

"Yes," said the young Philistine harper; "if the Greek should sing one
of the Hebrew's songs, you would know he had borrowed it, in a moment."

"And so, if it were the other way."

"Of course," said their old captain, joining in this conversation.
"Homer, if you call him so, sings the thing made: David sings the maker.
Or, rather, Homer thinks of the thing made: David thinks of the maker,
whatever they sing."

"I was going to say that Homer would sing of cities; and David, of the
life in them."

"It is not what they say so much, as the way they look at it. The Greek
sees the outside,--the beauty of the thing; the Hebrew--"

"Hush!"

For David and his new friend had been talking too. Homer had told him of
the storm at sea they met a few days before; and David, I think, had
spoken of a mountain-tornado, as he met it years before. In the
excitement of his narrative he struck the harp, which was still in his
hand, and sung:--

    "Then the earth shook and trembled,
    The foundations of the hills moved and were shaken,
        Because He was wroth;
    There went up a smoke out of his nostrils,
    And fire out of his mouth devoured;
        It burned with living coal.
      He bowed the heavens also, and came down,
    And darkness was under his feet;
    He rode upon a cherub and did fly,
    Yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.
    He made darkness his resting-place,
    His pavilion were dark waters and clouds of the skies;
    At the brightness before him his clouds passed by,
      Hail-stones and coals of fire.
    The Lord also thundered in the heavens,
    And the highest gave his voice;
      Hail-stones and coals of fire.
    Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them,
    And he shot out his lightnings, and discomfited them.
      Then the channels of waters were seen,
      And the foundations of the world were made known,
        At thy rebuke, O Lord!
      At the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
        He sent from above, he took me,
        He drew me out of many waters."

"Mine were but a few verses," said Homer. "I am more than repaid by
yours. Imagine Neptune, our sea-god, looking on a battle:--

    "There he sat high, retired from the seas;
    There looked with pity on his Grecians beaten;
    There burned with rage at the god-king who slew them.
    Then he rushed forward from the rugged mountains,
         Quickly descending;
    He bent the forests also as he came down,
    And the high cliffs shook under his feet.
       Three times he trod upon them,
    And with his fourth step reached the home he sought for.

    "There was his palace, in the deep waters of the seas,
    Shining with gold, and builded forever.
    There he yoked him his swift-footed horses;
    Their hoofs are brazen, and their manes are golden.
       He binds them with golden thongs,
       He seizes his golden goad,
    He mounts upon his chariot, and doth fly:
    Yes! he drives them forth into the waves!
    And the whales rise under him from the depths,
        For they know he is their king;
    And the glad sea is divided into parts,
    That his steeds may fly along quickly;
    And his brazen axle passes dry between the waves,
    So, bounding fast, they bring him to his Grecians."[C]

And the poets sank again into talk.

"You see it," said the old Philistine. "He paints the picture. David
sings the life of the picture."

"Yes: Homer sees what he sings; David feels his song."

"Homer's is perfect in its description."

"Yes; but for life, for the soul of the description, you need the
Hebrew."

"Homer might be blind; and, with that fancy and word-painting power of
his, and his study of everything new, he would paint pictures as he
sang, though unseen."

"Yes," said another; "but David--" And he paused.

"But David?" asked the chief.

"I was going to say that he might be blind, deaf, imprisoned, exiled,
sick, or all alone, and that yet he would never know he was alone;
feeling as he does, as he must to sing so, of the presence of this Lord
of his!"

"He does not think of a snow-flake, but as sent from him."

"While the snow-flake is reminding Homer of that hard, worrying,
slinging work of battle. He must have seen fight himself."

They were hushed again. For, though they no longer dared ask the poets
to sing to them,--so engrossed were they in each other's society,--the
soldiers were hardly losers from this modest courtesy. For the poets
were constantly arousing each other to strike a chord, or to sing some
snatch of remembered song. And so it was that Homer, _apropos_ of I do
not know what, sang in a sad tone:--

    "Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,
    Now green in youth, now withering on the ground:
    Another race the following spring supplies;
    They fall successive, and successive rise.
    So generations in their course decay,
    So flourish these, when those have passed away."[D]

David waited for a change in the strain; but Homer stopped. The young
Hebrew asked him to go on; but Homer said that the passage which
followed was mere narrative, from a long narrative poem. David looked
surprised that his new friend had not pointed a moral as he sang; and
said simply, "We sing that thus:--

    "As for man, his days are as grass;
    As a flower of the field, so he flourisheth;
    For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone,
    And the place thereof shall know it no more.
         But the mercy of the Lord
         Is from everlasting to everlasting
            Of them that fear him;
    And his righteousness
        Unto children's children,
          To such as keep his covenant,
    As remember his commandments to do them!"

Homer's face flashed delighted. "I, like you, 'keep his covenant,'" he
cried; and then without a lyre, for his was still in David's hands, he
sang, in clear tone:--

    "Thou bid'st me birds obey;--I scorn their flight,
    If on the left they rise, or on the right!
    Heed them who may, the will of Jove I own,
    Who mortals and immortals rules alone!"[E]

"That is more in David's key," said the young Philistine harper, seeing
that the poets had fallen to talk together again. "But how would it
sound in one of the hymns on one of our feast-days?"

    "Who mortals and immortals rules alone."

"How, indeed?" cried one of his young companions. "There would be more
sense in what the priests say and sing, if each were not quarrelling for
his own,--Dagon against Astarte, and Astarte against Dagon."

The old captain bent over, that the poets might not hear him, and
whispered: "There it is that the Hebrews have so much more heart than we
in such things. Miserable fellows though they are, so many of them, yet,
when I have gone through their whole land with the caravans, the chances
have been that any serious-minded man spoke of no God but this '_He_'
of David's."

"What is his name?"

"They do not know themselves, I believe."

"Well, as I said an hour ago, God's man or Dagon's man,--for those are
good names enough for me,--I care little; but I should like to sing as
that young fellow does."

"My boy," said the old man, "have not you heard him enough to see that
it is not _he_ that sings, near as much as this love of his for a Spirit
he does not name? It is that spirited heart of his that sings."

"_You_ sing like him? Find his life, boy; and perhaps it may sing for
you."

"We should be more manly men, if he sang to us every night."

"Or if the other did," said an Ionian sailor.

"Yes," said the chief. "And yet, I think, if your countryman sang every
night to me, he would make me want the other. Whether David's singing
would send me to his, I do not feel sure. But how silly to compare them!
As well compare the temple in Accho with the roar of a whirlwind--"

"Or the point of my lance with the flight of an eagle. The men are in
two worlds."

"O, no! that is saying too much. You said that one could paint
pictures--"

"--Into which the other puts life. Yes, I did say so. We are fortunate
that we have them together."

"For this man sings of men quite as well as the other does; and to have
the other sing of God--'

"--Why, it completes the song. Between them they bring the two worlds
together."

"He bows the heavens, and comes down," said the boy of the olive-harp,
trying to hum David's air.

"Let us ask them--"

And just then there rang along the valley the sound of a distant
conch-shell. The soldiers groaned, roused up, and each looked for his
own side-arms and his own skin.

But the poets talked on unheeding.

The old chief knocked down a stack of lances; but the crash did not
rouse them. He was obliged himself to interrupt their eager converse.

"I am sorry to break in; but the night-horn has sounded to rest, and the
guard will be round to inspect the posts. I am sorry to hurry you away,
sir," he said to David.

David thanked him courteously.
