
BARTHOLOMEW GOSNOLD'S DISCOVERY OF CAPE COD[1]

(1602)

I

BY GABRIEL ARCHER, ONE OF HIS COMPANIONS


The said captain [Gosnold] did set sail from Falmouth the day and year
above written accompanied with thirty-two persons, whereof eight
mariners and sailors, twelve purposing upon the discovery to return
with the ship for England, the rest remain there for population. The
fourteenth of April following, we had sight of Saint Mary's, an island
of the Azores....

The fifteenth day of May we had again sight of the land, which made
ahead, being as we thought an island, by reason of a large sound that
appeared westward between it and the main, for coming to the west end
thereof, we did perceive a large opening, we called it Shoal Hope.
Near this cape we came to anchor in fifteen fathoms, where we took
great store of codfish, for which we altered the name, and called it
Cape Cod.[2] Here we saw sculls of herring, mackerel, and other small
fish, in great abundance. This is a low sandy shoal, but without
danger, also we came to anchor again in sixteen fathoms, fair by the
land in the latitude of 42 degrees. This cape is well near a mile
broad, and lieth north-east by east. The captain went here ashore and
found the ground to be full of pease, strawberries, whortleberries,
&c., as then unripe, the sand also by the shore somewhat deep, the
firewood there by us taken in was of cypress, birch, witch-hazel and
beech. A young Indian came here to the captain, armed with his bow and
arrows, and had certain plates of copper hanging at his ears; he
showed a willingness to help us in our occasions.

The sixteenth, we trended the coast southerly, which was all champaign
and full of grass, but the island somewhat woody. Twelve leagues from
Cape Cod, we descried a point with some breach, a good distance off,
and keeping our luff to double it, we came on the sudden into shoal
water, yet well quitted ourselves thereof. This breach we called
Tucker's Terror, upon his exprest fear. The point we named Point Care;
having passed it we bore up again with the land, and in the night came
with it anchoring in eight fathoms, the ground good.

The seventeenth, appeared many breaches round about us, so as we
continued that day without remove. The eighteenth, being fair we sent
forth the boat, to sound over a breach, that in our course lay of
another point, by us called Gilbert's Point, who returned us four,
five, six, and seven fathoms over. Also, a discovery of divers islands
which after proved to be hills and hammocks, distinct within the land.
This day there came unto the ship's side divers canoes, the Indians
apparelled as aforesaid, with tobacco and pipes steeled with copper,
skins, artificial strings and other trifles to barter; one had hanging
about his neck a plate of rich copper, in length a foot, in breadth
half a foot for a breastplate, the ears of all the rest had pendants
of copper. Also, one of them had his face painted over, and head stuck
with feathers in manner of a turkey-cock's train. These are more
timorous than those of the Savage Rock, yet very thievish.

The nineteenth, we passed over the breach of Gilbert's Point in four
or five fathoms, and anchored a league or somewhat more beyond it;
between the last two points are two leagues, the interim, along shoal
water, the latitude here is 41 degrees two third parts.

The twentieth, by the ship's side, we there killed penguins, and saw
many sculls of fish. The coast from Gilbert's Point to the supposed
isles lieth east and by south. Here also we discovered two inlets
which might promise fresh water, inwardly whereof we perceived much
smoke, as though some population had there been. This coast is very
full of people, for that as we trended the same savages still run
along the shore, as men much admiring at us.

The one-and-twentieth, we went coasting from Gilbert's Point to the
supposed isles, in ten, nine, eight, seven, and six fathoms, close
aboard the shore, and that depth lieth a league off. A little from the
supposed isles, appeared unto us an opening, with which we stood,
judging it to be the end which Captain Gosnold descried from Cape Cod,
and as he thought to extend some thirty or more miles in length, and
finding there but three fathoms a league off, we omitted to make
further discovery of the same, calling it Shoal Hope.

From this opening the main lieth southwest, which coasting along we
saw a disinhabited island, which so afterward appeared unto us: we
bore with it, and named it Martha's Vineyard; from Shoal Hope it is
eight leagues in circuit, the island is five miles, and hath 41
degrees and one quarter of latitude. The place most pleasant; for the
two-and-twentieth, we went ashore, and found It full of wood, vines,
gooseberry bushes, whortleberries, raspberries, eglantines, &c. Here
we had cranes, stearnes, shoulers, geese, and divers other birds which
there at that time upon the cliffs being sandy with some rocky stones,
did breed and had young. In this place we saw deer: here we rode in
eight fathoms near the shore where we took great store of cod,--as
before at Cape Cod, but much better.

The three-and-twentieth we weighed, and toward night came to anchor at
the northwest part of this island, where the next morning offered unto
us fast running thirteen savages apparelled as aforesaid, and armed
with bows and arrows without any fear. They brought tobacco,
deer-skins, and some sodden fish. These offered themselves unto us in
great familiarity, who seemed to be well-conditioned. They came more
rich in copper than any before. This island is sound, and hath no
danger about it.

The four-and-twentieth, we set sail and doubled the Cape of another
island next unto it, which we called Dover Cliff, and then came into a
fair sound[3], where we rode all night; the next morning we sent off
one boat to discover another cape, that lay between us and the main,
from which were a ledge of rocks a mile into the sea, but all above
water, and without danger; we went about them, and came to anchor in
eight fathoms, a quarter of a mile from the shore, in one of the
stateliest sounds that ever I was in. This called we Gosnold's Hope;
the north bank whereof is the main, which stretcheth east and west.
This island Captain Gosnold called Elizabeth's isle, where we
determined our abode; the distance between every one of these islands
is, viz, from Martha's Vineyard to Dover Cliff, half a league over the
sound, thence to Elizabeth's isle[4], one league distant. From
Elizabeth's island unto the main is four leagues. On the north side,
near adjoining unto the island Elizabeth, is an islet in compass half
a mile, full of cedars, by me called Hill's Hap, to the northward of
which, in the mouth of an opening on the main, appeareth another the
like, that I called Hap's Hill, for that I hope much hap may be
expected from it.

The eight-and-twentieth we entered counsel about our abode and
plantation, which was concluded to be in the west part of Elizabeth's
island. The north-east thereof running from out our ken. The south and
north standeth in an equal parallel....

The one-and-thirtieth, Captain Gosnold, desirous to see the main
because of the distance, he set sail over; where coming to anchor,
went ashore with certain of his company, and immediately there
presented unto him men, women, and children, who, with all courteous
kindness entertained him, giving him certain skins of wild beasts,
which may be rich furs, tobacco, turtles, hemp, artificial strings
colored, chains, and such like things as at the instant they had about
them. These are a fair-conditioned people. On all the sea-coast along
we found mussel shells that in color did represent mother-of-pearl,
but not having means to dredge, could not apprehend further knowledge
thereof. This main is the goodliest continent that ever we saw,
promising more by far than we any way did expect; for it is
replenished with fair fields, and in them fragrant flowers, also
meadows, and hedged in with stately groves, being furnished also with
pleasant brooks, and beautified with two main rivers that (as we
judge) may haply become good harbors, and conduct us to the hopes men
so greedily do thirst after....

The first of June we employed ourselves in getting sassafras, and the
building of our fort. The second, third, and fourth, we wrought hard
to make ready our house for the provision to be had ashore to sustain
us till our ship's return. This day from the main came to our ship's
side a canoe, with their lord or chief commander, for that they made
little stay only pointing to the sun, as in sign that the next day he
would come and visit us, which he did accordingly.

The fifth, we continued our labor, when there came unto us ashore from
the main fifty savages, stout and lusty men with their bows and
arrows; amongst them there seemed to be one of authority, because the
rest made an inclining respect unto him. The ship was at their coming
a league off, and Captain Gosnold aboard, and so likewise Captain
Gilbert, who almost never went ashore, the company with me only eight
persons. These Indians in hasty manner came toward us, so as we
thought fit to make a stand at an angle between the sea and a fresh
water; I moved myself toward him seven or eight steps, and clapt my
hands first on the sides of mine head, then on my breast, and after
presented my musket with a threatening countenance, thereby to signify
unto them, either a choice of peace or war, whereupon he using me with
mine own signs of peace, I stept forth and embraced him; his company
then all sat down in manner like greyhounds upon their heels, with
whom my company fell a bartering. By this time Captain Gosnold was
come with twelve men more from aboard, and to show the savage seignior
that he was our Captain, we received him in a guard, which he passing
through, saluted the seignior with ceremonies of our salutations,
whereat he nothing moved or altered himself. Our Captain gave him a
straw hat and a pair of knives; the hat awhile he wore, but the knives
he beheld with great marveling, being very bright and sharp; this our
courtesy made them all in love with us....

The eighth we divided the victuals, namely, the ship's store for
England, and that of the planters, which by Captain Gilbert's
allowance could be but six weeks for six months, whereby there fell
out controversy, the rather, for that some seemed secretly to
understand of a purpose Captain Gilbert had not to return with supply
of the issue, those goods should make by him to be carried home.
Besides, there wanted not ambitious conceits in the minds of some
wrangling and ill-disposed persons who overthrew the stay there at
that time, which upon consultation thereof had, about five days after
was fully resolved all for England again. There came in this interim
aboard unto us, that stayed all night, an Indian, whom we used kindly,
and the next day sent ashore; he showed himself the most sober of all
the rest, we held him sent as a spy. In the morning, he filched away
our pothooks, thinking he had not done any ill therein; being ashore
we bid him strike fire, which with an emerald stone (such as the
glaziers use to cut glass) he did. I take it to be the very same that
in Latin is called _smiris_, for striking therewith upon touch-wood
that of purpose he had, by means of a mineral stone used therein,
sparkles proceeded and forthwith kindled with making of flame. The
ninth, we continued working on our storehouse, for as yet remained in
us a desired resolution of making stay. The tenth, Captain Gosnold
fell down with the ship to the little islet of cedars, called Hill's
Hap, to take in cedar wood, leaving me and nine more in the fort, only
with three meals meat, upon promise to return the next day....

The thirteenth, began some of our company that before vowed to stay,
to make revolt: whereupon the planters diminishing, all was given
over. The fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth, we spent in getting
sassafras and fire-wood of cedar, leaving house and little fort, by
ten men in nineteen days sufficient made to harbor twenty persons at
least with their necessary provisions.

The seventeenth, we set sail, doubling the rocks of Elizabeth's
island, and passing by Dover Cliff, came to anchor at Martha's
Vineyard, being five leagues distant from our fort, where we went
ashore, and had young cranes, herneshowes, and geese, which now were
grown to pretty bigness.

The eighteenth, we set sail and bore for England, cutting off our
shallop, that was well able to land five and twenty men or more, a
boat very necessary for the like occasions. The winds do range most
commonly upon this coast in the summer time, westerly. In our homeward
course we observed the foresaid floating weeds to continue till we
came within two hundred leagues of Europe. The three-and-twentieth of
July we came to anchor before Exmouth.[5]

    [1] Gosnold sailed from Falmouth, England, in 1602, Raleigh being
    interested in the expedition. He reached the New England coast in
    May of the same year, and discovered Cape Cod, to which, because of
    the abundance of codfish in neighboring waters he gave the name it
    bears. He afterward discovered Martha's Vineyard, and on the
    neighboring island of Cuttyhunk founded a settlement called
    Elizabeth, the first ever made in New England by Englishmen. This
    settlement lasted only a few weeks, the settlers returning to
    England.

    [2] The entire group of islands, of which Cuttyhunk is one, are now
    known as the Elizabeth Islands. The township which these islands
    comprize bears Gosnold's name. Gosnold became active afterward in
    promoting the expedition which In 1607 resulted in the settlement
    of Jamestown. The report of the expedition to Cape Cod, from which
    this account is taken, is known as "The Relation of Captain
    Gosnold's Voyage." It was "delivered by Gabriel Archer, a gentleman
    in the said voyage." Archer's account is printed in "Old South
    Leaflets."

    [3] Vineyard Sound.

    [4] Now Cuttyhunk, the westermost of the chain of islands called
    the Elizabeth Islands, which separate Buzzard's Bay from Vineyard
    Sound.

    [5] From Exmouth the ship sailed for Portsmouth, her real
    destination.




II

GOSNOLD'S OWN ACCOUNT[1]


I was in good hope that my occasions would have allowed me so much
liberty, as to have come unto you before this time; otherwise I would
have written more at large concerning the country from whence we
lately came, than I did: but not well remembering what I have already
written (though I am assured that there is nothing set down
disagreeing with the truth), I thought it fittest not to go about to
add anything in writing, but rather to leave the report of the rest
till I come myself; which now I hope shall be shortly, and so soon as
with conveniency I may. In the mean time, notwithstanding whereas you
seem not to be satisfied by that which I have already written,
concerning some especial matters; I have here briefly (and as well as
I can) added these few lines for your further satisfaction....

We cannot gather, by anything we could observe in the people, or by
any trial we had thereof ourselves, but that it is as healthful a
climate as any can be. The inhabitants there, as I wrote before, being
of tall stature, comely proportion, strong, active, and some of good
years, and as it should seem very healthful, are sufficient proof of
the healthfulness of the place. First, for ourselves (thanks be to
God) we had not a man sick two days together in all our voyage;
whereas others that went out with us, or about that time on other
voyages (especially such as went upon reprisal,) were most of them
infected with sickness, whereof they lost some of their men, and
brought home a many sick, returning notwithstanding long before us.
But Verazzano, and others (as I take it, you may read in the Book of
Discoveries), do more particularly entreat of the age of the people in
that coast.

The sassafras which we brought we had upon the islands; where though
we had little disturbance, and reasonable plenty; yet for that the
greatest part of our people were employed about the fitting of our
house, and such like affairs, and a few (and those but easy laborers)
undertook this work, the rather because we were informed before our
going forth, that a ton was sufficient to cloy England, and further,
for that we had resolved upon our return, and taken view of our
victual, we judged it then needful to use expedition; which afterward
we had more certain proof of; for when we came to an anchor before
Portsmouth, which was some four days after we made the land, we had
not one cake of bread, nor any drink, but a little vinegar left: for
these and other reasons we returned no otherwise laden than you have
heard. And thus much I hope shall suffice till I can myself come to
give you further notice, which though it be not so soon as I could
have wished, yet I hope it shall be in convenient time.

    [1] From a letter to his father, dated September 1, 1602.




THE FOUNDING OF JAMESTOWN

