would seem, for I saw men hoisting more into the towers as fast as
crane and windlass would serve them.

Now fell the javelins again, and still the grappling irons held the
ships, though the oars were manned. Then dared a man in each ship
to do the bravest deed of that day. Through rain of falling
javelins each ran forward, axe in hand, and cut the grappling lines
as our Norsemen cheered them in wild praise. Yet I know that not
one of those men lived to see that his deed had saved the ships,
for our oars were out and swiftly we towed them away to safety.

Aye, but I saw one tall Dane on the bridge strive to hold the hands
of his fellows that he might save at least the brave man in the
ship below him. And that should be told of him, for such a deed is
that of a true warrior.

All this I watched in dismay, for it seemed to me that we could in
no way take the town. As for Olaf, he said nought; and when we had
come to anchor again he sat on the steersman's bench, looking at
the bridge and saying no word to any of us. The Danes were crowding
the bridge and jeering at us, as one might well see.

Then Rani came aft and sat on the rail by me.

"Well," he said, "how like you this business?"

"Ill enough," I answered. "What can be done?"

He nodded towards Olaf, smiling grimly.

"I know of nothing; but if your king lets him go his own way he
will find out some plan. Know you what he did when the Swedes
blocked us into a lake some years ago?"

"I have not heard," I said.

"Why, seeing that we might not go out by the way in which we came,
Olaf made us dig a new channel, and we went out by that, laughing.
We all had to dig for our lives, grumbling, but we got away."

Now Olaf looked up and saw us, and his face was bright again.

"I am going to see Ethelred," he said, "for I think that I can take
the bridge."

A boat shot alongside even as he spoke, and a thane came to bid
Olaf to a council of the leaders on Ethelred's ship. So Olaf went
with him, and was long away. The tide was almost low, and darkness
had fallen before he came back in high spirits.

"Ethelred was sorely downcast, even to weeping," he told us, "and
so had almost given up hope of taking London. He thought of sailing
away and landing elsewhere. Then I said that I would take the
bridge tomorrow if I had help in what I needed tonight."

Then he looked round on us, and what he saw in our faces made him
laugh a little.

"It seems to me that you are over fearful of stone throwing after
the Danish sort," he said. "Had I not a plan that will save our
heads and the ship's timbers alike, I would not go. I am not the
man to risk both for nought. We will build roofs over the fore
decks and try again."

Then Rani growled:

"How are we to climb out from under your roofs so as to get upon
the bridge? We have already seen that ladders are needed for that
also."

"Nay," said Olaf, "we will bring the bridge down to us," and so he
went forward laughing to find his shipwrights.

So all that night long we wrought as he bade us, and Ethelred's men
came with spars and timber from houses they pulled down ashore, and
when morning broke we had on each ship the framework of a strong,
high-pitched roof that covered the vessels from stem to midships or
more, and stretched out beyond the gunwales on either board.

Then the men who wrought ashore brought us boatloads of strong
hurdles and the sides and roofs of the wattled huts of the
Southwark thralls, and with them all our wooden shelters were
covered so strongly that, if they might not altogether stand the
weight of the greatest stones, these roofs would break their fall
and save the ships.

When all this was finished, King Olaf told us what his plan was. We
were not to try to storm the bridge, but were to break it.

"See," he said, "all night long the wagons that brought more stones
have been rumbling and rattling into the middle of the bridge, and
every Dane thereon will crowd into the centre to see the breaking
of King Olaf's ships, and their weight will help us. We will go so
far under the bridge that we may make fast our cables to the piles,
and then will row hard down the falling tide at its swiftest.
Whereupon the laugh will be on our side instead of with the Danes,
as yesterday."

After that he bade us all sleep, for we had some long hours to wait
for the falling tide when all was done. And we did so, after a good
meal, as well as we could, while the wains yet brought stones, and
arrows and darts in sheaves to the bridge. But forward in our ships
the men were coiling the great cables that should, we hoped, bring
the bridge and stones alike down harmlessly to us.

It was plain that the Danes knew what the roofs over the ships were
for, since all the while that we wrought we could see them pointing
and laughing one to another in scorn, from where we lay, not much
beyond arrow shot below them. But not one of all the men on the
bridge could have guessed what our real plan might be. Only we who
looked at the ancient bridge from the water, and marked how frail
and decaying some of the piles that upheld its narrow spans were,
knew how likely it was that Olaf's plan would succeed. The wide
roadway seemed to them to be strong enough for the wooden towers
and the many tons of stones they had burdened it with; but now that
Olaf had showed us, we saw that it was none so safe, so we waited
in good spirits.

The tide reached its height and as the ships swung idly to their
cables on the slack, the Danes thronged the bridge, thinking,
doubtless, that we should attack when they were within reach, as
yesterday.

The hum of their voices came down to us, and as the time went by,
and the ebb tide set in, the hum strengthened into a long roar of
voices, that broke out into a yelling laugh now and then, as some
word of scorn went round. For they thought our Norsemen were
afraid.

But they could not see beneath the penthouse roofs, where the men,
three at each oar, were armed and ready. Nor could they see the
gangs of twelve men told off to the cables on each foredeck. Six of
these were to pass the cables round the piles and make fast while
the other six were to stand by with shields ready, in case the
roofs were broken. But even then it should not take long to do all
we needed, and some of the roof would be left surely at the worst.

Four only of the ships were to touch the bridge, one at each of the
four midmost pilings. The other four were made fast, stern to stern
of the leading ships, so that their weight of oar play might be
used to the full in the long pull to come, and two ships would haul
at each set of piles where the weight was heaviest upon the bridge.

So we waited until the tide was at its fiercest ebb. The water
rushed through the narrow waterways of the bridge in a broken
torrent streaked with foam that swirled far down the stream towards
us; so the time having come, Olaf gave the word. His own ship was
one of the two in the middle, and Rani was in command of the other.

Then in a moment the oars flashed out, and the moorings were
slipped; a shout went up from the bridge, and then the Danes were
silent, wondering. The foam flew from our bows, and as we dashed up
the stream the Danish war cry broke out again, while from end to
end of the bridge the weapons flashed and sparkled.

Now the arrows rattled on the penthouse roofs, and one or two
glanced from Olaf's armour and mine, and from the shields which
Ottar and I held before him. For we were alone with him at the
helm. He was steering his ship himself, as was Rani, and hardly
would he suffer us to be beside him to shield him. But we would
have it thus in the end.

At last we were almost on the bridge, and Olaf smiled and watched
the ships to right and left of us--the oar blades were bending as
the men struggled with clenched teeth against the fierce current
that flew past us foaming.

Then the Danish grapnels were cast, as yesterday. The shadow of the
bridge fell black upon us--the line of Danish faces were above our
bows--and then down crashed the great stones from above, and I saw
Olaf's lips tighten and set as he saw their work. Yet though the
good ship quivered and reeled under the shock, the penthouse roofs
were strong and steep, and but one great stone tore a hole for
itself, crushing two men beneath it; but the rest bounded into the
water, splintering an oar blade or two as they went. And all the
while the arrows rained round us, and the javelins strove to pierce
the roofs.

Then was a shout from forward of the ship, and Olaf's eyes
brightened as he raised his hand. Instantly the rowers stayed, and
the ships drifted away from the bridge more swiftly than they had
come, while the Danish grappling irons ripped and tore along the
roofs uselessly. There was no firm hold for them.

That made the Danes think that we were driven off, and their yells
began afresh.

Then came a quick word from Olaf, and the oars took the water to
ease the sharp check as the length of the cables was reached, while
the ship astern of us swung to her tow line. The king glanced to
right and left of him, and saw that the other three ships had fared
as well as we, and that they too were dropping down from the
bridge.

How the Danes roared and howled with joy, thinking that we were all
in full retreat! Yet, as the last ship tightened her cable, I saw
the jerk shake one of them from his perch on the bridge bulwarks
and send him headlong into the water.

Olaf saw it, and raised his hand and shouted. And with one accord
the oars of the eight great ships smote the water, and bent, and
tore the waves into foam--and London Bridge was broken!

The memory of that sight will never pass from my mind or from the
mind of any man of us who saw all that the lifted hand and shout of
Olaf the king brought about.

There was a slow groaning of timbers and a cracking, and then a
dead silence. Then the silence was broken by a wild yell of terror
from the swarming Danes, and ere they could fly from the crowded
towers and roadway where the bridge was steepest, the whole length
of three spans bent and swayed towards us, and a wide gap sprang
open across the roadway. Into that gap crumbled a great stone-laden
tower, and men like bees from a shaken swarm. And then those three
spans seemed to melt away with a great rush and roar, and howl of
men in mortal terror--and down the freed tide swept our ships,
dragging after them the timbers that the cables yet held.

Then into the Southwark fortress went Eadmund and his men like
fire, while from the London side of the river came the roar of a
fight, as the citizens fell on the Danes who were fleeing terror
smitten from the weakened spans that were left of London Bridge.

Then Olaf swung our ships to either bank, and past us went in
confusion, on the rush of pent-up water, the great timbers and
piles of the bridge, as it broke up piece by piece in the current.
The men on Ethelred's ships had all they could do to save their
vessels from being stove in by the heavier woodwork when it was
swept down among them.

That danger passed; and now was our turn come to join in the
fighting, for there were none to prevent us from getting the ships
up to the bridge. And so we scaled from our decks the bulwarks that
had been so terrible, and fell on the Danes in the rear as Eadmund
in Southwark and the citizens in London took them in the front. It
must have been that few Danes were left on either bank, for the
fighting lasted no long time, and when we had done with these men
from off the bridge there was no other attack.

So, before the evening came we knew that London was once more in
the hands of Ethelred, and the bells were ringing to welcome back
an English king to English land. For Olaf had brought him home.

There was high feasting in London town that night, and Ethelred
deemed that England was already won. Nor was there any honour too
great for him to show to the man who had wrought this for him.

But what Olaf said was this:

"To win London is much--though, indeed, it should never have been
thus lost--but London is not England. There will be more fighting
yet, if Cnut is a worthy son of Swein Forkbeard."

Now, in after years men made light of this breaking of London
Bridge, and the reason is not far to seek. For, first of all,
Cnut's folk, when they had the upper hand, liked not to hear
thereof. And then the citizens would speak little among themselves
of their thraldom to the Danes, and much of their welcome to
Ethelred and their own share in the business when the bridge had
been broken. And lastly, it was wrought by an outlander. Truly no
Englishman, whether of Saxon or Danish kin, grudges praise to a
stranger when he has won it well, but Olaf had few to speak for him
after he had gone hence. But I have told what I saw, and think that
it should not be forgotten, for it was a great deed. Men sing the
song that Ottar the scald wrote thereon in Olaf's Norway, and I
think that they will sing it for many an age to come.

We have forgotten that song; but the first time he sang it was at
the great feast in the wide hall of the London merchants' guild
that night, and sorely did the few Danish lords, who sat as
captives among us unwillingly enough, scowl as they listened. But
our folk held their breath lest they should lose aught of either
voice or words of the singer, for they had never heard his like
before, and this is part of what he sang {5}:

"Bold in the battle
Bravest in sword play!
Thou wert the breaker
Of London's broad bridge.
Wild waxed the warfare
When thou gold wonnest
Where the shields splintered
'Neath the stones' crashing--
When the war byrnies broke
Beaten beneath them.

"Thine was the strong arm
That Ethelred sought for;
Back to his lost land
Thou the king leddest.
Then was the war storm
Waged when thou earnest
Safe to his high seat
Leading that king's son,
Throned by thy help
On the throne of his fathers."

He ended, and our warriors rose and cheered both hero and singer,
and when the noise ceased Ethelred gave Ottar his own bracelet; but
to Olaf he gave his hand, and there in the presence of all the
company thanked him for what he had wrought, giving more praise to
him than Ottar had sung.

Then sang the English gleemen of the deeds of Eadmund the Atheling,
and all were well pleased. Now those songs have bided in our minds
while Ottar's song is forgotten, and maybe that is but natural. But
Olaf was my kinsman and very dear to me, and I am jealous for his
fame.



Chapter 4: Earl Wulfnoth Of Sussex.


Cnut the new Danish king was at Gainsborough with all the force
that had followed Swein his father, and he had made a pact with the
Lindsey folk, who were Danes of the old settlement, and of landings
long before the time of Ingvar, that they should fight for him and
find provision and horses for his host.

So it seemed most likely that the next thing would be that he would
march on us, and Ethelred gathered all the forces to him here in
London that he could, against his coming. At once the English
thanes came in, and even Sigeferth and Morcar, the powerful lords
of the old Danish seven boroughs in Mercia, brought their men to
his help, and that was almost more than could have been hoped. Then
too came Edric Streone, the great Earl of Mercia, Eadmund's uncle
by marriage and his foster father, praying for and gaining full
forgiveness for having seemed to side with Swein, as he said. With
these was Ulfkytel, our East Anglian earl, and many more, while
word came from Utred of Northumbria that he would not hold back.

So it was not long before Ethelred and Eadmund rode away north
towards Gainsborough at the head of as good a force as they had
ever led, in order to be beforehand with the Danes, who as yet had
made no move. It seemed as though they feared this new rising of
all England against them, although all Swein's men who had been
victors before were there with their new king.

But Olaf, who knew more of Denmark and what might happen there than
we, said that Cnut waited for news from thence. It might be that
some trouble would arise at home, for seldom did a king come to his
throne there without fighting against upstarts who would take it.

"So he holds his force in readiness in the Humber to fall on either
Denmark or England. If things go ill at home, he will go over sea
first, and return here. But if all is well, we shall have fighting
enough presently."

Now when the court of Ethelred had gathered again, it was not long
before he grew more cold in his way with Olaf, and one might easily
see that this grew more so with the coming of Edric Streone. So
that when the march to Lindsey was spoken of, Olaf thought well to
stay in the Thames with the ships, and when Eadmund asked him to
come north with the levies he said:

"It seems to me that there are jealousies already among your thanes
concerning me, and I will not be the cause of any divisions among
your folk. Yet I would help you, and here is what I can do. I will
see that no landing is made on these southern shores while you are
northward, for if you beat Cnut he will take ship and come to Essex
or Kent; or maybe even into the Thames again. Give me authority to
command here until you return, and I think I can be of more use
than if I went with you."

So that was what was done in the end, and Olaf was named as captain
of the ships and of any southern host that he might be able to
raise, and Olaf asked that I might stay with him.

That our atheling granted gladly, telling me that it was for no
lack of wish on his part to have me at his side, as ever of late,
but that I should take a better place with the king my kinsman than
among the crowd of thanes who were round Ethelred. Then he took his
own sword from his side and gave it me.

"Farewell therefore for a while, Redwald, my comrade," he said when
he went away. "You have helped me to tide over many heavy hours
that would have pressed sorely on me but for your cheerfulness.
When peace comes you shall have your Anglian home again, with more
added to its manors for the sake of past days and good service."

That was much for the atheling to say, and heartily did I thank
him. Yet I had grown to love Olaf my kinsman better than any other
man, and I was glad to be with him, away from the court jealousies
and strivings for place. There was little of that in Olaf's fleet,
where all were old comrades, and had each long ago found the place
that he could best fill.
