be given as to actions that might be taken by Wolfe. For example: How
would you attempt to destroy the fort? Where may Wolfe land his
soldiers? What led the French to place their soldiers down as far as the
Montmorenci? No doubt some wrong answers will be given, but the
probability is that some boy will say that he would take some guns to
the high bank on the Levis side and bombard the town of Quebec. The
teacher will then tell what was done and with what results.

This should be outlined briefly on the black-board, and problem
questions proposed as to the attempt of Wolfe to dislodge the French at
Montmorenci.

This second step is also told and added to the outline, after which the
teacher proceeds to explain the final step, dwelling particularly on the
illness of Wolfe, his careful arrangement of plans, the courage shown in
attempting the surprise of the hill, the speed with which his forces
were drawn up on the Plains, the battle with its final outcome.

This is added to the outline, and the whole story is reproduced orally
before the class is dismissed.

As desk work, the outline is copied in note-books and the pupils are
directed to read the full story in Parkman's _Montcalm and Wolfe_, or in
the History Reader, pp. 284-292.

     NOTE: If plasticine be used, miniature cannon, ships,
     bridges, etc., may be placed in position and a realistic
     explanation of the battle given. This would require more time and
     the whole story would require several lesson spaces.

     References: The text-book, Weaver's _Canadian History for Boys and
     Girls_, and Parkman's _Montcalm and Wolfe_.


FORM III

THE COMING OF THE UNITED EMPIRE LOYALISTS

1. Narrate briefly the story of the American Revolution, to show why
they had to leave the country; describe the treatment given to them by
the revolutionists; how they lost their property; how they were driven
from their homes and exposed to all sorts of hardships, sometimes fatal
to the women and children; emphasize their constant feeling of loyalty
in face of all their troubles.

2. There was nothing for them to do but go to some place where the
British flag still flew. The pupils may be asked, with the map before
them, to consider where they would be most likely to go. What were the
probable routes they would follow? That would depend on where they lived
in the States. What methods of travel could they use? The class will see
from a consideration of these points how they did travel, what routes
they followed, and where they settled down. The waterways would have to
be emphasized and traced out on the map; by sea from New York and Boston
to Nova Scotia; by Lake Champlain and the Richelieu River to Quebec and
Eastern Ontario; by the western rivers, the Mohawk, the Genesee, etc.,
to Western Ontario. (See _Fourth Reader_, p. 170.)

3. What the Government did for them and how they succeeded. Any account
of life in Canada in the early days will give the necessary information.
It may be that some old settler of the neighbourhood can supply the
story to one of the children.

4. In the Senior Form there may be taken up slightly the political
ideals of these Loyalists and how their presence led to changes in
affairs in Upper Canada.


FORM III

THE FLAG

In itself a flag is "only a small bit of bunting"; it becomes a powerful
aid to patriotism when it receives a meaning from its history. It is the
emblem of a nation, the symbol of sovereignty, and as such should have
a prominent place in the education of the young. Children should be
taught: (1) the history of the struggles and sacrifices of our
forefathers in securing and maintaining our liberties; (2) the
significance of the flag as standing for liberty, truth, and justice;
and (3) its construction, with the special significance of each part.

The last point--the construction of the Union Jack--should be preceded
by a series of lessons on the individual "jacks." These lessons should
explain the significance of the term "jack"; should give the stories of
St. George, the patron saint of England, of St. Andrew, the patron saint
of Scotland, and of St. Patrick, the patron saint of Ireland; and the
reasons for the placing of the crosses on the jacks of the several
countries. (See Appendix.)

These lessons may be taken as follows: that of the "jack" and "St.
George" after a lesson on the Crusaders; of "St. Andrew" after the
lesson on the Battle of Bannockburn; of "St. Patrick" after the lesson
on the Conquest of Ireland by Strongbow.

The opposite course may be followed. The construction or drawing of the
flag may be taken in connection with one of the flag days; then the
children will be interested in the work itself. The story of the jacks
may be given afterwards in the history lessons.

As desk work following each lesson, the pupils should construct the
flags, using coloured paper, and these flags should be kept for use in
the final lesson. The following sizes may be used in oblong flags:

   For St. George's--white ground--2-1/2 in. x 5 in., red cross 1/2 in.
   For St. Andrew's--blue ground--2-1/2 in. x 5 in., white cross 1/2 in.
   For St. Patrick's--white ground--2 1/2 in. x 5 in., red cross 1/3 in.

When the story of the union of the crowns of England and Scotland in the
reign of James I has been taught, the pupils should be asked to attempt
the problem of uniting the two flags into one. For this purpose the
flags already made can be used. The flag of England will surmount that
of Scotland, and in order that the flag of Scotland may be seen, the
white ground of the flag of England must be removed, only a narrow
border of white along each arm being retained to represent the ground
colour. This narrow border on each side is one third of the width of the
red cross.

The final lesson, the construction of the Union Jack of our day, should
be given on Empire Day or a few days before. As an introduction the
teacher should review the flag of each country in the Union, referring
also to the Union Jacks of James and of Anne. The problem of uniting the
Irish Jack with the other two might be given the pupils; but as they are
not likely to succeed in solving it, it will be better for the teacher
to place before them the Union Jack belonging to the school and to lead
them to observe:

     1. that it is usually oblong--twice as long as wide; (it may also
     be square);

     2. that the St. Andrew's Cross is partially covered by the St.
     Patrick's;

     3. that the St. George's Cross, as before, is one fifth of the
     width of the jack;

     4. that along the side of the St. Patrick's Cross is a strip of
     white;

     5. that this strip of white and the red of the St. Patrick's equal
     the broad white of the St. Andrew's;

     6. that the broad white of the St. Andrew's is partly white cross
     and partly white ground;

     7. that the broad white of the St. Andrew's is uppermost on the
     parts near the staff.

When these have been noted, the pupils are ready to unite the flags
which they had formerly made. The teacher directs them to cut away all
of the white ground and half of each arm of the St. Patrick's Cross,
retaining the centre. This should then be pasted upon the St. Andrew's
Cross as in the Union Jack. They next cut away all of the white ground
of the St. George's Cross, except the border (one third of the red), and
paste this above the other two. The result will be a correctly made
jack, and the pupils will know the several stages in its growth.

Where it is not possible to conduct the series of lessons as above, the
following method is suggested. The pupils are provided with white paper
and red and blue crayons, and are led to make, as above, a study of the
jack belonging to the school. The following directions are then given:

First line in with a ruler the dimensions of the flag, say five inches
wide and ten inches long. Draw the diagonals in faint lines. Place the
cross of St. George and its border upon the flag according to the
measurements mentioned, that is, the cross one inch wide and the border
one third of an inch wide. The diagonals will be the centre and dividing
lines of the crosses of St. Andrew and St. Patrick. Now place the
saltire crosses according to the measurements. The white arm of St.
Andrew's Cross will be one-half inch in width, the white border of St.
Patrick's Cross one-sixth of an inch wide, and the red cross of St.
Patrick one-third of an inch wide. The red cross of St. Patrick is
placed touching the diagonal, below in the first and third quarters, and
above in the second and fourth quarters. Great care must be exercised
in making the drawing of the Union Jack.

     The following are the official regulations for the proportions of
     the Union Jack:

     1. It may be either square, or twice as long as it is wide.

     2. The proportions are:

          Red Cross of St. George 1/5 of width of flag.
          White border to St. George 1/3 of red of St. George.
          Red Cross of St. Patrick 1/3 of red of St. George.
          White border to St. Patrick 1/6 of red of St. George.
          Broad white of St. Andrew 1/2 of red of St. George.

     3. Broad white of St. Andrew is uppermost in the two quarters next
     the staff; the red of St. Patrick is uppermost in the other
     quarters.

Its base is the cross of St. George, red on a white ground. On the
political union of England and Scotland in 1707, the cross of St.
Andrew, which is a white diagonal cross on a blue ground, was added, and
to this Union flag there was joined, in 1801, the cross of St. Patrick,
a red diagonal cross on a white ground. The colours of the Union Jack
are red, which is the emblem of courage; white, the emblem of purity;
and blue, the emblem of truth; so that we cannot do anything cowardly
without disgracing our flag.

On memorial days the teacher, as he describes the past events that have
helped to make our country strong and keep it free, may well refer to
the colours of the flag as reminders of the virtues on which our Empire
rests.

For memorial days the following, among others, are suggested:


FLAG DAYS

Opening and closing of each term

     Jan. 1.--Municipalities incorporated in Canada, 1842. (To be
     celebrated on the first school day of the new year.)

     Feb. 10.--Union of the Canadas, 1841.

     March 11.--First Responsible Ministry, 1848.

     March 14.--Founding of Upper Canada--Constitutional Act, 1791.

     March 24.--Egerton Ryerson's birthday (1803-1882).

     Empire Day.--The school day immediately preceding May 24.

     May 24.--Victoria Day.

     June 3.--The King's Birthday, 1865.

     July 1.--Dominion Day: Confederation of the Provinces, 1867.

     July 17.--First Parliament of Upper Canada, 1792.

     September 13.--Battle of the Plains of Abraham, 1759.

     October 13.--Battle of Queenston Heights--Death of Sir Isaac Brock,
     1812.

     October 21.--Trafalgar Day, 1805.

     December 24.--Close of the War of 1812-1814, by the Treaty of
     Ghent. (To be celebrated on the last school day before Christmas.)

Other days commemorating events connected with various localities may
also be chosen.

     For information respecting the flag, teachers are referred to
     Barlow Cumberland's _History of the Union Jack_ (latest edition),
     to the _Flag Charts_, by Mrs. Fessenden, and to _The Flag of
     Canada_, by Sir Joseph Pope. For the stories of the patron saints
     of England, Scotland, and Ireland, see Appendix.


THE COLOURS OF THE FLAG

    What is the blue on our flag, boys?
      The waves of the boundless sea,
    Where our vessels ride in their tameless pride,
      And the feet of the winds are free;
    From the sun and smiles of the coral isles
      To the ice of the South and North,
    With dauntless tread through tempests dread
      The guardian ships go forth.

    What is the white on our flag, boys?
      The honour of our land,
    Which burns in our sight like a beacon light
      And stands while the hills shall stand;
    Yea, dearer than fame is our land's great name,
      And we fight, wherever we be,
    For the mothers and wives that pray for the lives
      Of the brave hearts over the sea.

    What is the red on our flag, boys?
      The blood of our heroes slain,
    On the burning sands in the wild waste lands
      And the froth of the purple main;
    And it cries to God from the crimsoned sod
      And the crest of the waves outrolled,
    That He send us men to fight again
      As our fathers fought of old.

    We'll stand by the dear old flag, boys,
      Whatever be said or done,
    Though the shots come fast, as we face the blast,
      And the foe be ten to one--
    Though our only reward be the thrust of a sword
      And a bullet in heart or brain.
    What matters one gone, if the flag float on
      And Britain be Lord of the main!

--Frederick George Scott


THE UNION JACK

    It's only a small piece of bunting,
      It's only an old coloured rag;
    Yet thousands have died for its honour,
      And shed their best blood for the flag.

    It's charged with the cross of St. Andrew,
      Which, of old, Scotland's heroes has led;
    It carries the cross of St. Patrick,
      For which Ireland's bravest have bled.

    Joined with these is our old English ensign,
      St. George's red cross on white field;
    Round which, from Richard to Roberts,
      Britons conquer or die, but ne'er yield.

    It flutters triumphant o'er ocean,
      As free as the wind and the waves;
    And bondsmen from shackles unloosened,
      'Neath its shadows no longer are slaves.

    It floats o'er Australia, New Zealand,
      O'er Canada, the Indies, Hong Kong;
    And Britons, where'er their flag's flying,
      Claim the rights which to Britons belong.

    We hoist it to show our devotion
      To our King, our country, and laws;
    It's the outward and visible emblem,
      Of progress and liberty's cause.

    You may say it's an old bit of bunting,
      You may call it an old coloured rag;
    But freedom has made it majestic,
      And time has ennobled our flag.


FORMS III AND IV

SUGGESTIONS FOR EMPIRE DAY

The exercises on Empire Day may be extended to include most of the
subjects on the time-table by providing interesting problems in these
subjects which will, at the same time, keep the pupils' attention
focused on the purpose of the day.

The purpose of Empire Day may be stated briefly: (1) To increase the
pupils' knowledge of the various parts of the Empire; (2) To create in
them fine ideals of a larger citizenship; (3) To give a feeling of
responsibility for Canada's place and work in the Empire, both now and
in the future.


EXERCISES SUGGESTED

1. In literature: Study one or more of the selections in the Public
School Readers that are suitable; for example, in the IV Reader, pp. 1,
49, 74, 154, 155, 227, 231, 248, 302, 358, 409; in the III Reader, pp.
55, 140, 246, 258, 274. If these have been studied before, one or two
might be read or recited by the pupils. In this Manual poems are given
(pp. 73, 74) that may be used in the same way. Pamphlets containing
suitable matter for Empire Day have been sent out by the Department of
Education on several occasions.

2. In history: (_a_) Some information about the growth of the Empire;
for example, how and when Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa,
or any other part of the Empire was added; (_b_) Comparison of the size
of the British Empire with that of any earlier Empire, such as the
Persian, Greek, or Roman; (_c_) The growth of Great Britain's commercial
and naval supremacy, on what it is founded, what danger there is of
losing it, etc.; (_d_) Interpretation of the Union Jack, or of the
Canadian ensign.

3. In geography: (_a_) Story of the "All-Red" route, or of the "All-Red"
cable--explain the meaning of "All-Red" by reference to the map; (_b_)
"The sun never sets on the British flag." Make this clear by having
pupils notice on the map that there are red spots, showing British
territory, on or not very far from every meridian line; British ships,
too, are in every part of the ocean; (_c_) Compare the population and
area of Great Britain, Canada, Australia, the United States, Germany,
France, etc.

4. In arithmetic: The pupils may discover how many people there are to
the square mile in these countries; they may be asked to work out the
population Canada would have if she were as densely populated as
England, as the United States, as Germany, etc.; how fast did the
population of the United States increase in the first century after the
Revolution; what will the population of Canada be in fifty years, if it
increases as rapidly as the population of the United States in the last
fifty, etc.; at the present rate of increase, when will Canada catch up
to Great Britain? When surpass her? Indicate thus the possible position
and power of Canada in the not distant future, in order to deepen the
sense of responsibility for the use made of our opportunities. (Let the
pupils search for as much of the material needed for these calculations
as they can find in their text-books.)

5. In composition: Subjects may be given for either oral or written
composition; they may be reproductions of some of the exercises
mentioned above, or may be on topics connected with them.

6. In drawing: Pupils may draw the flag, or any map needed above.




TYPE LESSONS

FORM IV


INTRODUCTORY

As described in the details of method for Form IV (see p. 28), the ideal
method of teaching in this Form is the oral method, which means not only
the narration of the story, but the presentation to the pupils of
problems connected with the lesson that the experiences of the class may
help to solve. The full narration here of the lessons selected would be
like doing over again the work of the text-book; accordingly, in the
majority of the lessons, a topical analysis is all that is given. The
value of a topical analysis is that it emphasizes the principal points
that should be described or developed and, more important still, that it
assists the pupils to _understand_ the lesson better, that is, to see
more clearly the relation of cause and effect. The topical analysis will
also suggest to the teacher how to prepare a lesson. There is no better
evidence that a period of history is understood by the teacher than the
ability to make a clear, concise analysis of it. This analysis should
then be used instead of the text-book in teaching the lesson, and the
use of it will, after a little practice has made the teacher more
expert, contribute, to a surprising degree, to increased interest in the
class.


EGERTON RYERSON

One of the objects of instruction in civics is to create in the pupils
ideals of citizenship that may influence their conduct in after life.
The most powerful agency to use for this object is the life of some
useful and patriotic citizen who gave his talents and energy to the
bettering of his country. In using biography for this purpose the pupils
should be given only such facts as they can comprehend, and these facts
should be made as real, vivid, and interesting as possible by
appropriate personal details and concrete description. The following
sketch may serve as an example:

Dr. Ryerson, in speaking of his birth and parentage, said:

     I was born on March 24th, 1803, in the township of Charlotteville,
     near the village of Vittoria, in the then London district, now the
     County of Norfolk. My father had been an officer in the British
     army during the American Revolution, being a volunteer in the
     Prince of Wales' Regiment of New Jersey, of which place he was a
     native. His forefathers were from Holland, and his more remote
     ancestors were from Denmark. At the close of the American
     revolutionary war, he, with many others of the same class, went to
     New Brunswick, where he married my mother, whose maiden name was
     Stickney, a descendant of one of the early Massachusetts Puritan
     settlers. Near the close of the last century, my father with his
     family followed an elder brother to Canada, where he drew some
     2,500 acres of land from the Government for his services in the
     army, besides his pension.

Ryerson's mother had a very strong influence over him. She was a very
religious woman with a great love for her children, and from her Egerton
learned lessons that never ceased to influence him. After telling how
she treated him when he had done something naughty, he says that "though
thoughtless and full of playful mischief, I never afterwards knowingly
grieved my mother, or gave her other than respectful and kind words."

The whole family had to work hard at clearing the land and farming it.
Before he was twenty-one years of age he "had ploughed every acre of
ground for the season, cradled every stalk of wheat, rye, and oats, and
mowed every spear of grass, pitched the whole first on a wagon, and
then from the wagon to the haymow or stack." This was the work that gave
him strength and health to do the great things that were before him. His
years in the district school were few, yet he made such good use of them
that when he was only fifteen years old he was asked to take the place
of one of his teachers during the latter's illness. Further instruction
from teachers was not given him till he came of age. Then he went to
Hamilton to study in the Gore district grammar school for one year. Here
he studied so strenuously that he was seized with an attack of brain
fever, which was followed by inflammation of the lungs. His life was
despaired of, but his good constitution and his mother's nursing
restored him to health.

Shortly afterwards he began his work as a Methodist preacher. When
twenty-three years old, he undertook a mission to the Indians at the
Credit and resided among them as one of themselves, to show them better
ways of living and working. This is part of his account: "Between
daylight and sunrise, I called out four of the Indians in succession
and, working with them, showed them how to clear and fence in, and
plough and plant their first wheat and cornfields. In the afternoon I
called out the schoolboys to go with me, and cut and pile and burn the
brushwood in and around the village."

In 1829 _The Christian Guardian_ newspaper was organized as the organ of
the Methodists, and the young preacher placed in the editorial chair; in
1841 he was chosen President of Victoria College.

In 1844 Dr. Ryerson was appointed Chief Superintendent of Education for
Upper Canada. He immediately set himself to awaken the country to a
proper estimate of the importance of education, and to improve the
qualifications of teachers. He urged the people to build better schools
and to pay better salaries, so that well-qualified teachers could be
engaged. He visited foreign countries to study their systems and methods
that he might make the schools of Upper Canada more efficient. A
Provincial Normal and Model School was established in 1847, better books
were provided for the pupils, more and better apparatus and maps for all
schools. All this was done in the face of many difficulties inevitable
in a new country--popular ignorance, apathy, lack of means to build
schools and support them, lack of time to attend them. The opposition of
many who did not set the same value on education that he himself did had
also to be faced. With unwearied zeal, steadfast courage, and unfailing
patience, he met these difficulties. For over thirty years, he devoted
his matured manhood and great endowments to the task of developing a
public sentiment in favour of education, and of building on sure
foundations a system of elementary and secondary schools that is the
just pride of our Province and his own best monument.

In 1876 he resigned his position of Chief Superintendent, and was
succeeded by a Minister of Education. He had nobly fulfilled the promise
he made on accepting office in 1844--"to provide for my native country a
system of education, and facilities for intellectual improvement not
second to those in any country in the world."

He died in 1882. To honour him in his death as he had served it in his
life the whole country seemed assembled, in its representatives, at his
funeral. Members of the Legislature, judges, University authorities,
ecclesiastical dignitaries, thousands from the schools which he had
founded, and above all, the common people, for whose cause he never
failed to stand, followed to the grave the remains of the great Canadian
who had lived so faithfully and well for his country.

     NOTE.--If the pupils have been told about the Pilgrim
     Fathers, and the U.E. Loyalists, a review of those stories will add
     interest to this lesson; if not, it will serve as an introduction
     to them.

For a Form IV class, the following should be included in the lesson:

     With the close of the War of 1812 there opened a new era in the
     history of Canada. Its people had realized that their country was
     worth fighting for, and they had defended it successfully. A new
     interest in its political life was awakened, new movements
     inaugurated. These were along three lines--one, political with
     responsible government as its object; another, religious with equal
     rights and privileges for all churches as its aim; a third,
     educational with equal and efficient instruction for all without
     distinction of class or creed as its purpose. The first movement is
     known as the struggle for Responsible Government--the struggle for
     equal political rights; the second, as the Secularization of the
     Clergy Reserves--the struggle for equal religious rights; the third
     as the University Question--the struggle for non-denominational
     control of education. In the second and third movements Dr. Ryerson
     played a very prominent part and, because these affected the
     politics of his day, he took a keen interest in the first.

     NOTE.--For purposes of reference, consult _The Story of My
     Life_ by Dr. Ryerson; _The Ryerson Memorial Volume_ by Dr. J.G.
     Hodgins; _Egerton Ryerson_ by Nathaniel Burwash in THE MAKERS
     OF CANADA; and _Egerton Ryerson_ by J.H. Putnam.


THE INTERCOLONIAL RAILWAY

The lesson may be begun best by referring to the provisions in the
British North America Act for the building of the railway. (If the class
knows nothing yet of this Act, reference may be made to Dominion Day,
and the Act associated with it, by explaining the significance of the
Day. The date of Confederation, 1867, may be written on the board for
reference.) In the B.N.A. Act, it was provided that "the Canadian
Government should build a railway connecting the St. Lawrence with
