study for hours at a time, often till midnight, nay, sometimes till
daybreak. With his chin resting in the palm of his hand there he would
stay, gazing intently at her charming figure and her pale but beautiful
face. Frequently he would creep closer to her, creep so near that his
lips would almost touch her face; but then he would throw back his head
again, and if at such times the slave-girl half awoke from her slumbers,
he would beckon to her to go to sleep again--nobody should disturb her.

Halil did not trouble his head in the least about all this gossip. It
was noticed, indeed, that his face was somewhat paler than it used to
be, but if anyone ventured to jest with him on the subject, face to
face, he was very speedily convinced that Halil's arms, at any rate,
were no weaker than of yore.

One day he was sitting, as usual, at the door of his booth, paying
little attention to the people coming and going around him, and staring
abstractedly with wide and wandering eyes into space, as if his gaze was
fixed upon something above his head, when somebody who had approached
him so softly as to take him quite unawares, very affectionately greeted
him with the words:

"Well, my dear Chorbadshi, how are you?"

Patrona looked in the direction of the voice, and saw in front of him
his mysterious guest of the other day--the Greek Janaki.

"Ah, 'tis thou, musafir! I searched for you everywhere for two whole
days after you left me, for I wanted to give you back the five thousand
piastres which you were fool enough to make me a present of. It was just
as well, however, that I did not find you, and I have long ceased
looking for you, for I have now spent all the money."

"I am glad to hear it, Halil, and I hope the money has done you a good
turn. Are you willing to receive me into your house as a guest once
more?"

"With pleasure! But you must first of all promise me two things. The
first is, that you will not contrive by some crafty device to pay me
something for what I give you gratis; and the second is, that you will
not expect to stay the night with me, but will wander across the street
and pitch your tent at the house of my worthy neighbour Musli, who is
also a bachelor, and mends slippers, and is therefore a very worthy and
respectable man."

"And why may I not sleep at your house?"

"Because you must know that there are now two of us in the house--I and
my slave-girl."

"That will not matter a bit, Halil. I will sleep on the roof, and you
take the slave-girl down with you into the house."

"It cannot be so, Janaki! it cannot be."

"Why can it not be?"

"Because I would rather sleep in a pit into which a tiger has fallen, I
would rather sleep in the lair of a hippopotamus, I would rather sleep
in a canoe guarded by alligators and crocodiles, I would rather spend a
night in a cellar full of scorpions and scolopendras, or in the Tower of
Surem, which is haunted by the accursed Jinns, than pass a single night
in the same room with this slave-girl."

"Why; what's this, Halil? you fill me with amazement. Surely, it cannot
be that you are that Mussulman of whom all Pera is talking?--the man I
mean who purchased a slave-girl in order to be her slave?"

"It is as you say. But 'twere better not to talk of that matter at all.
Those five thousand piastres of yours are the cause of it; they have
ruined me out and out. My mind is going backwards I think. When people
come to my shop to buy wares of me, I give them such answers to their
questions that they laugh at me. Let us change the subject, let us
rather talk of your affairs. Have you found your daughter yet?"

It was now Janaki's turn to sigh.

"I have sought her everywhere, and nowhere can I find her."

"How did you lose her?"

"One Saturday she went with some companions on a pleasure excursion in
the Sea of Marmora in a sailing-boat. Their music and dancing attracted
a Turkish pirate to the spot, and in the midst of a peaceful empire he
stole all the girls, and contrived to dispose of them so secretly that I
have never been able to find any trace of them. I am now disposed to
believe that she was taken to the Sultan's Seraglio."

"You will never get her out of there then."

Janaki sighed deeply.

"You think, then, that I shall never get at her if she is there?" and he
shook his head sadly.

"Not unless the Janissaries, or the Debejis, or the Bostanjis lay their
heads together and agree to depose the Sultan."

"Who would even dare to think of such a thing, Halil?"

"I would if _my_ daughter were detained in the harem against her will
and against mine also. But that is not at all in your line, Janaki. You
have never shed any blood but the blood of sheep and oxen, but let me
tell you this, Janaki: if I were as rich a man as you are, trust me for
finding a way of getting my girl out of the very Seraglio itself. Wealth
is a mightier force than valour."

"I pray you, speak not so loudly. One of your neighbours might hear you,
and would think nothing of felling me to the earth to get my money. For
I carry a great deal of money about with me, and am always afraid of
being robbed of it. In front of the bazaar a slave is awaiting me with a
mule. On the back of that mule are strung two jars seemingly filled with
dried dates. Let me tell you that those jars are really half-filled with
gold pieces, the dates are only at the top. I should like to deposit
them at your house. I suppose your slave-girl will not pry too closely?"

"You can safely leave them with me. If you tell her not to look at them
she will close her eyes every time she passes the jars."

Meanwhile Patrona had closed his booth and invited his guest to
accompany him homewards. On the way thither he looked in at the house of
his neighbour, the well-mannered Janissary, who mended slippers. Musli
willingly offered Halil's guest a night's lodging. In return Patrona
invited him to share with him a small dish of well-seasoned pilaf and a
few cups of a certain forbidden fluid, which invitation the worthy
Janissary accepted with alacrity.

And now they crossed Halil's threshold.

Guel-Bejaze was standing by the fire-place getting ready Halil's supper
when the guests entered, and hearing footsteps turned round to see who
it might be.

The same instant the Greek wayfarer uttered a loud cry, and pitching
his long hat into the air, rushed towards the slave-girl, and flinging
himself down on his knees before her fell a-kissing, again and again,
her hands and arms, and at last her pale face also, while the girl flung
herself upon his shoulder and embraced the fellow's neck; and then the
pair of them began to weep, and the words, "My daughter!" "My father!"
could be heard from time to time amidst their sobs.

Halil could only gaze at them open-mouthed.

But Janaki, still remaining on his knees, raised his hands to Heaven,
and gave thanks to God for guiding his footsteps to this spot.

"Allah Akbar! The Lord be praised!" said Patrona in his turn, and he
drew nearer to them. "So her whom you have so long sought after you find
in my house, eh? Allah preordained it. And you may thank God for it, for
you receive her back from me unharmed by me. Take her away therefore!"

"You say not well, Halil," cried the father, his face radiant with joy.
"So far from giving her back to me you shall keep her; yes, she shall
remain yours for ever. For if I were thrice to traverse the whole earth
and go in a different direction each time, I certainly should not come
across another man like you. Tell me, therefore, what price you put
upon her that I may buy her back, and give her to you to wife as a free
woman?"

Halil did not consider very long what price he should ask, so far as he
was concerned the business was settled already. He cast but a single
look on Guel-Bejaze's smiling lips, and asked for a kiss from them--that
was the only price he demanded.

Janaki seized his daughter's hand and placed it in the hand of Halil.

And now Halil held the warm, smooth little hand in his own big paw, he
felt its reassuring pressure, he saw the girl smile, he saw her lips
open to return his kiss, and still he did not believe his eyes--still he
shuddered at the reflection that when his lips should touch hers, the
girl would suddenly die away, become pale and cold. Only when his lips
at last came into contact with her burning lips and her bosom throbbed
against his bosom, and he felt his kiss returned and the warm pulsation
of her heart, then only did he really believe in his own happiness, and
held her for a long--oh, so long!--time to his own breast, and pressed
his lips to her lips over and over again, and was happier--happier by
far--than the dwellers in Paradise.

And after that they made the girl sit down between them, with her father
on one side and her husband on the other, and they took her hands and
caressed and fondled her to her heart's content. The poor maid was
quite beside herself with delight. She kept receiving kisses and
caresses, first on the right hand and then on the left, and her face was
pale no longer, but of a burning red like the transfigured rose whereon
a drop of the blood of great Aphrodite fell. And she promised her father
and her husband that she would tell them such a lot of things--things
wondrous, unheard of, of which they had not and never could have the
remotest idea.

And through the thin iron shutters which covered the window the
Berber-Bashi curiously observed the touching scene!

They were still in the midst of their intoxication of delight when the
frequently before-mentioned neighbour of Halil, worthy Musli, thrust his
head inside the door, and witnessing the scene would discreetly have
withdrawn his perplexed countenance. But Halil, who had already caught
sight of him, bawled him a vociferous welcome.

"Nay, come along! come along! my worthy neighbour, don't stand on any
ceremony with us, you can see for yourself how merry we are!"

The worthy neighbour thereupon gingerly entered, on the tips of his
toes, with his hands fumbling nervously about in the breast of his
kaftan; for the poor fellow's hands were resinous to a degree. Wash and
scrub them as he might, the resin would persist in cleaving to them. His
awl, too, was still sticking in the folds of his turban--sticking forth
aloft right gallantly like some heron's plume. Naturally he whose
business it was to mend other men's shoes went about in slippers that
were mere bundles of rags--that is always the way with cobblers!

When he saw Guel-Bejaze on Halil's lap, and Halil's face beaming all over
with joy, he smote his hands together and fell a-wondering.

"There must be some great changes going on here!" thought he.

But Halil compelled him to sit down beside them, and after kissing
Guel-Bejaze again--apparently he could not kiss the girl enough--he
cried:

"Look! my dear neighbour! she is now my wife, and henceforth she will
love me as her husband, and I shall no longer be the slave of my slave.
And this worthy man here is my wife's father. Greet them, therefore, and
then be content to eat and drink with us!"

Then Musli approached Janaki and saluted him on the shoulder, then,
turning towards Guel-Bejaze, he touched with his hand first the earth and
next his forehead, sat down beside Janaki on the cushions that had been
drawn into the middle of the room, and made merry with them.

And now Janaki sent the slave he had brought with him to the
pastry-cook's while Musli skipped homewards and brought with him a
tambourine of chased silver, which he could beat right cunningly and
also accompany it with a voice not without feeling; and thus Halil's
bridal evening flowed pleasantly away with an accompaniment of wine and
music and kisses.

And all this time the worthy Berber-Bashi was looking on at this
junketing through the trellised window, and could scarce restrain
himself from giving expression to his astonishment when he perceived
that Guel-Bejaze no longer collapsed like a dead thing at the contact of
a kiss, or even at the pressure of an embrace, as she was wont to do in
the harem, indeed her face had now grown rosier than the dawn.

At last his curiosity completely overcame him, and turning the handle of
the door he appeared in the midst of the revellers.

He wore the garb of a common woodcutter, and his simple, foolish face
corresponded excellently to the disguise. Nobody in the world could have
taken him for anything but what he now professed to be, and it was with
a very humble obeisance that he introduced himself.

"Allah Kerim! Salaam aleikum! God's blessing go with your mirth. Why,
you were so merry that I heard you at the cemetery yonder as I was
passing. If it will not put you out I should be delighted to remain
here, as long as you will let me, that I may listen to the music this
worthy Mussulman here understands so well, and to the pretty stories
which flow from the harmonious lips of this houri who has, I am
persuaded, come down from Paradise for the delight of men."

Now Musli was drunk with wine, Guel-Bejaze and Halil Patrona were drunk
with love, so that not one of them had any exception to take to the
stranger's words. Janaki was the only sober man among them, neither wine
nor love had any attraction for him, and therefore he whispered in the
ear of Halil:

"For all you know this stranger may be a spy or a thief!"

"What an idea!" Halil whispered back, "why you can see for yourself that
he is only an honest baltaji.[1] Sit down, oh, worthy Mussulman," he
continued, turning to the stranger, "and make one of our little party."

The Berber-Bashi took him at his word. He ate and drank like one who has
gone hungry for three whole days, he was enchanted with the tambourine
of Musli, listened with open mouth to his story of the miserly slippers,
and laughed as heartily as if he had never heard it at least a hundred
times before.

"And now you tell us some tale, most beautiful of women!" said he,
wiping the tears from his eyes as he turned towards the damsel, and then
Guel-Bejaze, after first kissing her husband and sipping from the beaker
extended to her just enough to moisten her lips, thus began:

"Once upon a time there was a rich merchant. Where he lived I know not.
It might have been Pera, or Galata, or Damascus. Nor can I tell you his
name, but that has nothing to do with the story. This merchant had an
only daughter whom he loved most dearly. She had ne'er a wish that was
not instantly gratified, and he guarded her as the very apple of his
eye. Not even the breath of Heaven was allowed to blow upon her."

"And know you not what the name of the maiden was?" inquired the
Berber-Bashi.

"Certainly, they called her Irene, for she was a Greek girl."

Janaki trembled at the word. No doubt the girl was about to relate her
own story, for Irene was the very name she had received at her baptism.
It was very thoughtless of her to betray herself in the presence of a
stranger.

"One day," continued the maiden, "Irene went a-rowing on the sea with
some girl friends. The weather was fine, the sea smooth, and they sang
their songs and made merry, to their hearts' content. Suddenly the sail
of a corsair appeared on the smooth mirror of the ocean, pounced
straight down upon the maidens in their boat, and before they could
reach the nearest shore, they were all seized and carried away captive.

"Poor Irene! she was not even able to bid her dear father God speed! Her
thoughts were with him as the pirate-ship sped swiftly away with her,
and she saw the city where he dwelt recede further and further away in
the dim distance. Alas! he was waiting for her now--and would wait in
vain! Her father, she knew it, was standing outside his door and asking
every passer-by if he had not seen his little daughter coming. A banquet
had been prepared for her at home, and all the invited guests were
already there, but still no sign of her! And now she could see him
coming down to the sea-shore, and sweep the smooth shining watery mirror
with his eyes in every direction, and ask the sailor-men: 'Where is my
daughter? Do you know anything about her?'"

Here the eyes of the father and the husband involuntarily filled with
tears.

"Wherefore do you weep? How silly of you! Why, you know, of course, it
is only a tale. Listen now to how it goes on! The robber carried the
maiden he had stolen to Stambul. He took her straight to the Kizlar-Aga
whose office it is to purchase slave-girls for the harem of the
Padishah. The bargaining did not take long. The Kizlar-Aga paid down at
once the price which the slave-merchant demanded, and forthwith handed
Irene over to the slave-women of the Seraglio, who immediately conducted
her to a bath fragrant with perfumes. Her face, her figure, her charms,
amazed them exceedingly, and they lifted up their voices and praised her
loudly. But when Irene heard their praises she shuddered, and her heart
died away within her. Surely God never gave her beauty in order that she
might be sacrificed to it? At that moment she would have much preferred
to have been born humpbacked, squinting, swarthy; she would have liked
her face to be all seamed and scarred like half-frozen water, and her
body all diseased so that everyone who saw her would shrink from her
with disgust--better that than the feeling which now made her shrink
from the contemplation of herself."

Then they put upon her a splendid robe, hung diamond ear-rings in her
ears, tied a beautiful shawl round her loins, encircled her arms and
feet with rings of gold, and so led her into the secret apartment where
the damsels of the Padishah were all gathered together. This, of course,
was long, long ago. Who can tell what Sultan was reigning then? Why,
even our fathers did not know his name.

"Pomp and splendour, flowers and curtains adorned the immense saloon,
the ceiling whereof was inlaid with precious stones, while the floor was
fashioned entirely of mother-o'-pearl--he who set his foot thereon might
fancy he was walking on rainbows. Moreover, cunning artificers had
wrought upon this mother-o'-pearl floor flowers and birds and other most
wondrous fantastical figures, so that it was a joy to look thereon, for
no carpet, however precious, was suffered to cover all this splendour.
Yet lest the cold surface of the pavement should chill the feet of the
damsels, rows of tiny sandals stood ready there that they might bind
them upon their feet and so walk from one end of the room to the other
at their ease. And these sandals they called _kobkobs_."

"Aye, aye!" cried the anxious Janaki, "you describe the interior of the
Seraglio so vividly that I almost feel frightened. If a man listened
long enough to such a tale he might easily get to feel as guilty as if
he had actually cast an eye into the Sultan's harem, and 'twere best for
him to die rather than do that."

"Is it not a tale that I am telling you? is not the room I have just
described to you but a creature of the imagination?--In the centre of
this saloon, then, was a large fountain, whence fragrant rose-water
ascended into the air sporting with the golden balls. Along the whole
length of the walls were immense Venetian mirrors, in which splendid
odalisks admired their own shapely limbs. Hundreds and hundreds of lamps
shone upon the pillars which supported the room--lamps of manifold
colours--which gave to the vast chamber the magic hues of a fairy
palace, and in the midst thereof seemed to float a transparent blue
cloud--it was the light smoke of ambergris and spices which the damsels
blew forth from their long narghilis. But what impressed Irene far more
than all this magnificence, was the figure of the Sultana Asseki, to
whom she was now conducted. A tall, muscular lady was sitting at the end
of the room on a raised divan. Her figure was slender round the waist
but broad and round about the shoulders. Her snow-white arms and neck
were encircled by rows of real pearls with diamond clasps. A lofty
heron's plume nodded on her bejewelled turban, and lent a still
haughtier aspect to that majestic form. With her large black eyes she
seemed to be in the habit of ruling the whole world."

"Yes, yes!" exclaimed Janaki, "you describe it all so vividly, that I am
half afraid of sitting down here and listening to you. You might at
least have let a little bit of a veil hang in front of her face."

"But this happened long, long ago, remember! Who can even say under what
Sultan it took place?... So they led the slave-girl into the presence
of the Sultana, who was surrounded by two hundred other slave-girls, and
was playing with a tiny dwarf. They were singing and dancing all around
her and swinging censers. Above her head was a large fruit-tree made
