
'Let us go then,' I answered huskily, and drew her behind the trunk of
the old beech. And there I caught her in my arms and kissed her again
and yet again, nor was she ashamed to kiss me back.

After this I remember little of what happened, except that as we rode
away I saw her beloved face, wan and wistful, watching me departing out
of her life. For twenty years that sad and beautiful face haunted me,
and it haunts me yet athwart life and death. Other women have loved me
and I have known other partings, some of them more terrible, but the
memory of this woman as she was then, and of her farewell look, overruns
them all. Whenever I gaze down the past I see this picture framed in it
and I know that it is one which cannot fade. Are there any sorrows like
these sorrows of our youth? Can any bitterness equal the bitterness of
such good-byes? I know but one of which I was fated to taste in after
years, and that shall be told of in its place. It is a common jest to
mock at early love, but if it be real, if it be something more than the
mere arising of the passions, early love is late love also; it is love
for ever, the best and worst event which can befall a man or woman. I
say it who am old and who have done with everything, and it is true.

One thing I have forgotten. As we kissed and clung in our despair
behind the bole of the great beech, Lily drew a ring from her finger
and pressed it into my hand saying, 'Look on this each morning when you
wake, and think of me.' It had been her mother's, and to-day it still
is set upon my withered hand, gleaming in the winter sunlight as I trace
these words. Through the long years of wild adventure, through all the
time of after peace, in love and war, in the shine of the camp fire,
in the glare of the sacrificial flame, in the light of lonely stars
illumining the lonely wilderness, that ring has shone upon my hand,
reminding me always of her who gave it, and on this hand it shall go
down into the grave. It is a plain circlet of thick gold, somewhat worn
now, a posy-ring, and on its inner surface is cut this quaint couplet:


Heart to heart, Though far apart.


A fitting motto for us indeed, and one that has its meaning to this
hour.


That same day of our farewell I rode with my father to Yarmouth. My
brother Geoffrey did not come with us, but we parted with kindly words,
and of this I am glad, for we never saw each other again. No more was
said between us as to Lily Bozard and our wooing of her, though I knew
well enough that so soon as my back was turned he would try to take my
place at her side, as indeed happened. I forgive it to him; in truth I
cannot blame him much, for what man is there that would not have desired
to wed Lily who knew her? Once we were dear friends, Geoffrey and I, but
when we ripened towards manhood, our love of Lily came between us, and
we grew more and more apart. It is a common case enough. Well, as it
chanced he failed, so why should I think unkindly of him? Let me rather
remember the affection of our childhood and forget the rest. God rest
his soul.

Mary, my sister, who after Lily Bozard was now the fairest maiden in the
country side, wept much at my going. There was but a year between us,
and we loved each other dearly, for no such shadow of jealousy had
fallen on our affection. I comforted her as well as I was able, and
telling her all that had passed between me and Lily, I prayed her to
stand my friend and Lily's, should it ever be in her power to do so.
This Mary promised to do readily enough, and though she did not give the
reason, I could see that she thought it possible that she might be able
to help us. As I have said, Lily had a brother, a young man of some
promise, who at this time was away at college, and he and my sister Mary
had a strong fancy for each other, that might or might not ripen into
something closer. So we kissed and bade farewell with tears.

And after that my father and I rode away. But when we had passed down
Pirnhow Street, and mounted the little hill beyond Waingford Mills to
the left of Bungay town, I halted my horse, and looked back upon the
pleasant valley of the Waveney where I was born, and my heart grew full
to bursting. Had I known all that must befall me, before my eyes beheld
that scene again, I think indeed that it would have burst. But God, who
in his wisdom has laid many a burden upon the backs of men, has saved
them from this; for had we foreknowledge of the future, I think that of
our own will but few of us would live to see it. So I cast one long last
look towards the distant mass of oaks that marked the spot where Lily
lived, and rode on.

On the following day I embarked on board the 'Adventuress' and we
sailed. Before I left, my father's heart softened much towards me, for
he remembered that I was my mother's best beloved, and feared also lest
we should meet no more. So much did it soften indeed, that at the last
hour he changed his mind and wished to hold me back from going. But
having put my hand to the plough and suffered all the bitterness
of farewell, I would not return to be mocked by my brother and my
neighbours. 'You speak too late, father,' I said. 'You desired me to go
to work this vengeance and stirred me to it with many bitter words, and
now I would go if I knew that I must die within a week, for such oaths
cannot be lightly broken, and till mine is fulfilled the curse rests on
me.'

'So be it, son,' he answered with a sigh. 'Your mother's cruel death
maddened me and I said what I may live to be sorry for, though at the
best I shall not live long, for my heart is broken. Perhaps I should
have remembered that vengeance is in the hand of the Lord, who wreaks
it at His own time and without our help. Do not think unkindly of me, my
boy, if we should chance to meet no more, for I love you, and it was but
the deeper love that I bore to your mother which made me deal harshly
with you.'

'I know it, father, and bear no grudge. But if you think that you owe me
anything, pay it by holding back my brother from working wrong to me and
Lily Bozard while I am absent.'

'I will do my best, son, though were it not that you and she have grown
so dear to each other, the match would have pleased me well. But as I
have said, I shall not be long here to watch your welfare in this or any
other matter, and when I am gone things must follow their own fate. Do
not forget your God or your home wherever you chance to wander, Thomas:
keep yourself from brawling, beware of women that are the snare of
youth, and set a watch upon your tongue and your temper which is not of
the best. Moreover, wherever you may be do not speak ill of the religion
of the land, or make a mock of it by your way of life, lest you should
learn how cruel men can be when they think that it is pleasing to their
gods, as I have learnt already.'

I said that I would bear his counsel in mind, and indeed it saved me
from many a sorrow. Then he embraced me and called on the Almighty to
take me in His care, and we parted.

I never saw him more, for though he was but middle-aged, within a year
of my going my father died suddenly of a distemper of the heart in the
nave of Ditchingham church, as he stood there, near the rood screen,
musing by my mother's grave one Sunday after mass, and my brother took
his lands and place. God rest him also! He was a true-hearted man, but
more wrapped up in his love for my mother than it is well for any man
to be who would look at life largely and do right by all. For such love,
though natural to women, is apt to turn to something that partakes of
selfishness, and to cause him who bears it to think all else of small
account. His children were nothing to my father when compared to my
mother, and he would have been content to lose them every one if thereby
he might have purchased back her life. But after all it was a noble
infirmity, for he thought little of himself and had gone through much to
win her.


Of my voyage to Cadiz, to which port I had learned that de Garcia's ship
was bound, there is little to be told. We met with contrary winds in
the Bay of Biscay and were driven into the harbour of Lisbon, where we
refitted. But at last we came safely to Cadiz, having been forty days at
sea.



CHAPTER VII

ANDRES DE FONSECA


Now I shall dwell but briefly on all the adventures which befell me
during the year or so that I remained in Spain, for were I to set out
everything at length, this history would have no end, or at least mine
would find me before I came to it.

Many travellers have told of the glories of Seville, to which
ancient Moorish city I journeyed with all speed, sailing there up the
Guadalquiver, and I have to tell of lands from which no other wanderer
has returned to England, and must press on to them. To be short then;
foreseeing that it might be necessary for me to stop some time in
Seville, and being desirous to escape notice and to be at the smallest
expense possible, I bethought me that it would be well if I could find
means of continuing my studies of medicine, and to this end I obtained
certain introductions from the firm of merchants to whose care I had
been recommended, addressed to doctors of medicine in Seville. These
letters at my request were made out not in my own name but in that
of 'Diego d'Aila,' for I did not wish it to be known that I was an
Englishman. Nor, indeed, was this likely, except my speech should betray
me, for, as I have said, in appearance I was very Spanish, and the
hindrance of the language was one that lessened every day, since having
already learned it from my mother, and taking every opportunity to read
and speak it, within six months I could talk Castilian except for some
slight accent, like a native of the land. Also I have a gift for the
acquiring of languages.


When I was come to Seville, and had placed my baggage in an inn, not one
of the most frequented, I set out to deliver a letter of recommendation
to a famous physician of the town whose name I have long forgotten. This
physician had a fine house in the street of Las Palmas, a great avenue
planted with graceful trees, that has other little streets running into
it. Down one of these I came from my inn, a quiet narrow place having
houses with patios or courtyards on either side of it. As I walked
down this street I noticed a man sitting in the shade on a stool in the
doorway of his patio. He was small and withered, with keen black eyes
and a wonderful air of wisdom, and he watched me as I went by. Now the
house of the famous physician whom I sought was so placed that the man
sitting at this doorway could command it with his eyes and take note
of all who went in and came out. When I had found the house I returned
again into the quiet street and walked to and fro there for a while,
thinking of what tale I should tell to the physician, and all the time
the little man watched me with his keen eyes. At last I had made up my
story and went to the house, only to find that the physician was from
home. Having inquired when I might find him I left, and once more took
to the narrow street, walking slowly till I came to where the little man
sat. As I passed him, his broad hat with which he was fanning himself
slipped to the ground before my feet. I stooped down, lifted it from the
pavement, and restored it to him.

'A thousand thanks, young sir,' he said in a full and gentle voice. 'You
are courteous for a foreigner.'

'How do you know me to be a foreigner, senor?' I asked, surprised out of
my caution.

'If I had not guessed it before, I should know it now,' he answered,
smiling gravely. 'Your Castilian tells its own tale.'

I bowed, and was about to pass on, when he addressed me again.

'What is your hurry, young sir? Step in and take a cup of wine with me;
it is good.'

I was about to say him nay, when it came into my mind that I had nothing
to do, and that perhaps I might learn something from this gossip.

'The day is hot, senor, and I accept.'

He spoke no more, but rising, led me into a courtyard paved with marble
in the centre of which was a basin of water, having vines trained around
it. Here were chairs and a little table placed in the shade of the
vines. When he had closed the door of the patio and we were seated,
he rang a silver bell that stood upon the table, and a girl, young and
fair, appeared from the house, dressed in a quaint Spanish dress.

'Bring wine,' said my host.

The wine was brought, white wine of Oporto such as I had never tasted
before.

'Your health, senor?' And my host stopped, his glass in his hand, and
looked at me inquiringly.

'Diego d'Aila,' I answered.

'Humph,' he said. 'A Spanish name, or perhaps an imitation Spanish name,
for I do not know it, and I have a good head for names.'

'That is my name, to take or to leave, senor?'--And I looked at him in
turn.

'Andres de Fonseca,' he replied bowing, 'a physician of this city, well
known enough, especially among the fair. Well, Senor Diego, I take your
name, for names are nothing, and at times it is convenient to change
them, which is nobody's business except their owners'. I see that you
are a stranger in this city--no need to look surprised, senor, one who
is familiar with a town does not gaze and stare and ask the path of
passers-by, nor does a native of Seville walk on the sunny side of the
street in summer. And now, if you will not think me impertinent, I will
ask you what can be the business of so healthy a young man with my rival
yonder?' And he nodded towards the house of the famous physician.

'A man's business, like his name, is his own affair, senor,' I answered,
setting my host down in my mind as one of those who disgrace our art by
plying openly for patients that they may capture their fees. 'Still, I
will tell you. I am also a physician, though not yet fully qualified,
and I seek a place where I may help some doctor of repute in his daily
practice, and thus gain experience and my living with it.'

'Ah is it so? Well, senor, then you will look in vain yonder,' and
again he nodded towards the physician's house. 'Such as he will take no
apprentice without the fee be large indeed; it is not the custom of this
city.'

'Then I must seek a livelihood elsewhere, or otherwise.'

'I did not say so. Now, senor, let us see what you know of medicine, and
what is more important, of human nature, for of the first none of us can
ever know much, but he who knows the latter will be a leader of men--or
of women--who lead the men.'

And without more ado he put me many questions, each of them so shrewd
and going so directly to the heart of the matter in hand, that I
marvelled at his sagacity. Some of these questions were medical, dealing
chiefly with the ailments of women, others were general and dealt more
with their characters. At length he finished.

'You will do, senor,' he said; 'you are a young man of parts and
promise, though, as was to be expected from one of your years, you lack
experience. There is stuff in you, senor, and you have a heart, which
is a good thing, for the blunders of a man with a heart often carry him
further than the cunning of the cynic; also you have a will and know how
to direct it.'

I bowed, and did my best to hold back my satisfaction at his words from
showing in my face.

'Still,' he went on, 'all this would not cause me to submit to you the
offer that I am about to make, for many a prettier fellow than yourself
is after all unlucky, or a fool at the bottom, or bad tempered and
destined to the dogs, as for aught I know you may be also. But I take
my chance of that because you suit me in another way. Perhaps you may
scarcely know it yourself, but you have beauty, senor, beauty of a very
rare and singular type, which half the ladies of Seville will praise
when they come to know you.'

'I am much flattered,' I said, 'but might I ask what all these
compliments may mean? To be brief, what is your offer?'

'To be brief then, it is this. I am in need of an assistant who must
possess all the qualities that I see in you, but most of all one which
I can only guess you to possess--discretion. That assistant would not
be ill-paid; this house would be at his disposal, and he would have
opportunities of learning the world such as are given to few. What say
you?'

'I say this, senor, that I should wish to know more of the business in
which I am expected to assist. Your offers sound too liberal, and I fear
that I must earn your bounty by the doing of work that honest men might
shrink from.'

'A fair argument, but, as it happens, not quite a correct one. Listen:
you have been told that yonder physician, to whose house you went but
now, and these'--here he repeated four or five names--'are the greatest
of their tribe in Seville. It is not so. I am the greatest and the
richest, and I do more business than any two of them. Do you know
what my earnings have been this day alone? I will tell you; just over
twenty-five gold pesos,* more than all the rest of the profession have
taken together, I will wager. You want to know how I earn so much; you
want to know also, why, if I have earned so much, I am not content to
rest from my labours. Good, I will tell you. I earn it by ministering to
the vanities of women and sheltering them from the results of their own
folly. Has a lady a sore heart, she comes to me for comfort and advice.
Has she pimples on her face, she flies to me to cure them. Has she a
secret love affair, it is I who hide her indiscretion; I consult the
future for her, I help her to atone the past, I doctor her for imaginary
ailments, and often enough I cure her of real ones. Half the secrets of
Seville are in my hands; did I choose to speak I could set a score of
noble houses to broil and bloodshed. But I do not speak, I am paid to
keep silent; and when I am not paid, still I keep silent for my credit's
sake. Hundreds of women think me their saviour, I know them for my
dupes. But mark you, I do not push this game too far. A love philtre--of
coloured water--I may give at a price, but not a poisoned rose. These
they must seek elsewhere. For the rest, in my way I am honest. I take
the world as it comes, that is all, and, as women will be fools, I
profit by their folly and have grown rich upon it.

     * About sixty-three pounds sterling.

'Yes, I have grown rich, and yet I cannot stop. I love the money that is
power; but more than all, I love the way of life. Talk of romances and
adventure! What romance or adventure is half so wonderful as those that
come daily to my notice? And I play a part in every one of them, and
none the less a leading part because I do not shout and strut upon the
boards.'

'If all this is so, why do you seek the help of an unknown lad, a
stranger of whom you know nothing?' I asked bluntly.

'Truly, you lack experience,' the old man answered with a laugh. 'Do you
then suppose that I should choose one who was NOT a stranger--one who
might have ties within this city with which I was unacquainted. And as
for knowing nothing of you, young man, do you think that I have followed
this strange trade of mine for forty years without learning to judge at
sight? Perhaps I know you better than you know yourself. By the way, the
fact that you are deeply enamoured of that maid whom you have left in
England is a recommendation to me, for whatever follies you may commit,
you will scarcely embarrass me and yourself by suffering your affections
to be seriously entangled. Ah! have I astonished you?'

'How do you know?' I began--then ceased.

'How do I know? Why, easily enough. Those boots you wear were made in
England. I have seen many such when I travelled there; your accent also
though faint is English, and twice you have spoken English words when
your Castilian failed you. Then for the maid, is not that a betrothal
ring upon your hand? And when I spoke to you of the ladies of this
country, my talk did not interest you overmuch as at your age it had
done were you heart-whole. Surely also the lady is fair and tall? Ah!
I thought so. I have noticed that men and women love their opposite in
colour, no invariable rule indeed, but good for a guess.'

'You are very clever, senor.'

'No, not clever, but trained, as you will be when you have been a year
in my hands, though perchance you do not intend to stop so long in
Seville. Perhaps you came here with an object, and wish to pass the time
profitably till it is fulfilled. A good guess again, I think. Well, so
be it, I will risk that; object and attainment are often far apart. Do
you take my offer?'

'I incline to do so.'

'Then you will take it. Now I have something more to say before we come
to terms. I do not want you to play the part of an apothecary's drudge.
You will figure before the world as my nephew, come from abroad to learn
my trade. You will help me in it indeed, but that is not all your duty.
Your part will be to mix in the life of Seville, and to watch those whom
I bid you watch, to drop a word here and a hint there, and in a hundred
ways that I shall show you to draw grist to my mill--and to your own.
You must be brilliant and witty, or sad and learned, as I wish; you must
make the most of your person and your talents, for these go far with my
customers. To the hidalgo you must talk of arms, to the lady, of love;
but you must never commit yourself beyond redemption. And above all,
young man'--and here his manner changed and his face grew stern and
almost fierce--'you must never violate my confidence or the confidence
of my clients. On this point I will be quite open within you, and I
pray you for your own sake to believe what I say, however much you may
mistrust the rest. If you break faith with me, YOU DIE. You die, not by
my hand, but you die. That is my price; take it or leave it. Should you
leave it and go hence to tell what you have heard this day, even then
misfortune may overtake you suddenly. Do you understand?'

'I understand. For my own sake I will respect your confidence.'

'Young sir, I like you better than ever. Had you said that you would
respect it because it was a confidence, I should have mistrusted you,
for doubtless you feel that secrets communicated so readily have
no claim to be held sacred. Nor have they, but when their violation
involves the sad and accidental end of the violator, it is another
matter. Well now, do you accept?'

'I accept.'

'Good. Your baggage I suppose is at the inn. I will send porters to
discharge your score and bring it here. No need for you to go, nephew,
let us stop and drink another glass of wine; the sooner we grow intimate
the better, nephew.'


It was thus that first I became acquainted with Senor Andres de Fonseca,
my benefactor, the strangest man whom I have ever known. Doubtless any
person reading this history would think that I, the narrator, was sowing
a plentiful crop of troubles for myself in having to deal with him,
setting him down as a rogue of the deepest, such as sometimes, for their
own wicked purposes, decoy young men to crime and ruin. But it was not
so, and this is the strangest part of the strange story. All that Andres
de Fonseca told me was true to the very letter.

He was a gentleman of great talent who had been rendered a little mad
by misfortunes in his early life. As a physician I have never met his
master, if indeed he has one in these times, and as a man versed in the
world and more especially in the world of women, I have known none to
compare with him. He had travelled far, and seen much, and he forgot
nothing. In part he was a quack, but his quackery always had a meaning
in it. He fleeced the foolish, indeed, and even juggled with astronomy,
making money out of their superstition; but on the other hand he did
many a kind act without reward. He would make a rich lady pay ten gold
pesos for the dyeing of her hair, but often he would nurse some poor
girl through her trouble and ask no charge; yes, and find her honest
employment after it. He who knew all the secrets of Seville never made
money out of them by threat of exposure, as he said because it would
not pay to do so, but really because though he affected to be a selfish
knave, at bottom his heart was honest.

For my own part I found life with him both easy and happy, so far as
mine could be quite happy. Soon I learned my role and played it well. It
was given out that I was the nephew of the rich old physician Fonseca,
whom he was training to take his place; and this, together with my
own appearance and manners, ensured me a welcome in the best houses of
Seville. Here I took that share of our business which my master could
not take, for now he never mixed among the fashion of the city. Money I
was supplied with in abundance so that I could ruffle it with the
best, but soon it became known that I looked to business as well as to
pleasure. Often and often during some gay ball or carnival, a lady would
glide up to me and ask beneath her breath if Don Andres de Fonseca would
consent to see her privately on a matter of some importance, and I would
fix an hour then and there. Had it not been for me such patients would
have been lost to us, since, for the most part, their timidity had kept
them away.

In the same fashion when the festival was ended and I prepared to wend
homewards, now and again a gallant would slip his arm in mine and ask
my master's help in some affair of love or honour, or even of the purse.
Then I would lead him straight to the old Moorish house where Don Andres
sat writing in his velvet robe like some spider in his web, for the most
of our business was done at night; and straight-way the matter would
be attended to, to my master's profit and the satisfaction of all. By
degrees it became known that though I was so young yet I had discretion,
and that nothing which went in at my ears came out of my lips; that I
neither brawled nor drank nor gambled to any length, and that though I
was friendly with many fair ladies, there were none who were entitled to
know my secrets. Also it became known that I had some skill in my art of
healing, and it was said among the ladies of Seville that there lived no
man in that city so deft at clearing the skin of blemishes or changing
the colour of the hair as old Fonseca's nephew, and as any one may know
this reputation alone was worth a fortune. Thus it came about that I was
more and more consulted on my own account. In short, things went so well
with us that in the first six months of my service I added by one third
to the receipts of my master's practice, large as they had been before,
besides lightening his labours not a little.

It was a strange life, and of the things that I saw and learned, could
they be written, I might make a tale indeed, but they have no part in
this history. For it was as though the smiles and silence with which men
and women hide their thoughts were done away, and their hearts spoke to
us in the accents of truth. Now some fair young maid or wife would come
to us with confessions of wickedness that would be thought impossible,
