from the first plundered them in the face of day, laying aside all
thought of law. For then they would themselves have admitted that the
weaker must give way to the stronger. Mankind resents injustice more
than violence, because the one seems to be an unfair advantage taken
by an equal, the other is the irresistible force of a superior. They
were patient under the yoke of the Persian, who inflicted on them far
more grievous wrongs; but now our dominion is odious in their eyes.
And no wonder: the ruler of the day is always detested by his
subjects. And should your empire supplant ours, may not you lose the
good-will which you owe to the fear of us? Lose it you certainly will,
if you mean again to exhibit the temper of which you gave a specimen
when, for a short time, you led the confederacy against the Persian.
For the institutions under which you live are incompatible with those
of foreign states; and further, when any of you goes abroad, he
respects neither these nor any other Hellenic laws.

"Do not then be hasty in deciding a question which is serious; and do
not, by listening to the misrepresentations and complaints of others,
bring trouble upon yourselves. Realize, while there is time, the
inscrutable nature of war; and how when protracted it generally ends
in becoming a mere matter of chance, over which neither of us can have
any control, the event being equally unknown and equally hazardous to
both. The misfortune is that in their hurry to go to war, men begin
with blows, and when a reverse comes upon them, then have recourse to
words. But neither you nor we have as yet committed this mistake; and
therefore while both of us can still choose the prudent part, we tell
you not to break the peace or violate your oaths. Let our differences
be determined by arbitration, according to the treaty. If you refuse,
we call to witness the gods by whom you have sworn that you are the
authors of the war; and we will do our best to strike in return."

When the Lacedaemonians had heard the charges brought by the allies
against the Athenians, and their rejoinder, they ordered everybody but
themselves to withdraw, and deliberated alone. The majority were
agreed that there was now a clear case against the Athenians, and that
they must fight at once.[25]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 18: Jowett says Thucydides "stands absolutely alone among
historians, not only of Hellas, but of the world, in his impartiality
and love of truth." Macaulay's enthusiasm for him is well known.
Mahaffy says his work was intended to be a military history, compiled
from original documents and from personal observations made by himself
and other eye-witnesses. "There can not be the smallest doubt," adds
Mahaffy, "that, in the hands of Thucydides, the art of writing history
made an extraordinary stride and attained a perfection which no
subsequent Hellenic, and few modern writers have attained." He is
praised for the "lofty dignity" which he imparts to every subject. His
temper is so solemn and severe as to be "strangely un-Attic." Among
his great and enduring merits is the fact that he has "taught us to
know more of Greek interpolitical life than all other Greek writers
put together." No historian has been greater than he, not only in
dignity of language, but in calmness of judgment, in intellectual
force, and in breadth and acuteness of observation.]

[Footnote 19: From Book I of the "History of the Peloponnesian War."
Translated by Benjamin Jowett.]

[Footnote 20: The Peloponnesians were the people of the peninsula
which forms the southern part of Greece, and which is now known as
Morea. In ancient times this territory was called the Peloponnesus.
Its people comprized the inhabitants of several political domains
called Achaia, Sicyonia, Corinthia, Argolis, Arcadia, Laconia,
Messenia, and Elis. Laconia was otherwise, and quite anciently, known
as Lacedaemon, its capital being the city of Sparta.]

[Footnote 21: Potidaea, the modern Pinaka, had revolted from Athens in
432 B.C., but did not capitulate until the end of the second year of
the Peloponnesian war. It was a rich and flourishing town, originally
Dorian, but colonized later from Corinth. During one of the Eastern
invasions of Greece, it fell into Persian hands.]

[Footnote 22: These walls connected Athens with its port, the Piraeus,
and were each about five miles long. They ran parallel and were
separated from each other by about 500 feet of space. This intervening
land was used for a carriage road, on either side of which were
houses. Thus was formed a continuous walled street from Athens to the
sea, so that communication in case of war was made secure.]

[Footnote 23: The battle of Marathon was fought in September, 490. It
ended the attempts of Darius to subdue Greece.]

[Footnote 24: The battle of Salamis took place in September, 480, and
was fought in waters lying between the Piraeus and the island of
Salamis. Themistocles commanded the Greeks. The Persian ships were
practically annihilated. Byron's lines on this battle, in his poem
"The Isles of Greece," will be recalled.]




II

THE PLAGUE AT ATHENS[26] (430--425 B.C.)


They [the enemy] had not been there [in Attica] many days when the
plague broke out at Athens for the first time. A similar disorder is
said to have previously smitten many places, particularly Lemnos;[27]
but there is no record of such a pestilence occurring elsewhere, or of
so great a destruction of human life. For a while physicians, in
ignorance of the nature of the disease, sought to apply remedies; but
it was in vain, and they themselves were among the first victims,
because they oftenest came into contact with it. No human art was of
any avail, and as to supplications in temples, inquiries of oracles,
and the like, they were utterly useless, and at last men were
overpowered by the calamity and gave up all remedies.

The disease is said to have begun south of Egypt in Ethiopia; thence
it descended into Egypt and Libya, and after spreading over the
greater part of the Persian empire, suddenly fell upon Athens. It
first attacked the inhabitants of the Piraeus, and it was supposed that
the Peloponnesians had poisoned the cisterns, no conduits having as
yet been made there. It afterward reached the upper city, and then the
mortality became far greater. As to its probable origin or the causes
which might or could have produced such a disturbance of nature, every
man, whether a physician or not, will give his own opinion. But I
shall describe its actual course, and the symptoms by which any one
who knows them beforehand may recognize the disorder should it ever
reappear. For I was myself attacked, and witnessed the sufferings of
others.

The season was admitted to have been remarkably free from ordinary
sickness; and if anybody was already ill of any other disease, it was
absorbed in this. Many who were in perfect health, all in a moment,
and without any apparent reason, were seized with violent heats in the
head and with redness and inflammation of the eyes. Internally the
throat and the tongue were quickly suffused with blood, and the breath
became unnatural and fetid. There followed sneezing and hoarseness; in
a short time the disorder, accompanied by a violent cough, reached the
chest; then fastening lower down, it would move the stomach and bring
on all the vomits of bile to which physicians have ever given names;
and they were very distressing. An ineffectual retching producing
violent convulsions attacked most of the sufferers; some as soon as
the previous symptoms had abated, others not until long afterward. The
body externally was not so very hot to the touch, nor yet pale; it was
of a livid color inclining to red, and breaking out in pustules and
ulcers. But the internal fever was intense; the sufferers could not
bear to have on them even the finest linen garment; they insisted on
being naked, and there was nothing which they longed for more eagerly
than to throw themselves into cold water. And many of those who had no
one to look after them actually plunged into the cisterns, for they
were tormented by unceasing thirst, which was not in the least
assuaged whether they drank little or much. They could not sleep; a
restlessness which was intolerable never left them.

While the disease was at its height the body, instead of wasting away,
held out amid these sufferings in a marvelous manner, and either they
died on the seventh or ninth day, not of weakness, for their strength
was not exhausted, but of internal fever, which was the end of most;
or, if they survived, then the disease descended into the bowels and
there produced violent ulcerations; severe diarrhea at the same time
set in, and at a later stage caused exhaustion, which finally with few
exceptions carried them off. For the disorder, which had originally
settled in the head, passed gradually through the whole body, and, if
a person got over the worst, would often seize the extremities and
leave its mark, attacking the privy parts and the fingers and the
toes; and some escaped with the loss of these, some with the loss of
their eyes. Some, again, had no sooner recovered than they were seized
with a forgetfulness of all things and knew neither themselves nor
their friends.

The malady took a form not to be described, and the fury with which it
fastened upon each sufferer was too much for human nature to endure.
There was one circumstance in particular which distinguished it from
ordinary diseases. The birds and animals, which feed on human flesh,
altho so many bodies were lying unburied, either never went near them
or died if they touched them. This was proved by a remarkable
disappearance of the birds of prey, which were not to be seen either
about the bodies or anywhere else; while in the case of the dogs the
fact was even more obvious, because they live with man.

Such was the general nature of the disease; I omit many strange
peculiarities which characterized individual cases. None of the
ordinary sicknesses attacked any one while it lasted, or, if they did,
they ended in the plague. Some of the sufferers died from want of
care, others equally who were receiving the greatest attention. No
single remedy could be deemed a specific; for that which did good to
one did harm to another. No constitution was of itself strong enough
to resist or weak enough to escape the attacks; the disease carried
off all alike and defied every mode of treatment. Most appalling was
the despondency which seized upon any one who felt himself sickening;
for he instantly abandoned his mind to despair and, instead of holding
out, absolutely threw away his chance of life. Appalling too was the
rapidity with which men caught the infection, dying like sheep if they
attended on one another, and this was the principal cause of
mortality. When they were afraid to visit one another, the sufferers
died in their solitude, so that many houses were empty because there
had been no one left to take care of the sick; or if they ventured
they perished, especially those who aspired to heroism. For they went
to see their friends without thought of themselves and were ashamed to
leave them, even at a time when the very relatives of the dying were
at last growing weary and ceased to make lamentations, overwhelmed by
the vastness of the calamity. But whatever instances there may have
been of such devotion, more often the sick and the dying were tended
by the pitying care of those who had recovered, because they knew the
course of the disease and were themselves free from apprehension. For
no one was ever attacked a second time, or not with a fatal result.
All men congratulated them; and they themselves, in the excess of
their joy at the moment, had an innocent fancy that they could not die
of any other sickness.

The crowding of the people out of the country into the city aggravated
the misery, and the newly arrived suffered most. For, having no houses
of their own, but inhabiting, in the height of summer, stifling huts,
the mortality among them was dreadful, and they perished in wild
disorder. The dead lay as they had died, one upon another, while
others hardly alive wallowed in the streets and crawled about every
fountain craving for water. The temples in which they lodged were full
of the corpses of those who had died in them; for the violence of the
calamity was such that men, not knowing where to turn, grew reckless
of all law, human and divine. The customs which had hitherto been
observed at funerals were universally violated, and they buried their
dead each one as best he could. Many, having no proper appliances,
because the deaths in their household had been so frequent, made no
scruple of using the burial-place of others. When one man had raised a
funeral pile, others would come, and throwing on their dead first, set
fire to it; or when some other corpse was already burning, before they
could be stopt would throw their own dead upon it and depart.

There were other and worse forms of lawlessness which the plague
introduced at Athens. Men who had hitherto concealed their indulgence
in pleasure now grew bolder. For, seeing the sudden change--how the
rich died in a moment, and those who had nothing immediately inherited
their property--they reflected that life and riches were alike
transitory, and they resolved to enjoy themselves while they could,
and to think only of pleasure. Who would be willing to sacrifice
himself to the law of honor when he knew not whether he would ever
live to be held in honor? The pleasure of the moment and any sort of
thing which conduced to it took the place both of honor and of
expediency. No fear of God or law of man deterred a criminal. Those
who saw all perishing alike thought that the worship or neglect of the
gods made no difference. For offenses against human law no punishment
was to be feared; no one would live long enough to be called to
account. Already a far heavier sentence had been passed and was
hanging over a man's head; before that feeling, why should he not take
a little pleasure?

Such was the grievous calamity which now afflicted the Athenians;
within the walls their people were dying, and without, their country
was being ravaged. In their troubles they naturally called to mind a
verse which the elder men among them declared to have been current
long ago:

     "A Dorian war will come and a plague with it."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 25: The Peloponnesian war broke out in 431 B.C., and lasted
until 404. Its result was the abasement of Athens and the elevation of
Sparta to supreme power in Greece. When it began, Athens with her
allies included all the coast cities of Asia Minor as far south as
Lycia, the cities bordering on the Thracian and Chalcidian shores, and
nearly all the islands of the AEgean Sea. Sparta at the same time was
leader in a confederacy of independent states, among which were nearly
all the Peloponnesian states, besides some of those in northern
Greece, those of Magna Graecia and Sicily. Athens was strong in her
navy, which comprized 300 galleys, while the Spartan strength lay in
her land forces. The treasury of Athens was full, that of Sparta weak.
After the war, the walls of Athens were demolished and she was
deprived of her foreign possessions. The government set over her was
an oligarchy of thirty persons, known in history as the thirty
tyrants. These men soon made their harsh rule so intolerable that
within sixteen months after Athens surrendered to Sparta they were
deposed and democratic rule was restored to the Athenians.]

[Footnote 26: From Book II of the "History of the Peloponnesian War."
Translated by Benjamin Jowett.]

[Footnote 27: One of the larger islands of the AEgean Sea, its area
being about one hundred and eighty square miles.]




III

THE SAILING OF THE ATHENIAN FLEET FOR SICILY[28] (413 B.C.)


About the middle of summer the expedition started for Sicily. Orders
had been previously given to most of the allies, to the corn-ships,
the smaller craft, and generally to the vessels in attendance on the
armament that they should muster at Corcyra, whence the whole fleet
was to strike across the Ionian Gulf to the promontory of Iapygia.[29]
Early in the morning of the day appointed for their departure, the
Athenians and such of their allies as had already joined them went
down to the Piraeus and began to man the ships. The entire population
of Athens accompanied them, citizens and strangers alike. The citizens
came to take farewell, one of an acquaintance another of a kinsman,
another of a son; the crowd as they passed along were full of hope and
full of tears; hope of conquering Sicily, tears because they doubted
whether they would ever see their friends again, when they thought of
the long voyage on which they were sending them. At the moment of
parting, the danger was nearer; and terrors which had never occurred
to them when they were voting the expedition now entered into their
souls. Nevertheless their spirits revived at the sight of the armament
in all its strength and of the abundant provision which they had made.
The strangers and the rest of the multitude came out of curiosity,
desiring to witness an enterprise of which the greatness exceeded
belief.

No armament so magnificent or costly had ever been sent out by any
single Hellenic power, tho in mere number of ships and hoplites that
which sailed to Epidaurus under Pericles and afterward under Hagnon to
Potidaea was not inferior. For that expedition consisted of a hundred
Athenian and fifty Chian and Lesbian triremes, conveying four thousand
hoplites, all Athenian citizens, three hundred cavalry, and a
multitude of allied troops. Still the voyage was short and the
equipments were poor, whereas this expedition was intended to be long
absent, and was thoroughly provided both for sea and land service,
wherever its presence might be required.

On the fleet the greatest pains and expense had been lavished by the
trierarchs and the state. The public treasury gave a drachma a day to
each sailor, and furnished empty hulls for sixty swift sailing
vessels, and for forty transports carrying hoplites. All these were
manned with the best crews which could be obtained. The trierarchs,
besides the pay given by the state, added somewhat more out of their
own means to the wages of the upper ranks of rowers and of the petty
officers. The figureheads and other fittings provided by the
trierarchs were of the most costly description. Every one strove to
the utmost that his own ship might excel both in beauty and
swiftness. The infantry had been well selected and the lists carefully
made up. There was the keenest rivalry among the soldiers in the
matter of arms and personal equipment.

And while at home the Athenians were thus competing with one another
in the performance of their several duties, to the rest of Hellas the
expedition seemed to be a grand display of their power and greatness,
rather than a preparation for war. If any one had reckoned up the
whole expenditure (1) of the state, (2) of individual soldiers and
others, including in the first not only what the city had already laid
out, but what was entrusted to the generals, and in the second what
either at the time or afterward private persons spent upon their
outfit, or the trierarchs upon their ships, the provision for the long
voyage which every one may be supposed to have carried with him over
and above his public pay, and what soldiers or traders may have taken
for purposes of exchange, he would have found that altogether an
immense sum amounting to many talents was withdrawn from the city. Men
were quite amazed at the boldness of the scheme and the magnificence
of the spectacle, which were everywhere spoken of, no less than at the
great disproportion of the force when compared with that of the enemy
against whom it was intended. Never had a greater expedition been sent
to a foreign land; never was there an enterprise in which the hope of
future success seemed to be better justified by actual power.

When the ships were manned and everything required for the voyage had
been placed on board, silence was proclaimed by the sound of the
trumpet, and all with one voice before setting sail offered up the
customary prayers; these were recited, not in each ship, but by a
single herald, the whole fleet accompanying him. On every deck both
officers and men, mingling wine in bowls, made libations from vessels
of gold and silver. The multitude of citizens and other well-wishers
who were looking on from the land joined in the prayer. The crews
raised the paean, and when the libations were completed, put to sea.
After sailing out for some distance in single file, the ships raced
with one another as far as AEgina;[30] thence they hastened onward to
Corcyra, where the allies who formed the rest of the army were
assembling.

Meanwhile reports of the expedition were coming in to Syracuse from
many quarters, but for a long time nobody gave credit to them. At
length an assembly was held. Even then different opinions were
exprest, some affirming and others denying that the expedition was
coming. At last Hermocrates,[31] the son of Hermon, believing that he
had certain information, came forward, and warned the Syracusans....

Great was the contention which his words aroused among the Syracusan
people, some asserting that the Athenians would never come, and that
he was not speaking truth, others asking, "And if they should come,
what harm could they do to us nearly so great as we could do to them?"
while others were quite contemptuous, and made a jest of the whole
matter. A few only believed Hermocrates and realized the danger. At
last Athenagoras, the popular leader, who had at that time the
greatest influence with the multitude, came forward and spoke....

The Athenians and their allies were by this time collected at Corcyra.
There the generals began by holding a final review of the ships, and
disposed them in the order in which they were to anchor at their
stations. The fleet was divided into three squadrons, and one of them
assigned by lot to each of the three generals, in order to avoid any
difficulties which might occur, if they sailed together, in finding
water, anchorage, and provisions where they touched; they thought also
that the presence of a general in each division would promote good
order and discipline throughout the fleet. They then sent before them
to Italy and Sicily three ships, which had orders to find out what
cities in those regions would receive them, and to meet them again on
their way, that they might know before they put in.

At length the great armament proceeded to cross from Corcyra to
Sicily. It consisted of a hundred and thirty-four triremes in all,
besides two Rhodian vessels of fifty oars. Of these a hundred were
Athenian, sixty being swift vessels, and the remaining forty
transports; the rest of the fleet was furnished by the Chians and
other allies. The hoplites numbered in all five thousand one hundred,
of whom fifteen hundred were Athenians taken from the roll, and seven
hundred who served as marines were of the fourth and lowest class of
Athenian citizens. The remainder of the hoplites were furnished by the
allies, mostly by the subject states; but five hundred came from
Argos, besides two hundred and fifty Mantinean and other mercenaries.
The archers were in all four hundred and eighty, of whom eighty were
Cretans. There were seven hundred Rhodian slingers, a hundred and
twenty light-armed Megarians who were exiles, and one horse transport
which conveyed thirty horsemen and horses.

Such were the forces with which the first expedition crossed the sea.
For the transport of provisions thirty merchant-ships, which also
conveyed bakers, masons, carpenters, and tools such as are required in
sieges, were included in the armament. It was likewise attended by a
hundred small vessels; these as well as the merchant-vessels, were
prest into the service. Other merchant-vessels and lesser craft in
