Yesterday morning, at the Pump-room, I saw a broken-winded
Wapping landlady squeeze through a circle of peers, to salute her
brandy-merchant, who stood by the window, propped upon crutches; and a
paralytic attorney of Shoe-lane, in shuffling up to the bar, kicked the
shins of the chancellor of England, while his lordship, in a cut bob,
drank a glass of water at the pump. I cannot account for my being
pleased with these incidents, any other way, than by saying they are
truly ridiculous in their own nature, and serve to heighten the humour
in the farce of life, which I am determined to enjoy as long as I can.

Those follies, that move my uncle's spleen, excite my laughter. He is
as tender as a man without a skin; who cannot bear the slightest touch
without flinching. What tickles another would give him torment; and
yet he has what we may call lucid intervals, when he is remarkably
facetious--Indeed, I never knew a hypochondriac so apt to be infected
with good-humour. He is the most risible misanthrope I ever met with.
A lucky joke, or any ludicrous incident, will set him a-laughing
immoderately, even in one of his most gloomy paroxysms; and, when the
laugh is over, he will curse his own imbecility. In conversing with
strangers, he betrays no marks of disquiet--He is splenetic with his
familiars only; and not even with them, while they keep his attention
employed; but when his spirits are not exerted externally, they seem
to recoil and prey upon himself--He has renounced the waters with
execration; but he begins to find a more efficacious, and, certainly,
a much more palatable remedy in the pleasures of society. He has
discovered some old friends, among the invalids of Bath; and, in
particular, renewed his acquaintance with the celebrated James Quin, who
certainly did not come here to drink water. You cannot doubt, but that I
had the strongest curiosity to know this original; and it was gratified
by Mr Bramble, who has had him twice at our house to dinner.

So far as I am able to judge, Quin's character is rather more
respectable than it has been generally represented. His bon mots are in
every witling's mouth; but many of them have a rank flavour, which one
would be apt to think was derived from a natural grossness of idea.
I suspect, however, that justice has not been done the author, by the
collectors of those Quiniana; who have let the best of them slip through
their fingers, and only retained such as were suited to the taste and
organs of the multitude. How far he may relax in his hours of jollity, I
cannot pretend to say; but his general conversation is conducted by the
nicest rules of Propriety; and Mr James Quin is, certainly, one of the
best bred men in the kingdom. He is not only a most agreeable companion
but (as I am credibly informed) a very honest man; highly susceptible
of friendship, warm, steady, and even generous in his attachments,
disdaining flattery, and incapable of meanness and dissimulation. Were I
to judge, however, from Quin's eye alone, I should take him to be proud,
insolent, and cruel. There is something remarkably severe and forbidding
in his aspect; and, I have been told, he was ever disposed to insult his
inferiors and dependants.--Perhaps that report has influenced my opinion
of his looks--You know we are the fools of prejudice. Howsoever that may
be, I have as yet seen nothing but his favourable side, and my uncle,
who frequently confers with him, in a corner, declares he is one of the
most sensible men he ever knew--He seems to have a reciprocal regard for
old Squaretoes, whom he calls by the familiar name of Matthew, and often
reminds of their old tavern-adventures: on the other hand, Matthew's
eyes sparkle whenever Quin makes his appearance--Let him be never so
jarring and discordant, Quin puts him in tune; and, like treble and bass
in the same concert, they make excellent music together--. T'other day,
the conversation turning upon Shakespeare, I could not help saying, with
some emotion, that I would give an hundred guineas to see Mr Quin act
the part of Falstaff; upon which, turning to me with a smile, 'And I
would give a thousand, young gentleman (said he) that I could gratify
your longing.' My uncle and he are perfectly agreed in their estimate of
life; which Quin says, would stink in his nostrils, if he did not steep
it in claret.

I want to see this phenomenon in his cups; and have almost prevailed
upon uncle to give him a small turtle at the Bear. In the mean time, I
must entertain you with an incident, that seems to confirm the judgment
of those two cynic philosophers. I took the liberty to differ in opinion
from Mr Bramble, when he observed, that the mixture of people in the
entertainments of this place was destructive of all order and urbanity;
that it rendered the plebeians insufferably arrogant and troublesome,
and vulgarized the deportment and sentiments of those who moved in the
upper spheres of life. He said such a preposterous coalition would bring
us into contempt with all our neighbours; and was worse, in fact, than
debasing the gold coin of the nation. I argued, on the contrary, that
those plebeians who discovered such eagerness to imitate the dress and
equipage of their superiors, would likewise, in time, adopt their maxims
and their manners, be polished by their conversation, and refined by
their example; but when I appealed to Mr Quin, and asked if he did not
think that such an unreserved mixture would improve the whole mass? 'Yes
(said he) as a plate of marmalade would improve a pan of sirreverence.'

I owned I was not much conversant in high-life, but I had seen what were
called polite assemblies in London and elsewhere; that those of Bath
seemed to be as decent as any; and that, upon the whole, the individuals
that composed it, would not be found deficient in good manners and
decorum. 'But let us have recourse to experience (said I)--Jack Holder,
who was intended for a parson, has succeeded to an estate of two
thousand a year, by the death of his elder brother. He is now at the
Bath, driving about in a phaeton and four, with French horns. He has
treated with turtle and claret at all the taverns in Bath and Bristol,
till his guests are gorged with good chear: he has bought a dozen suits
of fine clothes, by the advice of the Master of the Ceremonies, under
whose tuition he has entered himself. He has lost hundreds at billiards
to sharpers, and taken one of the nymphs of Avon-street into keeping;
but, finding all these channels insufficient to drain him of his current
cash, his counsellor has engaged him to give a general tea-drinking
to-morrow at Wiltshire's room. In order to give it the more eclat, every
table is to be furnished with sweet-meats and nosegays; which, however,
are not to be touched till notice is given by the ringing of a bell, and
then the ladies may help themselves without restriction. This will be no
bad way of trying the company's breeding.'

'I will abide by that experiment (cried my uncle) and if I could find
a place to stand secure, without the vortex of the tumult, which I know
will ensue, I would certainly go thither and enjoy the scene.' Quin
proposed that we should take our station in the music-gallery, and
we took his advice. Holder had got thither before us, with his horns
perdue, but we were admitted. The tea-drinking passed as usual, and the
company having risen from the tables, were sauntering in groupes, in
expectation of the signal for attack, when the bell beginning to
ring, they flew with eagerness to the dessert, and the whole place was
instantly in commotion. There was nothing but justling, scrambling,
pulling, snatching, struggling, scolding, and screaming. The nosegays
were torn from one another's hands and bosoms; the glasses and china
went to wreck; the tables and floors were strewed with comfits. Some
cried; some swore; and the tropes and figures of Billingsgate were used
without reserve in all their native zest and flavour; nor were those
flowers of rhetoric unattended with significant gesticulation. Some
snapped their fingers; some forked them out; some clapped their hands,
and some their back-sides; at length, they fairly proceeded to pulling
caps, and every thing seemed to presage a general battle; when Holder
ordered his horns to sound a charge, with a view to animate the
combatants, and inflame the contest; but this manoeuvre produced an
effect quite contrary to what he expected. It was a note of reproach
that roused them to an immediate sense of their disgraceful situation.
They were ashamed of their absurd deportment, and suddenly desisted.
They gathered up their caps, ruffles, and handkerchiefs; and great part
of them retired in silent mortification.

Quin laughed at this adventure; but my uncle's delicacy was hurt. He
hung his head in manifest chagrin, and seemed to repine at the triumph
of his judgment--Indeed, his victory was more complete than he imagined;
for, as we afterwards learned, the two amazons who singularized
themselves most in the action, did not come from the purlieus of
Puddle-dock, but from the courtly neighbourhood of St James's palace.
One was a baroness, and the other, a wealthy knight's dowager--My uncle
spoke not a word, till we had made our retreat good to the coffee-house;
where, taking off his hat and wiping his forehead, 'I bless God (said
he) that Mrs Tabitha Bramble did not take the field today!' 'I would pit
her for a cool hundred (cried Quin) against the best shake-bag of the
whole main.' The truth is, nothing could have kept her at home but the
accident of her having taken physic before she knew the nature of the
entertainment. She has been for some days furbishing up an old suit of
black velvet, to make her appearance as Sir Ulic's partner at the next
ball.

I have much to say of this amiable kinswoman; but she has not been
properly introduced to your acquaintance. She is remarkably civil to
Mr Quin; of whose sarcastic humour she seems to stand in awe; but her
caution is no match for her impertinence. 'Mr Gwynn (said she the other
day) I was once vastly entertained with your playing the Ghost of Gimlet
at Drury-lane, when you rose up through the stage, with a white face and
red eyes, and spoke of quails upon the frightful porcofine--Do, pray,
spout a little the Ghost of Gimlet.' 'Madam (said Quin, with a glance of
ineffable disdain) the Ghost of Gimlet is laid, never to rise again'--
Insensible of this check, she proceeded: 'Well, to be sure, you looked
and talked so like a real ghost; and then the cock crowed so natural.
I wonder how you could teach him to crow so exact, in the very nick of
time; but, I suppose, he's game--An't he game, Mr Gwynn?' 'Dunghill,
madam.'--'Well, dunghill, or not dunghill, he has got such a clear
counter-tenor, that I wish I had such another at Brambleton-hall, to
wake the maids of a morning. Do you know where I could find one of his
brood?' 'Probably in the work-house at St Giles's parish, madam; but I
protest I know not his particular mew!' My uncle, frying with vexation,
cried, 'Good God, sister, how you talk! I have told you twenty times,
that this gentleman's name is not Gwynn.'--'Hoity toity, brother mine
(she replied) no offence, I hope--Gwynn is an honorable name, of true
old British extraction--I thought the gentleman had been come of Mrs
Helen Gwynn, who was of his own profession; and if so be that were the
case, he might be of king Charles's breed, and have royal blood in his
veins.'--'No, madam (answered Quin, with great solemnity) my mother was
not a whore of such distinction--True it is, I am sometimes tempted
to believe myself of royal descent; for my inclinations are often
arbitrary--If I was an absolute prince, at this instant, I believe I
should send for the head of your cook in a charger--She has committed
felony, on the person of that John Dory, which is mangled in a cruel
manner, and even presented without sauce--O tempora! O mores!'

This good-humoured sally turned the conversation into a less
disagreeable channel--But, lest you should think my scribble as tedious
as Mrs Tabby's clack, I shall not add another word, but that I am as
usual

Yours, J. MELFORD BATH, April 30.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

I received your bill upon Wiltshire, which was punctually honoured; but
as I don't choose to keep so much cash by me, in a common lodging house,
I have deposited 250l. in the bank of Bath, and shall take their bills
for it in London, when I leave this place, where the season draws to an
end--You must know, that now being a-foot, I am resolved to give Liddy a
glimpse of London. She is one of the best hearted creatures I ever knew,
and gains upon my affection every day--As for Tabby, I have dropt such
hints to the Irish baronet, concerning her fortune, as, I make no doubt,
will cool the ardour of his addresses. Then her pride will take the
alarm; and the rancour of stale maidenhood being chafed, we shall hear
nothing but slander and abuse of Sir Ulic Mackilligut--This rupture,
I foresee, will facilitate our departure from Bath; where, at present,
Tabby seems to enjoy herself with peculiar satisfaction. For my part, I
detest it so much, that I should not have been able to stay so long in
the place if I had not discovered some old friends; whose conversation
alleviates my disgust--Going to the coffeehouse one forenoon, I
could not help contemplating the company, with equal surprize and
compassion--We consisted of thirteen individuals; seven lamed by the
gout, rheumatism, or palsy; three maimed by accident; and the rest
either deaf or blind. One hobbled, another hopped, a third dragged his
legs after him like a wounded snake, a fourth straddled betwixt a pair
of long crutches, like the mummy of a felon hanging in chains; a fifth
was bent into a horizontal position, like a mounted telescope, shoved in
by a couple of chairmen; and a sixth was the bust of a man, set upright
in a wheel machine, which the waiter moved from place to place.

Being struck with some of their faces, I consulted the
subscription-book; and, perceiving the names of several old friends,
began to consider the groupe with more attention. At length I discovered
rear-admiral Balderick, the companion of my youth, whom I had not seen
since he was appointed lieutenant of the Severn. He was metamorphosed
into an old man, with a wooden leg and a weatherbeaten face, which
appeared the more ancient from his grey locks, that were truly
venerable--Sitting down at the table, where he was reading a news-paper,
I gazed at him for some minutes, with a mixture of pleasure and regret,
which made my heart gush with tenderness; then, taking him by the hand,
'Ah, Sam (said I) forty years ago I little thought'--I was too much
moved to proceed. 'An old friend, sure enough! (cried he, squeezing my
hand, and surveying me eagerly through his glasses) I know the looming
of the vessel, though she has been hard strained since we parted; but I
can't heave up the name'--The moment I told him who I was, he exclaimed,
'Ha! Matt, my old fellow cruizer, still afloat!' And, starting up,
hugged me in his arms. His transport, however, boded me no good; for, in
saluting me, he thrust the spring of his spectacles into my eye, and,
at the same time, set his wooden stump upon my gouty toe; an attack that
made me shed tears in sad earnest--After the hurry of our recognition
was over, he pointed out two of our common friends in the room: the bust
was what remained of colonel Cockril, who had lost the use of his
limbs in making an American campaign; and the telescope proved to be
my college chum, sir Reginald Bently; who, with his new title, and
unexpected inheritance, commenced fox-hunter, without having served
his apprenticeship to the mystery; and, in consequence of following the
hounds through a river, was seized with an inflammation of his bowels,
which has contracted him into his present attitude.

Our former correspondence was forthwith renewed, with the most hearty
expressions of mutual good-will, and as we had met so unexpectedly, we
agreed to dine together that very day at the tavern. My friend Quin,
being luckily unengaged, obliged us with his company; and, truly, this
the most happy day I have passed these twenty years. You and I, Lewis,
having been always together, never tasted friendship in this high gout,
contracted from long absence. I cannot express the half of what I felt
at this casual meeting of three or four companions, who had been so
long separated, and so roughly treated by the storms of life. It was a
renovation of youth; a kind of resuscitation of the dead, that realized
those interesting dreams, in which we sometimes retrieve our ancient
friends from the grave. Perhaps my enjoyment was not the less pleasing
for being mixed with a strain of melancholy, produced by the remembrance
of past scenes, that conjured up the ideas of some endearing connexions,
which the hand of Death has actually dissolved.

The spirits and good humour of the company seemed to triumph over the
wreck of their constitutions. They had even philosophy enough to
joke upon their own calamities; such is the power of friendship, the
sovereign cordial of life--I afterwards found, however, that they were
not without their moments, and even hours of disquiet. Each of them
apart, in succeeding conferences, expatiated upon his own particular
grievances; and they were all malcontents at bottom--Over and above
their personal disasters, they thought themselves unfortunate in the
lottery of life. Balderick complained, that all the recompence he
had received for his long and hard service, was the half-pay of a
rear-admiral. The colonel was mortified to see himself over-topped by
upstart generals, some of whom he had once commanded; and, being a man
of a liberal turn, could ill put up with a moderate annuity, for which
he had sold his commission. As for the baronet, having run himself
considerably in debt, on a contested election, he has been obliged to
relinquish his seat in parliament, and his seat in the country at the
same time, and put his estate to nurse; but his chagrin, which is the
effect of his own misconduct, does not affect me half so much as that of
the other two, who have acted honourable and distinguished parts on the
great theatre, and are now reduced to lead a weary life in this stew-pan
of idleness and insignificance. They have long left off using the
waters, after having experienced their inefficacy. The diversions of the
place they are not in a condition to enjoy. How then do they make shift
to pass their time? In the forenoon they crawl out to the Rooms or
the coffeehouse, where they take a hand at whist, or descant upon the
General Advertiser; and their evenings they murder in private parties,
among peevish invalids, and insipid old women--This is the case with
a good number of individuals, whom nature seems to have intended for
better purposes.

About a dozen years ago, many decent families, restricted to small
fortunes, besides those that came hither on the score of health, were
tempted to settle at Bath, where they could then live comfortably, and
even make a genteel appearance, at a small expence: but the madness of
the times has made the place too hot for them, and they are now obliged
to think of other migrations--Some have already fled to the mountains
of Wales, and others have retired to Exeter. Thither, no doubt, they
will be followed by the flood of luxury and extravagance, which will
drive them from place to place to the very Land's End; and there, I
suppose, they will be obliged to ship themselves to some other country.
Bath is become a mere sink of profligacy and extortion. Every article of
house-keeping is raised to an enormous price; a circumstance no longer
to be wondered at, when we know that every petty retainer of fortune
piques himself upon keeping a table, and thinks it is for the honour
of his character to wink at the knavery of his servants, who are in a
confederacy with the market-people; and, of consequence, pay whatever
they demand. Here is now a mushroom of opulence, who pays a cook seventy
guineas a week for furnishing him with one meal a day. This portentous
frenzy is become so contagious, that the very rabble and refuse of
mankind are infected. I have known a negro-driver, from Jamaica, pay
over-night, to the master of one of the rooms, sixty-five guineas for
tea and coffee to the company, and leave Bath next morning, in such
obscurity, that not one of his guests had the slightest idea of his
person, or even made the least inquiry about his name. Incidents of this
kind are frequent; and every day teems with fresh absurdities, which are
too gross to make a thinking man merry.

--But I feel the spleen creeping on me apace; and therefore will indulge
you with a cessation, that you may have no unnecessary cause to curse
your correspondence with,

Dear Dick, Yours ever, MAT. BRAMBLE BATH, May 5.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

I wrote you at great length by the post, the twenty-sixth of last month,
to which I refer you for an account of our proceedings at Bath; and I
expect your answer with impatience. But, having this opportunity of a
private hand, I send you two dozen of Bath rings; six of the best of
which I desire you will keep for yourself, and distribute the rest among
the young ladies, our common friends, as you shall think proper--I don't
know how you will approve of the mottoes; some of them are not much
to my own liking; but I was obliged to take such as I could find ready
manufactured--I am vexed, that neither you nor I have received any
further information of a certain person--Sure it cannot be wilful
neglect!--O my dear Willis! I begin to be visited by strange fancies,
and to have some melancholy doubts; which, however, it would be
ungenerous to harbour without further inquiry--My uncle, who has made
me a present of a very fine set of garnets, talks of treating us with a
jaunt to London; which, you may imagine, will be highly agreeable; but
I like Bath so well, that I hope he won't think of leaving it till the
season is quite over; and yet, betwixt friends, something has happened
to my aunt, which will probably shorten our stay in this place.

Yesterday, in the forenoon, she went by herself to a breakfasting in one
of the rooms; and, in half an hour, returned in great agitation, having
Chowder along with her in the chair. I believe some accident must have
happened to that unlucky animal, which is the great source of all her
troubles. Dear Letty! what a pity it is, that a woman of her years
and discretion, should place her affection upon such an ugly,
ill-conditioned cur, that snarls and snaps at every body. I asked John
Thomas, the footman who attended her, what was the matter? and he did
nothing but grin. A famous dog-doctor was sent for, and undertook to
cure the patient, provided he might carry him home to his own house; but
his mistress would not part with him out of her own sight--She ordered
the cook to warm cloths, which she applied to his bowels, with her own
hand. She gave up all thoughts of going to the ball in the evening; and
when Sir Ulic came to drink tea, refused to be seen; so that he went
away to look for another partner. My brother Jery whistles and dances.
My uncle sometimes shrugs up his shoulders, and sometimes bursts out
a-laughing. My aunt sobs and scolds by turns; and her woman, Win.
Jenkins, stares and wonders with a foolish face of curiosity; and, for
my part, I am as curious as she, but ashamed to ask questions.

Perhaps time will discover the mystery; for if it was any thing that
happened in the Rooms, it cannot be long concealed--All I know is, that
last night at supper, miss Bramble spoke very disdainfully of Sir Ulic
Mackilligut, and asked her brother if he intended to keep us sweltering
all the summer at Bath? 'No, sister Tabitha (said he, with an arch
smile) we shall retreat before the Dog-days begin; though I make no
doubt, that with a little temperance and discretion, our constitutions
might be kept cool enough all the year, even at Bath.' As I don't know
the meaning of this insinuation, I won't pretend to make any remarks
upon it at present: hereafter, perhaps, I may be able to explain it more
to your satisfaction--In the mean time, I beg you will be punctual in
your correspondence, and continue to love your ever faithful

LYDIA MELFORD BATH, May 6.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

So then Mrs Blackerby's affair has proved a false alarm, and I have
saved my money? I wish, however, her declaration had not been so
premature; for though my being thought capable of making her a mother,
might have given me some credit, the reputation of an intrigue with such
a cracked pitcher does me no honour at all In my last I told you I had
hopes of seeing Quin, in his hours of elevation at the tavern which is
the temple of mirth and good fellowship; where he, as priest of Comus,
utters the inspirations of wit and humour--I have had that satisfaction.
I have dined with his club at the Three Tuns, and had the honour to sit
him out. At half an hour past eight in the evening, he was carried
home with six good bottles of claret under his belt; and it being then
Friday, he gave orders that he should not be disturbed till Sunday at
noon--You must not imagine that this dose had any other effect upon his
conversation, but that of making it more extravagantly entertaining--He
had lost the use of his limbs, indeed, several hours before we parted,
but he retained all his other faculties in perfection; and as he gave
vent to every whimsical idea as it rose, I was really astonished at the
brilliancy of his thoughts, and the force of his expression. Quin is a
real voluptuary in the articles of eating and drinking; and so confirmed
an epicure, in the common acceptation of the term, that he cannot put up
with ordinary fare. This is a point of such importance with him, that he
always takes upon himself the charge of catering; and a man admitted
to his mess, is always sure of eating delicate victuals, and drinking
excellent wine--He owns himself addicted to the delights of the stomach,
and often jokes upon his own sensuality; but there is nothing selfish in
this appetite--He finds that good chear unites good company, exhilerates
the spirits, opens the heart, banishes all restraint from conversation,
and promotes the happiest purposes of social life. But Mr James Quin
is not a subject to be discussed in the compass of one letter; I shall
therefore, at present, leave him to his repose, and call another of a
very different complexion.

You desire to have further acquaintance with the person of our aunt,
and promise yourself much entertainment from her connexion with Sir Ulic
Mackilligut: but in this hope you are baulked already; that connexion is
dissolved. The Irish baronet is an old hound, that, finding her carrion,
has quitted the scent--I have already told you, that Mrs Tabitha Bramble
is a maiden of forty-five. In her person, she is tall, raw-boned,
aukward, flat-chested, and stooping; her complexion is sallow and
freckled; her eyes are not grey, but greenish, like those of a cat, and
generally inflamed; her hair is of a sandy, or rather dusty hue; her
forehead low; her nose long, sharp, and, towards the extremity, always
red in cool weather; her lips skinny, her mouth extensive, her teeth
straggling and loose, of various colours and conformation; and her long
neck shrivelled into a thousand wrinkles--In her temper, she is proud,
stiff, vain, imperious, prying, malicious, greedy, and uncharitable. In
all likelihood, her natural austerity has been soured by disappointment
in love; for her long celibacy is by no means owing to her dislike of
matrimony: on the contrary, she has left no stone unturned to avoid the
reproachful epithet of old maid.

Before I was born, she had gone such lengths in the way of flirting
with a recruiting officer, that her reputation was a little singed. She
afterwards made advances to the curate of the parish, who dropped some
distant hints about the next presentation to the living, which was in
her brother's gift; but finding that was already promised to another, he
flew off at a tangent; and Mrs Tabby, in revenge, found means to deprive
him of his cure. Her next lover was lieutenant of a man of war, a
relation of the family, who did not understand the refinements of the
passion, and expressed no aversion to grapple with cousin Tabby in the
way of marriage; but before matters could be properly adjusted, he went
out on a cruise, and was killed in an engagement with a French frigate.
Our aunt, though baffled so often, did not yet despair. She layed all
her snares for Dr Lewis, who is the fidus Achates of my uncle. She even
fell sick upon the occasion, and prevailed with Matt to interpose in her
behalf with his friend; but the Doctor, being a shy cock, would not be
caught with chaff, and flatly rejected the proposal: so that Mrs Tabitha
was content to exert her patience once more, after having endeavoured
in vain to effect a rupture betwixt the two friends; and now she thinks
proper to be very civil to Lewis, who is become necessary to her in the
way of his profession.

These, however, are not the only efforts she has made towards a nearer
conjunction with our sex. Her fortune was originally no more than a
