fulfil it hereafter, and they shall pay dearly with their lives and
with their wives and children. The day will surely come when mighty
Ilius shall be laid low, with Priam and Priam's people, when the son of
Saturn from his high throne shall overshadow them with his awful aegis
in punishment of their present treachery. This shall surely be; but
how, Menelaus, shall I mourn you, if it be your lot now to die? I
should return to Argos as a by-word, for the Achaeans will at once go
home. We shall leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of still keeping
Helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie here at Troy with
your purpose not fulfilled. Then shall some braggart Trojan leap upon
your tomb and say, 'Ever thus may Agamemnon wreak his vengeance; he
brought his army in vain; he is gone home to his own land with empty
ships, and has left Menelaus behind him.' Thus will one of them say,
and may the earth then swallow me."

But Menelaus reassured him and said, "Take heart, and do not alarm the
people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal part, for my outer belt
of burnished metal first stayed it, and under this my cuirass and the
belt of mail which the bronze-smiths made me."

And Agamemnon answered, "I trust, dear Menelaus, that it may be even
so, but the surgeon shall examine your wound and lay herbs upon it to
relieve your pain."

He then said to Talthybius, "Talthybius, tell Machaon, son to the great
physician, Aesculapius, to come and see Menelaus immediately. Some
Trojan or Lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our dismay,
and to his own great glory."

Talthybius did as he was told, and went about the host trying to find
Machaon. Presently he found standing amid the brave warriors who had
followed him from Tricca; thereon he went up to him and said, "Son of
Aesculapius, King Agamemnon says you are to come and see Menelaus
immediately. Some Trojan or Lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow
to our dismay and to his own great glory."

Thus did he speak, and Machaon was moved to go. They passed through the
spreading host of the Achaeans and went on till they came to the place
where Menelaus had been wounded and was lying with the chieftains
gathered in a circle round him. Machaon passed into the middle of the
ring and at once drew the arrow from the belt, bending its barbs back
through the force with which he pulled it out. He undid the burnished
belt, and beneath this the cuirass and the belt of mail which the
bronze-smiths had made; then, when he had seen the wound, he wiped away
the blood and applied some soothing drugs which Chiron had given to
Aesculapius out of the good will he bore him.

While they were thus busy about Menelaus, the Trojans came forward
against them, for they had put on their armour, and now renewed the
fight.

You would not have then found Agamemnon asleep nor cowardly and
unwilling to fight, but eager rather for the fray. He left his chariot
rich with bronze and his panting steeds in charge of Eurymedon, son of
Ptolemaeus the son of Peiraeus, and bade him hold them in readiness
against the time his limbs should weary of going about and giving
orders to so many, for he went among the ranks on foot. When he saw men
hasting to the front he stood by them and cheered them on. "Argives,"
said he, "slacken not one whit in your onset; father Jove will be no
helper of liars; the Trojans have been the first to break their oaths
and to attack us; therefore they shall be devoured of vultures; we
shall take their city and carry off their wives and children in our
ships."

But he angrily rebuked those whom he saw shirking and disinclined to
fight. "Argives," he cried, "cowardly miserable creatures, have you no
shame to stand here like frightened fawns who, when they can no longer
scud over the plain, huddle together, but show no fight? You are as
dazed and spiritless as deer. Would you wait till the Trojans reach the
sterns of our ships as they lie on the shore, to see whether the son of
Saturn will hold his hand over you to protect you?"

Thus did he go about giving his orders among the ranks. Passing through
the crowd, he came presently on the Cretans, arming round Idomeneus,
who was at their head, fierce as a wild boar, while Meriones was
bringing up the battalions that were in the rear. Agamemnon was glad
when he saw him, and spoke him fairly. "Idomeneus," said he, "I treat
you with greater distinction than I do any others of the Achaeans,
whether in war or in other things, or at table. When the princes are
mixing my choicest wines in the mixing-bowls, they have each of them a
fixed allowance, but your cup is kept always full like my own, that you
may drink whenever you are minded. Go, therefore, into battle, and show
yourself the man you have been always proud to be."

Idomeneus answered, "I will be a trusty comrade, as I promised you from
the first I would be. Urge on the other Achaeans, that we may join
battle at once, for the Trojans have trampled upon their covenants.
Death and destruction shall be theirs, seeing they have been the first
to break their oaths and to attack us."

The son of Atreus went on, glad at heart, till he came upon the two
Ajaxes arming themselves amid a host of foot-soldiers. As when a
goat-herd from some high post watches a storm drive over the deep
before the west wind--black as pitch is the offing and a mighty
whirlwind draws towards him, so that he is afraid and drives his flock
into a cave--even thus did the ranks of stalwart youths move in a dark
mass to battle under the Ajaxes, horrid with shield and spear. Glad was
King Agamemnon when he saw them. "No need," he cried, "to give orders
to such leaders of the Argives as you are, for of your own selves you
spur your men on to fight with might and main. Would, by father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo that all were so minded as you are, for the city of
Priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it."

With this he left them and went onward to Nestor, the facile speaker of
the Pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in company
with Pelagon, Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, and Bias shepherd of his
people. He placed his knights with their chariots and horses in the
front rank, while the foot-soldiers, brave men and many, whom he could
trust, were in the rear. The cowards he drove into the middle, that
they might fight whether they would or no. He gave his orders to the
knights first, bidding them hold their horses well in hand, so as to
avoid confusion. "Let no man," he said, "relying on his strength or
horsemanship, get before the others and engage singly with the Trojans,
nor yet let him lag behind or you will weaken your attack; but let each
when he meets an enemy's chariot throw his spear from his own; this be
much the best; this is how the men of old took towns and strongholds;
in this wise were they minded."

Thus did the old man charge them, for he had been in many a fight, and
King Agamemnon was glad. "I wish," he said to him, "that your limbs
were as supple and your strength as sure as your judgment is; but age,
the common enemy of mankind, has laid his hand upon you; would that it
had fallen upon some other, and that you were still young."

And Nestor, knight of Gerene, answered, "Son of Atreus, I too would
gladly be the man I was when I slew mighty Ereuthalion; but the gods
will not give us everything at one and the same time. I was then young,
and now I am old; still I can go with my knights and give them that
counsel which old men have a right to give. The wielding of the spear I
leave to those who are younger and stronger than myself."

Agamemnon went his way rejoicing, and presently found Menestheus, son
of Peteos, tarrying in his place, and with him were the Athenians loud
of tongue in battle. Near him also tarried cunning Ulysses, with his
sturdy Cephallenians round him; they had not yet heard the battle-cry,
for the ranks of Trojans and Achaeans had only just begun to move, so
they were standing still, waiting for some other columns of the
Achaeans to attack the Trojans and begin the fighting. When he saw this
Agamemnon rebuked them and said, "Son of Peteos, and you other, steeped
in cunning, heart of guile, why stand you here cowering and waiting on
others? You two should be of all men foremost when there is hard
fighting to be done, for you are ever foremost to accept my invitation
when we councillors of the Achaeans are holding feast. You are glad
enough then to take your fill of roast meats and to drink wine as long
as you please, whereas now you would not care though you saw ten
columns of Achaeans engage the enemy in front of you."

Ulysses glared at him and answered, "Son of Atreus, what are you
talking about? How can you say that we are slack? When the Achaeans are
in full fight with the Trojans, you shall see, if you care to do so,
that the father of Telemachus will join battle with the foremost of
them. You are talking idly."

When Agamemnon saw that Ulysses was angry, he smiled pleasantly at him
and withdrew his words. "Ulysses," said he, "noble son of Laertes,
excellent in all good counsel, I have neither fault to find nor orders
to give you, for I know your heart is right, and that you and I are of
a mind. Enough; I will make you amends for what I have said, and if any
ill has now been spoken may the gods bring it to nothing."

He then left them and went on to others. Presently he saw the son of
Tydeus, noble Diomed, standing by his chariot and horses, with
Sthenelus the son of Capaneus beside him; whereon he began to upbraid
him. "Son of Tydeus," he said, "why stand you cowering here upon the
brink of battle? Tydeus did not shrink thus, but was ever ahead of his
men when leading them on against the foe--so, at least, say they that
saw him in battle, for I never set eyes upon him myself. They say that
there was no man like him. He came once to Mycenae, not as an enemy but
as a guest, in company with Polynices to recruit his forces, for they
were levying war against the strong city of Thebes, and prayed our
people for a body of picked men to help them. The men of Mycenae were
willing to let them have one, but Jove dissuaded them by showing them
unfavourable omens. Tydeus, therefore, and Polynices went their way.
When they had got as far the deep-meadowed and rush-grown banks of the
Aesopus, the Achaeans sent Tydeus as their envoy, and he found the
Cadmeans gathered in great numbers to a banquet in the house of
Eteocles. Stranger though he was, he knew no fear on finding himself
single-handed among so many, but challenged them to contests of all
kinds, and in each one of them was at once victorious, so mightily did
Minerva help him. The Cadmeans were incensed at his success, and set a
force of fifty youths with two captains--the godlike hero Maeon, son of
Haemon, and Polyphontes, son of Autophonus--at their head, to lie in
wait for him on his return journey; but Tydeus slew every man of them,
save only Maeon, whom he let go in obedience to heaven's omens. Such
was Tydeus of Aetolia. His son can talk more glibly, but he cannot
fight as his father did."

Diomed made no answer, for he was shamed by the rebuke of Agamemnon;
but the son of Capaneus took up his words and said, "Son of Atreus,
tell no lies, for you can speak truth if you will. We boast ourselves
as even better men than our fathers; we took seven-gated Thebes, though
the wall was stronger and our men were fewer in number, for we trusted
in the omens of the gods and in the help of Jove, whereas they perished
through their own sheer folly; hold not, then, our fathers in like
honour with us."

Diomed looked sternly at him and said, "Hold your peace, my friend, as
I bid you. It is not amiss that Agamemnon should urge the Achaeans
forward, for the glory will be his if we take the city, and his the
shame if we are vanquished. Therefore let us acquit ourselves with
valour."

As he spoke he sprang from his chariot, and his armour rang so fiercely
about his body that even a brave man might well have been scared to
hear it.

As when some mighty wave that thunders on the beach when the west wind
has lashed it into fury--it has reared its head afar and now comes
crashing down on the shore; it bows its arching crest high over the
jagged rocks and spews its salt foam in all directions--even so did the
serried phalanxes of the Danaans march steadfastly to battle. The
chiefs gave orders each to his own people, but the men said never a
word; no man would think it, for huge as the host was, it seemed as
though there was not a tongue among them, so silent were they in their
obedience; and as they marched the armour about their bodies glistened
in the sun. But the clamour of the Trojan ranks was as that of many
thousand ewes that stand waiting to be milked in the yards of some rich
flockmaster, and bleat incessantly in answer to the bleating of their
lambs; for they had not one speech nor language, but their tongues were
diverse, and they came from many different places. These were inspired
of Mars, but the others by Minerva--and with them came Panic, Rout, and
Strife whose fury never tires, sister and friend of murderous Mars,
who, from being at first but low in stature, grows till she uprears her
head to heaven, though her feet are still on earth. She it was that
went about among them and flung down discord to the waxing of sorrow
with even hand between them.

When they were got together in one place shield clashed with shield and
spear with spear in the rage of battle. The bossed shields beat one
upon another, and there was a tramp as of a great multitude--death-cry
and shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red with
blood. As torrents swollen with rain course madly down their deep
channels till the angry floods meet in some gorge, and the shepherd on
the hillside hears their roaring from afar--even such was the toil and
uproar of the hosts as they joined in battle.

First Antilochus slew an armed warrior of the Trojans, Echepolus, son
of Thalysius, fighting in the foremost ranks. He struck at the
projecting part of his helmet and drove the spear into his brow; the
point of bronze pierced the bone, and darkness veiled his eyes;
headlong as a tower he fell amid the press of the fight, and as he
dropped King Elephenor, son of Chalcodon and captain of the proud
Abantes began dragging him out of reach of the darts that were falling
around him, in haste to strip him of his armour. But his purpose was
not for long; Agenor saw him haling the body away, and smote him in the
side with his bronze-shod spear--for as he stooped his side was left
unprotected by his shield--and thus he perished. Then the fight between
Trojans and Achaeans grew furious over his body, and they flew upon
each other like wolves, man and man crushing one upon the other.

Forthwith Ajax, son of Telamon, slew the fair youth Simoeisius, son of
Anthemion, whom his mother bore by the banks of the Simois, as she was
coming down from Mt. Ida, where she had been with her parents to see
their flocks. Therefore he was named Simoeisius, but he did not live to
pay his parents for his rearing, for he was cut off untimely by the
spear of mighty Ajax, who struck him in the breast by the right nipple
as he was coming on among the foremost fighters; the spear went right
through his shoulder, and he fell as a poplar that has grown straight
and tall in a meadow by some mere, and its top is thick with branches.
Then the wheelwright lays his axe to its roots that he may fashion a
felloe for the wheel of some goodly chariot, and it lies seasoning by
the waterside. In such wise did Ajax fell to earth Simoeisius, son of
Anthemion. Thereon Antiphus of the gleaming corslet, son of Priam,
hurled a spear at Ajax from amid the crowd and missed him, but he hit
Leucus, the brave comrade of Ulysses, in the groin, as he was dragging
the body of Simoeisius over to the other side; so he fell upon the body
and loosed his hold upon it. Ulysses was furious when he saw Leucus
slain, and strode in full armour through the front ranks till he was
quite close; then he glared round about him and took aim, and the
Trojans fell back as he did so. His dart was not sped in vain, for it
struck Democoon, the bastard son of Priam, who had come to him from
Abydos, where he had charge of his father's mares. Ulysses, infuriated
by the death of his comrade, hit him with his spear on one temple, and
the bronze point came through on the other side of his forehead.
Thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. Hector, and they that were in
front, then gave round while the Argives raised a shout and drew off
the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. But Apollo looked
down from Pergamus and called aloud to the Trojans, for he was
displeased. "Trojans," he cried, "rush on the foe, and do not let
yourselves be thus beaten by the Argives. Their skins are not stone nor
iron that when hit them you do them no harm. Moreover, Achilles, the
son of lovely Thetis, is not fighting, but is nursing his anger at the
ships."

Thus spoke the mighty god, crying to them from the city, while Jove's
redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, went about among the host of the
Achaeans, and urged them forward whenever she beheld them slackening.

Then fate fell upon Diores, son of Amarynceus, for he was struck by a
jagged stone near the ancle of his right leg. He that hurled it was
Peirous, son of Imbrasus, captain of the Thracians, who had come from
Aenus; the bones and both the tendons were crushed by the pitiless
stone. He fell to the ground on his back, and in his death throes
stretched out his hands towards his comrades. But Peirous, who had
wounded him, sprang on him and thrust a spear into his belly, so that
his bowels came gushing out upon the ground, and darkness veiled his
eyes. As he was leaving the body, Thoas of Aetolia struck him in the
chest near the nipple, and the point fixed itself in his lungs. Thoas
came close up to him, pulled the spear out of his chest, and then
drawing his sword, smote him in the middle of the belly so that he
died; but he did not strip him of his armour, for his Thracian
comrades, men who wear their hair in a tuft at the top of their heads,
stood round the body and kept him off with their long spears for all
his great stature and valour; so he was driven back. Thus the two
corpses lay stretched on earth near to one another, the one captain of
the Thracians and the other of the Epeans; and many another fell round
them.

And now no man would have made light of the fighting if he could have
gone about among it scatheless and unwounded, with Minerva leading him
by the hand, and protecting him from the storm of spears and arrows.
For many Trojans and Achaeans on that day lay stretched side by side
face downwards upon the earth.



BOOK V

  The exploits of Diomed, who, though wounded by Pandarus,
  continues fighting--He kills Pandarus and wounds AEneas--Venus
  rescues AEneas, but being wounded by Diomed, commits him
  to the care of Apollo and goes to Olympus, where she is tended
  by her mother Dione--Mars encourages the Trojans, and
  AEneas returns to the fight cured of his wound--Minerva and
  Juno help the Achaeans, and by the advice of the former
  Diomed wounds Mars, who returns to Olympus to get cured.

Then Pallas Minerva put valour into the heart of Diomed, son of Tydeus,
that he might excel all the other Argives, and cover himself with
glory. She made a stream of fire flare from his shield and helmet like
the star that shines most brilliantly in summer after its bath in the
waters of Oceanus--even such a fire did she kindle upon his head and
shoulders as she bade him speed into the thickest hurly-burly of the
fight.

Now there was a certain rich and honourable man among the Trojans,
priest of Vulcan, and his name was Dares. He had two sons, Phegeus and
Idaeus, both of them skilled in all the arts of war. These two came
forward from the main body of Trojans, and set upon Diomed, he being on
foot, while they fought from their chariot. When they were close up to
one another, Phegeus took aim first, but his spear went over Diomed's
left shoulder without hitting him. Diomed then threw, and his spear
sped not in vain, for it hit Phegeus on the breast near the nipple, and
he fell from his chariot. Idaeus did not dare to bestride his brother's
body, but sprang from the chariot and took to flight, or he would have
shared his brother's fate; whereon Vulcan saved him by wrapping him in
a cloud of darkness, that his old father might not be utterly
overwhelmed with grief; but the son of Tydeus drove off with the
horses, and bade his followers take them to the ships. The Trojans were
scared when they saw the two sons of Dares, one of them in fright and
the other lying dead by his chariot. Minerva, therefore, took Mars by
the hand and said, "Mars, Mars, bane of men, bloodstained stormer of
cities, may we not now leave the Trojans and Achaeans to fight it out,
and see to which of the two Jove will vouchsafe the victory? Let us go
away, and thus avoid his anger."

So saying, she drew Mars out of the battle, and set him down upon the
steep banks of the Scamander. Upon this the Danaans drove the Trojans
back, and each one of their chieftains killed his man. First King
Agamemnon flung mighty Odius, captain of the Halizoni, from his
chariot. The spear of Agamemnon caught him on the broad of his back,
just as he was turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders
and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground.

Then Idomeneus killed Phaesus, son of Borus the Meonian, who had come
from Varne. Mighty Idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as he
was mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshrouded him as
he fell heavily from the car.

The squires of Idomeneus spoiled him of his armour, while Menelaus, son
of Atreus, killed Scamandrius the son of Strophius, a mighty huntsman
and keen lover of the chase. Diana herself had taught him how to kill
every kind of wild creature that is bred in mountain forests, but
neither she nor his famed skill in archery could now save him, for the
spear of Menelaus struck him in the back as he was flying; it struck
him between the shoulders and went right through his chest, so that he
fell headlong and his armour rang rattling round him.

Meriones then killed Phereclus the son of Tecton, who was the son of
Hermon, a man whose hand was skilled in all manner of cunning
workmanship, for Pallas Minerva had dearly loved him. He it was that
made the ships for Alexandrus, which were the beginning of all
mischief, and brought evil alike both on the Trojans and on Alexandrus
himself; for he heeded not the decrees of heaven. Meriones overtook him
as he was flying, and struck him on the right buttock. The point of the
spear went through the bone into the bladder, and death came upon him
as he cried aloud and fell forward on his knees.

Meges, moreover, slew Pedaeus, son of Antenor, who, though he was a
bastard, had been brought up by Theano as one of her own children, for
the love she bore her husband. The son of Phyleus got close up to him
and drove a spear into the nape of his neck: it went under his tongue
all among his teeth, so he bit the cold bronze, and fell dead in the
dust.

And Eurypylus, son of Euaemon, killed Hypsenor, the son of noble
Dolopion, who had been made priest of the river Scamander, and was
honoured among the people as though he were a god. Eurypylus gave him
chase as he was flying before him, smote him with his sword upon the
arm, and lopped his strong hand from off it. The bloody hand fell to
the ground, and the shades of death, with fate that no man can
withstand, came over his eyes.

Thus furiously did the battle rage between them. As for the son of
Tydeus, you could not say whether he was more among the Achaeans or the
Trojans. He rushed across the plain like a winter torrent that has
burst its barrier in full flood; no dykes, no walls of fruitful
vineyards can embank it when it is swollen with rain from heaven, but
in a moment it comes tearing onward, and lays many a field waste that
many a strong man's hand has reclaimed--even so were the dense
phalanxes of the Trojans driven in rout by the son of Tydeus, and many
though they were, they dared not abide his onslaught.

Now when the son of Lycaon saw him scouring the plain and driving the
Trojans pell-mell before him, he aimed an arrow and hit the front part
of his cuirass near the shoulder: the arrow went right through the
metal and pierced the flesh, so that the cuirass was covered with
blood. On this the son of Lycaon shouted in triumph, "Knights Trojans,
come on; the bravest of the Achaeans is wounded, and he will not hold
out much longer if King Apollo was indeed with me when I sped from
Lycia hither."

Thus did he vaunt; but his arrow had not killed Diomed, who withdrew
and made for the chariot and horses of Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus.
"Dear son of Capaneus," said he, "come down from your chariot, and draw
the arrow out of my shoulder."

Sthenelus sprang from his chariot, and drew the arrow from the wound,
whereon the blood came spouting out through the hole that had been made
in his shirt. Then Diomed prayed, saying, "Hear me, daughter of
aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, if ever you loved my father well and
stood by him in the thick of a fight, do the like now by me; grant me
to come within a spear's throw of that man and kill him. He has been
too quick for me and has wounded me; and now he is boasting that I
shall not see the light of the sun much longer."

Thus he prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard him; she made his limbs supple
and quickened his hands and his feet. Then she went up close to him and
said, "Fear not, Diomed, to do battle with the Trojans, for I have set
in your heart the spirit of your knightly father Tydeus. Moreover, I
have withdrawn the veil from your eyes, that you know gods and men
apart. If, then, any other god comes here and offers you battle, do not
fight him; but should Jove's daughter Venus come, strike her with your
spear and wound her."

When she had said this Minerva went away, and the son of Tydeus again
took his place among the foremost fighters, three times more fierce
even than he had been before. He was like a lion that some mountain
shepherd has wounded, but not killed, as he is springing over the wall
of a sheep-yard to attack the sheep. The shepherd has roused the brute
to fury but cannot defend his flock, so he takes shelter under cover of
the buildings, while the sheep, panic-stricken on being deserted, are
smothered in heaps one on top of the other, and the angry lion leaps
out over the sheep-yard wall. Even thus did Diomed go furiously about
among the Trojans.

He killed Astynous, and Hypeiron shepherd of his people, the one with a
