lots, looking backward; and quickly the lot of Paris leaped forth. They
then sat down in their ranks, where the fleet steeds of each stood, and
their varied arms lay. But divine Alexander, the husband of fair-haired
Helen, put on his beauteous armour around his shoulders. In the first
place, around his legs he placed his beautiful greaves fitted with
silver clasps; then again he put on his breast the corslet of his
brother Lycaon, for it fitted him; but around his shoulders he slung his
brazen, silver-studded sword and then his huge and solid shield. But on
his valiant head he placed a well-wrought helmet, crested with
horse-hair, and the crest nodded dreadfully from above; and he grasped
his doughty spear, which fitted to his hands. In this same manner the
martial Menelaus put on his arms.

But they, when they were armed from each side of the throne, advanced to
the middle between the Trojans and Greeks, looking dreadfully; and
amazement seized the beholders, both the horse-breaking Trojans and the
well-greaved Greeks. They then stood near in the measured-out space,
brandishing their spears, incensed against each other. Alexander ander
first hurled his long-shadowed spear, and smote the shield of the son of
Atreus, equal on all sides, nor did the brass break, for the point was
bent upon the strong shield: but next Menelaus, son of Atreus, commenced
the attack with his brazen spear, praying to father Jove:

"O king Jove, grant [me] to avenge myself [on him] who first injured me,
and subdue impious Alexander under my hands, that every one, even of
future men, may shudder to offer injury to a guest who may have afforded
[him] an hospitable reception."

He spoke; and brandishing, he hurled his long-shadowed spear, and smote
the shield of the son of Priam, equal on all sides; and through the
glittering shield went the impetuous spear, and was stuck firmly into
the deftly-wrought corslet: and the spear pierced right through his soft
tunic beside the flank: but he bent sideways, and evaded black death.
Next the son of Atreus having drawn his silver-studded sword, raising
it, struck the cone[161] of his helmet, but it fell from his hand
shivered round about into three or four pieces. And the son of Atreus
groaned aloud, looking towards the wide heaven:

   [Footnote 161: Buttmann, Lexil. p. 521, makes [Greek: phalos] to
   be the same as [Greek: konos], a metal ridge in which the plume
   was fixed.]

"O father Jove, none other of the gods is more baleful than thou.
Certainly I hoped to be revenged upon Alexander for his wickedness: but
now my sword has been broken in my hands, and my spear has been hurled
from my hand in vain, nor have I smote him."

He spoke; and rushing on, he seized him by the horse-hair tufted helmet,
and turning, began to drag him to the well-greaved Greeks: but the
richly-embroidered band under his tender throat was choking him, which
was drawn under his chin as the strap of his helmet. And now he had
dragged him away, and obtained infinite glory, had not Venus, the
daughter of Jove, quickly perceived it, who broke for him[162] the
thong, [made] from the hide of an ox slaughtered by violence: and
thereupon the empty helmet followed with his strong hand. It, then, the
hero whirling round, cast to the well-greaved Greeks, and his dear
companions took it up. And he [Menelaus] again rushed on, desiring to
slay him with his brazen spear: but him [Paris] Venus very easily, as
being a goddess, rescued, and covered him in a thick mist; then placed
him down in his fragrant chamber, exhaling perfumes.

   [Footnote 162: _I.e._ Menelaus.--to his confusion.]

But she herself, on the other hand, went to call Helen, and she found
her on the lofty tower, and many Trojan dames around her. Then with her
hand catching her by the fragrant mantle, she shook her: and likening
herself to an ancient dame, a spinner of wool, who used to comb fair
wool for her when dwelling at Lacedaemon, and she loved her much: to her
having likened herself, divine Venus accosted [Helen]:

"Come hither, Alexander calls thee to return home. He himself is in his
chamber and turned bed, shining both in beauty and attire; nor wouldst
thou say that he had returned after having fought with a hero, but that
he was going to the dance, or that just ceasing from the dance, he sat
down."

Thus she said, and agitated the heart in her breast: and when she beheld
the all-beauteous neck of the goddess, and her lovely bosom, and her
flashing eyes, she was awe-struck, and spoke a word, and said:

"Strange one! why dost thou desire to deceive me in these things? Wilt
thou lead me anywhere farther on to one of the well-inhabited cities,
either of Phrygia or pleasant Maeonia, if there be any of
articulately-speaking men dear to thee there? Is it because Menelaus,
having now conquered noble Alexander, wishes to bring hated me home,
that therefore with artful purpose thou now standest near me? Going,
sit with him thyself, and renounce the path of the gods. And mayest thou
no more return on thy feet to Olympus: but always grieve beside him, and
watch him, until he either make thee his consort, or he indeed [make
thee] his handmaid. But there I will not go to adorn his couch, for it
would be reprehensible: all the Trojan ladies henceforth will reproach
me. But I shall have woes without measure in my soul."

But her, divine Venus, incensed, thus addressed: "Wretch, provoke me
not, lest in my wrath I abandon thee, and detest thee as much as
heretofore I have wonderfully loved thee, and lest I scatter destructive
hate in the midst of the Trojans and Greeks, and thou perish by an evil
fate."

Thus she spoke: but Helen, sprung from Jove, dreaded, and she went
covered with a white transparent robe, in silence; and escaped the
notice of all the Trojan dames, for the goddess led the way.

But when they reached the very beautiful palace of Alexander, then the
maids, on their part, turned themselves speedily to their tasks; but
she, divine of women, ascended into her lofty-roofed chamber: and then
laughter-loving Venus, carrying, placed a seat for her opposite
Alexander: there Helen, daughter of the aegis-bearing Jove, sat, averting
her eyes, and reproached her husband with these words:

"Thou hast come from the war: would that thou hadst perished there,
slain by that brave hero, who was my former husband. Certainly, thou
didst formerly boast, that thou wast superior to Mars-beloved Menelaus,
in might, in hands, and at the spear. But go now, challenge Mars-beloved
Menelaus to fight once more against thee! But I advise thee to refrain,
nor unadvisedly wage war and fight against fair-haired Menelaus, lest
perchance thou mayest be subdued beneath his spear."

But her Paris answering addressed in words: "Woman! assail me not in
soul with reproachful taunts; for now indeed has Menelaus conquered by
Minerva's aid; but I in turn will vanquish him, for gods are with us
also. But come, let us delight in dalliance, reclining together, for
never before did love so fondly enwrap my soul, not even when formerly,
having borne thee away from pleasant Lacedaemon, I sailed in the
sea-traversing ships, and was united with thee in love and in the couch
in the island Cranae; so now am I enamoured of thee, and sweet desire
possesses me."

He spoke, and led the way, ascending the couch; but his wife followed
with him: they therefore rested upon their perforated couch.

Meanwhile the son of Atreus was wandering through the crowd like to a
savage beast, if anywhere he could perceive godlike Alexander. But none
of the Trojans or their illustrious allies could then point out
Alexander to Mars-beloved Menelaus; for neither through friendship would
they have concealed him, if any one did see him; for he was hateful to
them all, like sable death. But amongst them spoke Agamemnon, king of
heroes:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, Greeks, and allies: the victory indeed appears [to
belong to] Mars-beloved Menelaus. Do ye therefore restore Argive Helen
and her treasures with her, and pay the fine which is fitting, and which
shall be remembered by future men."

Thus spoke the son of Atreus, and the other Greeks approved.




                           BOOK THE FOURTH


                              ARGUMENT.

_Paris not being slain, the combat left it doubtful whether Helen should
be returned or not; but Juno extorts a promise from Jove of the final
destruction of Troy. Minerva then persuades Pandarus to break the truce
by aiming an arrow at Menelaus. The wound is, however, cured by Machaon.
The Trojans proceed to the battle, while Agamemnon exhorts the
chieftains of the Greeks. The fight then commences, Mars and Apollo
encouraging the Trojans, Minerva and the other deities the Greeks._


Now they, the gods, sitting on the golden floor[163] with Jove, were
engaged in consultation, and amidst them venerable Hebe poured out the
nectar: but they pledged[164] one another with golden cups, looking
towards the city of the Trojans. Forthwith the son of Saturn attempted
to irritate Juno, speaking with a covert allusion, with reproachful
words:[165]

"Two goddesses, indeed, are auxiliaries to Menelaus, Argive[166] Juno
and Minerva of Alalcomenae:[167] and yet these, forsooth, sitting apart,
amuse themselves with looking on; but to the other, on the contrary
[Paris], laughter-loving Venus is ever present,[168] and averts fate
from him. Even now has she saved him, thinking that he was about to die.
But the victory, indeed, belongs to Mars-beloved Menelaus: let us
therefore consult how these things shall be, whether we shall again
excite the destructive war, and dreadful battle-din, or promote
friendship between both parties. And if, moreover, this shall
perchance[169] be grateful and pleasing to all, the city of king Priam,
indeed, may be inhabited, but let Menelaus lead back again Argive
Helen."

   [Footnote 163: "On the golden floor of Jove's abode."--Cowper.]

   [Footnote 164: Athenaeus, i. ll, [Greek: edexiounto, propinonies
   eautois, tais dexiais]. Cf. xi. 14. Hesych. [Greek: deidecto,
   edexioto, dia philias espazeto kai logon].]

   [Footnote 165: I am indebted to Arnold for this version.]

   [Footnote 166: So called from her temple at Argos. See Pausan.
   ii. 17; Apul. Met. vi. p. 458; Servius on AEn. i. 28.]

   [Footnote 167: She had a temple at Alalcomenae, in Boeotia. Cf.
   Pausan. ix. 33; Steph. Byz. n. [Greek: alalkomenion].]

   [Footnote 168: On the affinity of [Greek: bloskein] and [Greek:
   poleini], see Buttm. Lexil. p. 84.]

   [Footnote 169: Read [Greek: pos] for [Greek: autos], with
   Aristarchus, Wolf, Spitzner.]

Thus he spoke: but Minerva and Juno murmured with closed lips, for they
were sitting near, and were devising evils for the Trojans. Minerva,
indeed, was silent, nor said anything, indignant with her father Jove,
for dreadful rage possessed her. But Juno could not retain her fury in
her breast, but addressed him:

"Most baleful son of Saturn! what a sentence hast thou uttered! How dost
thou wish to render my labour vain, and my sweat fruitless, which I have
sweated through with toil? For the steeds are tired to me assembling the
host, evils to Priam and to his sons. Do so: but all we the other gods
do not approve."

But her cloud-compelling Jove, in great wrath, answered: "Strange one!
how now do Priam and the sons of Priam work so many wrongs against thee,
that thou desirest implacably to overturn the well-built city of Ilion?
But if thou, entering the gates and the lofty walls, couldst devour
alive[170] Priam and the sons of Priam, and the other Trojans, then
perhaps thou mightst satiate thy fury. Do as thou wilt, lest this
contention be in future a great strife between thee and me. But another
thing I tell thee, and do thou lay it up in thy soul: whenever haply I,
anxiously desiring, shall wish to destroy some city, where men dear to
thee are born, retard not my rage, but suffer me; for I have given thee
this of free will, though with unwilling mind. For of those cities of
earthly men, which are situated under the sun and the starry heaven,
sacred Ilion was most honoured by me in my heart, and Priam and the
people of Priam skilled in the ashen spear. For there my altars never
lacked a due banquet and libation, and savour; for this honour were we
allotted."

   [Footnote 170: Literally, "eat raw." Cf. Xenoph. Anab. iv. 8, 14.
   [Greek: Toutous en pos dynometha, kai omous dei
   kataphagein].--Clarke.]

Him then the venerable full-eyed Juno answered: "There are three cities,
indeed, most dear to me: Argos, and Sparta, and wide-wayed Mycenae;[171]
destroy these whenever they become hateful to thy soul. In behalf of
these I neither stand forth, nor do I grudge them to thee: for even
were I to grudge them, and not suffer thee to destroy them, by grudging
I avail nothing, since thou art much more powerful. And yet it becomes
[thee] to render my labour not fruitless; for I am a goddess, and thence
my race, whence thine; and wily Saturn begat me, very venerable on two
accounts, both by my parentage, and because I have been called thy
spouse. Moreover, thou rulest amongst all the immortals. But truly let
us make these concessions to each other: I, on my part, to thee, and
thou to me; and the other immortal gods will follow. Do thou without
delay bid Minerva go to the dreadful battle-din of the Trojans and
Greeks, and contrive that the Trojans may first begin to injure the most
renowned Greeks, contrary to the leagues."

   [Footnote 171: "It certainly seems to me, that, in a reference so
   distinct to the three great Peloponnesian cities which the
   Dorians invaded and possessed, Homer makes as broad an allusion
   to the conquests of the Heraclidae, not only as would be
   consistent with the pride of an Ionic Greek in attesting the
   triumphs of the national Dorian foe, but as the nature of a theme
   cast in a distant period, and remarkably removed, in its general
   conduct, from the historical detail of subsequent events, would
   warrant to the poet."--Bulwer, Athens, i. 8. The correctness of
   this view, however, depends upon the true date of Homer's
   existence.]

Thus she spoke; nor did the father of gods and men disobey. Instantly he
addressed Minerva in winged words:

"Go very quickly to the army, among the Trojans and Greeks, and contrive
that the Trojans may first begin to injure the most renowned Greeks,
contrary to the league."

Thus having spoken, he urged on Minerva already inclined; she hastening
descended the heights of Olympus; such as the star which the son of wily
Saturn sends, a sign either to mariners, or to a wide host of nations,
and from it many sparks are emitted. Like unto this Pallas Minerva
hastened to the earth, and leaped into the midst [of the army]; and
astonishment seized the horse-breaking Trojans and the well-greaved
Greeks, looking on. And thus would one say, looking at some other near
him:

"Doubtless evil war and dreadful battle-din will take place again, or
Jove is establishing friendship between both sides, he who has been
ordained the arbiter of war amongst men." [172]

   [Footnote 172: Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 20, compares the words of
   Belisarius in Procop. Vandal. i. [Greek: Machontai men anthropoi,
   brazeyei de o theos opos pote auto dokei, kai to tou molemou
   didosi kratos].]

Thus then did some one of the Greeks and Trojans say; but she like a
hero entered the host of the Trojans, the brave warrior Laodocus, son of
Antenor, seeking godlike Pandarus, if anywhere she might find him. She
found the blameless and valiant son of Lycaon standing, and around him
the brave ranks of shielded warriors, who had followed him from the
streams of AEsepus; and standing near, she thus to him spoke winged
words:

"Wouldst thou now hearken to me in anything, O warlike son of Lycaon?
Thou wouldst venture then to aim a swift arrow at Menelaus. Doubtless
thou wouldst bear away both thanks and glory from all the Trojans, but
of all, chiefly from the prince Alexander, from whom, indeed, first of
all, thou wouldst receive splendid gifts, if he should see martial
Menelaus, the son of Atreus, subdued by this weapon, ascending the sad
pile. But come, aim an arrow at renowned Menelaus; and vow to
Lycian-born[173] Apollo, the renowned archer, that thou wilt sacrifice a
splendid hecatomb of firstling lambs, having returned home to the city
of sacred Zeleia."

   [Footnote 173: This is probably the true interpretation, and is
   given by the Scholiast, Hesychius, and others. But Heraclides,
   Alleg. Sec. 6, says that Apollo is so called [Greek: epeide tou kata
   ten orthrion oran lykaugous estin aitioi, e oti likazania genna,
   toutesti tono eniauton]. Cf. Macrob. Sat. i. 17; Serv. on AEn. iv.
   377.]

Thus spoke Minerva, and she persuaded his mind for him, unthinking one.
Straightway he uncased his well-polished bow, made from [the horn of] a
wild, bounding goat, which he indeed surprising once on a time in
ambush, as it was coming out of a cavern, struck, aiming at it beneath
the breast; but it fell supine on the rock. Its horns had grown sixteen
palms from its head; and these the horn-polishing artist, having duly
prepared, fitted together, and when he had well smoothed all, added a
golden tip. And having bent the bow, he aptly lowered it, having
inclined it against the ground; but his excellent companions held their
shields before him, lest the martial sons of the Greeks should rise
against him, before warlike Menelaus, the chief of the Greeks, was
wounded. Then he drew off the cover of his quiver, and took out an
arrow, fresh, winged, a cause of gloomy ills. Forthwith he fitted the
bitter arrow to the string, and vowed to Lycian-born Apollo, the
renowned archer, that he would sacrifice a splendid hecatomb of
firstling lambs, having returned home to the city of sacred Zeleia.
Having seized them, he drew together the notch [of the arrow] and the
ox-hide string; the string, indeed, he brought near to his breast, and
the barb to the bow. But after he had bent the great bow into a circle,
the bow twanged, the bowstring rang loudly, and the sharp-pointed shaft
bounded forth, impatient to wing its flight through the host.

Nor did the blessed immortal gods forget thee, O Menelaus;[174] but
chiefly the spoil-hunting daughter of Jove, who, standing before thee,
averted the deadly weapon. She as much repelled it from thy body, as a
mother repels a fly from her infant, when it shall have laid itself down
in sweet sleep. But she herself guided it to that part where the golden
clasps of the girdle bound it, and the double-formed corslet met.[175]
The bitter arrow fell on his well-fitted belt, and through the
deftly-wrought belt was it driven, and it stuck in the variegated
corslet and the brazen-plated belt which he wore, the main defence of
his body, a guard against weapons, which protect him most; through even
this did it pass onwards, and the arrow grazed the surface of the hero's
skin, and straightway black gore flowed from the wound. And as when some
Maeonian[176] or Carian woman tinges ivory with purple colour, to be a
cheek-trapping for steeds; in her chamber it lies, and many charioteers
desire to bear it, but it lies by as an ornament for the king, both as a
decoration to the steed, and a glory to the rider: so, Menelaus, were
thy well-proportioned thighs, and legs, and fair feet below, stained
with gore.

   [Footnote 174: It is elegantly observed by Coleridge, p. 160,
   that "it is principally owing to our sense of the dramatic
   probability of the action of the divinities in the Iliad that the
   heroes do not seem dwarfed by their protectors; on the contrary,
   the manifest favourite of the gods stands out in a dilated and
   more awful shape before our imagination, and seems, by the
   association, to be lifted up into the demigod."]

   [Footnote 175: "Occurrebat sagittae, obvius erat ei
   penetranti."--Heyne. But it is better to understand, "where the
   plates of the cuirass meet and overlay the [Greek: zoma]."--Arnold.]

   [Footnote 176: _I.e._ Lydian.]

Then Agamemnon, the king of men, shuddered, as he beheld the black gore
flowing from the wound, and Mars-beloved Menelaus himself shuddered. But
when he saw the string[177] and the barbs still outside, his courage was
once more collected in his breast. But Agamemnon, deeply sighing, and
holding Menelaus with his hand, spoke thus amidst them, and all his
companions kept groaning with him:

   [Footnote 177: With which the iron head was fastened to the
   shaft.]

"O dear brother, now have I ratified a treaty which will prove thy
death, exposing thee alone to fight with the Trojans for the Greeks;
since the Trojans have thus wounded thee, and trampled on the faithful
league. But by no means shall the league and the blood of the lambs be
in vain, and the pure libations, and the right hands in which we
confided. For even although Olympian Jove has not immediately brought
them to pass, he will however bring them to pass at last; and at a great
price have they paid the penalty,[178] to wit, with their own heads, and
their wives and children. For this I know well in mind and soul. A day
will be, when sacred Ilium shall perish, and Priam, and the people of
ashen-speared Priam; and when Saturnian Jove, lofty-throned, dwelling in
the aether, will himself shake his gloomy aegis over all, wrathful on
account of this treachery. These things, indeed, shall not be
unaccomplished; but to me there will be grief on thy account, O
Menelaus, if thou shalt die and fulfil the fate of life; then, indeed,
branded with shame, shall I return to much longed-for Argos. For quickly
the Greeks will bethink themselves of their fatherland, and we shall
leave Argive Helen a boast to Priam and to the Trojans, and the earth
will rot thy bones lying in Troy, near to an unfinished work. And thus
will some one of the haughty Trojans exclaim, leaping upon the tomb of
glorious Menelaus: 'Would that Agamemnon thus wreaked his vengeance
against all, as even now he has led hither an army of the Greeks in
vain, and has now returned home into his dear native land, with empty
ships, having left behind him brave Menelaus.' Thus will some one
hereafter say: then may the wide earth yawn for me."

   [Footnote 178: The past tense for the future: implying that the
   hour of retribution is so certain, that it may be considered
   already arrived.]

But him fair-haired Menelaus accosted, cheering him: "Have courage, nor
in anywise frighten the people of the Achaeans. The sharp arrow has not
stuck in a vital part, but before [it reached a vital part], the
variegated belt, and the girdle beneath, and the plate which
brass-working men forged, warded it off."

King Agamemnon answering him replied: "Would that it were so, O beloved
Menelaus; but the physician shall probe the wound, and apply remedies,
which may ease thee of thy acute pains."

He spoke; and thus accosted Talthybius, the divine herald: "Talthybius,
summon hither with all speed the hero Machaon, son of the blameless
physician AEsculapius, that he may see martial Menelaus, the chief of the
Greeks, whom some skilful archer of the Trojans, or of the Lycians, has
wounded with a shaft; a glory, indeed, to him, but a grief to us."

He spoke; nor did the herald disobey when he had heard. But he proceeded
to go through the forces of the brazen-mailed Greeks, looking around for
the hero Machaon: him he saw standing, and round him the brave ranks of
the shield-bearing hosts, who followed him from steed-nourishing Tricca.
Standing near, he spoke winged words:

"Come, O son of AEsculapius, Agamemnon, king of men, calls thee, that
thou mayest see martial Menelaus, the son of Atreus, whom some skilful
archer of the Trojans or of the Lycians has wounded with a dart; a glory
indeed to him, but a grief to us."

Thus he spoke, and incited his soul within his breast. And they
proceeded to go through the host, through the wide army of the Greeks;
but when they had now arrived where fair-haired Menelaus had been
wounded (but around him were collected as many as were bravest, in a
circle, while the godlike hero stood in the midst), instantly thereupon
he extracted the arrow from the well-fitted belt. But while it was being
extracted, the sharp barbs were broken. Then he loosed the variegated
belt, and the girdle beneath, and the plated belt which brass-workers
had forged. But when he perceived the wound, where the bitter shaft had
fallen, having sucked out the blood, he skilfully sprinkled on it
soothing remedies,[179] which, benevolent Chiron had formerly given to
his father.

   [Footnote 179: Celsus, Pref. "Podalirius et Machaon, bello
   Trajano ducem Agamemnonem secuti, non mediocrem opem
   commilitonibus suis attulerunt. Quos tamen Homerus non in
   pestilentia neque in variis generibus morborum aliquid attulisse
   auxilii, sed vulneribus tantummodo ferro et medicamentis mederi
   solitos esse proposuit. Ex quo apparet, has partes medicinae solas
   ab his esse tentatas, easque esse vetustissimas."]

Whilst they were thus occupied around warlike Menelaus, meantime the
ranks of the shielded Trojans advanced; and these again put on their
arms, and were mindful of battle. Then would you not see divine
Agamemnon slumbering, nor trembling nor refusing to fight; but hastening
quickly to the glorious fight. He left his steeds, indeed, and his
brass-variegated chariot; and these his servant Eurymedon, son of
Ptolymaeus, the son of Piraeis, held apart panting. Him he strictly
enjoined to keep them near him, against the time when weariness should
seize his limbs, commanding over many. But he on foot traversed the
ranks of the heroes, and whichever of the swift-horsed Greeks he saw
hastening, them standing beside, he encouraged with words:

"Argives! remit nought of your fierce ardour, for father Jove will not
be an abettor to falsehoods, but certainly vultures will devour the
tender bodies of those very persons, who first offered injury, contrary
to the league; and we, after we shall have taken the city, will carry
off in our ships their dear wives, and their infant children."

But whomsoever on the other hand he saw declining hateful battle, them
he much rebuked with angry words:

"Argives, ye arrow-fighters,[180] subjects for disgrace, are ye not
ashamed? Why stand ye here astounded, like fawns, which, when they are
wearied, running through the extensive plain, stand, and have no
strength in their hearts? Thus do ye stand amazed, nor fight. Do ye
await the Trojans until they come near, where your fair-prowed galleys
are moored on the shore of the hoary sea, that ye may know whether the
son of Saturn will stretch forth his hand over you."

   [Footnote 180: If it be remembered that archery, in comparison
   with fighting close-handed, handed, was much despised (cf. Soph.
   Aj. 1120, sqq.; Eur. Herc. Fur. 160), the term [Greek: iomoroi]
   ([Greek: oi peri tous ious memoremenoi], Apoll. Lex. and Hesych.)
   need not be forced into any of the out-of-the-way meanings which
   Anthon and others have assigned to it.]

Thus he, acting as commander, kept going through the ranks of heroes,
and he came to the Cretans, going through the throng of men. But they
were armed around warlike Idomeneus. Idomeneus, on his part, [commanded]
in the van, like a boar in strength; but Meriones urged on the hindmost
phalanxes for him. Seeing these, Agamemnon, the king of men, rejoiced,
and instantly accosted Idomeneus, in bland words:

"O Idomeneus, I honour thee, indeed, above the swift-horsed Greeks, as
well in war, as in any other work, and at the banquet, when the nobles
of the Argives mix in their cups the dark-red honourable[181] wine: for
though the other crested Greeks drink by certain measures, thy cup
always stands full, as [mine] to me, that thou mayest drink when thy
mind desires it. But hasten into war, such as formerly thou didst boast
to be."

   [Footnote 181: See my note on Od.]

But him Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, in turn answered: "Son of
Atreus, a very congenial ally will I be to thee, as first I promised and
assented. But exhort the other crested Greeks that we may fight with all
haste, since the Trojans have confounded the league: death and griefs
shall be theirs hereafter, since they first offered injury, contrary to
the league."

Thus he spoke: and the son of Atreus passed on, joyous at heart, and he
came to the Ajaces, going through the troops of the heroes. But they
were armed, and with them followed a cloud of infantry. As when a
goat-herd from a hill-top perceives a cloud traversing the deep, beneath
the north-western blast; and to him, standing at a distance, it appears
while coming over the ocean, darker than pitch, and brings with it a
mighty whirlwind;[182] he both shudders on seeing it, and drives his
flock into a cave. Such, with the Ajaces, moved into hostile battle the
dense dark phalanxes of Jove-nurtured youths, bristling with shields and
spears. And king Agamemnon seeing them, rejoiced, and accosting them,
spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 182: The _waterspout_, which is often followed by
   hurricanes, is meant. See Arnold.]

"Ye Ajaces, leaders of the brazen-mailed Argives, ye two, indeed, for it
becomes me not, I in no respect desire to incite; for ye yourselves
mightily instigate the people to fight valiantly. Would that, O father
Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, such courage were in the breasts of all; soon
then would the city of king Priam bend to its fall, taken and destroyed
by our hands."

Thus having said, he left them there and went to the others; there he
found Nestor, the harmonious orator of the Pylians, marshalling his
associates, and exhorting them to battle, mighty Pelagon, Alastor,
Chromius, and prince Haemon, and Bias the shepherd of the people. In
front, indeed, he placed the cavalry[183] with their horses and
chariots, but the foot, both numerous and brave, in the rear, to be the
stay of the battle; but the cowards he drove into the middle, that
every man, even unwilling, might fight from necessity. At first, indeed,
he gave orders to the horsemen; these he commanded to rein in their
horses, nor to be confused with the crowd. "And let no person, relying
on his skill in horsemanship, and on his strength, desire alone, before
the rest, to fight with the Trojans, nor let him retreat: for [if so],
ye will be weaker. And whatever man, from his own chariot, can reach
that of another, let him stretch out with his spear;[184] for so it is
much better: for thus the ancients overturned cities and walls, keeping
this purpose and resolution in their breasts."

   [Footnote 183: _I. e._ those who fought from chariots.]

   [Footnote 184: With Arnold and Anthon, I follow Koeppen's
   interpretation. The meaning is, whoever, without leaping from his
   own chariot, can reach that of another, should commence the
   attack. This was less dangerous than dismounting.]

Thus the old man, long since well skilled in wars, exhorted them, and
king Agamemnon rejoiced when he saw him; and accosting him, spoke winged
words:

"O old man, would that thy knees could so follow thee, and thy strength
were firm as is the courage in thy breast. But old age, common alike to
all, wearies thee. Would that some other man had thy age, and that thou
wert amongst the more youthful."

Him then the Gerenian knight Nestor answered: "Son of Atreus, I myself
would much wish to be so, as when I killed Eruthalion. But the gods
never give all things at the same time to men. If I were a young man
then, now in turn old age invades me. Yet even so, I will be with the
horse, and will exhort them with counsel and words: for this is the
office of old men. But let the youths, who are younger than I am, and
confide in their strength, brandish their spears."

Thus he spoke; and the son of Atreus passed him by, rejoicing at heart.
Next he found the horseman Menestheus, son of Peteus, standing, and
around him the Athenians skilled in the war-shout: but crafty Ulysses
stood near; and round him stood the ranks of the Cephallenians not
feeble; for not yet had the troops of these heard the shout, since
lately the roused phalanxes of the horse-subduing Trojans and of the
Greeks moved along; but they stood waiting till another division of the
Greeks, coming on, should charge the Trojans and begin the battle.
Having seen these, therefore, Agamemnon, the king of men, reproved them,
and, accosting them, spoke winged words:

"O son of Peteus, Jove-nurtured king, and thou, accomplished in evil
wiles, crafty-minded [Ulysses], why trembling do ye refrain from battle,
and wait for others? It became you, indeed, being amongst the first, to
stand and meet the ardent battle. For ye are the first invited by me to
the feast when we Greeks prepare a banquet for the chiefs. Then it is
pleasant to you to eat the roasted meats, and to quaff cups of sweet
wine, as long as ye please. But now would ye in preference be
spectators, though ten divisions of the Greeks should fight in your
presence with the ruthless brass."

But him sternly regarding, crafty Ulysses answered thus: "Son of Atreus,
what a word has escaped the barrier of thy teeth! How canst thou say
that we are remiss in fighting? Whenever we Greeks stir up fierce
conflict against the horse-taming Trojans, thou shalt see, if thou
desirest, and if these things are a care to thee, the beloved father of
Telemachus mingled with the foremost of the horse-taming Trojans. But
thou sayest these things rashly."

But him king Agamemnon, when he perceived that he was angry, smiling,
addressed, and he retracted his words:

"Noble son of Laertes, much-contriving Ulysses, I neither chide thee in
terms above measure, nor exhort thee. For I am aware that thy mind in
thy breast kens friendly counsels: for thou thinkest the same that I do.
But come, we shall settle these disputes at a future time, should
anything evil have now been uttered. But may the gods render all these
things vain."

Thus having spoken, he left them there, and went to others; he found
magnanimous Diomede, son of Tydeus, standing by his horses and
brass-mounted[185] chariot. Near him stood Sthenelus, son of Capaneus.
And having seen him too, king Agamemnon reproved him, and accosting him
thus, spoke winged words:

"Alas! O son of warlike horse-breaking Tydeus, why dost thou tremble?
Why dost thou explore the intervals of the ranks?[186] It was not with
Tydeus thus customary to tremble, but to fight with the enemy far before
his dear companions. So they have said, who beheld him toiling: for I
never met, nor have I beheld him: but they say that he excelled all
others. For certainly with godlike Polynices he entered Mycenae without
warlike array, a guest, collecting forces: they[187] were then preparing
an expedition against the sacred walls of Thebes, and supplicated much
that they would give renowned auxiliaries. But they [the Mycenaeans] were
willing to give them, and approved of it, as they urged; but Jove
changed [their design], showing unpropitious omens. But, after they
departed, and proceeded on their way, they came to rushy, grassy Asopus.
Then the Achaeans sent Tydeus upon an embassy.[188] Accordingly he went,
and found many Cadmeans feasting in the palace of brave Eteocles. Then
