    But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Glow'd in the East, then from his couch arose                    380
    The warlike Menelaus, fresh attir'd;
    His faulchion o'er his shoulders slung, he bound
    His sandals fair to his unsullied feet,
    And like a God issuing, at the side
    Sat of Telemachus, to whom he spake.
      Hero! Telemachus! what urgent cause
    Hath hither led thee, to the land far-famed
    Of Lacedaemon o'er the spacious Deep?
    Public concern or private? Tell me true.
      To whom Telemachus discrete replied.                           390
    Atrides! Menelaus! prince renown'd!
    News seeking of my Sire, I have arrived.
    My household is devour'd, my fruitful fields
    Are desolated, and my palace fill'd
    With enemies, who while they mutual wage
    Proud competition for my mother's love,
    My flocks continual slaughter, and my beeves.
    For this cause, at thy knees suppliant, I beg
    That thou wouldst tell me his disastrous end,
    If either thou beheld'st with thine own eyes                     400
    His death, or from some wand'rer of the Greeks
    Hast heard it; for no common woes, alas!
    Was he ordain'd to share ev'n from the womb.
    Neither through pity or o'erstrain'd respect
    Flatter me, but explicit all relate
    Which thou hast witness'd. If my noble Sire
    E'er gratified thee by performance just
    Of word or deed at Ilium, where ye fell
    So num'rous slain in fight, oh recollect
    Now his fidelity, and tell me true!                              410
      Then Menelaus, sighing deep, replied.
    Gods! their ambition is to reach the bed
    Of a brave man, however base themselves.
    But as it chances, when the hart hath lay'd
    Her fawns new-yean'd and sucklings yet, to rest
    Within some dreadful lion's gloomy den,
    She roams the hills, and in the grassy vales
    Feeds heedless, till the lion, to his lair
    Return'd, destroys her and her little-ones,
    So them thy Sire shall terribly destroy.                         420
    Jove, Pallas and Apollo! oh that such
    As erst in well-built Lesbos, where he strove
    With Philomelides, and threw him flat,
    A sight at which Achaia's sons rejoic'd,
    Such, now, Ulysses might assail them all!
    Short life and bitter nuptials should be theirs.
    But thy enquiries neither indirect
    Will I evade, nor give thee false reply,
    But all that from the Antient of the Deep[14]
    I have receiv'd will utter, hiding nought.                       430
      As yet the Gods on AEgypt's shore detained
    Me wishing home, angry at my neglect
    To heap their altars with slain hecatombs.
    For they exacted from us evermore
    Strict rev'rence of their laws. There is an isle
    Amid the billowy flood, Pharos by name,
    In front of AEgypt, distant from her shore
    Far as a vessel by a sprightly gale
    Impell'd, may push her voyage in a day.
    The haven there is good, and many a ship                         440
    Finds wat'ring there from riv'lets on the coast.
    There me the Gods kept twenty days, no breeze
    Propitious granting, that might sweep the waves,
    And usher to her home the flying bark.
    And now had our provision, all consumed,
    Left us exhausted, but a certain nymph
    Pitying saved me. Daughter fair was she
    Of mighty Proteus, Antient of the Deep,
    Idothea named; her most my sorrows moved;
    She found me from my followers all apart                         450
    Wand'ring (for they around the isle, with hooks
    The fishes snaring roamed, by famine urged)
    And standing at my side, me thus bespake.
      Stranger! thou must be ideot born, or weak
    At least in intellect, or thy delight
    Is in distress and mis'ry, who delay'st
    To leave this island, and no egress hence
    Canst find, although thy famish'd people faint.
      So spake the Goddess, and I thus replied.
    I tell thee, whosoever of the Pow'rs                             460
    Divine thou art, that I am prison'd here
    Not willingly, but must have, doubtless, sinn'd
    Against the deathless tenants of the skies.
    Yet say (for the Immortals all things know)
    What God detains me, and my course forbids
    Hence to my country o'er the fishy Deep?
      So I; to whom the Goddess all-divine.
    Stranger! I will inform thee true. A seer
    Oracular, the Antient of the Deep,
    Immortal Proteus, the AEgyptian, haunts                           470
    These shores, familiar with all Ocean's gulphs,
    And Neptune's subject. He is by report
    My father; him if thou art able once
    To seize and bind, he will prescribe the course
    With all its measured distances, by which
    Thou shalt regain secure thy native shores.
    He will, moreover, at thy suit declare,
    Thou favour'd of the skies! what good, what ill
    Hath in thine house befall'n, while absent thou
    Thy voyage difficult perform'st and long.                        480
      She spake, and I replied--Thyself reveal
    By what effectual bands I may secure
    The antient Deity marine, lest, warn'd
    Of my approach, he shun me and escape.
    Hard task for mortal hands to bind a God!
      Then thus Idothea answer'd all-divine.
    I will inform thee true. Soon as the sun
    Hath climb'd the middle heav'ns, the prophet old,
    Emerging while the breezy zephyr blows,
    And cover'd with the scum of ocean, seeks                        490
    His spacious cove, in which outstretch'd he lies.
    The phocae[15] also, rising from the waves,
    Offspring of beauteous Halosydna, sleep
    Around him, num'rous, and the fishy scent
    Exhaling rank of the unfathom'd flood.
    Thither conducting thee at peep of day
    I will dispose thee in some safe recess,
    But from among thy followers thou shalt chuse
    The bravest three in all thy gallant fleet.
    And now the artifices understand                                 500
    Of the old prophet of the sea. The sum
    Of all his phocae numb'ring duly first,
    He will pass through them, and when all by fives
    He counted hath, will in the midst repose
    Content, as sleeps the shepherd with his flock.
    When ye shall see him stretch'd, then call to mind
    That moment all your prowess, and prevent,
    Howe'er he strive impatient, his escape.
    All changes trying, he will take the form
    Of ev'ry reptile on the earth, will seem                         510
    A river now, and now devouring fire;
    But hold him ye, and grasp him still the more.
    And when himself shall question you, restored
    To his own form in which ye found him first
    Reposing, then from farther force abstain;
    Then, Hero! loose the Antient of the Deep,
    And ask him, of the Gods who checks thy course
    Hence to thy country o'er the fishy flood.
      So saying, she plunged into the billowy waste.
    I then, in various musings lost, my ships                        520
    Along the sea-beach station'd sought again,
    And when I reach'd my galley on the shore
    We supp'd, and sacred night falling from heav'n,
    Slept all extended on the ocean-side.
    But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Look'd rosy forth, pensive beside the shore
    I walk'd of Ocean, frequent to the Gods
    Praying devout, then chose the fittest three
    For bold assault, and worthiest of my trust.
    Meantime the Goddess from the bosom wide                         530
    Of Ocean rising, brought us thence four skins
    Of phocae, and all newly stript, a snare
    Contriving subtle to deceive her Sire.
    Four cradles in the sand she scoop'd, then sat
    Expecting us, who in due time approach'd;
    She lodg'd us side by side, and over each
    A raw skin cast. Horrible to ourselves
    Proved that disguise whom the pernicious scent
    Of the sea-nourish'd phocae sore annoy'd;
    For who would lay him down at a whale's side?                    540
    But she a potent remedy devised
    Herself to save us, who the nostrils sooth'd
    Of each with pure ambrosia thither brought
    Odorous, which the fishy scent subdued.
    All morning, patient watchers, there we lay;
    And now the num'rous phocae from the Deep
    Emerging, slept along the shore, and he
    At noon came also, and perceiving there
    His fatted monsters, through the flock his course
    Took regular, and summ'd them; with the first                    550
    He number'd us, suspicion none of fraud
    Conceiving, then couch'd also. We, at once,
    Loud-shouting flew on him, and in our arms
    Constrain'd him fast; nor the sea-prophet old
    Call'd not incontinent his shifts to mind.
    First he became a long-maned lion grim,
    Then dragon, panther then, a savage boar,
    A limpid stream, and an o'ershadowing tree.
    We persevering held him, till at length
    The Antient of the Deep, skill'd as he is                        560
    In wiles, yet weary, question'd me, and said.
      Oh Atreus' son, by what confed'rate God
    Instructed liest thou in wait for me,
    To seize and hold me? what is thy desire?
      So He; to whom thus answer I return'd.
    Old Seer! thou know'st; why, fraudful, should'st thou ask?
    It is because I have been prison'd long
    Within this isle, whence I have sought in vain
    Deliv'rance, till my wonted courage fails.
    Yet say (for the Immortals all things know)                      570
    What God detains me, and my course forbids
    Hence to my country o'er the fishy Deep?
      So I; when thus the old one of the waves.
    But thy plain duty[16] was to have adored
    Jove, first, in sacrifice, and all the Gods,
    That then embarking, by propitious gales
    Impell'd, thou might'st have reach'd thy country soon.
    For thou art doom'd ne'er to behold again
    Thy friends, thy palace, or thy native shores,
    Till thou have seen once more the hallow'd flood                 580
    Of AEgypt, and with hecatombs adored
    Devout, the deathless tenants of the skies.
    Then will they speed thee whither thou desir'st.
      He ended, and my heart broke at his words,
    Which bade me pass again the gloomy gulph
    To AEgypt; tedious course, and hard to atchieve!
    Yet, though in sorrow whelm'd, I thus replied.
      Old prophet! I will all thy will perform.
    But tell me, and the truth simply reveal;
    Have the Achaians with their ships arrived                       590
    All safe, whom Nestor left and I, at Troy?
    Or of the Chiefs have any in their barks,
    Or in their followers' arms found a dire death
    Unlook'd for, since that city's siege we closed?
      I spake, when answer thus the God return'd.
    Atrides, why these questions? Need is none
    That thou should'st all my secrets learn, which once
    Reveal'd, thou would'st not long dry-eyed remain.
    Of those no few have died, and many live;
    But leaders, two alone, in their return                          600
    Have died (thou also hast had war to wage)
    And one, still living, roams the boundless sea.
      Ajax,[17] surrounded by his galleys, died.
    Him Neptune, first, against the bulky rocks
    The Gyrae drove, but saved him from the Deep;
    Nor had he perish'd, hated as he was
    By Pallas, but for his own impious boast
    In frenzy utter'd that he would escape
    The billows, even in the Gods' despight.
    Neptune that speech vain-glorious hearing, grasp'd               610
    His trident, and the huge Gyraean rock
    Smiting indignant, dash'd it half away;
    Part stood, and part, on which the boaster sat
    When, first, the brainsick fury seiz'd him, fell,
    Bearing him with it down into the gulphs
    Of Ocean, where he drank the brine, and died.
    But thy own brother in his barks escaped
    That fate, by Juno saved; yet when, at length,
    He should have gain'd Malea's craggy shore,
    Then, by a sudden tempest caught, he flew                        620
    With many a groan far o'er the fishy Deep
    To the land's utmost point, where once his home
    Thyestes had, but where Thyestes' son
    Dwelt then, AEgisthus. Easy lay his course
    And open thence, and, as it pleased the Gods,
    The shifted wind soon bore them to their home.
    He, high in exultation, trod the shore
    That gave him birth, kiss'd it, and, at the sight,
    The welcome sight of Greece, shed many a tear.
    Yet not unseen he landed; for a spy,                             630
    One whom the shrewd AEgisthus had seduced
    By promise of two golden talents, mark'd
    His coming from a rock where he had watch'd
    The year complete, lest, passing unperceived,
    The King should reassert his right in arms.
    Swift flew the spy with tidings to this Lord,
    And He, incontinent, this project framed
    Insidious. Twenty men, the boldest hearts
    Of all the people, from the rest he chose,
    Whom he in ambush placed, and others charged                     640
    Diligent to prepare the festal board.
    With horses, then, and chariots forth he drove
    Full-fraught with mischief, and conducting home
    The unsuspicious King, amid the feast
    Slew him, as at his crib men slay an ox.
    Nor of thy brother's train, nor of his train
    Who slew thy brother, one survived, but all,
    Welt'ring in blood together, there expired.
      He ended, and his words beat on my heart
    As they would break it. On the sands I sat                       650
    Weeping, nor life nor light desiring more.
    But when I had in dust roll'd me, and wept
    To full satiety, mine ear again
    The oracle of Ocean thus address'd.
     Sit not, O son of Atreus! weeping here
    Longer, for remedy can none be found;
    But quick arising, trial make, how best
    Thou shalt, and soonest, reach thy home again.
    For either him still living thou shalt find,
    Or ere thou come, Orestes shall have slain                       660
    The traytor, and thine eyes shall see his tomb.
      He ceas'd, and I, afflicted as I was,
    Yet felt my spirit at that word refresh'd,
    And in wing'd accents answer thus return'd.
      Of these I am inform'd; but name the third
    Who, dead or living, on the boundless Deep
    Is still detain'd; I dread, yet wish to hear.
      So I; to whom thus Proteus in return.
    Laertes' son, the Lord of Ithaca--
    Him in an island weeping I beheld,                               670
    Guest of the nymph Calypso, by constraint
    Her guest, and from his native land withheld
    By sad necessity; for ships well-oar'd,
    Or faithful followers hath he none, whose aid
    Might speed him safely o'er the spacious flood.
    But, Menelaus dear to Jove! thy fate
    Ordains not thee the stroke of death to meet
    In steed-fam'd Argos, but far hence the Gods
    Will send thee to Elysium, and the earth's
    Extremest bounds; (there Rhadamanthus dwells,                    680
    The golden-hair'd, and there the human kind
    Enjoy the easiest life; no snow is there,
    No biting winter, and no drenching show'r,
    But zephyr always gently from the sea
    Breathes on them to refresh the happy race)
    For that fair Helen is by nuptial bands
    Thy own, and thou art son-in-law of Jove.
      So saying, he plunged into the billowy waste,
    I then, with my brave comrades to the fleet
    Return'd, deep-musing as I went, and sad.                        690
    No sooner had I reach'd my ship beside
    The ocean, and we all had supp'd, than night
    From heav'n fell on us, and, at ease reposed
    Along the margin of the sea, we slept.
    But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Look'd rosy forth, drawing our galleys down
    Into the sacred Deep, we rear'd again
    The mast, unfurl'd the sail, and to our seats
    On board returning, thresh'd the foamy flood.
    Once more, at length, within the hallow'd stream                 700
    Of AEgypt mooring, on the shore I slew
    Whole hecatombs, and (the displeasure thus
    Of the immortal Gods appeased) I reared
    To Agamemnon's never-dying fame
    A tomb, and finishing it, sail'd again
    With such a gale from heaven vouchsafed, as sent
    My ships swift-scudding to the shores of Greece.
    But come--eleven days wait here, or twelve
    A guest with me, when I will send thee hence
    Nobly, and honour'd with illustrious gifts,                      710
    With polish'd chariot, with three princely steeds,
    And with a gorgeous cup, that to the Gods
    Libation pouring ever while thou liv'st
    From that same cup, thou may'st remember me.
      Him, prudent, then answer'd Telemachus.
    Atrides, seek not to detain me here
    Long time; for though contented I could sit
    The year beside thee, nor regret my home
    Or parents, (so delightful thy discourse
    Sounds in my ear) yet, even now, I know,                         720
    That my attendants to the Pylian shore
    Wish my return, whom thou thus long detain'st.
    What boon soe'er thou giv'st me, be it such
    As I may treasur'd keep; but horses none
    Take I to Ithaca; them rather far
    Keep thou, for thy own glory. Thou art Lord
    Of an extended plain, where copious springs
    The lotus, herbage of all savours, wheat,
    Pulse, and white barley of luxuriant growth.
    But Ithaca no level champaign owns,                              730
    A nursery of goats, and yet a land
    Fairer than even pastures to the eye.
    No sea-encircled isle of ours affords
    Smooth course commodious and expanse of meads,
    But my own Ithaca transcends them all!
      He said; the Hero Menelaus smiled,
    And stroaking tenderly his cheek, replied.
    Dear youth! thy speech proclaims thy noble blood.
    I can with ease supply thee from within
    With what shall suit thee better, and the gift                   740
    Of all that I possess which most excels
    In beauty, and the noblest shall be thine.
    I give thee, wrought elaborate, a cup
    Itself all silver, bound with lip of gold.
    It is the work of Vulcan, which to me
    The Hero Phaedimus imparted, King
    Of the Sidonians, when on my return
    His house received me. That shall be thy own.
      Thus they conferr'd; and now the busy train
    Of menials culinary,[18] at the gate                             750
    Enter'd of Menelaus, Chief renown'd;
    They brought him sheep, with heart-ennobling wine,
    While all their wives, their brows with frontlets bound,
    Came charg'd with bread. Thus busy they prepared
    A banquet in the mansion of the King.
      Meantime, before Ulysses' palace gate
    The suitors sported with the quoit and spear
    On the smooth area, customary scene
    Of all their strife and angry clamour loud.
    There sat Antinoues, and the godlike youth                        760
    Eurymachus, superior to the rest
    And Chiefs among them, to whom Phronius' son
    Noemon drawing nigh, with anxious mien
    Question'd Antinoues, and thus began.
      Know we, Antinoues! or know we not,
    When to expect Telemachus at home
    Again from Pylus? in my ship he went,
    Which now I need, that I may cross the sea
    To Elis, on whose spacious plain I feed
    Twelve mares, each suckling a mule-colt as yet                   770
    Unbroken, but of which I purpose one
    To ferry thence, and break him into use.
      He spake, whom they astonish'd heard; for him
    They deem'd not to Neleian Pylus gone,
    But haply into his own fields, his flocks
    To visit, or the steward of his swine.
    Then thus, Eupithes' son, Antinoues, spake.
      Say true. When sail'd he forth? of all our youth,
    Whom chose he for his followers? his own train
    Of slaves and hirelings? hath he pow'r to effect                 780
    This also? Tell me too, for I would learn--
    Took he perforce thy sable bark away,
    Or gav'st it to him at his first demand?
      To whom Noemon, Phronius' son, replied.
    I gave it voluntary; what could'st thou,
    Should such a prince petition for thy bark
    In such distress? Hard were it to refuse.
    Brave youths (our bravest youths except yourselves)
    Attend him forth; and with them I observed
    Mentor embarking, ruler o'er them all,                           790
    Or, if not him, a God; for such he seem'd.
    But this much moves my wonder. Yester-morn
    I saw, at day-break, noble Mentor here,
    Whom shipp'd for Pylus I had seen before.
      He ceas'd; and to his father's house return'd;
    They, hearing, sat aghast. Their games meantime
    Finish'd, the suitors on their seats reposed,
    To whom Eupithes' son, Antinoues, next,
    Much troubled spake; a black storm overcharged
    His bosom, and his vivid eyes flash'd fire.                      800
      Ye Gods, a proud exploit is here atchieved,
    This voyage of Telemachus, by us
    Pronounced impracticable; yet the boy
    In downright opposition to us all,
    Hath headlong launched a ship, and, with a band
    Selected from our bravest youth, is gone.
    He soon will prove more mischievous, whose pow'r
    Jove wither, ere we suffer its effects!
    But give me a swift bark with twenty rowers,
    That, watching his return within the streights                   810
    Of rocky Samos and of Ithaca,
    I may surprise him; so shall he have sail'd
    To seek his Sire, fatally for himself.
      He ceased and loud applause heard in reply,
    With warm encouragement. Then, rising all,
    Into Ulysses' house at once they throng'd.
    Nor was Penelope left uninformed
    Long time of their clandestine plottings deep,
    For herald Medon told her all, whose ear
    Their councils caught while in the outer-court                   820
    He stood, and they that project framed within.
    Swift to Penelope the tale he bore,
    Who as he pass'd the gate, him thus address'd.
      For what cause, herald! have the suitors sent
    Thee foremost? Wou'd they that my maidens lay
    Their tasks aside, and dress the board for them?
    Here end their wooing! may they hence depart
    Never, and may the banquet now prepared,
    This banquet prove your last![19] who in such throngs
    Here meeting, waste the patrimony fair                           830
    Of brave Telemachus; ye never, sure,
    When children, heard how gracious and how good
    Ulysses dwelt among your parents, none
    Of all his people, or in word or deed
    Injuring, as great princes oft are wont,
    By favour influenc'd now, now by disgust.
    He no man wrong'd at any time; but plain
    Your wicked purpose in your deeds appears,
    Who sense have none of benefits conferr'd.
      Then Medon answer'd thus, prudent, return'd.                   840
    Oh Queen! may the Gods grant this prove the worst.
    But greater far and heavier ills than this
    The suitors plan, whose counsels Jove confound!
    Their base desire and purpose are to slay
    Telemachus on his return; for he,
    To gather tidings of his Sire is gone
    To Pylus, or to Sparta's land divine.
      He said; and where she stood, her trembling knees
    Fail'd under her, and all her spirits went.
    Speechless she long remain'd, tears filled her eyes,             850
    And inarticulate in its passage died
    Her utt'rance, till at last with pain she spake.
      Herald! why went my son? he hath no need
    On board swift ships to ride, which are to man
    His steeds that bear him over seas remote.
    Went he, that, with himself, his very name
    Might perish from among mankind for ever?
      Then answer, thus, Medon the wise return'd.
    I know not whether him some God impell'd
    Or his own heart to Pylus, there to hear                         860
    News of his Sire's return, or by what fate
    At least he died, if he return no more.
      He said, and traversing Ulysses' courts,
    Departed; she with heart consuming woe
    O'erwhelm'd, no longer could endure to take
    Repose on any of her num'rous seats,
    But on the threshold of her chamber-door
    Lamenting sat, while all her female train
    Around her moan'd, the antient and the young,
    Whom, sobbing, thus Penelope bespake.                            870
      Hear me, ye maidens! for of women born
    Coeval with me, none hath e'er received
    Such plenteous sorrow from the Gods as I,
    Who first my noble husband lost, endued
    With courage lion-like, of all the Greeks
    The Chief with ev'ry virtue most adorn'd,
    A prince all-excellent, whose glorious praise
    Through Hellas and all Argos flew diffused.
    And now, my darling son,--him storms have snatch'd
    Far hence inglorious, and I knew it not.                         880
    Ah treach'rous servants! conscious as ye were
    Of his design, not one of you the thought
    Conceived to wake me when he went on board.
    For had but the report once reach'd my ear,
    He either had not gone (how much soe'er
    He wish'd to leave me) or had left me dead.
    But haste ye,--bid my antient servant come,
    Dolion, whom (when I left my father's house
    He gave me, and whose office is to attend
    My num'rous garden-plants) that he may seek                      890
    At once Laertes, and may tell him all,
    Who may contrive some remedy, perchance,
    Or fit expedient, and shall come abroad
    To weep before the men who wish to slay
    Even the prince, godlike Ulysses' son.
      Then thus the gentle Euryclea spake,
    Nurse of Telemachus. Alas! my Queen!
    Slay me, or spare, deal with me as thou wilt,
    I will confess the truth. I knew it all.
    I gave him all that he required from me.                         900
    Both wine and bread, and, at his bidding, swore
    To tell thee nought in twelve whole days to come,
    Or till, enquiry made, thou should'st thyself
    Learn his departure, lest thou should'st impair
    Thy lovely features with excess of grief.
    But lave thyself, and, fresh attired, ascend
    To thy own chamber, there, with all thy train,
    To worship Pallas, who shall save, thenceforth,
    Thy son from death, what ills soe'er he meet.
    Add not fresh sorrows to the present woes                        910
    Of the old King, for I believe not yet
    Arcesias' race entirely by the Gods
    Renounced, but trust that there shall still be found
    Among them, who shall dwell in royal state,
    And reap the fruits of fertile fields remote.
      So saying, she hush'd her sorrow, and her eyes
    No longer stream'd. Then, bathed and fresh attired,
    Penelope ascended with her train
    The upper palace, and a basket stored
    With hallow'd cakes off'ring, to Pallas pray'd.                  920
      Hear matchless daughter of Jove AEgis-arm'd!
    If ever wise Ulysses offer'd here
    The thighs of fatted kine or sheep to thee,
    Now mindful of his piety, preserve
    His darling son, and frustrate with a frown
    The cruelty of these imperious guests!
      She said, and wept aloud, whose earnest suit
    Pallas received. And now the spacious hall
    And gloomy passages with tumult rang
    And clamour of that throng, when thus, a youth,                  930
    Insolent as his fellows, dared to speak.
      Much woo'd and long, the Queen at length prepares
    To chuse another mate,[20] and nought suspects
    The bloody death to which her son is doom'd.
      So he; but they, meantime, themselves remain'd
    Untaught, what course the dread concern elsewhere
    Had taken, whom Antinoues thus address'd.
      Sirs! one and all, I counsel you, beware
    Of such bold boasting unadvised; lest one
    O'erhearing you, report your words within.                       940
    No--rather thus, in silence, let us move
    To an exploit so pleasant to us all.
      He said, and twenty chose, the bravest there,
    With whom he sought the galley on the shore,
    Which drawing down into the deep, they placed
    The mast and sails on board, and, sitting, next,
    Each oar in order to its proper groove,
    Unfurl'd and spread their canvas to the gale.
    Their bold attendants, then, brought them their arms,
    And soon as in deep water they had moor'd                        950
    The ship, themselves embarking, supp'd on board,
    And watch'd impatient for the dusk of eve.
      But when Penelope, the palace stairs
    Remounting, had her upper chamber reach'd,
