learned that, old as she was, she was for ever expecting, by the good
offices of saints and relics, to have an heir to the title of Esmond.

Harry Esmond was too young to have been introduced into the secrets
of politics in which his patrons were implicated; for they put but few
questions to the boy (who was little of stature, and looked much younger
than his age), and such questions as they put he answered cautiously
enough, and professing even more ignorance than he had, for which his
examiners willingly enough gave him credit. He did not say a word about
the window or the cupboard over the fireplace; and these secrets quite
escaped the eyes of the searchers.

So then my lady was consigned to her coach, and sent off to Hexton, with
her woman and the man of law to bear her company, a couple of troopers
riding on either side of the coach. And Harry was left behind at the
Hall, belonging as it were to nobody, and quite alone in the world.
The captain and a guard of men remained in possession there; and the
soldiers, who were very good-natured and kind, ate my lord's mutton and
drank his wine, and made themselves comfortable, as they well might do
in such pleasant quarters.

The captains had their dinner served in my lord's tapestry parlor, and
poor little Harry thought his duty was to wait upon Captain Westbury's
chair, as his custom had been to serve his lord when he sat there.

After the departure of the Countess, Dick the Scholar took Harry Esmond
under his special protection, and would examine him in his humanities
and talk to him both of French and Latin, in which tongues the lad
found, and his new friend was willing enough to acknowledge, that he was
even more proficient than Scholar Dick. Hearing that he had learned them
from a Jesuit, in the praise of whom and whose goodness Harry was never
tired of speaking, Dick, rather to the boy's surprise, who began to have
an early shrewdness, like many children bred up alone, showed a great
deal of theological science, and knowledge of the points at issue
between the two churches; so that he and Harry would have hours of
controversy together, in which the boy was certainly worsted by the
arguments of this singular trooper. "I am no common soldier," Dick would
say, and indeed it was easy to see by his learning, breeding, and
many accomplishments, that he was not. "I am of one of the most ancient
families in the empire; I have had my education at a famous school,
and a famous university; I learned my first rudiments of Latin near to
Smithfield, in London, where the martyrs were roasted."

"You hanged as many of ours," interposed Harry; "and, for the matter of
persecution, Father Holt told me that a young gentleman of Edinburgh,
eighteen years of age, student at the college there, was hanged for
heresy only last year, though he recanted, and solemnly asked pardon for
his errors."

"Faith! there has been too much persecution on both sides: but 'twas you
taught us."

"Nay, 'twas the Pagans began it," cried the lad, and began to instance
a number of saints of the Church, from the proto-martyr downwards--"this
one's fire went out under him: that one's oil cooled in the caldron: at
a third holy head the executioner chopped three times and it would not
come off. Show us martyrs in YOUR church for whom such miracles have
been done."

"Nay," says the trooper gravely, "the miracles of the first three
centuries belong to my Church as well as yours, Master Papist," and then
added, with something of a smile upon his countenance, and a queer look
at Harry--"And yet, my little catechiser, I have sometimes thought about
those miracles, that there was not much good in them, since the victim's
head always finished by coming off at the third or fourth chop, and the
caldron, if it did not boil one day, boiled the next. Howbeit, in our
times, the Church has lost that questionable advantage of respites.
There never was a shower to put out Ridley's fire, nor an angel to turn
the edge of Campion's axe. The rack tore the limbs of Southwell
the Jesuit and Sympson the Protestant alike. For faith, everywhere
multitudes die willingly enough. I have read in Monsieur Rycaut's
'History of the Turks,' of thousands of Mahomet's followers rushing
upon death in battle as upon certain Paradise; and in the great Mogul's
dominions people fling themselves by hundreds under the cars of the
idols annually, and the widows burn themselves on their husbands'
bodies, as 'tis well known. 'Tis not the dying for a faith that's so
hard, Master Harry--every man of every nation has done that--'tis the
living up to it that is difficult, as I know to my cost," he added with
a sigh. "And ah!" he added, "my poor lad, I am not strong enough to
convince thee by my life--though to die for my religion would give me
the greatest of joys--but I had a dear friend in Magdalen College in
Oxford; I wish Joe Addison were here to convince thee, as he quickly
could--for I think he's a match for the whole College of Jesuits; and
what's more, in his life too. In that very sermon of Dr. Cudworth's
which your priest was quoting from, and which suffered martydom in the
brazier,"--Dick added with a smile, "I had a thought of wearing the
black coat (but was ashamed of my life, you see, and took to this sorry
red one); I have often thought of Joe Addison--Dr. Cudworth says,
'A good conscience is the best looking-glass of heaven'--and there's
serenity in my friend's face which always reflects it--I wish you could
see him, Harry."

"Did he do you a great deal of good?" asked the lad, simply.

"He might have done," said the other--"at least he taught me to see and
approve better things. 'Tis my own fault, deteriora sequi."

"You seem very good," the boy said.

"I'm not what I seem, alas!" answered the trooper--and indeed, as it
turned out, poor Dick told the truth--for that very night, at supper
in the hall, where the gentlemen of the troop took their repasts,
and passed most part of their days dicing and smoking of tobacco, and
singing and cursing, over the Castlewood ale--Harry Esmond found Dick
the Scholar in a woful state of drunkenness. He hiccupped out a sermon
and his laughing companions bade him sing a hymn, on which Dick,
swearing he would run the scoundrel through the body who insulted his
religion, made for his sword, which was hanging on the wall, and fell
down flat on the floor under it, saying to Harry, who ran forward to
help him, "Ah, little Papist, I wish Joseph Addison was here!"

Though the troopers of the King's Life-Guards were all gentlemen, yet
the rest of the gentlemen seemed ignorant and vulgar boors to Harry
Esmond, with the exception of this good-natured Corporal Steele the
Scholar, and Captain Westbury and Lieutenant Trant, who were always
kind to the lad. They remained for some weeks or months encamped in
Castlewood, and Harry learned from them, from time to time, how the lady
at Hexton Castle was treated, and the particulars of her confinement
there. 'Tis known that King William was disposed to deal very leniently
with the gentry who remained faithful to the old King's cause; and no
prince usurping a crown, as his enemies said he did, (righteously
taking it, as I think now,) ever caused less blood to be shed. As for
women-conspirators, he kept spies on the least dangerous, and locked up
the others. Lady Castlewood had the best rooms in Hexton Castle, and the
gaoler's garden to walk in; and though she repeatedly desired to be led
out to execution, like Mary Queen of Scots, there never was any thought
of taking her painted old head off, or any desire to do aught but keep
her person in security.

And it appeared she found that some were friends in her misfortune, whom
she had, in her prosperity, considered as her worst enemies. Colonel
Francis Esmond, my lord's cousin and her ladyship's, who had married the
Dean of Winchester's daughter, and, since King James's departure out of
England, had lived not very far away from Hexton town, hearing of his
kinswoman's strait, and being friends with Colonel Brice, commanding for
King William in Hexton, and with the Church dignitaries there, came
to visit her ladyship in prison, offering to his uncle's daughter any
friendly services which lay in his power. And he brought his lady and
little daughter to see the prisoner, to the latter of whom, a child
of great beauty and many winning ways, the old Viscountess took not
a little liking, although between her ladyship and the child's mother
there was little more love than formerly. There are some injuries which
women never forgive one another; and Madam Francis Esmond, in marrying
her cousin, had done one of those irretrievable wrongs to Lady
Castlewood. But as she was now humiliated, and in misfortune, Madam
Francis could allow a truce to her enmity, and could be kind for a
while, at least, to her husband's discarded mistress. So the little
Beatrix, her daughter, was permitted often to go and visit the
imprisoned Viscountess, who, in so far as the child and its father
were concerned, got to abate in her anger towards that branch of the
Castlewood family. And the letters of Colonel Esmond coming to light,
as has been said, and his conduct being known to the King's council, the
Colonel was put in a better position with the existing government than
he had ever before been; any suspicions regarding his loyalty were
entirely done away; and so he was enabled to be of more service to his
kinswoman than he could otherwise have been.

And now there befell an event by which this lady recovered her liberty,
and the house of Castlewood got a new owner, and fatherless little Harry
Esmond a new and most kind protector and friend. Whatever that secret
was which Harry was to hear from my lord, the boy never heard it; for
that night when Father Holt arrived, and carried my lord away with him,
was the last on which Harry ever saw his patron. What happened to my
lord may be briefly told here. Having found the horses at the place
where they were lying, my lord and Father Holt rode together to
Chatteris, where they had temporary refuge with one of the Father's
penitents in that city; but the pursuit being hot for them, and the
reward for the apprehension of one or the other considerable, it was
deemed advisable that they should separate; and the priest betook
himself to other places of retreat known to him, whilst my lord passed
over from Bristol into Ireland, in which kingdom King James had a court
and an army. My lord was but a small addition to this; bringing, indeed,
only his sword and the few pieces in his pocket; but the King received
him with some kindness and distinction in spite of his poor plight,
confirmed him in his new title of Marquis, gave him a regiment, and
promised him further promotion. But titles or promotion were not to
benefit him now. My lord was wounded at the fatal battle of the Boyne,
flying from which field (long after his master had set him an example)
he lay for a while concealed in the marshy country near to the town of
Trim, and more from catarrh and fever caught in the bogs than from the
steel of the enemy in the battle, sank and died. May the earth lie light
upon Thomas of Castlewood! He who writes this must speak in charity,
though this lord did him and his two grievous wrongs: for one of these
he would have made amends, perhaps, had life been spared him; but the
other lay beyond his power to repair, though 'tis to be hoped that a
greater Power than a priest has absolved him of it. He got the comfort
of this absolution, too, such as it was: a priest of Trim writing a
letter to my lady to inform her of this calamity.

But in those days letters were slow of travelling, and our priest's took
two months or more on its journey from Ireland to England: where, when
it did arrive, it did not find my lady at her own house; she was at the
King's house of Hexton Castle when the letter came to Castlewood, but it
was opened for all that by the officer in command there.

Harry Esmond well remembered the receipt of this letter, which Lockwood
brought in as Captain Westbury and Lieutenant Trant were on the green
playing at bowls, young Esmond looking on at the sport, or reading his
book in the arbor.

"Here's news for Frank Esmond," says Captain Westbury; "Harry, did you
ever see Colonel Esmond?" And Captain Westbury looked very hard at the
boy as he spoke.

Harry said he had seen him but once when he was at Hexton, at the ball
there.

"And did he say anything?"

"He said what I don't care to repeat," Harry answered. For he was now
twelve years of age: he knew what his birth was, and the disgrace of
it; and he felt no love towards the man who had most likely stained his
mother's honor and his own.

"Did you love my Lord Castlewood?"

"I wait until I know my mother, sir, to say," the boy answered, his eyes
filling with tears.

"Something has happened to Lord Castlewood," Captain Westbury said in a
very grave tone--"something which must happen to us all. He is dead of a
wound received at the Boyne, fighting for King James."

"I am glad my lord fought for the right cause," the boy said.

"It was better to meet death on the field like a man, than face it on
Tower-hill, as some of them may," continued Mr. Westbury. "I hope he has
made some testament, or provided for thee somehow. This letter says he
recommends unicum filium suum dilectissimum to his lady. I hope he has
left you more than that."

Harry did not know, he said. He was in the hands of Heaven and Fate; but
more lonely now, as it seemed to him, than he had been all the rest of
his life; and that night, as he lay in his little room which he still
occupied, the boy thought with many a pang of shame and grief of his
strange and solitary condition: how he had a father and no father; a
nameless mother that had been brought to ruin, perhaps, by that very
father whom Harry could only acknowledge in secret and with a blush,
and whom he could neither love nor revere. And he sickened to think how
Father Holt, a stranger, and two or three soldiers, his acquaintances
of the last six weeks, were the only friends he had in the great wide
world, where he was now quite alone. The soul of the boy was full of
love, and he longed as he lay in the darkness there for some one upon
whom he could bestow it. He remembers, and must to his dying day, the
thoughts and tears of that long night, the hours tolling through it.
Who was he, and what? Why here rather than elsewhere? I have a mind, he
thought, to go to that priest at Trim, and find out what my father said
to him on his death-bed confession. Is there any child in the whole
world so unprotected as I am? Shall I get up and quit this place, and
run to Ireland? With these thoughts and tears the lad passed that night
away until he wept himself to sleep.

The next day, the gentlemen of the guard, who had heard what had
befallen him, were more than usually kind to the child, especially his
friend Scholar Dick, who told him about his own father's death, which
had happened when Dick was a child at Dublin, not quite five years of
age. "That was the first sensation of grief," Dick said, "I ever knew.
I remember I went into the room where his body lay, and my mother sat
weeping beside it. I had my battledore in my hand, and fell a-beating
the coffin, and calling Papa; on which my mother caught me in her arms,
and told me in a flood of tears Papa could not hear me, and would play
with me no more, for they were going to put him under ground, whence he
could never come to us again. And this," said Dick kindly, "has made
me pity all children ever since; and caused me to love thee, my poor
fatherless, motherless lad. And, if ever thou wantest a friend, thou
shalt have one in Richard Steele."

Harry Esmond thanked him, and was grateful. But what could Corporal
Steele do for him? take him to ride a spare horse, and be servant to the
troop? Though there might be a bar in Harry Esmond's shield, it was a
noble one. The counsel of the two friends was, that little Harry
should stay where he was, and abide his fortune: so Esmond stayed on at
Castlewood, awaiting with no small anxiety the fate, whatever it was,
which was over him.




CHAPTER VII.

I AM LEFT AT CASTLEWOOD AN ORPHAN, AND FIND MOST KIND PROTECTORS THERE.


During the stay of the soldiers in Castlewood, honest Dick the Scholar
was the constant companion of the lonely little orphan lad Harry Esmond:
and they read together, and they played bowls together, and when the
other troopers or their officers, who were free-spoken over their cups,
(as was the way of that day, when neither men nor women were over-nice,)
talked unbecomingly of their amours and gallantries before the child,
Dick, who very likely was setting the whole company laughing, would stop
their jokes with a maxima debetur pueris reverentia, and once offered
to lug out against another trooper called Hulking Tom, who wanted to ask
Harry Esmond a ribald question.

Also, Dick seeing that the child had, as he said, a sensibility above
his years, and a great and praiseworthy discretion, confided to Harry
his love for a vintner's daughter, near to the Tollyard, Westminster,
whom Dick addressed as Saccharissa in many verses of his composition,
and without whom he said it would be impossible that he could continue
to live. He vowed this a thousand times in a day, though Harry smiled to
see the love-lorn swain had his health and appetite as well as the most
heart-whole trooper in the regiment: and he swore Harry to secrecy too,
which vow the lad religiously kept, until he found that officers and
privates were all taken into Dick's confidence, and had the benefit of
his verses. And it must be owned likewise that, while Dick was sighing
after Saccharissa in London, he had consolations in the country; for
there came a wench out of Castlewood village who had washed his linen,
and who cried sadly when she heard he was gone: and without paying her
bill too, which Harry Esmond took upon himself to discharge by giving
the girl a silver pocket-piece, which Scholar Dick had presented to him,
when, with many embraces and prayers for his prosperity, Dick parted
from him, the garrison of Castlewood being ordered away. Dick the
Scholar said he would never forget his young friend, nor indeed did he:
and Harry was sorry when the kind soldiers vacated Castlewood, looking
forward with no small anxiety (for care and solitude had made him
thoughtful beyond his years) to his fate when the new lord and lady of
the house came to live there. He had lived to be past twelve years old
now; and had never had a friend, save this wild trooper, perhaps, and
Father Holt; and had a fond and affectionate heart, tender to weakness,
that would fain attach itself to somebody, and did not seem at rest
until it had found a friend who would take charge of it.

The instinct which led Henry Esmond to admire and love the gracious
person, the fair apparition of whose beauty and kindness had so moved
him when he first beheld her, became soon a devoted affection and
passion of gratitude, which entirely filled his young heart, that
as yet, except in the case of dear Father Holt, had had very little
kindness for which to be thankful. O Dea certe, thought he, remembering
the lines out of the AEneas which Mr. Holt had taught him. There seemed,
as the boy thought, in every look or gesture of this fair creature,
an angelical softness and bright pity--in motion or repose she seemed
gracious alike; the tone of her voice, though she uttered words ever so
trivial, gave him a pleasure that amounted almost to anguish. It cannot
be called love, that a lad of twelve years of age, little more than a
menial, felt for an exalted lady, his mistress: but it was worship.
To catch her glance, to divine her errand and run on it before she had
spoken it; to watch, follow, adore her; became the business of his life.
Meanwhile, as is the way often, his idol had idols of her own, and never
thought of or suspected the admiration of her little pigmy adorer.

My lady had on her side her three idols: first and foremost, Jove
and supreme ruler, was her lord, Harry's patron, the good Viscount of
Castlewood. All wishes of his were laws with her. If he had a headache,
she was ill. If he frowned, she trembled. If he joked, she smiled and
was charmed. If he went a-hunting, she was always at the window to see
him ride away, her little son crowing on her arm, or on the watch till
his return. She made dishes for his dinner: spiced wine for him: made
the toast for his tankard at breakfast: hushed the house when he slept
in his chair, and watched for a look when he woke. If my lord was not a
little proud of his beauty, my lady adored it. She clung to his arm as
he paced the terrace, her two fair little hands clasped round his great
one; her eyes were never tired of looking in his face and wondering at
its perfection. Her little son was his son, and had his father's look
and curly brown hair. Her daughter Beatrix was his daughter, and had his
eyes--were there ever such beautiful eyes in the world? All the house
was arranged so as to bring him ease and give him pleasure. She liked
the small gentry round about to come and pay him court, never caring for
admiration for herself; those who wanted to be well with the lady must
admire him. Not regarding her dress, she would wear a gown to rags,
because he had once liked it: and, if he brought her a brooch or a
ribbon, would prefer it to all the most costly articles of her wardrobe.

My lord went to London every year for six weeks, and the family being
too poor to appear at Court with any figure, he went alone. It was not
until he was out of sight that her face showed any sorrow: and what
a joy when he came back! What preparation before his return! The fond
creature had his arm-chair at the chimney-side--delighting to put the
children in it, and look at them there. Nobody took his place at the
table; but his silver tankard stood there as when my lord was present.

A pretty sight it was to see, during my lord's absence, or on those many
mornings when sleep or headache kept him a-bed, this fair young lady of
Castlewood, her little daughter at her knee, and her domestics gathered
round her, reading the Morning Prayer of the English Church. Esmond
long remembered how she looked and spoke, kneeling reverently before the
sacred book, the sun shining upon her golden hair until it made a halo
round about her. A dozen of the servants of the house kneeled in a line
opposite their mistress; for a while Harry Esmond kept apart from these
mysteries, but Doctor Tusher showing him that the prayers read were
those of the Church of all ages, and the boy's own inclination prompting
him to be always as near as he might to his mistress, and to think all
things she did right, from listening to the prayers in the ante-chamber,
he came presently to kneel down with the rest of the household in
the parlor; and before a couple of years my lady had made a thorough
convert. Indeed, the boy loved his catechiser so much that he would have
subscribed to anything she bade him, and was never tired of listening to
her fond discourse and simple comments upon the book, which she read to
him in a voice of which it was difficult to resist the sweet persuasion
and tender appealing kindness. This friendly controversy, and the
intimacy which it occasioned, bound the lad more fondly than ever to his
mistress. The happiest period of all his life was this; and the
young mother, with her daughter and son, and the orphan lad whom she
protected, read and worked and played, and were children together.
If the lady looked forward--as what fond woman does not?--towards the
future, she had no plans from which Harry Esmond was left out; and a
thousand and a thousand times, in his passionate and impetuous way,
he vowed that no power should separate him from his mistress; and only
asked for some chance to happen by which he might show his fidelity
to her. Now, at the close of his life, as he sits and recalls in
tranquillity the happy and busy scenes of it, he can think, not
ungratefully, that he has been faithful to that early vow. Such a life
is so simple that years may be chronicled in a few lines. But few men's
life-voyages are destined to be all prosperous; and this calm of which
we are speaking was soon to come to an end.

As Esmond grew, and observed for himself, he found of necessity much to
read and think of outside that fond circle of kinsfolk who had admitted
him to join hand with them. He read more books than they cared to study
with him; was alone in the midst of them many a time, and passed nights
over labors, futile perhaps, but in which they could not join him. His
dear mistress divined his thoughts with her usual jealous watchfulness
of affection: began to forebode a time when he would escape from his
home-nest; and, at his eager protestations to the contrary, would
only sigh and shake her head. Before those fatal decrees in life are
executed, there are always secret previsions and warning omens. When
everything yet seems calm, we are aware that the storm is coming. Ere
the happy days were over, two at least of that home-party felt that they
were drawing to a close; and were uneasy, and on the look-out for the
cloud which was to obscure their calm.

'Twas easy for Harry to see, however much his lady persisted in
obedience and admiration for her husband, that my lord tired of his
quiet life, and grew weary, and then testy, at those gentle bonds with
which his wife would have held him. As they say the Grand Lama of Thibet
is very much fatigued by his character of divinity, and yawns on
his altar as his bonzes kneel and worship him, many a home-god grows
heartily sick of the reverence with which his family-devotees pursue
him, and sighs for freedom and for his old life, and to be off the
pedestal on which his dependants would have him sit for ever, whilst
they adore him, and ply him with flowers, and hymns, and incense,
and flattery;--so, after a few years of his marriage my honest Lord
Castlewood began to tire; all the high-flown raptures and devotional
ceremonies with which his wife, his chief priestess, treated him, first
sent him to sleep, and then drove him out of doors; for the truth must
be told, that my lord was a jolly gentleman, with very little of the
august or divine in his nature, though his fond wife persisted in
revering it--and, besides, he had to pay a penalty for this love, which
persons of his disposition seldom like to defray: and, in a word, if he
had a loving wife, had a very jealous and exacting one. Then he wearied
of this jealousy; then he broke away from it; then came, no doubt,
complaints and recriminations; then, perhaps, promises of amendment
not fulfilled; then upbraidings not the more pleasant because they
were silent, and only sad looks and tearful eyes conveyed them. Then,
perhaps, the pair reached that other stage which is not uncommon in
married life, when the woman perceives that the god of the honeymoon is
a god no more; only a mortal like the rest of us--and so she looks into
her heart, and lo! vacuae sedes et inania arcana. And now, supposing our
lady to have a fine genius and a brilliant wit of her own, and the magic
spell and infatuation removed from her which had led her to worship as
a god a very ordinary mortal--and what follows? They live together, and
they dine together, and they say "my dear" and "my love" as heretofore;
but the man is himself, and the woman herself: that dream of love is
over as everything else is over in life; as flowers and fury, and griefs
and pleasures, are over.

Very likely the Lady Castlewood had ceased to adore her husband herself
long before she got off her knees, or would allow her household to
discontinue worshipping him. To do him justice, my lord never exacted
this subservience: he laughed and joked and drank his bottle, and
swore when he was angry, much too familiarly for any one pretending to
sublimity; and did his best to destroy the ceremonial with which his
wife chose to surround him. And it required no great conceit on young
Esmond's part to see that his own brains were better than his patron's,
who, indeed, never assumed any airs of superiority over the lad, or
over any dependant of his, save when he was displeased, in which case he
would express his mind in oaths very freely; and who, on the contrary,
perhaps, spoiled "Parson Harry," as he called young Esmond, by
constantly praising his parts and admiring his boyish stock of learning.

It may seem ungracious in one who has received a hundred favors from his
patron to speak in any but a reverential manner of his elders; but the
present writer has had descendants of his own, whom he has brought
up with as little as possible of the servility at present exacted
by parents from children (under which mask of duty there often lurks
indifference, contempt, or rebellion): and as he would have his
grandsons believe or represent him to be not an inch taller than Nature
has made him: so, with regard to his past acquaintances, he would
speak without anger, but with truth, as far as he knows it, neither
extenuating nor setting down aught in malice.

So long, then, as the world moved according to Lord Castlewood's wishes,
he was good-humored enough; of a temper naturally sprightly and easy,
liking to joke, especially with his inferiors, and charmed to receive
the tribute of their laughter. All exercises of the body he could
perform to perfection--shooting at a mark and flying, breaking horses,
riding at the ring, pitching the quoit, playing at all games with great
skill. And not only did he do these things well, but he thought he did
them to perfection; hence he was often tricked about horses, which he
pretended to know better than any jockey; was made to play at ball and
billiards by sharpers who took his money, and came back from London
wofully poorer each time than he went, as the state of his affairs
testified when the sudden accident came by which his career was brought
to an end.

He was fond of the parade of dress, and passed as many hours daily at
his toilette as an elderly coquette. A tenth part of his day was spent
in the brushing of his teeth and the oiling of his hair, which was
curling and brown, and which he did not like to conceal under a periwig,
such as almost everybody of that time wore. (We have the liberty of our
hair back now, but powder and pomatum along with it. When, I wonder,
will these monstrous poll-taxes of our age be withdrawn, and men allowed
to carry their colors, black, red, or gray, as Nature made them?) And as
he liked her to be well dressed, his lady spared no pains in that matter
to please him; indeed, she would dress her head or cut it off if he had
bidden her.

It was a wonder to young Esmond, serving as page to my lord and lady,
to hear, day after day, to such company as came, the same boisterous
stories told by my lord, at which his lady never failed to smile or hold
down her head, and Doctor Tusher to burst out laughing at the proper
point, or cry, "Fie, my lord, remember my cloth!" but with such a
faint show of resistance, that it only provoked my lord further. Lord
Castlewood's stories rose by degrees, and became stronger after the ale
at dinner and the bottle afterwards; my lady always taking flight after
the very first glass to Church and King, and leaving the gentlemen to
drink the rest of the toasts by themselves.

And, as Harry Esmond was her page, he also was called from duty at this
time. "My lord has lived in the army and with soldiers," she would
say to the lad, "amongst whom great license is allowed. You have had
a different nurture, and I trust these things will change as you grow
older; not that any fault attaches to my lord, who is one of the best
and most religious men in this kingdom." And very likely she believed
so. 'Tis strange what a man may do, and a woman yet think him an angel.

And as Esmond has taken truth for his motto, it must be owned, even
with regard to that other angel, his mistress, that she had a fault of
character which flawed her perfections. With the other sex perfectly
tolerant and kindly, of her own she was invariably jealous; and a proof
that she had this vice is, that though she would acknowledge a thousand
faults that she had not, to this which she had she could never be got
to own. But if there came a woman with even a semblance of beauty to
Castlewood, she was so sure to find out some wrong in her, that my lord,
laughing in his jolly way, would often joke with her concerning her
foible. Comely servant-maids might come for hire, but none were taken
at Castlewood. The housekeeper was old; my lady's own waiting-woman
squinted, and was marked with the small-pox; the housemaids and scullion
were ordinary country wenches, to whom Lady Castlewood was kind, as her
nature made her to everybody almost; but as soon as ever she had to do
with a pretty woman, she was cold, retiring, and haughty. The country
ladies found this fault in her; and though the men all admired her,
their wives and daughters complained of her coldness and aims, and said
that Castlewood was pleasanter in Lady Jezebel's time (as the dowager
was called) than at present. Some few were of my mistress's side.
Old Lady Blenkinsop Jointure, who had been at court in King James the
First's time, always took her side; and so did old Mistress Crookshank,
Bishop Crookshank's daughter, of Hexton, who, with some more of their
like, pronounced my lady an angel: but the pretty women were not of this
mind; and the opinion of the country was that my lord was tied to his
wife's apron-strings, and that she ruled over him.

The second fight which Harry Esmond had, was at fourteen years of age,
with Bryan Hawkshaw, Sir John Hawkshaw's son, of Bramblebrook, who,
advancing this opinion, that my lady was jealous and henpecked my lord,
put Harry in such a fury, that Harry fell on him and with such rage,
that the other boy, who was two years older and by far bigger than he,
had by far the worst of the assault, until it was interrupted by Doctor
Tusher walking out of the dinner-room.

Bryan Hawkshaw got up bleeding at the nose, having, indeed, been
surprised, as many a stronger man might have been, by the fury of the
assault upon him.

"You little bastard beggar!" he said, "I'll murder you for this!"

And indeed he was big enough.

"Bastard or not," said the other, grinding his teeth, "I have a
couple of swords, and if you like to meet me, as a man, on the terrace
to-night--"

And here the Doctor coming up, the colloquy of the young champions
ended. Very likely, big as he was, Hawkshaw did not care to continue a
fight with such a ferocious opponent as this had been.




CHAPTER VIII.

AFTER GOOD FORTUNE COMES EVIL.


Since my Lady Mary Wortley Montagu brought home the custom of
inoculation from Turkey (a perilous practice many deem it, and only a
useless rushing into the jaws of danger), I think the severity of the
small-pox, that dreadful scourge of the world, has somewhat been abated
in our part of it; and remember in my time hundreds of the young and
beautiful who have been carried to the grave, or have only risen from
their pillows frightfully scarred and disfigured by this malady. Many
a sweet face hath left its roses on the bed on which this dreadful and
withering blight has laid them. In my early days, this pestilence would
enter a village and destroy half its inhabitants: at its approach, it
may well be imagined, not only the beautiful but the strongest were
alarmed, and those fled who could. One day in the year 1694 (I have good
reason to remember it), Doctor Tusher ran into Castlewood House, with a
face of consternation, saying that the malady had made its appearance at
the blacksmith's house in the village, and that one of the maids there
was down in the small-pox.

The blacksmith, besides his forge and irons for horses, had an ale-house
for men, which his wife kept, and his company sat on benches before the
inn-door, looking at the smithy while they drank their beer. Now,
there was a pretty girl at this inn, the landlord's men called Nancy
Sievewright, a bouncing, fresh-looking lass, whose face was as red as
the hollyhocks over the pales of the garden behind the inn. At this time
Harry Esmond was a lad of sixteen, and somehow in his walks and rambles
it often happened that he fell in with Nancy Sievewright's bonny face;
if he did not want something done at the blacksmith's he would go and
drink ale at the "Three Castles," or find some pretext for seeing this
poor Nancy. Poor thing, Harry meant or imagined no harm; and she, no
doubt, as little, but the truth is they were always meeting--in the
lanes, or by the brook, or at the garden-palings, or about Castlewood:
