if he transgressed the orders given him, 'verily he would be scourged.'

Promises cost Benjie nothing, and he showered them out wholesale;
till the Quaker at length yielded up the bridle to him, repeating his
charges, and enforcing them by holding up his forefinger. On my part, I
called to Benjie to leave the fish he had taken at Mount Sharon, making,
at the same time, an apologetic countenance to my new friend, not
being quite aware whether the compliment would be agreeable to such a
condemner of field-sports.

He understood me at once, and reminded me of the practical distinction
betwixt catching the animals as an object of cruel and wanton sport, and
eating them as lawful and gratifying articles of food, after they were
killed. On the latter point he had no scruples; but, on the contrary,
assured me that this brook contained the real red trout, so highly
esteemed by all connoisseurs, and that, when eaten within an hour
of their being caught, they had a peculiar firmness of substance and
delicacy of flavour, which rendered them an agreeable addition to a
morning meal, especially when earned, like ours, by early rising, and an
hour or two's wholesome exercise.

But to thy alarm be it spoken, Alan, we did not come so far as the
frying of our fish without further adventure. So it is only to spare thy
patience, and mine own eyes, that I pull up for the present, and send
thee the rest of my story in a subsequent letter.




LETTER VII

THE SAME TO THE SAME (In continuation.)

Little Benjie, with the pony, having been sent off on the left side of
the brook, the Quaker and I sauntered on, like the cavalry and infantry
of the same army occupying the opposite banks of a river, and observing
the same line of march. But, while my worthy companion was assuring me
of a pleasant greensward walk to his mansion, little Benjie, who had
been charged to keep in sight, chose to deviate from the path assigned
him, and, turning to the right, led his charge, Solomon, out of our
vision.

'The villain means to mount him!' cried Joshua, with more vivacity than
was consistent with his profession of passive endurance.

I endeavoured to appease his apprehensions, as he pushed on, wiping his
brow with vexation, assuring him that, if the boy did mount, he would,
for his own sake, ride gently.

'You do not know him,' said Joshua, rejecting all consolation; 'HE do
anything gently!--no, he will gallop Solomon--he will misuse the sober
patience of the poor animal who has borne me so long! Yes, I was given
over to my own devices when I ever let him touch the bridle, for such a
little miscreant there never was before him in this country.'

He then proceeded to expatiate on every sort of rustic enormity of which
he accused Benjie. He had been suspected of snaring partridges--was
detected by Joshua himself in liming singing-birds--stood fully charged
with having worried several cats, by aid of a lurcher which attended
him, and which was as lean, and ragged, and mischievous, as his master.
Finally, Benjie stood accused of having stolen a duck, to hunt it with
the said lurcher, which was as dexterous on water as on land. I chimed
in with my friend, in order to avoid giving him further irritation, and
declared I should be disposed, from my own experience, to give up Benjie
as one of Satan's imps. Joshua Geddes began to censure the phrase as
too much exaggerated, and otherwise unbecoming the mouth of a reflecting
person; and, just as I was apologizing for it, as being a term of common
parlance, we heard certain sounds on the opposite side of the brook,
which seemed to indicate that Solomon and Benjie were at issue together.
The sandhills behind which Benjie seemed to take his course, had
concealed from us, as doubtless he meant they should, his ascent into
the forbidden saddle, and, putting Solomon to his mettle, which he was
seldom called upon to exert, they had cantered away together in
great amity, till they came near to the ford from which the palfrey's
legitimate owner had already turned back.

Here a contest of opinions took place between the horse and his rider.
The latter, according to his instructions, attempted to direct Solomon
towards the distant bridge of stone; but Solomon opined that the ford
was the shortest way to his own stable. The point was sharply contested,
and we heard Benjie gee-hupping, tchek-tcheking, and, above all,
flogging in great style; while Solomon, who, docile in his general
habits, was now stirred beyond his patience, made a great trampling and
recalcitration; and it was their joint noise which we heard, without
being able to see, though Joshua might too well guess, the cause of it.

Alarmed at these indications, the Quaker began to shout out,
'Benjie--thou varlet! Solomon--thou fool!' when the couple presented
themselves in full drive, Solomon having now decidedly obtained the
better of the conflict, and bringing his unwilling rider in high career
down to the ford. Never was there anger changed so fast into humane
fear, as that of my good companion. 'The varlet will be drowned!' he
exclaimed--'a widow's son!--her only son!--and drowned!--let me go'--And
he struggled with me stoutly as I hung upon him, to prevent him from
plunging into the ford.

I had no fear whatever for Benjie; for the blackguard vermin, though he
could not manage the refractory horse, stuck on his seat like a monkey.
Solomon and Benjie scrambled through the ford with little inconvenience,
and resumed their gallop on the other side.

It was impossible to guess whether on this last occasion Benjie was
running off with Solomon, or Solomon with Benjie; but, judging from
character and motives, I rather suspected the former. I could not help
laughing as the rascal passed me, grinning betwixt terror and delight,
perched on the very pommel of the saddle, and holding with extended arms
by bridle and mane while Solomon, the bit secured between his teeth,
and his head bored down betwixt his forelegs, passed his master in this
unwonted guise as hard as he could pelt.

'The mischievous bastard!' exclaimed the Quaker, terrified out of his
usual moderation of speech--'the doomed gallows-bird!--he will break
Solomon's wind to a certainty.'

I prayed him to be comforted--assured, him a brushing gallop would do
his favourite no harm and reminded him of the censure he had bestowed on
me a minute before, for applying a harsh epithet to the boy.

But Joshua was not without his answer; 'Friend youth,' he said, 'thou
didst speak of the lad's soul, which thou didst affirm belonged to the
enemy, and of that thou couldst say nothing of thine own knowledge; on
the contrary, I did but speak of his outward man, which will assuredly
be suspended by a cord, if he mendeth not his manners. Men say that,
young as he is, he is one of the laird's gang.'

'Of the laird's gang!' said I, repeating the words in surprise. 'Do you
mean the person with whom I slept last night? I heard you call him the
laird. Is he at the head of a gang?'

'Nay, I meant not precisely a gang,' said the Quaker, who appeared in
his haste to have spoken more than he intended--a company, or party, I
should have said; but thus it is, friend Latimer, with the wisest men
when they permit themselves to be perturbed with passion, and speak as
in a fever, or as with the tongue of the foolish and the forward. And
although thou hast been hasty to mark my infirmity, yet I grieve not
that thou hast been a witness to it, seeing that the stumbles of the
wise may be no less a caution to youth and inexperience, than is the
fall of the foolish.'

This was a sort of acknowledgement of what I had already begun to
suspect--that my new friend's real goodness of disposition, joined to
the acquired quietism of his religious sect, had been unable entirely to
check the effervescence of a temper naturally warm and hasty.

Upon the present occasion, as if sensible he had displayed a greater
degree of emotion than became his character, Joshua avoided further
allusion to Benjie and Solomon, and proceeded to solicit my attention to
the natural objects around us, which increased in beauty and interest,
as, still conducted by the meanders of the brook, we left the common
behind us, and entered a more cultivated and enclosed country, where
arable and pasture ground was agreeably varied with groves and hedges.
Descending now almost close to the stream, our course lay through a
little gate, into a pathway kept with great neatness, the sides of which
were decorated with trees and flowering shrubs of the hardier species;
until, ascending by a gentle slope, we issued from the grove, and stood
almost at once in front of a low but very neat building, of an irregular
form; and my guide, shaking me cordially by the hand, made me welcome to
Mount Sharon.

The wood through which we had approached this little mansion was thrown
around it both on the north and north-west, but, breaking off into
different directions, was intersected by a few fields well watered and
sheltered. The house fronted to the south-east, and from thence the
pleasure-ground, or, I should rather say, the gardens, sloped down
to the water. I afterwards understood that the father of the present
proprietor had a considerable taste for horticulture, which had been
inherited by his son, and had formed these gardens, which, with their
shaven turf, pleached alleys, wildernesses, and exotic trees and shrubs,
greatly excelled anything of the kind which had been attempted in the
neighbourhood.

If there was a little vanity in the complacent smile with which Joshua
Geddes saw me gaze with delight on a scene so different from the naked
waste we had that day traversed in company, it might surely be permitted
to one who, cultivating and improving the beauties of nature, had found
therein, as he said, bodily health, and a pleasing relaxation for the
mind. At the bottom of the extended gardens the brook wheeled round in a
wide semicircle, and was itself their boundary. The opposite side was
no part of Joshua's domain, but the brook was there skirted by a
precipitous rock of limestone, which seemed a barrier of nature's own
erecting around his little Eden of beauty, comfort, and peace.

'But I must not let thee forget,' said the kind Quaker, 'amidst thy
admiration of these beauties of our little inheritance, that thy
breakfast has been a light one.'

So saying, Joshua conducted me to a small sashed door, opening under
a porch amply mantled by honeysuckle and clematis, into a parlour
of moderate size; the furniture of which, in plainness and excessive
cleanliness, bore the characteristic marks of the sect to which the
owner belonged.

Thy father's Hannah is generally allowed to be an exception to all
Scottish housekeepers, and stands unparalleled for cleanliness among
the women of Auld Reekie; but the cleanliness of Hannah is sluttishness
compared to the scrupulous purifications of these people, who seem to
carry into the minor decencies of life that conscientious rigour which
they affect in their morals.

The parlour would have been gloomy, for the windows were small and the
ceiling low; but the present proprietor had rendered it more cheerful
by opening one end into a small conservatory, roofed with glass, and
divided from the parlour by a partition of the same. I have never before
seen this very pleasing manner of uniting the comforts of an apartment
with the beauties of a garden, and I wonder it is not more practised
by the great. Something of the kind is hinted at in a paper of the
SPECTATOR.

As I walked towards the conservatory to view it more closely, the
parlour chimney engaged my attention. It was a pile of massive stone,
entirely out of proportion to the size of the apartment. On the front
had once been an armorial scutcheon; for the hammer, or chisel, which
had been employed to deface the shield or crest, had left uninjured
the scroll beneath, which bore the pious motto, 'TRUST IN GOD.'
Black-letter, you know, was my early passion, and the tombstones in the
Greyfriars' churchyard early yielded up to my knowledge as a decipherer
what little they could tell of the forgotten dead.

Joshua Geddes paused when he saw my eye fixed on this relic of
antiquity. 'Thou canst read it?' he said.

I repeated the motto, and added, there seemed vestiges of a date.

'It should be 1537,' said he; 'for so long ago, at the least
computation, did my ancestors, in the blinded times of Papistry, possess
these lands, and in that year did they build their house.'

'It is an ancient descent,' said I, looking with respect upon the
monument. 'I am sorry the arms have been defaced.'

It was perhaps impossible for my friend, Quaker as he was, to seem
altogether void of respect for the pedigree which he began to recount
to me, disclaiming all the while the vanity usually connected with
the subject; in short, with the air of mingled melancholy, regret, and
conscious dignity, with which Jack Fawkes used to tell us at college of
his ancestor's unfortunate connexion with the Gunpowder Plot.

'Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher,' thus harangued Joshua Gleddes
of Mount Sharon; 'if we ourselves are nothing in the sight of Heaven,
how much less than nothing must be our derivation from rotten bones and
mouldering dust, whose immortal spirits have long since gone to their
private account? Yes, friend Latimer, my ancestors were renowned among
the ravenous and bloodthirsty men who then dwelt in this vexed country;
and so much were they famed for successful freebooting, robbery, and
bloodshed, that they are said to have been called Geddes, as likening
them to the fish called a Jack, Pike, or Luce, and in our country
tongue, a GED--a goodly distinction truly for Christian men! Yet did
they paint this shark of the fresh waters upon their shields, and these
profane priests of a wicked idolatry, the empty boasters called heralds,
who make engraven images of fishes, fowls, and four-footed beasts, that
men may fall down and worship them, assigned the ged for the device and
escutcheon of my fathers, and hewed it over their chimneys, and placed
it above their tombs; and the men were elated in mind, and became yet
more ged-like, slaying, leading into captivity, and dividing the spoil,
until the place where they dwelt obtained the name of Sharing-Knowe,
from the booty which was there divided amongst them and their
accomplices. But a better judgement was given to my father's father,
Philip Geddes, who, after trying to light his candle at some of the vain
wildfires then held aloft at different meetings and steeple-houses, at
length obtained a spark from the lamp of the blessed George Fox, who
came into Scotland spreading light among darkness, as he himself hath
written, as plentifully as fly the sparkles from the hoof of the horse
which gallops swiftly along the stony road.'--Here the good Quaker
interrupted himself with, 'And that is very true, I must go speedily to
see after the condition of Solomon.'

A Quaker servant here entered the room with a tray, and inclining his
head towards his master, but not after the manner of one who bows, said
composedly, 'Thou art welcome home, friend Joshua, we expected thee not
so early; but what hath befallen Solomon thy horse?'

'What hath befallen him, indeed?' said my friend; 'hath he not been
returned hither by the child whom they call Benjie?'

'He hath,' said his domestic, 'but it was after a strange fashion; for
he came hither at a swift and furious pace, and flung the child Benjie
from his back, upon the heap of dung which is in the stable-yard.'

'I am glad of it,' said Joshua, hastily,--'glad of it, with all my heart
and spirit! But stay, he is the child of the widow--hath the boy any
hurt?'

'Not so' answered the servant, 'for he rose and fled swiftly.'

Joshua muttered something about a scourge, and then inquired after
Solomon's present condition.

'He seetheth like a steaming cauldron,' answered the servant; 'and
Bauldie, the lad, walketh him about the yard with a halter, lest he take
cold.'

Mr. Geddes hastened to the stable-yard to view personally the condition
of his favourite, and I followed to offer my counsel as a jockey. Don't
laugh, Alan, sure I have jockeyship enough to assist a Quaker--in this
unpleasing predicament.

The lad who was leading the horse seemed to be no Quaker, though his
intercourse with the family had given him a touch of their prim sobriety
of look and manner. He assured Joshua that his horse had received no
injury, and I even hinted that the exercise would be of service to him.
Solomon himself neighed towards his master, and rubbed his head against
the good Quaker's shoulder, as if to assure him of his being quite well;
so that Joshua returned in comfort to his parlour, where breakfast was
now about to be displayed.

I have since learned that the affection of Joshua for his pony is
considered as inordinate by some of his own sect; and that he has been
much blamed for permitting it to be called by the name of Solomon, or
any other name whatever; but he has gained so much respect and influence
among them that they overlook these foibles.

I learned from him (whilst the old servant, Jehoiachim, entering and
re-entering, seemed to make no end of the materials which he brought in
for breakfast) that his grandfather Philip, the convert of George Fox,
had suffered much from the persecution to which these harmless devotees
were subjected on all sides during that intolerant period, and much
of their family estate had been dilapidated. But better days dawned
on Joshua's father, who, connecting himself by marriage with a wealthy
family of Quakers in Lancashire, engaged successfully in various
branches of commerce, and redeemed the remnants of the property,
changing its name in sense, without much alteration of sound, from the
Border appellation of Sharing-Knowe, to the evangelical appellation of
Mount Sharon.

This Philip Geddes, as I before hinted, had imbibed the taste for
horticulture and the pursuits of the florist, which are not uncommon
among the peaceful sect he belonged to. He had destroyed the remnants
of the old peel-house, substituting the modern mansion in its place;
and while he reserved the hearth of his ancestors, in memory of their
hospitality, as also the pious motto which they had chanced to assume,
he failed not to obliterate the worldly and military emblems displayed
upon the shield and helmet, together with all their blazonry.

In a few minutes after Mr. Geddes had concluded the account; of himself
and his family, his sister Rachel, the only surviving member of it,
entered the room. Her appearance is remarkably pleasing, and although
her age is certainly thirty at least, she still retains the shape and
motion of an earlier period. The absence of everything like fashion
or ornament was, as usual, atoned for by the most perfect neatness and
cleanliness of her dress; and her simple close cap was particularly
suited to eyes which had the softness and simplicity of the dove's.
Her features were also extremely agreeable, but had suffered a little
through the ravages of that professed enemy to beauty, the small-pox; a
disadvantage which was in part counterbalanced by a well-formed mouth,
teeth like pearls, and a pleasing sobriety of smile, that seemed to wish
good here and hereafter to every one she spoke to. You cannot make
any of your vile inferences here, Alan, for I have given a full-length
picture of Rachel Geddes; so that; you cannot say, in this case, as in
the letter I have just received, that she was passed over as a subject
on which I feared to dilate. More of this anon.

Well, we settled to our breakfast after a blessing, or rather an
extempore prayer, which Joshua made upon the occasion, and which
the spirit moved him to prolong rather more than I felt altogether
agreeable. Then, Alan, there was such a dispatching of the good things
of the morning as you have not witnessed since you have seen Darsie
Latimer at breakfast. Tea and chocolate, eggs, ham, and pastry, not
forgetting the broiled fish, disappeared with a celerity which seemed
to astonish the good-humoured Quakers, who kept loading my plate
with supplies, as if desirous of seeing whether they could, by any
possibility, tire me out. One hint, however, I received, which put me in
mind where I was. Miss Geddes had offered me some sweet-cake, which, at
the moment, I declined; but presently afterwards, seeing it within
my reach, I naturally enough helped myself to a slice, and had just;
deposited it beside my plate, when Joshua, mine host, not with the
authoritative air of Sancho's doctor, Tirteafuera, but in a very calm
and quiet manner, lifted it away and replaced it on the dish, observing
only, 'Thou didst refuse it before, friend Latimer.'

These good folks, Alan, make no allowance for what your good father
calls the Aberdeen-man's privilege, of 'taking his word again;' or what
the wise call second thoughts.

Bating this slight hint that I was among a precise generation, there
was nothing in my reception that was peculiar--unless, indeed, I were to
notice the solicitous and uniform kindness with which all the attentions
of my new friends were seasoned, as if they were anxious to assure me
that the neglect of worldly compliments interdicted by their sect, only
served to render their hospitality more sincere. At length my hunger was
satisfied, and the worthy Quaker, who, with looks of great good nature,
had watched my progress, thus addressed his sister:--

'This young man, Rachel, hath last night sojourned in the tents of our
neighbour whom men call the laird. I am sorry I had not met him the
evening before, for our neighbour's hospitality is too unfrequently
exercised to be well prepared with the means of welcome.'

'Nay, but, Joshua,' said Rachel, 'if our neighbour hath done a kindness,
thou shouldst not grudge him the opportunity; and if our young friend
hath fared ill for a night, he will the better relish what Providence
may send him of better provisions.'

'And that he may do so at leisure,' said Joshua, 'we will pray him,
Rachel, to tarry a day or twain with us: he is young, and is but now
entering upon the world, and our habitation may, if he will, be like a
resting-place, from which he may look abroad upon the pilgrimage which
he must take, and the path which he has to travel.--What sayest thou,
friend Latimer? We constrain not our friends to our ways, and thou art,
I think, too wise to quarrel with us for following our own fashions; and
if we should even give thee a word of advice, thou wilt not, I think, be
angry, so that it is spoken in season.'

You know, Alan, how easily I am determined by anything resembling
cordiality--and so, though a little afraid of the formality of my host
and hostess, I accepted their invitation, provided I could get some
messenger to send to Shepherd's Bush for my servant and portmanteau.

'Why, truly, friend,' said Joshua, 'thy outward frame would be improved
by cleaner garments; but I will do thine errand myself to the Widow
Gregson's house of reception, and send thy lad hither with thy clothes.
Meanwhile, Rachel will show thee these little gardens, and then will put
thee in some way of spending thy time usefully, till our meal calls
us together at the second hour after noon. I bid thee farewell for
the present, having some space to walk, seeing I must leave the animal
Solomon to his refreshing rest.'

With these words, Mr. Joshua Geddes withdrew. Some ladies we have known
would have felt, or at least affected, reserve or embarrassment, at
being left to do the honours of the grounds to (it will be out, Alan)--a
smart young fellow--an entire stranger. She went out for a few minutes,
and returned in her plain cloak and bonnet, with her beaver gloves,
prepared to act as my guide, with as much simplicity as if she had been
to wait upon thy father. So forth I sallied with my fair Quakeress.

If the house at Mount Sharon be merely a plain and convenient dwelling,
of moderate size and small pretensions, the gardens and offices, though
not extensive, might rival an earl's in point of care and expense.
Rachel carried me first to her own favourite resort, a poultry-yard,
stocked with a variety of domestic fowls, of the more rare as well as
the most ordinary kinds, furnished with every accommodation which may
suit their various habits. A rivulet which spread into a pond for the
convenience of the aquatic birds, trickled over gravel as it passed
through the yards dedicated to the land poultry, which were thus amply
supplied with the means they use for digestion.

All these creatures seemed to recognize the presence of their mistress,
and some especial favourites hastened to her feet, and continued to
follow her as far as their limits permitted. She pointed out their
peculiarities and qualities, with the discrimination of one who had made
natural history her study; and I own I never looked on barn-door
fowls with so much interest before--at least until they were boiled
or roasted. I could not help asking the trying question, how she could
order the execution of any of the creatures of which she seemed so
careful.

'It was painful,' she said, 'but it was according to the law of their
being. They must die; but they knew not when death was approaching; and
in making them comfortable while they lived, we contributed to their
happiness as much as the conditions of their existence permitted to us.'

I am not quite of her mind, Alan. I do not believe either pigs or
poultry would admit that the chief end of their being was to be killed
and eaten. However, I did not press the argument, from which my Quaker
seemed rather desirous to escape; for, conducting me to the greenhouse,
which was extensive, and filled with the choicest plants, she pointed
out an aviary which occupied the farther end, where, she said, she
employed herself with attending the inhabitants, without being disturbed
with any painful recollections concerning their future destination.

I will not trouble you with any account of the various hot-houses
and gardens, and their contents. No small sum of money must have been
expended in erecting and maintaining them in the exquisite degree
of good order which they exhibited. The family, I understood, were
connected with that of the celebrated Millar, and had imbibed his taste
for flowers, and for horticulture. But instead of murdering botanical
names, I will rather conduct you to the POLICY, or pleasure-garden,
which the taste of Joshua or his father had extended on the banks
betwixt the house and river. This also, in contradistinction to the
prevailing simplicity, was ornamented in an unusual degree. There were
various compartments, the connexion of which was well managed, and
although the whole ground did not exceed five or six acres, it was so
much varied as to seem four times larger. The space contained close
alleys and open walks; a very pretty artificial waterfall; a fountain
also, consisting of a considerable jet-d'eau, whose streams glittered in
the sunbeams and exhibited a continual rainbow. There was a cabinet of
verdure, as the French call it, to cool the summer heat, and there was
a terrace sheltered from the north-east by a noble holly hedge, with all
its glittering spears where you might have the full advantage of the sun
in the clear frosty days of winter.

I know that you, Alan, will condemn all this as bad and antiquated; for,
ever since Dodsley has described the Leasowes, and talked of Brown's
imitations of nature and Horace Walpole's late Essay on Gardening, you
are all for simple nature--condemn walking up and down stairs in the
open air and declare for wood and wilderness. But NE QUID NIMIS. I would
not deface a scene of natural grandeur or beauty, by the introduction
of crowded artificial decorations; yet such may, I think, be very
interesting, where the situation, in its natural state, otherwise has no
particular charms.

So that when I have a country-house (who can say how soon?) you may
look for grottoes, and cascades, and fountains; nay if you vex me by
contradiction, perhaps I may go the length of a temple--so provoke me
not, for you see of what enormities I am capable.

At any rate, Alan, had you condemned as artificial the rest of Friend
Geddes's grounds, there is a willow walk by the very verge of the
stream, so sad, so solemn, and so silent, that it must have commanded
your admiration. The brook, restrained at the ultimate boundary of the
grounds by a natural dam-dike or ledge of rocks, seemed, even in
its present swollen state, scarcely to glide along: and the pale
willow-trees, dropping their long branches into the stream, gathered
around them little coronals of the foam that floated down from the more
rapid stream above. The high rock, which formed the opposite bank of the
brook, was seen dimly through the branches, and its pale and splintered
front, garlanded with long streamers of briers and other creeping
plants, seemed a barrier between the quiet path which we trod, and the
toiling and bustling world beyond. The path itself, following the sweep
of the stream, made a very gentle curve; enough, however, served by its
inflection completely to hide the end of the walk until you arrived at
it. A deep and sullen sound, which increased as you proceeded, prepared
you for this termination, which was indeed only a plain root-seat, from
which you looked on a fall of about six or seven feet, where the brook
flung itself over the ledge of natural rock I have already mentioned,
which there crossed its course.

The quiet and twilight seclusion of this walk rendered it a fit scene
for confidential communing; and having nothing more interesting to
say to my fair Quaker, I took the liberty of questioning her about the
laird; for you are, or ought to be, aware, that next to discussing the
affairs of the heart, the fair sex are most interested in those of their
neighbours.

I did not conceal either my curiosity, or the check which it had
received from Joshua, and I saw that my companion answered with
embarrassment. 'I must not speak otherwise than truly,' she said; 'and
therefore I tell thee, that my brother dislikes, and that I fear, the
man of whom thou hast asked me. Perhaps we are both wrong--but he is a
man of violence, and hath great influence over many, who, following
the trade of sailors and fishermen, become as rude as the elements with
which they contend. He hath no certain name among them, which is
not unusual, their rude fashion being to distinguish each other
by nicknames; and they have called him the Laird of the Lakes (not
remembering there should be no one called Lord, save one only) in idle
derision; the pools of salt water left by the tide among the sands being
called the Lakes of Solway.'

'Has he no other revenue than he derives from these sands?' I asked.

'That I cannot answer,' replied Rachel; 'men say that he wants not
money, though he lives like an ordinary fisherman, and that he imparts
freely of his means to the poor around him. They intimate that he is
a man of consequence, once deeply engaged in the unhappy affair of the
rebellion, and even still too much in danger from the government
to assume his own name. He is often absent from his cottage at
Broken-burn-cliffs, for weeks and months.'

'I should have thought,' said I, 'that the government would scarce, at
this time of day, be likely to proceed against any one even of the most
obnoxious rebels. Many years have passed away'--

'It is true,' she replied; 'yet such persons may understand that their
being connived at depends on their living in obscurity. But indeed there
can nothing certain be known among these rude people. The truth is not
in them--most of them participate in the unlawful trade betwixt these
parts and the neighbouring shore of England; and they are familiar with
every species of falsehood and deceit.'

'It is a pity,' I remarked, 'your brother should have neighbours of such
a description, especially as I understand he is at some variance with
them.'

'Where, when, and about what matter?' answered Miss Geddes, with an
eager and timorous anxiety, which made me regret having touched on the
subject.

I told her, in a way as little alarming as I could devise, the purport
of what passed betwixt this Laird of the Lakes and her brother, at their
morning's interview.

'You affright me much,' answered she; 'it is this very circumstance
which has scared me in the watches of the night. When my brother Joshua
withdrew from an active share in the commercial concerns of my father,
being satisfied with the portion of worldly substance which he already
possessed, there were one or two undertakings in which he retained an
interest, either because his withdrawing might have been prejudicial to
friends, or because he wished to retain some mode of occupying his time.
Amongst the more important of these is a fishing station on the coast,
where, by certain improved modes of erecting snares, opening at the
advance of the tide, and shutting at the reflux, many more fish are
taken than can be destroyed by those who, like the men of Broken-burn,
use only the boat-net and spear, or fishing-rod. They complain of these
tide-nets, as men call them, as an innovation, and pretend to a right
to remove and destroy them by the strong hand. I fear me, this man of
violence, whom they call the laird, will execute these his threats,
which cannot be without both loss and danger to my brother.'

'Mr. Geddes,' said I, 'ought to apply to the civil, magistrate; there
are soldiers at Dumfries who would be detached for his protection.'

'Thou speakest, friend Latimer,' answered the lady, 'as one who is
still in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity. God forbid that
we should endeavour to preserve nets of flax and stakes of wood, or the
Mammon of gain which they procure for us, by the hands of men of war and
at the risk of spilling human blood.'

'I respect your scruples,' I replied; 'but since such is your way
of thinking, your brother ought to avert the danger by compromise or
submission.'

'Perhaps it would be best,' answered Rachel; 'but what can I say? Even
in the best-trained temper there may remain some leaven of the old Adam;
and I know not whether it is this or a better spirit that maketh my
brother Joshua determine, that though he will not resist force by force,
neither will he yield up his right to mere threats, or encourage wrong
to others by yielding to menaces. His partners, he says, confide in his
steadiness: and that he must not disappoint them by yielding up their
right for the fear of the threats of man, whose breath is in his
nostrils.'

This observation convinced me that the spirit of the old sharers of
the spoil was not utterly departed even from the bosom of the peaceful
Quaker; and I could not help confessing internally that Joshua had the
right, when he averred that there was as much courage in sufferance as
in exertion.

As we approached the farther end of the willow walk, the sullen and
continuous sound of the dashing waters became still more and more
audible, and at length rendered it difficult for us to communicate
with each other. The conversation dropped, but apparently my companion
continued to dwell upon the apprehensions which it had excited. At the
bottom of the walk we obtained a view of the cascade, where the swollen
brook flung itself in foam and tumult over the natural barrier of rock,
which seemed in vain to attempt to bar its course. I gazed with delight,
and, turning to express my sentiment to my companion, I observed that
she had folded her hands in an attitude of sorrowful resignation, which
showed her thoughts were far from the scene which lay before her.
When she saw that her abstraction was observed, she resumed her former
placidity of manner; and having given me sufficient time to admire this
termination of our sober and secluded walk, proposed that me should
return to the house through her brother's farm. 'Even we Quakers, as
we are called, have our little pride,' she said; 'and my brother Joshua
would not forgive me, were I not to show thee the fields which he taketh
delight to cultivate after the newest and best fashion; for which, I
promise thee, he hath received much praise from good judges, as well as
some ridicule from those who think it folly to improve on the customs of
our ancestors.'

As she spoke, she opened a low door, leading through a moss and
ivy-covered wall, the boundary of the pleasure-ground, into the open
fields; through which we moved by a convenient path, leading, with good
taste and simplicity, by stile and hedgerow, through pasturage, and
arable, and woodland; so that in all ordinary weather, the good man
might, without even soiling his shoes, perform his perambulation round
the farm. There were seats also, on which to rest; and though not
adorned with inscriptions, nor quite so frequent in occurrence as those
mentioned in the account of the Leasowes, their situation was always
chosen with respect to some distant prospect to be commanded, or some
home-view to be enjoyed.

But what struck me most in Joshua's domain was the quantity and the
tameness of the game. The hen partridge scarce abandoned the roost, at
the foot of the hedge where she had assembled her covey, though the path
went close beside her; and the hare, remaining on her form, gazed at us
as we passed, with her full dark eye, or rising lazily and hopping to
a little distance, stood erect to look at us with more curiosity than
apprehension. I observed to Miss Geddes the extreme tameness of these
timid and shy animals, and she informed me that their confidence arose
from protection in the summer, and relief during the winter.
