perhaps, of the very marked attention that he showed her when the supper
was spread. She had never been so made to feel what it was to be at once
a king's daughter and a beauty; and at the most magnificent banquet she
had ever known.

Durham had afforded a great advance on Scottish festivities; but in the
absence of its Prince Bishop, another Nevil, it had lacked much of what
was to be found at Fotheringay in the full blossoming of the splendours
of the princely nobility of England, just ere the decimation that they
were to perpetrate on one another.

The hall itself was vast, and newly finished in the rich culmination of
Gothic work, with a fan tracery-vaulted roof, a triumph of architecture,
each stalactite glowing with a shield or a badge of England, France,
Mortimer, and Nevil--lion or lily, falcon and fetterlock, white rose and
dun cow, all and many others--likewise shining in the stained glass of
the great windows.

The high table was loaded with gold and silver plate, and Venice glasses
even more precious; there were carpets under the feet of the nobler
guests, and even the second and third tables were spread with more
richness and refinement than ever the sisters of James II had known
in their native land. In a gallery above, the Duke's musicians and the
choristers of his chapel were ready to enliven the meal; and as the
chief guest, the Lady Joanna of Scotland was handed to her place by the
Duke of York, who, as she now perceived, though small in stature, was
eminently handsome and graceful, and conversed with her, not as a mere
child, but as a fair lady of full years.

Eleanor, who sat on his other hand beside the Earl of Salisbury, was
rather provoked with her sister for never asking after the fate of her
champion; but was reassured by seeing his red head towering among the
numerous squires and other retainers of the second rank. It certainly
was not his proper place, but it was plain that he was not in disgrace;
and in fact the whole affair had been treated as a mere pardonable
blunder of the rangers. The superior one was sitting next to the young
Scot, making good cheer with him. Grand as the whole seemed to the
travellers, it was not an exceptional banquet; indeed, the Duchess
apologised for its simplicity, since she had been taken at unawares,
evidently considering it as the ordinary family meal. There was ample
provision, served up in by no means an unrefined manner, even to the
multitudinous servants and retainers of the various trains; and beyond,
on the steps and in the court, were a swarm of pilgrims, friars, poor,
and beggars of all kinds, waiting for the fragments.

It was a wet evening, and when the tables were drawn the guests devoted
themselves to various amusements. Lord Salisbury challenged Sir Patrick
to a game at chess, Lady Salisbury and Dame Lilias wished for nothing
better than to converse over old times at Middleham Castle; but the
younger people began with dancing, the Duke, who was only thirty years
old, leading out the elder Scottish princess, and the young King of the
Isle of Wight the stately and beautiful Duchess Cicely. Eleanor,
who knew she did not excel in anything that required grace, and was,
besides, a good deal fatigued, would fain have excused herself when
paired with the young Richard Nevil; but there was a masterful look
about him that somewhat daunted her, and she obeyed his summons, though
without acquitting herself with anything approaching to the dexterity
of her sister, who, with quite as little practice as herself, danced
well--by quickness of eye and foot, and that natural elegance of
movement which belongs to symmetry.

The dance was a wreathing in and out of the couples, including all
of rank to dance together, and growing more and more animated, till
excitement took the place of weariness; and Eleanor's pale cheeks were
flushed, her eyes glowing, when the Duchess's signal closed the dance.

Music was then called for, and several of the princely company sang to
the lute; Jean, pleased to show there was something in which her sister
excelled, and gratified at some recollections that floated up of her
father's skill in minstrelsy, insisted on sending for Eleanor's harp.

'Oh, Jean, not now; I canna,' murmured Eleanor, who had been sitting
with fixed eyes, as though in a dream.

But the Duke and other nobles came and pressed her, and Jean whispered
to her not to show herself a fule body, and disgrace herself before
the English, setting the harp before her and attending to the strings.
Eleanor's fingers then played over them in a dreamy, fitful way, that
made the old Earl raise his head and say--

'That twang carries me back to King Harry's tent, and the good old time
when an Englishman's sword was respected.'

''Tis the very harp,' said Sir Patrick; 'ay, and the very tune--'

'Come, Elleen, begin. What gars thee loiter in that doited way?'
insisted Jean. 'Come, "Up atween."'

And, led by her sister in spite of herself, almost, as it were, without
volition, Eleanor's sweet pathetic voice sang--


     'Up atween yon twa hill-sides, lass,
       Where I and my true love wont to be,
     A' the warld shall never ken, lass,
       What my true love said to me.

     'Owre muckle blinking blindeth the ee, lass,
       Owre muckle thinking changeth the mind,
     Sair is the life I've led for thee, lass,
       Farewell warld, for it's a' at an end.'


Her voice had been giving way through the last verse, and in the final
line, with a helpless wail of the harp, she hid her face, and sank back
with a strange choked agony.

'Why, Elleen! Elleen, how now?' cried Jean. 'Cousin Lilias, come!'

Lady Drummond was already at her side, and the Duchess and Lady
Salisbury proffering essences and cordials, the gentlemen offering
support; but in a moment or two Eleanor recovered enough to cling to
Lady Drummond, muttering--

'Oh, take me awa', take me awa'!'

And hushing the scolding which Jean was commencing by way of bracing,
and rejecting all the kind offers of service, Dame Lilias led the girl
away, leaving Jean to make excuses and explanations about her sister
being but 'silly' since they had lost their mother, and the tune minding
her of home and of her father.

When, with only Annis following, the chambers had been reached, Eleanor
let herself sink on a cushion, hiding her face against her friend, and
sobbing hysterically--

'Oh, take me awa', take me awa'! It's all blood and horror!'

'My bairnie, my dearie! You are over-weary--'tis but a dreamy fancy.
Look up! All is safe; none can harm you here.'

With soothings, and with some of the wine on the table, Lady Drummond
succeeded in calming the girl, and, with Annis's assistance, she
undressed her and placed her in the bed.

'Oh, do not gang! Leave me not,' she entreated. And as the lady sat by
her, holding her hand, she spoke, 'It was all dim before me as the music
played, and--'

'Thou wast sair forefaughten, dearie.'

Eleanor went on--

'And then as I touched mine harp, all, all seemed to swim in a mist of
blood and horror. There was the old Earl and the young bridegroom, and
many and many more of them, with gaping wounds and deathly faces--all
but the young King of the Isle of Wight and his shroud, his shroud,
Cousin Lily, it was up to his breast; and the ladies' faces that were
so blithe, they were all weeping, ghastly, and writhen; and they were
whirling round a great sea of blood right in the middle of the hall, and
I could--I could bear it no longer.'

Lady Drummond controlled herself, and for the sake both of the sobbing
princess and of her own shuddering daughter said that this terrible
vision came of the fatigue of the day, and the exhaustion and excitement
that had followed. She also knew that on poor Eleanor that fearful
Eastern's Eve had left an indelible impression, recurring in any
state of weakness or fever. She scarcely marvelled at the strange and
frightful fancies, except that she believed enough in second-sight to
be concerned at the mention of the shroud enfolding the young Beauchamp,
who bore the fanciful title of the King of the Isle of Wight.

For the present, however, she applied herself to the comforting of
Eleanor with tender words and murmured prayers, and never left her till
she had slept and wakened again, her full self, upon Jean coming up to
bed at nine o'clock--a very late hour--escorted by sundry of the ladies
to inquire for the patient.

Jean was still excited, but she was, with all her faults, very fond of
her sister, and obeyed Lady Drummond in being as quiet as possible.
She seemed to take it as a matter of course that Elleen should have her
strange whims.

'Mother used to beat her for them,' she said, 'but Nurse Ankaret said
that made her worse, and we kept them secret as much as we could. To
think of her having them before all that English folk! But she will be
all right the morn.'

This proved true; after the night's rest Eleanor rose in the morning
as if nothing had disturbed her, and met her hosts as if no visions
had hung around them. It was well, for Sir Patrick had accepted the
invitation courteously given by the Duke of York to join the great
cavalcade with which he, with his brothers-in-law, the Earl of Salisbury
and Bishop of Durham, and the Earl of Warwick, alias the King of the
Isle of Wight, were on their way to the Parliament that was summoned
anent the King's marriage. The unwilling knights of the shire and
burgesses of Northampton who would have to assist in the money grant
had asked his protection; and all were to start early on the Monday--for
Sunday was carefully observed as a holiday, and the whole party in all
their splendours attended high mass in the beautiful church.

After time had been given for the ensuing meal, all the yeomen and young
men of the neighbourhood came up to the great outer court of the castle,
where there was ample space for sports and military exercises, shooting
with the long and cross bow, riding at the quintain and the like, in
competitions with the grooms and men-at-arms attached to the retinue of
the various great men; and the wives, daughters, and sweethearts came
up to watch them. For the most successful there were prizes of leathern
coats, bows, knives, and the like, and refreshments of barley-bread,
beef, and very small beer, served round with a liberal hand by the
troops of servants bearing the falcon and fetterlock badge, and all was
done not merely in sport but very much in earnest, in the hope on the
part of the Duke, and all who were esteemed patriotic, that these youths
might serve in retaining at least, if not in recovering, the English
conquests.

Those of gentle blood abstained from their warlike exercises on this day
of the week, but they looked on from the broad walk in the thickness of
the massive walls; the Duke with his two beautiful little boys by his
side, the young Earls of March and Rutland, handsome fair children, in
whom the hereditary blue eyes and fair complexion of the Plantagenets
recurred, and who bade fair to surpass their father in stature. Their
mother was by right and custom to distribute the prizes, but she always
disliked doing so, and either excused herself, or reached them out
with the ungracious demeanour that had won for her the muttered name
of 'Proud Cis'. On this day she had avoided the task on the plea of the
occupations caused by her approaching journey, and the Duke put in her
place his elder boy and his little cousin, Lady Anne Beauchamp, the
child of the young King of the Isle of Wight--a short-lived little
delicate being, but very fair and pretty, so that the two children
together upon a stone chair, cushioned with red velvet, were like a
fairy king and queen, and there was many a murmur of admiration, and
'Bless their little hearts' or 'their sweet faces,' as Anne's dainty
fingers handled the prizes, big bows or knives, arrows or belts, and
Edward had a smile and appropriate speech for each, such as 'Shoot at a
Frenchman's breast next time, Bob'; 'There's a knife to cut up the deer
with, Will,' and the like amenities, at which his father nodded, well
pleased to see the arts of popularity coming to him by nature.
Sir Patrick watched with grave eyes, as he thought of his beloved
sovereign's desire to see his people thus practised in arms without
peril of feud and violence to one another.

Jean looked on, eager to see some of the Scots of their own escort
excel the English pock-puddings, but though Dandie and two or three
more contended, the habits were too unfamiliar for them to win any great
distinction, and George Douglas did not come forward; the competition
was not for men of gentle blood, and success would have brought him
forward in a manner it was desirable to avoid. There was a good deal of
merry talk between Jean and the hosts, enemies though she regarded
them. The Duke of York was evidently much struck with her beauty and
liveliness, and he asked Sir Patrick in private whether there were
any betrothal or contract in consequence of which he was taking her to
France.

'None,' said Sir Patrick, 'it is merely to be with her sister, the
Dauphiness.'

'Then,' said young Richard Nevil, who was standing by him, and seemed to
have instigated the question, 'there would be no hindrance supposing she
struck the King's fancy.'

'The King is contracted,' said Sir Patrick.

'Half contracted! but to the beggarly daughter of a Frenchman who calls
himself king of half-a-dozen realms without an acre in any of them. It
is not gone so far but that it might be thrown over if he had sense and
spirit not to be led by the nose by the Cardinal and Suffolk.'

'Hush-hush, Dick! this is dangerous matter,' said the Duke, and Sir
Patrick added--

'These ladies are nieces to the Cardinal.'

'That is well, and it would win the more readily consent--even though
Suffolk and his shameful peace were thrown over,' eagerly said the
future king-maker.

'Gloucester would be willing,' added the Duke. 'He loved the damsel's
father, and hateth the French alliance.'

'I spoke with her,' added Nevil, 'and, red-hot little Scot as she is,
she only lacks an English wedlock to make her as truly English, which
this wench of Anjou can never be.'

'She would give our meek King just the spring and force he needs,' said
the Duke; 'but thou wilt hold thy peace, Sir Knight, and let no whisper
reach the women-folk.'

This Sir Patrick readily promised. He was considerably tickled by the
idea of negotiating such an important affair for his young King and his
protegee, feeling that the benefit to Scotland might outweigh any qualms
as to the disappointment to the French allies. Besides, if King Henry of
Windsor should think proper to fall in love with her, he could not help
it; he had not brought her away from home or to England with any such
purpose; he had only to stand by and let things take their course, so
long as the safety and honour of her, her brother, and the kingdom
were secure. So reasoned the canny Scot, but he held his tongue to his
Lilias.




CHAPTER 4. ST. HELEN S


     'I thought King Henry had resembled thee,
      In courage, courtship, and proportion:
      But all his mind is bent to holiness,
      To number Ave-Maries on his beads:
      His champions are the prophets and apostles;
      His weapons, holy saws of sacred writ.'
                                        King Henry VI.


George Douglas's chivalrous venture in defence of the falcon of his
lady-love had certainly not done much for him hitherto, as Davie
observed. The Lady Joanna, as every one now called her, took it as only
the bounden duty and natural service of one of her suite, and would have
cared little for his suffering for it personally, except so far as it
concerned her own dignity, which she understood much better than she
had done in Scotland, where she was only one of 'the lassies,' an
encumbrance to every one.

The York retainers had dropped all idea of visiting his offence upon
Douglas when they found that he had acted in the service of an honoured
guest of their lord, but they did not look with much favour on him or
on any other of the Scottish troop, whom their master enjoined them to
treat as guests and comrades.

The uniting of so many suites of the mighty nobles of the fifteenth
century formed quite a little army, amounting to some two or three
hundred horsemen, mostly armed, and well appointed, with their masters'
badges on their sleeves,--falcon and fetterlock, dun cow, bear and
ragged staff and the cross of Durham, while all likewise wore in their
caps the white rose. Waggons with household furniture and kitchen
needments had been sent in advance with the numerous 'black guard,' and
a provision of cattle for slaughter accompanied these, since it was one
of the considerate acts that already had won affection to Richard of
York that, unlike many of the great nobles, he always avoided as much as
possible letting his train be oppressive to the country-people.

David Drummond had been seeing that all his father's troop were duly
provided with the Drummond badge, the thyme, which was requisite as
showing them accepted of the Duke of York's company, but as George and
his follower had never submitted to wear it, he was somewhat surprised
to find the gray blossom prominent in George's steel-guarded cap, and to
hear him saying--

'Don it, Ringan, as thou wouldst obey me.'

'His father's son is not his own father,' said Ringan sulkily.

'Then tak' thy choice of wearing it, or winning hame as thou canst--most
like hanging on the nearest oak.'

'And I'd gey liefer than demean myself in the Drummond thyme!' replied
Ringan, half turning away. 'But then what would come of Gray Meg wi'
only the Master to see till her,' muttered he, caressing the mare's
neck. 'Weel, aweel, sir'--and he held out his hand for the despised
spray.

'Is yon thy wild callant, Geordie?' said David in some surprise, for
Ringan was not only provided with a pony, but his thatch of tow-like
hair had been trimmed and covered with a barret cap, and his leathern
coat and leggings were like those of the other horse-boys.

'Ay,' said George, 'this is no place to be ower kenspeckle.'

'I was coming to ask,' said David, 'if thou wouldst not own thyself to
my father, and take thy proper place ere ganging farther south. It irks
me to see some of the best blood in Scotland among the grooms.'

'It must irk thee still, Davie,' returned George. 'These English folk
might not thole to see my father's son in their hands without winning
something out of him, and I saw by what passed the other day that thou
and thy father would stand by me, hap what hap, and I'll never embroil
him and peril the lady by my freak.'

'My father kens pretty well wha is riding in his companie,' said David.

'Ay, but he is not bound to ken.'

'And thou winna write to the Yerl, as ye said ye would when ye were ower
the Border? There's a clerk o' the Bishop of Durham ganging back, and
my father is writing letters that he will send forward to the King, and
thou couldst get a scart o' the pen to thy father.'

'And what wad be thought of a puir man-at-arms sending letters to
the Yerl?' said George. 'Na, na; I may write when we win to France,
a friendly land, but while we are in England, the loons shall make
naething out of my father's son.'

'Weel, gang thine ain gait, and an unco strange one it is,' said David.
'I marvel what thou count'st on gaining by it!'

'The sicht of her at least,' said George. 'Nay, she needed a stout hand
once, she may need it again.'

Whereat David waved his hands in a sort of contemptuous wonder.

'If it were the Duchess of York now!' he said. 'She is far bonnier and
even prouder, gin that be what tak's your fancy! And as to our Jeanie,
they are all cockering her up till she'll no be content with a king. I
