the British stronghold at Fort Miami.

A few days brought the army to a place known as Fallen Timbers, where
a tornado had piled the trunks and branches of mighty trees in
indescribable confusion. The British post was but five or six miles
distant; and there behind the breastworks which nature had provided, and
in easy reach of their allies, the Indians chose to make their stand. On
the morning of the 20th of August, Wayne, now so crippled by gout that
he had to be lifted into his saddle, gallantly led an assault. The
Indian fire was murderous, and a battalion of mounted Kentuckians was
at first hurled back. But the front line of infantry rushed up and
dislodged the savages from their covert, while the regular cavalry on
the right charged the enemy's left flank. Before the second line of
infantry could get into action the day was won. The whole engagement
lasted less than three-quarters of an hour, and not a third of Wayne's
three thousand men actually took part in it.

The fleeing redskins were pursued to the walls of the British fort, and
even there many were slain. The British soldiery not only utterly failed
to come to the relief of their hard-pressed allies, but refused to
open the gates to give them shelter. The American loss was thirty-three
killed and one hundred wounded. But the victory was the most decisive as
yet gained over the Indians of the Northwest. A warfare of forty years
was ended in as many minutes.

From the lower Maumee, Wayne marched back to Fort Defiance, and thence
to the junction of the St. Mary's and St. Joseph rivers, where he built
a fort and gave it the name still borne by the thriving city that grew
up around it--Fort Wayne. Everywhere the American soldiers destroyed the
ripened crops and burned the villages, while the terrified inhabitants
fled. In November the army took up winter quarters at Fort Greenville.

At last the Americans had the upper hand. Their arms were feared; the
British promises of help were no longer credited by the Indians; and it
was easy for Wayne to convince the tribal representatives who visited
him in large numbers during the winter that their true interest was to
win the good-will of the United States. In the summer of 1795 there
was a general pacification. Delegation after delegation arrived at
Fort Greenville, until more than a thousand chiefs and braves were in
attendance. The prestige of Wayne was still further increased when the
news came that John Jay had negotiated a treaty at London under which
the British posts on United States soil were finally to be given up;
and on August 3rd Wayne was able to announce a great treaty wherein the
natives ceded all of what is now southern Ohio and southeastern Indiana,
and numerous tracts around posts within the Indian country, such as Fort
Wayne, Detroit, and Michilimackinac--strategic points on the western
waterways. "Elder Brother," said a Chippewa chief in the course of one
of the interminable harangues delivered during the negotiation, "you
asked who were the true owners of the land now ceded to the United
States. In answer, I tell you, if any nations should call themselves
the owners of it, they would be guilty of falsehood; our claim to it
is equal; our Elder Brother has conquered it." The United States
duly recognized the Indian title to all lands not expressly ceded and
promised the Indians annual subsidies. The terms of the treaty were
faithfully observed on both sides, and for fifteen years the pioneer
lived and toiled in peace.

Wayne forthwith became a national hero. Returning to Philadelphia in
1796, he was met by a guard of honor, hailed with the ringing of bells
and a salute of fifteen guns, and treated to a dazzling display of
fireworks. Congress voted its thanks, and Washington, whose fears had
long since vanished, added his congratulations. There was one other
service on the frontier for the doughty general to render. The British
posts were at last to be surrendered, and Wayne was designated to
receive them. By midsummer he was back in the forest country, and in
the autumn he took possession of Detroit, amid acclamations of Indians,
Americans, Frenchmen, and Englishmen alike. But his work was done. On
the return journey he suffered a renewed attack of his old enemy, gout,
and at Presqu'isle (Erie) he died. A blockhouse modeled on the defenses
which he built during his western campaign marks his first resting-place
and bears aloft the flag which he helped plant in the heart of the
Continent.



Chapter VI. The Great Migration

While the fate of the Northwest still hung in the balance, emigration
from the eastern States became the rage. "Every small farmer whose
barren acres were covered with mortgages, whose debts pressed heavily
upon him, or whose roving spirit gave him no peace, was eager to sell
his homestead for what it would bring and begin life anew on the banks
of the Muskingum or the Ohio." * Land companies were then just as
optimistic and persuasive as they are today, and the attractions of the
western country lost nothing in the telling. Pamphlets described the
climate as luxurious, the soil as inexhaustible, the rainfall as both
abundant and well distributed, the crops as unfailingly bountiful;
paid agents went among the people assuring them that a man of push and
courage could nowhere be so prosperous and so happy as in the West.


 * McMaster, "History of the People of the United States," vol.
III, p. 461.


As early as 1787 an observer at Pittsburgh reported that in six weeks
he saw fifty flatboats set off for the downriver settlements; in 1788
forty-five hundred emigrants were said to have passed Fort Harmar
between February and June. Most of these people were bound for Kentucky
or Tennessee. But the census of 1790 gave the population north of the
Ohio as 4,280, and after Wayne's victory the proportion of newcomers who
fixed their abodes in that part of the country rapidly increased. For
a decade Ohio was the favorite goal; and within eight years after the
battle at Fallen Timbers this region was ready for admission to the
Union as a State. Southern Indiana also filled rapidly.

For a time the westward movement was regarded as of no disadvantage to
the seaboard States. It was supposed that the frontier would attract a
population of such character as could easily be spared in more settled
communities. But it became apparent that the new country did not appeal
simply to broken-down farmers, bankrupts, and ne'er-do-wells. Robust and
industrious men, with growing families, were drawn off in great numbers;
and public protest was raised against the "plots to drain the East of
its best blood." Anti-emigration pamphlets were scattered broadcast,
and, after the manner of the day, the leading western enterprises were
belabored with much bad verse. A rude cut which gained wide circulation
represented a stout, ruddy, well-dressed man on a sleek horse, with a
label, "I am going to Ohio," meeting a pale and ghastly skeleton of
a man, in rags, on the wreck of what had once been a horse, with the
label, "I have been to Ohio."

The streams of migration flowed from many sources. New England
contributed heavily. Marietta, Cincinnati, and many other rising river
towns received some of the best blood of that remote section. The
Western Reserve--a tract bordering on Lake Erie which Connecticut had
not ceded to the Federal Government--drew largely from the Nutmeg
State. A month before Wayne set out to take possession of Detroit, Moses
Cleaveland with a party of fifty Connecticut homeseekers started off to
found a settlement in the Reserve; and the town which took its name from
the leader was but the first of a score which promptly sprang up in
this inviting district. The "Seven Ranges," lying directly south of the
Reserve, drew emigrants from Pennsylvania, with some from farther
south. The Scioto valley attracted chiefly Virginians, who early made
Chillicothe their principal center. In the west, and north of the Symmes
tract, Kentuckians poured in by the thousands.

Thus in a decade Ohio became a frontier melting-pot. Puritan, Cavalier,
Irishman, Scotch-Irishman, German--all were poured into the crucible.
Ideals clashed, and differing customs grated harshly. But the product of
a hundred years of cross-breeding was a splendid type of citizenship. At
the presidential inaugural ceremonies of March 4, 1881, six men chiefly
attracted the attention of the crowd: the retiring President, Hayes;
the incoming President, Garfield; the Chief-Justice who administered the
oath, Waite; the general commanding the army, William T. Sherman; the
ex-Secretary of the Treasury, John Sherman; and "the Marshal Ney of
America," Lieutenant-General Sheridan. Five of the six were natives
of Ohio, and the sixth was a lifelong resident. Men commented on the
striking group and rightly remarked that it could have been produced
only by a singularly happy blending of the ideas and ideals that form
the warp and woof of Americanism.

Amalgamation, however, took time; for there were towering prejudices
and antipathies to be overcome. The Yankee scorned the Southerner, who
reciprocated with a double measure of dislike. The New England settlers
were, as a rule, people of some education; not one of their communities
long went without a schoolmaster. They were pious, law-abiding,
industrious; their more easygoing neighbors were likely to consider them
over-sensitive and critical. But the quality that made most impression
upon others was their shrewdness in business transactions. They could
drive a bargain and could discover loopholes in a contract in a fashion
to take the average backwoodsman off his feet. "Yankee tricks" became,
indeed, a household phrase wherever New Englander and Southerner met.
Whether the Yankee talked or kept silent, whether he was generous or
parsimonious, he was always under suspicion.

What of the "Long Knives" from Virginia, the Carolinas, and Kentucky who
also made the Ohio lands their goal? Of books they knew little; they
did not name their settlements in honor of classic heroes. They were
not "gentlemen"; many of them, indeed, had sought the West to escape a
society in which distinctions of birth and possessions had put them at a
disadvantage. They were not so pious as the New Englanders, though
they were capable of great religious enthusiasm, and their morals were
probably not inferior. Their houses were poorer; their villages were not
so well kept; their dress was more uncouth, and their ways rougher. But
they were a hardy folk--brave, industrious, hospitable, and generous to
a fault.

In the first days of westward migration the favorite gateway into
the Ohio Valley was Cumberland Gap, at the southeastern corner of the
present State of Kentucky. Thence the Virginians and Carolinians passed
easily to the Ohio in the region of Cincinnati or Louisville. Later
emigrants from more northern States found other serviceable routes.
Until the opening of the Erie Canal in 1825, New Englanders reached
the West by three main avenues. Some followed the Mohawk and Genesee
turnpikes across central New York to Lake Erie. This route led directly,
of course, to the Western Reserve. Some traveled along the Catskill
turnpike from the Hudson to the headwaters of the Allegheny, and thence
descended the Ohio. Still others went by boat from Boston to New York,
Philadelphia, or Baltimore, in order to approach the Ohio by a more
southerly course.

The natural outlet from Pennsylvania was the Ohio River. Emigrants from
the western parts of the State floated down the Allegheny or Monongahela
to the main stream. Those from farther east, including settlers from New
Jersey, made the journey overland by one of several well-known roads.
The best of these was a turnpike following the line that General Forbes
had cut during the French and Indian War from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh
by way of Lancaster and Bedford. Baltimore was a favorite point of
departure, and from it the route lay almost invariably along a turnpike
to Cumberland on the upper Potomac, and thence by the National Road
across the mountains to Wheeling. In later days this was the route
chiefly taken from Virginia, although more southerly passes through the
Blue Ridge were used as outlets to the Great Kanawha, the Big Sandy, and
other streams flowing into the Ohio farther down.

Thus the lines of westward travel which in the East spread fan-shape
from Maine to Georgia converged on the Ohio; and that stream became, and
for half a century remained, the great pathway of empire. Most of the
emigrants had to cover long distances in overland travel before they
reached the hospitable waterway; some, especially in earlier times,
made the entire journey by land. Hundreds of the very poor went afoot,
carrying all their earthly possessions on their backs, or dragging
them in rude carts. But the usual conveyance was the canvas-covered
wagon--ancestor of the "prairie schooner" of the western plains--drawn
over the rough and muddy roads by four, or even six, horses. In this
vehicle the emigrants stowed their provisions, household furniture and
utensils, agricultural implements, looms, seeds, medicines, and every
sort of thing that the prudent householder expected to need, and for
which he could find space. Extra horses or oxen sometimes drew an
additional load; cattle, and even flocks of sheep, were occasionally
driven ahead or behind by some member of the family.

In the years of heaviest migration the highways converging on Pittsburgh
and Wheeling were fairly crowded with westward-flowing traffic. As a
rule several families, perhaps from the same neighborhood in the old
home, traveled together; and in any case the chance acquaintances of the
road and of the wayside inns broke the loneliness of the journey.
There were wonderful things to be seen, and every day brought novel
experiences. But exposure and illness, dread of Indian attacks, mishaps
of every sort, and the awful sense of isolation and of uncertainty
of the future, caused many a man's stout heart to quail, and brought
anguish unspeakable to brave women. Of such joys and sorrows, however,
is a frontier existence compounded; and of the growing thousands who
turned their faces toward the setting sun, comparatively few yielded
to discouragement and went back East. Those who did so were usually the
land speculators and people of weak, irresolute, or shiftless character.

An English traveler, Morris Birkbeck, who passed over the National Road
through southwestern Pennsylvania in 1817, was filled with amazement
at the number, hardihood, and determination of the emigrants whom he
encountered.

"Old America seems to be breaking up [he wrote] and moving westward. We
are seldom out of sight, as we travel on this grand track, towards the
Ohio, of family groups, behind and before us.... A small wagon (so light
that you might almost carry it, yet strong enough to bear a good load of
bedding, utensils and provisions, and a swarm of young citizens--and to
sustain marvelous shocks in its passage over these rocky heights) with
two small horses; sometimes a cow or two, comprises their all; excepting
a little store of hard-earned cash for the land office of the district;
where they may obtain a title for as many acres as they possess
half-dollars, being one fourth of the purchase money. The wagon has a
tilt, or cover, made of a sheet, or perhaps a blanket. The family are
seen before, behind, or within the vehicle, according to the road or the
weather, or perhaps the spirits of the party.... A cart and single
horse frequently affords the means of transfer, sometimes a horse and
pack-saddle. Often the back of the poor pilgrim bears all his effects,
and his wife follows, naked-footed, bending under the hopes of the
family." *


 * Quoted in Turner, "Rise of the New West," pp. 79-80.


Arrived at the Ohio, the emigrant either engaged passage on some form of
river-craft or set to work to construct with his own hands a vessel that
would bear him and his belongings to the promised land. The styles of
river-craft that appeared on the Ohio and other western streams in
the great era of river migration make a remarkable pageant. There
were canoes, pirogues, skiffs, rafts, dugouts, scows, galleys,
arks, keelboats, flatboats, barges, "broadhorns," "sneak-boxes," and
eventually ocean-going brigs, schooners, and steamboats. The canoe
served the early explorer and trader, and even the settler whose
possessions had been carried over the Alleghanies on a single packhorse.
But after the Revolution the needs of an awakening empire led to
the introduction of new types of craft, built to afford a maximum of
capacity and safety on a downward voyage, without regard for the demands
of a round trip. The most common of these one-way vessels was the
flatboat.

A flatboat trip down the great river was likely to be filled with
excitement. The sound of the steam-dredge had never been heard on the
western waters, and the streambed was as Nature had made it, or rather
was continually remaking it. Yearly floods washed out new channels and
formed new reefs and sand-bars, while logs and brush borne from the
heavily forested banks continually built new obstructions. Consequently
the sharpest lookout had to be maintained, and the pilot was both
skilful and lucky who completed his trip without permitting his boat
to be caught on a "planter" (a log immovably fixed in the river bed),
entangled in the branches of overhanging trees, driven on an island, or
dashed on the bank at a bend. Navigation by night and on foggy days was
hazardous in the extreme and was avoided as far as possible. If all went
well, the voyage from Pittsburgh to Cincinnati could be completed in six
or eight days; but delays might easily extend the period to a month.

One grave danger has not been mentioned--the Indians. From the moment
when the slow-moving flatboat passed beyond the protection of a white
settlement, it was liable to be fired on, by day or by night, by
redskins; and the better-built boats were so constructed as to be at
least partially bullet-proof. Sometimes extra timber was used to give
safety; sometimes the cargo was specially placed with that aim in view.
The Indians rarely went beyond the water's edge. Their favorite ruse was
to cause captive or renegade whites to run along the bank imploring to
be saved. When a boat had been decoyed to shore, and perhaps a landing
had been made, the savages would pour a murderous fire on the voyagers.
This practice became so common that pioneer boats "shunned the whites
who hailed them from the shores as they would have shunned the Indians,"
and as a consequence many whites escaping from the Indians in the
interior were refused succor and left to die.

When the flatboat reached its destination, it might find service as a
floating store, or even as a schoolhouse. But it was likely to be broken
up, so that the materials in it could be used for building purposes.
Before sawmills became common, lumber was a precious commodity, and
hundreds of pioneer cabins in the Ohio Valley were built partly or
wholly of the boards and timbers taken from the flatboats of their
owners. Even the "gunnels" were sometimes used in Cincinnati as
foundations for houses. In later days the flatboat, if in reasonably
good condition, was not unlikely to be sold to persons engaged in
trading down the Mississippi. Loaded with grain, flour, meats, and other
backwoods products, it would descend to Natchez or New Orleans, where
its cargo could be transferred to ocean-going craft. But in any case
its end was the same; for it would not have been profitable, even had
it been physically possible, to move the heavy, ungainly craft upstream
over long distances, in order to keep it continuously in service.



Chapter VII. Pioneer Days And Ways

Arrived on the lower Ohio, or one of its tributaries, the pioneer looked
out upon a land of remarkable riches. It was not a Mexico or a Peru,
with emblazoned palaces and glittering temples, nor yet a California,
with gold-flecked sands. It was merely an unending stretch of wooded
hills and grassy plains, bedecked with majestic forests and fructifying
rivers and lakes. It had no treasures save for the man of courage,
industry, and patience; but for such it held home, broad acres, liberty,
and the coveted opportunity for social equality and advancement.

The new country has been commonly thought of, and referred to by writers
on the history of the West, as a "wilderness"; and offhand, one might
suppose that the settlers were obliged literally to hew their way
through densely grown vegetation to the spots which they selected for
their homes. In point of fact, there were great areas of upland--not
alone in the prairie country of northern Indiana and Illinois, but in
the hilly regions within a hundred miles of the Ohio--that were almost
treeless. On these unobstructed stretches grasses grew in profusion; and
here roamed great herds of herbivorous animal-kind--deer and elk,
and also buffalo, "filing in grave procession to drink at the rivers,
plunging and snorting among the rapids and quicksands, rolling their
huge bulk on the grass, rushing upon each other in hot encounter, like
champions under shield." Along the watercourses ducks, wild geese,
cranes, herons, and other fowl sounded their harsh cries; gray
squirrels, prairie chickens, and partridges the hunter found at every
turn.

Furthermore, the forests, as a rule, were not difficult to penetrate.
The trees stood thick, but deer paths, buffalo roads, and Indian trails
ramified in all directions, and sometimes were wide enough to allow two
or three wagons to advance abreast. Mighty poplars, beeches, sycamores,
and "sugars" pushed to great heights in quest of air and sunshine, and
often their intertwining branches were locked solidly together by a
heavy growth of grape or other vines, producing a canopy which during
the summer months permitted scarcely a ray of sunlight to reach the
ground. There was, therefore, a notable absence of undergrowth. When a
tree died and decayed, it fell apart piecemeal; it was with difficulty
that woodsmen could wrest a giant oak or poplar from its moorings and
bring it to the ground, even by severing the trunk completely at the
base. Here and there a clean swath was cut through a forest, for perhaps
dozens of miles, by a hurricane. This gave opportunity for the growth of
a thicket of bushes and small trees, and such spots were equally likely
to be the habitations of wild beasts and the hiding-places of warlike
bands of redskins.

There were always adventurous pioneers who scorned the settlements and
went off with their families to fix their abodes in isolated places.
But the average newcomer preferred to find a location in, or reasonably
near, a settlement. The choice of a site, whether by a company of
immigrants wishing to establish a settlement or by an individual
settler, was a matter of much importance. Some thought must be given to
facilities for fortification against hostile natives. There must be
an adequate supply of drinking-water; and the location of innumerable
pioneer dwellings was selected with reference to free-flowing springs.
Pasture land for immediate use was desirable; and of course the
soil must be fertile. As a rule, the settler had the alternative of
establishing himself on the lowlands along a stream and obtaining ground
of the greatest productiveness, with the almost certain prospect of
annual attacks of malaria, or of seeking the poorer but more healthful
uplands. The attractions of the "bottoms" were frequently irresistible,
and the "ague" became a feature of frontier life almost as inevitable as
the proverbial "death and taxes."

The site selected, the next task was to clear a few acres of ground
where the cabin was to stand. It was highly desirable to have a belt
of open land as a protection against Indians and wild beasts; besides,
there must be fields cleared for tillage. If the settler had neighbors,
he was likely to have their aid in cutting away the densest growth of
trees, and in raising into position the heavy timbers which formed the
framework and walls of his cabin. Splendid oaks, poplars, and sycamores
were cut into convenient lengths, and such as could not be used were
rolled into great heaps and burned. Before sawmills were introduced
lumber could not be manufactured; afterwards, it became so plentiful as
to have small market value.

Almost without exception the frontier cabins had log walls; and they
were rarely of larger size than single lengths would permit. On an
average, they were twelve or fourteen feet wide and fifteen or eighteen
feet long. Sometimes they were divided into two rooms, with an attic
above; frequently there was but one room "downstairs." The logs were
notched together at the corners, and the spaces between them were filled
with moss or clay or covered with bark. Rafters were affixed to the
uppermost logs, and to one another, with wooden pins driven through
auger holes. In earliest times the roof was of bark; later on, shingles
were used, although nails were long unknown, and the shingles, after
being laid in rows, were weighted down with straight logs.

Sometimes there was only an earth floor. But as a rule "puncheons,"
i.e., thick, rough boards split from logs, were laid crosswise on round
logs and were fastened with wooden pins. There was commonly but a single
door, which was made also of puncheons and hung on wooden hinges. A
favorite device was to construct the door in upper and lower sections,
so as to make it possible, when there came a knock or a call from the
outside, to respond without offering easy entrance to an unwelcome
visitor. In the days when there was considerable danger of Indian
attacks no windows were constructed, for the householder could defend
only one aperture. Later, square holes which could be securely barred at
night and during cold weather were made to serve as windows. Flat pieces
of sandstone, if they could be found, were used in building the great
fireplace; otherwise, thick timbers heavily covered with clay were made
to serve. In scarcely a cabin was there a trace of iron or glass; the
whole could be constructed with only two implements--an ax and an auger.

Occasionally a family carried to its new home some treasured bits
of furniture; but the difficulty of transportation was likely to be
prohibitive, and as a rule the cabins contained only such pieces
of furniture as could be fashioned on the spot. A table was made by
mounting a smoothed slab on four posts, set in auger holes. For seats
short benches and three-legged stools, constructed after the manner of
the tables, were in common use. Cooking utensils, food-supplies, seeds,
herbs for medicinal purposes, and all sorts of household appliances were
stowed away on shelves, made by laying clapboards across wooden pins
driven into the wall and mounting to the ceiling; although after sawed
lumber came into use it was a matter of no great difficulty to construct
chests and cupboards. Not infrequently the settler's family slept on
bear skins or blankets stretched on the floor. But crude bedsteads were
made by erecting a pole with a fork in such a manner that other poles
could be supported horizontally in this fork and by crevices in the
walls. Split boards served as "slats" on which the bedding was spread.
For a long time "straw-ticks"--large cloth bags filled with straw or
sometimes dry grass or leaves--were articles of luxury. Iron pots and
knives were necessities which the wise householder carried with him from
his eastern or southern home. In the West they were hard to obtain.
The chief source of supply was the iron-manufacturing districts
of Pennsylvania and Virginia, whence the wares were carried to the
entrepots of river trade by packhorses. The kitchen outfit of the
average newcomer was completed with a few pewter dishes, plates, and
spoons. But winter evenings were utilized in whittling out wooden bowls,
trenchers, and noggins or cups, while gourds and hard-shelled squashes
were turned to numerous uses. The commonest drinking utensil was a
