thoroughness that his speeches are still an indispensable part of the
history of tariff legislation. His habitual manner was so mild
and unassuming that it gave little indication of the force of his
personality, which was full of energy and perseverance.

Randall was more imperious in his mien. He was a party leader of
established renown which he had gained in the struggles over force bills
at the close of the reconstruction period. His position on the tariff
was that of a Pennsylvania protectionist, and upon the tariff reform
issue in 1883, he was defeated for the Speakership. At that time, John
G. Carlisle of Kentucky was raised to that post, while Morrison again
became chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. But Randall, now
appointed chairman of the Appropriations Committee, had so great an
influence that he was able to turn about forty Democratic votes against
the tariff bill reported by the Ways and Means Committee, thus enabling
the Republicans to kill the bill by striking out the enacting clause.

Only this practical aim, then, was in view in the reports presented by
the committee on rules. The principal feature of the majority report was
a proposal to curtail the jurisdiction of the Appropriations Committee
by transferring to other committees five of the eleven regular
appropriation bills. What, from the constitutional point of view, would
appear to be the main question--the recovery by the House of its freedom
of action--was hardly noticed in the report or in the debates which
followed. Heretofore, the rules had allotted certain periods to general
business; now, the majority report somewhat enlarged these periods and
stipulated that no committee should bring more than one proposal before
the House until all other committees had had their turn. This provision
might have been somewhat more effective had it been accompanied by a
revision of the list of committees such as was proposed by William M.
Springer. He pointed out that there were a number of committees "that
have no business to transact or business so trifling and unimportant as
to make it unnecessary to have standing committees upon such subjects";
he proposed to abolish twenty-one of these committees and to create four
new ones to take their place; he showed that "if we allow these twenty
useless committees to be again put on our list, to be called regularly
in the morning hour... forty-two days will be consumed in calling these
committees"; and, finally, he pointed out that the change would effect a
saving since it would "do away with sixteen committee clerkships."

This saving was, in fact, fatal to the success of Springer's proposal,
since it meant the extinction of so many sinecures bestowed through
congressional favor. In the end, Springer reduced his proposed change to
the creation of one general committee on public expenditures to take the
place of eight committees on departmental expenditures. It was notorious
that such committees did nothing and could do nothing, and their
futility, save as dispensers of patronage, had been demonstrated in a
startling manner by the effect of the Acts of July 12, 1870, and June
20, 1874, requiring all unused appropriations to be paid into the
Treasury. The amounts thus turned into the Treasury aggregated
$174,000,000 and in a single bureau there was an unexpended balance of
$36,000,000, which had accumulated for a quarter of a century because
Congress had not been advised that no appropriation was needed. Mr.
Springer remarked that, during the ten years in which he had been a
member of Congress, he had observed with regard to these committees
"that in nearly all cases, after their appointment, organization, and
the election of a clerk, the committee practically ceased to exist, and
nothing further is done." William R. Morrison at once came to the
rescue of the endangered sinecures and argued that even although these
committees had been inactive in the past they "constituted the eyes, the
ears, and the hands of the House." In consequence, after a short debate
Mr. Springer's motion was rejected without a division.

The arrangements subsequently made to provide time and opportunity
for general legislation, turned out in practice to be quite futile and
indeed they were never more than a mere formal pretense. It was quite
obvious, therefore, that the new rules tended only to make the situation
worse than before. Thomas Ryan of Kansas told the plain truth when he
said: "You do not propose to remedy any of those things of which you
complain by any of the rules you have brought forward. You propose to
clothe eight committees with the same power, with the same temptation
and capacity to abuse it. You multiply eightfold the very evils of which
you complain." James H. Blount of Georgia sought to mitigate the
evils of the situation by giving a number of other committees the same
privilege as the appropriation committees, but this proposal at once
raised a storm, for appropriation committees had leave to report at any
time, and to extend the privilege would prevent expeditious handling
of appropriation bills. Mr. Blount's motion was, therefore, voted down
without a division.

While in the debate, the pretense of facilitating routine business was
ordinarily kept up; occasional intimations of actual ulterior purpose
leaked out, as when John B. Storm of Pennsylvania remarked that it was a
valuable feature of the rules that they did hamper action and "that
the country which is least governed is the best governed, is a maxim in
strict accord with the idea of true civil liberty." William McKinley was
also of the opinion that barriers were needed "against the wild projects
and visionary schemes which will find advocates in this House." Some
years later, when the subject was again up for discussion, Thomas B.
Reed went to the heart of the situation when he declared that the rules
had been devised not to facilitate action but to obstruct it, for "the
whole system of business here for years has been to seek methods of
shirking, not of meeting, the questions which the people present for
the consideration of their representatives. Peculiar circumstances
have caused this. For a long time, one section of the country largely
dominated the other. That section of the country was constantly
apprehensive of danger which might happen at any time by reason of an
institution it was maintaining. Very naturally, all the rules of the
House were bent for the obstruction of action on the part of Congress."
It may be added that these observations apply even more forcibly, to
the rules of the Senate. The privilege of unrestricted debate was not
originally granted by those rules but was introduced as a means
of strengthening the power of sectional resistance to obnoxious
legislation.

The revision of the rules in 1885, then, was not designed really to
facilitate action by the House, but rather to effect a transfer of the
power to rule the House. It was at least clear that under the proposed
changes the chairman of the committee on appropriations would no longer
retain such complete mastery as Randall had wielded, and this was enough
to insure the adoption of the majority report. The minority report
opposed this weakening of control on the ground that it would be
destructive of orderly and responsible management of the public funds.
Everything which Randall said on that point has since been amply
confirmed by much sad experience. Although some leading Republicans,
among whom was Joseph G. Cannon of Illinois, argued strongly in support
of Randall's views, the temper of the House was such that the majority
in favor of the change was overwhelming, and on December 18, 1885, the
Morrison plan was finally adopted without a roll call.

The hope that the change in organization would expedite action on
appropriation bills, was promptly disappointed. Only one of the fourteen
regular appropriation bills became law before the last day of the fiscal
year. The duress to which the House was subject became tighter and
harder than before, and the Speakership entered upon a development
unparalleled in constitutional history. The Speaker was practically in a
position to determine what business the House might consider and what it
might not, and the circumstances were such as to breed a belief that it
was his duty to use his discretion where a choice presented itself. It
is obvious that, when on the floor of the House there are a number of
applicants for recognition, the Speaker must choose between them. All
cannot be allowed to speak at once. There is no chance to apply the shop
rule, "first come first served," for numerous applications for the floor
come at the same time. Shall the Speaker choose at random or according
to some definite principle of selection? In view of the Speaker's
interest in the welfare of the party which raised him to the office, he
would naturally inquire in advance the purpose for which the recognition
of the chair was desired. It was a manifest step towards orderly
procedure in session, however, when instead of crowding around the
clerk's desk bawling for recognition, members applied to the Speaker in
advance. In Speaker Blaine's time, this had become a regular practice
and ever since then, a throng of members at the Speaker's office trying
to arrange with him for recognition has been a daily occurrence during
a legislative session. Samuel W. McCall, in his work on "The Business of
Congress," says that the Speaker "usually scrutinizes the bill and the
committee's report upon it, and in case of doubt he sometimes refers
them to a member in whom he has confidence, for a more careful
examination than he himself has time to give."

Under Speaker Carlisle, this power to censor proposals was made
conspicuous through the factional war in the Democratic party. For
several sessions of Congress, a bill had been pending to repeal the
internal revenue taxes upon tobacco, and it had such support that it
might have passed if it could have been reached for consideration. On
February 5, 1887, a letter was addressed to Speaker Carlisle by three
prominent Democrats: Samuel J. Randall of Pennsylvania, George D. Wise
of Virginia, and John S. Henderson of North Carolina, saying: "At the
instance of many Democratic members of the House, we appeal to you
earnestly to recognize on Monday next, some Democrat who will move to
suspend the rules for the purpose of giving the House an opportunity
of considering the question of the total repeal of the internal revenue
taxes on tobacco." The letter went on to argue that it would be bad
policy to let a Republican have credit for a proposal, which it was
declared "will command more votes than any other measure pending before
the House looking towards a reduction in taxation; and favorable action
on this proposition will not interfere with other efforts that are being
made to reduce the burden of the people."

Speaker Carlisle, however, refused to allow the House to consider the
matter on the ground that negotiations with Randall and his friends for
concerted party action had so far been fruitless. "Among other things,"
he wrote, "we proposed to submit the entire subject to a caucus of our
political friends, with the understanding that all parties would abide
by the result of its action.... We have received no response to that
communication, and I consider that it would not be proper under the
circumstances for me to agree to a course of action which would present
to the House a simple proposition for the repeal of the internal revenue
tax on tobacco, snuff and cigars, to the exclusion of all other measures
for the reduction of taxation." The letter closed by "sincerely hoping
that some plan may yet be devised which will enable the House to
consider the whole subject of revenue reduction."

No one was less of an autocrat in temper and habit of thought than
Speaker Carlisle, and he assumed this position in deference to
a recognized function of his office, supported by a long line of
precedents. The case was, therefore, a signal illustration of the way
in which the House has impaired its ability to consider legislation by
claiming the exclusive privilege of proposing legislation. If the rules
had allowed the President to propose his measures directly to the House,
then the way would have been opened for a substitute or an amendment. As
it was, the House was able to act only upon matters within the control
of a few persons advantageously posted, and none of the changes of rules
that have been made from time to time have seriously disturbed this
fundamental situation.

Notwithstanding the new rules adopted in December, 1885, nothing of
importance was accomplished by the House. On February 15, 1886, William
R. Morrison introduced a tariff bill making a moderate reduction in
rates of duty, which, after considerable amendment in the committee of
ways and means, was reported to the House on the 12th of April; but no
further action was taken until the 17th of June, when Morrison moved
that the House go into committee of the whole to consider the bill.
Thirty-five Democrats voted with the Republicans against the motion,
which was defeated by 157 nays to 140 yeas. No further attempt was
made to take up the bill during that session, and in the ensuing fall
Morrison was defeated as a candidate for reelection. Before leaving
Congress he tried once more to obtain consideration of his bill but in
vain. Just as that Congress was expiring, John S. Henderson of North
Carolina was at last allowed to move a suspension of the rules in order
to take a vote on a bill to reduce internal revenue taxes, but he failed
to obtain the two-thirds vote required for suspension of the rules.

That the proceedings of the Forty-ninth Congress were not entirely
fruitless, was mainly due to the initiative and address of the Senate.
Some important measures were thus pushed through, among them the
act regulating the presidential succession and the act creating the
Interstate Commerce Commission. The first of these provided for the
succession of the heads of departments in turn, in case of the
removal, death, resignation, or inability of both the President and the
Vice-President.

The most marked legislative achievement of the House was an act
regulating the manufacture and sale of oleomargarine, to which
the Senate assented with some amendment, and which was signed with
reluctance by the President, after a special message to the House
sharply criticizing some of the provisions of the act. A bill providing
for arbitration of differences between common carriers and their
employees was passed by the Senate without a division, but it did not
reach the President until the closing days of the session and failed of
enactment because he did not sign it before the final adjournment. Taken
as a whole, then, the record of the Congress elected in 1884 showed
that while the Democratic party had the Presidency and the House of
Representatives, the Republican party, although defeated at the polls,
still controlled public policy through the agency of the Senate.



CHAPTER VI. PRESIDENTIAL KNIGHT-ERRANTRY

Although President Cleveland decisively repelled the Senate's attempted
invasion of the power of removal belonging to his office, he was still
left in a deplorable state of servitude through the operation of old
laws based upon the principle of rotation in office. The Acts of 1820
and 1836, limiting commissions to the term of four years, forced him
to make numerous appointments which provoked controversy and made
large demands upon his time and thought. In the first year of his
administration, he sent about two thousand nominations to the Senate,
an average of over six a day, assuming that he was allowed to rest on
Sunday. His freedom of action was further curtailed by an Act of 1863,
prohibiting the payment of a salary to any person appointed to fill a
vacancy existing while the Senate was in session, until the appointment
had been confirmed by the Senate. The President was thus placed under a
strict compulsion to act as a party employment agent.

If it is the prime duty of a President to act in the spirit of a
reformer, Cleveland is entitled to high praise for the stanchness with
which he adhered to his principles under most trying circumstances. Upon
November 27, 1885, he approved rules confirming and extending the civil
service regulations. Charges that Collector Hedden of the New York
Customs House was violating the spirit of the Civil Service Act, and
was making a party machine of his office, caused the Civil Service
Commission to make an investigation which resulted in his resignation
in July, 1886. On the 10th of August, Daniel Magone of Ogdensburg, New
York, a widely known lawyer, was personally chosen by the President with
a view to enforcing the civil service law in the New York Customs House.
Before making this appointment, President Cleveland issued an order to
all heads of departments warning all officeholders against the use of
their positions to control political movements in their localities.
"Officeholders," he declared, "are the agents of the people, not their
masters. They have no right, as officeholders, to dictate the political
action of their associates, or to throttle freedom of action within
party lines by methods and practices which prevent every useful and
justifiable purpose of party organization." In August, President
Cleveland gave signal evidence of his devotion to civil service reform
by appointing a Republican, because of his special qualifications, to be
chief examiner for the Civil Service Commission.

Democratic party workers were so angered and disgusted by the
President's policy that any mention of his name was enough to start a
flow of coarse denunciation. Strong hostility to his course of action
was manifested in Congress. Chairman Randall, of the committee on
appropriations, threatened to cut off the appropriation for office room
for the commission. A "rider" to the legislative appropriation bill,
striking at the civil service law, caused a vigorous debate in the House
in which leading Democrats assailed the Administration, but eventually
the "rider" was ruled out on a point of order. In the Senate, such party
leaders as Vance of North Carolina, Saulsbury of Delaware, and Voorhees
of Indiana, openly ridiculed the civil service law, and various attempts
to cripple it were made but were defeated. Senator Vance introduced a
bill to repeal the law, but it was indefinitely postponed by a vote of
33 to 6, the affirmative vote being cast mainly by Republicans; and in
general the strongest support for the law now came from the Republican
side. Early in June, 1887, an estimate was made that nine thousand civil
offices outside the scope of the civil service rules were still held by
Republicans. The Republican party press gloated over the situation and
was fond of dwelling upon the way in which old-line Democrats were being
snubbed while the Mugwumps were favored. At the same time, civil
service reformers found much to condemn in the character of Cleveland's
appointments. A special committee of the National Civil Service Reform
League, on March 30, 1887, published a report in which they asserted
that, "tried by the standard of absolute fidelity to the reform as it
is understood by this League, it is not to be denied that this
Administration has left much to be desired." At a subsequent session of
the League, its President, George William Curtis, proclaimed that the
League did not regard the Administration as "in any strict sense of
the words a civil service reform administration." Thus while President
Cleveland was alienating his regular party support, he was not getting
in return any dependable support from the reformers. He seemed to be
sitting down between two stools, both tilting to let him fall.

Meanwhile, he went on imperturbably doing his duty as he saw it. Like
many of his predecessors, he would rise early to get some time to attend
to public business before the rush of office seekers began, but the bulk
of his day's work lay in the discharge of his compulsory duties as an
employment agent. Many difficult situations were created by contentions
among Congressmen over appointments. It was Cleveland's habit to
deal with these cases by homely expostulation and by pleas for mutual
concessions. Such incidents do not of course go upon record, and it is
only as memoirs and reminiscences of public men are published that this
personal side of history becomes known. Senator Cullom of Illinois in
his "Fifty Years of Public Service" gives an account that doubtless
fairly displays Cleveland's way of handling his vexatious problems. "I
happened to be at the White House one day, and Mr. Cleveland said to
me, 'I wish you would take up Lamar's nomination and dispose of it. I am
between hay and grass with reference to the Interior Department. Nothing
is being done there; I ought to have some one on duty, and I cannot do
anything until you dispose of Lamar.'" Mr. Lamar, who had entered
the Cabinet as Secretary of the Interior, was nominated for associate
justice of the Supreme Court on December 6, 1887. He had been an eminent
member of the Senate, with previous distinguished service in the House,
so that the Senate must have had abundant knowledge of his character
and attainments. It is impossible to assign the delay that ensued
to reasonable need of time for inquiry as to his qualifications, but
Senator Cullom relates that "the nomination pended before the Judiciary
Committee for a long time." Soon after the personal appeal, which
was made by the President to every Senator he could reach, action was
finally taken and the appointment was confirmed January 16, 1888.

Senator Cullom's reminiscences also throw light upon the process by
which judges are appointed. President Cleveland had selected Melville W.
Fuller of Illinois for the office of chief justice of the Supreme Court.
According to Senator Cullom, Senator Edmunds "was very much out of humor
with the President because he had fully expected that Judge Phelps, of
his own State, was to receive the honor.... The result was that Senator
Edmunds held the nomination, without any action, in the Judiciary
Committee for some three months." Senator Cullom, although a party
associate of Edmunds, was pleased that the President had selected an
Illinois jurist and he was determined that, if he could help it, Edmunds
should not have the New Hampshire candidate appointed. He therefore
appealed to the committee to do something about the nomination, either
one way or the other. The committee finally reported the nomination to
the Senate without recommendation. When the matter came up in executive
session, "Senator Edmunds at once took the floor and attacked Judge
Fuller most viciously as having sympathized with the rebellion." But
Cullom was primed to meet that argument. He had been furnished with a
copy of a speech attacking President Lincoln which Phelps had delivered
during the war, and he now read it to the Senate, "much to the chagrin
and mortification of Senator Edmunds." Cullom relates that the Democrats
in the Senate enjoyed the scene. "Naturally, it appeared to them a very
funny performance, two Republicans quarreling over the confirmation of
a Democrat. They sat silent, however, and took no part at all in the
debate, leaving us Republicans to settle it among ourselves." The result
of the Republican split was that the nomination of Fuller was confirmed
"by a substantial majority."

Another nomination which caused much agitation at the time was that of
James C. Matthews of New York, to be Recorder of Deeds in the District
of Columbia. The office had been previously held by Frederick Douglass,
a distinguished leader of the colored race; and in filling the vacancy
the President believed it would be an exercise of wise and kindly
consideration to choose a member of the same race. But in the Washington
community, there was such a strong antipathy to the importation of
a negro politician from New York to fill a local office that a great
clamor was raised, in which Democrats joined. The Senate rejected the
nomination, but meanwhile Mr. Matthews had entered upon the duties of
his office and he showed such tact and ability as gradually to soften
the opposition. On December 21, 1886, President Cleveland renominated
him, pointing out that he had been in actual occupation of the office
for four months, managing its affairs with such ability as to remove
"much of the opposition to his appointment which has heretofore
existed." In conclusion, the President confessed "a desire to cooperate
in tendering to our colored fellow-citizens just recognition." This was
a shrewd argument. The Republican majority in the Senate shrank from
what might seem to be drawing the color line, and the appointment was
eventually confirmed; but this did not remove the sense of grievance in
Washington over the use of local offices for national party purposes.
Local sentiment in the District of Columbia is, however, politically
unimportant, as the community has no means of positive action.*


     *  It is a singular fact, which contains matter for deep
consideration, that the District of Columbia, the national capital,
is the only populated area in the civilized world without any sort of
suffrage rights.


In the same month in which President Cleveland issued his memorable
special message to the Senate on the Tenure of Office Act, he began
another struggle against congressional practice in which he was not
so fortunate. On March 10, 1886, he sent to Congress the first of his
pension vetoes. Although liberal provision for granting pensions had
been made by general laws, numerous special applications were made
directly to Congress, and congressmen were solicited to secure favorable
consideration for them. That it was the duty of a representative to
support an application from a resident of his district, was a doctrine
enforced by claim agents with a pertinacity from which there was no
escape. To attempt to assume a judicial attitude in the matter was
politically dangerous, and to yield assent was a matter of practical
convenience. Senator Cullom relates that when he first became a member
of the committee on pensions he was "a little uneasy" lest he "might
be too liberal." But he was guided by the advice of an old, experienced
Congressman, Senator Sawyer of Wisconsin, who told him: "You need not
worry, you cannot very well make a mistake allowing liberal pensions to
the soldier boys. The money will get back into the Treasury very soon."

The feeling that anything that the old soldiers wanted should be granted
was even stronger in the House, where about the only opportunity of
distinction allowed by the procedure was to champion these local demands
upon the public treasury. It was indeed this privilege of passing
pension bills which partially reconciled members of the House to
the actual control of legislative opportunity by the Speaker and
the chairmen of a few dominating committees. It was a congressional
perquisite to be allowed to move the passage of so many bills; enactment
followed as a matter of course. President Cleveland made a pointed
reference to this process in a veto message of June 21, 1886. He
observed that the pension bills had only "an apparent Congressional
sanction" for the fact was that "a large proportion of these bills have
never been submitted to a majority of either branch of Congress, but are
the results of nominal sessions held for the express purpose of their
consideration and attended by a small minority of the members of the
respective houses of the legislative branch of government."

Obviously, the whole system of pension legislation was faulty. Mere
individual effort on the part of the President to screen the output of
the system was scarcely practicable, even if it were congruous with
the nature of the President's own duties; but nevertheless Cleveland
attempted it, and kept at it with stout perseverance. One of his veto
messages remarks that in a single day nearly 240 special pension bills
were presented to him. He referred them to the Pension Bureau for
examination and the labor involved was so great that they could not
be returned to him until within a few hours of the limit fixed by the
Constitution for the President's assent.

There could be no more signal proof of President Cleveland's constancy
of soul than the fact that he was working hard at his veto forge, with
the sparks falling thickly around, right in his honeymoon. He married
Miss Frances Folsom of Buffalo on June 2, 1886. The ceremony took place
in the White House, and immediately thereafter, the President and his
charming bride went to Deer Park, Maryland, a mountain resort. The
respite from official cares was brief; on June 8th, the couple returned
to Washington and some of the most pugnacious of the pension vetoes
were sent to Congress soon after. The rest of his public life was passed
under continual storm, but the peace and happiness of his domestic life
provided a secure refuge.

On the other hand, the rebuffs which Democratic Congressmen received in
the matter of pension legislation were, it must be admitted, peculiarly
exasperating. Reviewing the work of the Forty-ninth Congress, "The
Nation" mentioned three enactments which it characterized as great
achievements that should be placed to the credit of Congress. Those were
the act regulating the presidential succession, approved January 18,
1886; the act regulating the counting of the electoral votes, approved
February 3, 1887; and the repeal of the Tenure of Office Act, approved
March 3, 1887. But all three measures originated in the Senate, and
the main credit for their enactment might be claimed by the Republican
party. There was some ground for the statement that they would have
been enacted sooner but for the disturbance of legislative routine by
political upheavals in the House; and certainly no one could pretend
that it was to get these particular measures passed that the Democratic
party was raised to power. The main cause of the political revolution of
1884 had been the continuance of war taxes, producing revenues that were
not only not needed but were positively embarrassing to the Government.
Popular feeling over the matter was so strong that even the Republican
party had felt bound to put into its national platform, in 1884, a
pledge "to correct the irregularities of the tariff and to reduce the
surplus." The people, however, believed that the Republican party had
already been given sufficient opportunity, and they now turned to
the Democratic party for relief. The rank and file of this party felt
acutely, therefore, that they were not accomplishing what the people
expected. Members arrived in Washington full of good intentions. They
