him was insufficient.

The most significant testimony before the Mazet Committee was that given
by Boss Croker himself. His last public office had been that of City
Chamberlain, 1889-90, at a salary of $25,000. Two years later he
purchased for $250,000 an interest in a stock-farm and paid over
$100,000 for some noted race-horses. He spent over half a million
dollars on the English racetrack in three years and was reputed a
millionaire, owning large blocks of city real estate. He told the
committee that he virtually determined all city nominations; and that
all candidates were assessed, even judicial candidates, from $10,000
to $25,000 for their nominations. "We try to have a pretty effective
organization--that's what we are there for," he explained. "We are
giving the people pure organization government," even though the
organizing took "a lot of time" and was "very hard work." Tammany
members stood by one another and helped each other, not only in politics
but in business. "We want the whole business [city business] if we can
get it." If "we win, we expect everyone to stand by us." Then he uttered
what must have been to every citizen of understanding a self-evident
truth, "I am working for my pockets all the time."

Soon afterwards Croker retired to his Irish castle, relinquishing the
leadership to Charles Murphy, the present boss. The growing alertness of
the voters, however, makes Murphy's task a more difficult one than that
of any of his predecessors. It is doubtful if the nature of the machine
has changed during all the years of its history. Tweed and Croker were
only natural products of the system. They typify the vulgar climax of
organized looting.

In 1913 the Independent Democrats, Republicans, and Progressives
united in a fusion movement. They nominated and, after a most spirited
campaign, elected John Purroy Mitchel as mayor. He was a young man, not
yet forty, had held important city offices, and President Wilson had
appointed him Collector of the Port of New York. His experience, his
vigor, ability, and straight-dealing commended him to the friends of good
government, and they were not disappointed. The Mitchel regime set a
new record for clean and efficient municipal administration. Men of high
character and ability were enlisted in public service, and the Police
Department, under Commissioner Woods, achieved a new usefulness.
The decent citizens, not alone in the metropolis, but throughout the
country, believed with Theodore Roosevelt that Mr. Mitchel was "the
best mayor New York ever had." But neither the effectiveness of
his administration nor the combined efforts of the friends of good
government could save him from the designs of Tammany Hall when, in
1917, he was a candidate for reelection. Through a tactical blunder of
the Fusionists, a small Republican group was permitted to control the
party primaries and nominate a candidate of its own; the Socialists,
greatly augmented by various pacifist groups, made heavy inroads among
the foreign-born voters. And, while the whole power and finesse of
Tammany were assiduously undermining the mayor's strength, ethnic,
religious, partizan, and geographical prejudices combined to elect
the machine candidate, Judge Hylan, a comparatively unknown Brooklyn
magistrate.

How could Tammany regain its power, and that usually within two
years, after such disclosures as we have seen? The main reason is the
scientific efficiency of the organization. The victory of Burr in New
York in 1800 was the first triumph of the first ward machine in America,
and Tammany has forgotten neither this victory nor the methods by which
it was achieved. The organization which was then set in motion has
simply been enlarged to keep easy pace with the city's growth. There
are, in fact, two organizations, Tammany Hall, the political machine,
and Tammany Society, the "Columbian Order" organized by Mooney, which
is ruled by sachems elected by the members. Both organizations, however,
are one in spirit. We need concern ourselves only with the organization
of Tammany Hall.

The framework of Tammany Hall's machinery has always been the general
committee, still known, in the phraseology of Burr's day, as "the
Democratic-Republican General Committee." It is a very democratic body
composed of representatives from every assembly district, apportioned
according to the number of voters in the district. The present
apportionment is one committeeman for every fifteen votes. This makes a
committee of over 9000, an unwieldy number. It is justified, however, on
two very practical grounds: first, that it is large enough to keep close
to the voters; and second, that its assessment of ten dollars a member
brings in $90,000 a year to the war chest. This general committee holds
stated meetings and appoints subcommittees. The executive committee,
composed of the leaders of the assembly districts and the chairman and
treasurer of the county committee, is the real working body of the
great committee. It attends to all important routine matters, selects
candidates for office, and conducts their campaigns. It is customary for
the members of the general committee to designate the district leaders
for the executive committee, but they are elected by their own districts
respectively at the annual primary elections. The district leader is a
very important wheel in the machine. He not only leads his district
but represents it on the executive committee; and this brotherhood of
leaders forms the potent oligarchy of Tammany. Its sanction crowns the
high chieftain, the boss, who, in turn, must be constantly on the alert
that his throne is not undermined; that is to say, he and his district
leaders must "play politics" within their own bailiwicks to keep their
heads on their own shoulders. After their enfranchisement in New York
(1917) women were made eligible to the general and executive committees.
Thirty-seven were at once elected to the executive committee, and plans
were made to give them one-half of the representation on the general
committee.

Each of the twenty-three assembly districts is in turn divided into
election districts of about 400 voters, each with a precinct captain who
is acquainted with every voter in his precinct and keeps track, as
far as possible, of his affairs. In every assembly district there are
headquarters and a club house, where the voters can go in the evening
and enjoy a smoke, a bottle, and a more or less quiet game.

This organization is never dormant. And this is the key to its vitality.
There is no mystery about it. Tammany is as vigilant between elections
as it is on election day. It has always been solicitous for the poor and
the humble, who most need and best appreciate help and attention. Every
poor immigrant is welcomed, introduced to the district headquarters,
given work, or food, or shelter. Tammany is his practical friend; and in
return he is merely to become naturalized as quickly as possible under
the wardship of a Tammany captain and by the grace of a Tammany judge,
and then to vote the Tammany ticket. The new citizen's lessons in
political science are all flavored with highly practical notions.

Tammany's machinery enables a house-to-house canvass to be made in one
day. But this machinery must be oiled. There are three sources of
the necessary lubricant: offices, jobs, the sale of favors; these are
dependent on winning the elections. From its very earliest days,
fraud at the polls has been a Tammany practice. As long as property
qualifications were required, money was furnished for buying houses
which could harbor a whole settlement of voters. It was not, however,
until the adoption of universal suffrage that wholesale frauds became
possible or useful; for with a limited suffrage it was necessary to sway
only a few score votes to carry an ordinary election.

Fernando Wood set a new pace in this race for votes. It has been
estimated that in 1854 there "were about 40,000 shiftless, unprincipled
persons who lived by their wits and the labor of others. The trade of
a part of these was turning primary elections, packing nominating
conventions, repeating, and breaking up meetings." Wood also
systematized naturalization. A card bearing the following legend was the
open sesame to American citizenship:

     "Common Pleas:
      Please naturalize the bearer.
      N. Seagrist, Chairman."

Seagrist was one of the men charged by an aldermanic committee "with
robbing the funeral pall of Henry Clay when his sacred person passed
through this city."

When Hoffman was first elected mayor, over 15,000 persons were
registered who could not be found at the places indicated. The
naturalization machinery was then running at high speed. In 1868, from
25,000 to 30,000 foreigners were naturalized in New York in six weeks.
Of 156,288 votes cast in the city, 25,000 were afterwards shown to be
fraudulent. It was about this time that an official whose duty it was
to swear in the election inspectors, not finding a Bible at hand, used a
volume of Ollendorf's "New Method of Learning to Read, Write, and Speak
French." The courts sustained this substitution on the ground that it
could not possibly have vitiated the election!

A new federal naturalization law and rigid election laws have made
wholesale frauds impossible; and the genius of Tammany is now attempting
to adjust itself to the new immigration, the new political spirit, and
the new communal vigilance. Its power is believed by some optimistic
observers to be waning. But the evidences are not wanting that its
vitality and internal discipline are still persistent.



CHAPTER VI. LESSER OLIGARCHIES

New York City is not unique in its experience with political bossdom.
Nearly every American city, in a greater or less degree, for longer or
shorter periods, has been dominated by oligarchies.

Around Philadelphia, American sentiment has woven the memories of great
events. It still remains, of all our large cities, the most "American."
It has fewer aliens than any other, a larger percentage of home owners,
a larger number of small tradespeople and skilled artisans--the sort of
population which democracy exalts, and who in turn are presumed to be
the bulwark of democracy. These good citizens, busied with the anxieties
and excitements of their private concerns, discovered, in the decade
following the Civil War, that their city had slipped unawares into
the control of a compact oligarchy, the notorious Gas Ring. The city
government at this time was composed of thirty-two independent boards
and departments, responsible to the council, but responsible to the
council in name only and through the medium of a council committee. The
coordinating force, the political gravitation which impelled all these
diverse boards and council committees to act in unison, was the Gas
Department. This department was controlled by a few designing and
capable individuals under the captaincy of James McManes. They had
reduced to political servitude all the employees of the department,
numbering about two thousand. Then they had extended their sway over
other city departments, especially the police department. Through the
connivance of the police and control over the registration of voters,
they soon dominated the primaries and the nominating conventions.
They carried the banner of the Republican party, the dominant party in
Philadelphia and in the State, under which they more easily controlled
elections, for the people voted "regular." Then every one of the city's
servants was made to pay to the Gas Ring money as well as obeisance.
Tradespeople who sold supplies to the city, contractors who did its
work, saloon-keepers and dive-owners who wanted protection--all paid.
The city's debt increased at the rate of $3,000,000 a year, without
visible evidence of the application of money to the city's growing
needs.

In 1883 the citizens finally aroused themselves and petitioned the
legislature for a new charter. They confessed: "Philadelphia is now
recognized as the worst paved and worst cleaned city in the civilized
world. The water supply is so bad that during many weeks of the last
winter it was not only distasteful and unwholesome for drinking, but
offensive for bathing purposes. The effort to clean the streets was
abandoned for months and no attempt was made to that end until some
public-spirited citizens, at their own expense, cleaned a number of the
principal thoroughfares.... The physical condition of the sewers"
is "dangerous to the health and most offensive to the comfort of our
people. Public work has been done so badly that structures have to be
renewed almost as soon as finished. Others have been in part constructed
at enormous expense and then permitted to fall to decay without
completion." This is a graphic and faithful description of the result
which follows government of the Ring, for the Ring, with the people's
money. The legislature in 1885 granted Philadelphia a new charter,
called the Bullitt Law, which went into effect in 1887, and which
greatly simplified the structure of the government and centered
responsibility in the mayor. It was then necessary for the Ring to
control primaries and win elections in order to keep the city within
its clutches. So began in Philadelphia the practice of fraudulent
registering and voting on a scale that has probably never been equaled
elsewhere in America. Names taken from tombstones in the cemeteries and
from the register of births found their way to the polling registers.
Dogs, cats, horses, anything living or dead, with a name, served the
purpose.

The exposure of these frauds was undertaken in 1900 by the Municipal
League. In two wards, where the population had decreased one per cent
in ten years (1890-1900), it was found that the registered voters had
increased one hundred per cent. From one house sixty-two voters were
registered, of sundry occupations as follows: "Professors, bricklayers,
gentlemen, moulders, cashiers, barbers, ministers, bakers, doctors,
drivers, bartenders, plumbers, clerks, cooks, merchants, stevedores,
bookkeepers, waiters, florists, boilermakers, salesmen, soldiers,
electricians, printers, book agents, and restaurant keepers." One
hundred and twenty-two voters, according to the register, lived at
another house, including nine agents, nine machinists, nine gentlemen,
nine waiters, nine salesmen, four barbers, four bakers, fourteen clerks,
three laborers, two bartenders, a milkman, an optician, a piano-mover, a
window-cleaner, a nurse, and so on.

On the day before the election the Municipal League sent registered
letters to all the registered voters of certain precincts. Sixty-three
per cent were returned, marked by the postman, "not at," "deceased,"
"removed," "not known." Of forty-four letters addressed to names
registered from one four-story house, eighteen were returned. From
another house, supposed to be sheltering forty-eight voters, forty-one
were returned; from another, to which sixty-two were sent, sixty-one
came back. The league reported that "two hundred and fifty-two votes
were returned in a division that had less than one hundred legal voters
within its boundaries." Repeating and ballot-box stuffing were common.
Election officers would place fifty or more ballots in the box
before the polls opened or would hand out a handful of ballots to the
recognized repeaters. The high-water mark of boss rule was reached under
Mayor Ashbridge, "Stars-and-Stripes Sam," who had been elected in 1899.
The moderation of Martin, who had succeeded McManes as boss, was cast
aside; the mayor was himself a member of the Ring. When Ashbridge
retired, the Municipal League reported: "The four years of the Ashbridge
administration have passed into history leaving behind them a scar on
the fame and reputation of our city which will be a long time healing.
Never before, and let us hope never again, will there be such brazen
defiance of public opinion, such flagrant disregard of public interest,
such abuse of power and responsibility for private ends."

Since that time the fortunes of the Philadelphia Ring have fluctuated.
Its hold upon the city, however, is not broken, but is still strong
enough to justify Owen Wister's observation: "Not a Dickens, only a
Zola, would have the face (and the stomach) to tell the whole truth
about Philadelphia."

St. Louis was one of the first cities of America to possess the
much-coveted home rule. The Missouri State Constitution of 1875 granted
the city the power to frame its own charter, under certain limitations.
The new charter provided for a mayor elected for four years with the
power of appointing certain heads of departments; others, however,
were to be elected directly by the people. It provided for a Municipal
Assembly composed of two houses: the Council, with thirteen members,
elected at large for four years, and the House of Delegates, with
twenty-eight members, one from each ward, elected for two years. These
two houses were given coordinate powers; one was presumed to be a check
on the other. The Assembly fixed the tax rate, granted franchises, and
passed upon all public improvements. The Police Department was, however,
under the control of the mayor and four commissioners, the latter
appointed by the Governor. The city was usually Republican by about 8000
majority; the State was safely Democratic. The city, until a few years
ago, had few tenements and a small floating population.

Outwardly, all seemed well with the city until 1901, when the inside
workings of its government were revealed to the public gaze through
the vengeance of a disappointed franchise-seeker. The Suburban Railway
Company sought an extension of its franchises. It had approached the
man known as the dispenser of such favors, but, thinking his price
($145,000) too high, had sought to deal directly with the Municipal
Assembly. The price agreed upon for the House of Delegates was $75,000;
for the Council, $60,000. These sums were placed in safety vaults
controlled by a dual lock. The representative of the Company held one of
the keys; the representative of the Assembly, the other; so that neither
party could take the money without the presence of both. The Assembly
duly granted the franchises; but property owners along the line of the
proposed extension secured an injunction, which delayed the proceedings
until the term of the venal House of Delegates had expired. The
Assemblymen, having delivered the goods, demanded their pay. The
Company, held up by the courts, refused. Mutterings of the disappointed
conspirators reached the ear of an enterprising newspaper reporter.
Thereby the Circuit Attorney, Joseph W. Folk, struck the trail of the
gang. Both the president of the railway company and the "agent" of the
rogues of the Assembly turned state's evidence; the safe-deposit
boxes were opened, disclosing the packages containing one hundred and
thirty-five $1000 bills.

This exposure led to others--the "Central Traction Conspiracy," the
"Lighting Deal," the "Garbage Deal." In the cleaning-up process,
thirty-nine persons were indicted, twenty-four for bribery and fifteen
for perjury.

The evidence which Folk presented in the prosecution of these scoundrels
merely confirmed what had long been an unsavory rumor: that franchises
and contracts were bought and sold like merchandise; that the buyers
were men of eminence in the city's business affairs; and that the
sellers were the people's representatives in the Assembly. The Grand
Jury reported: "Our investigation, covering more or less fully a period
of ten years shows that, with few exceptions, no ordinance has been
passed wherein valuable privileges or franchises are granted until those
interested have paid the legislators the money demanded for action in
the particular case.... So long has this practice existed that such
members have come to regard the receipt of money for action on pending
measures as a legitimate perquisite of a legislator."

These legislators, it appeared from the testimony, had formed a
water-tight ring or "combine" in 1899, for the purpose of systematizing
this traffic. A regular scale of prices was adopted: so much for an
excavation, so much per foot for a railway switch, so much for a street
pavement, so much for a grain elevator. Edward R. Butler was the master
under whose commands for many years this trafficking was reduced to
systematic perfection. He had come to St. Louis when a young man, had
opened a blacksmith shop, had built up a good trade in horseshoeing, and
also a pliant political following in his ward. His attempt to defeat the
home rule charter in 1876 had given him wider prominence, and he soon
became the boss of the Democratic machine. His energy, shrewdness,
liberality, and capacity for friendship gave him sway over both
Republican and Democratic votes in certain portions of the city. A
prominent St. Louis attorney says that for over twenty years "he named
candidates on both tickets, fixed, collected, and disbursed campaign
assessments, determined the results in elections, and in fine,
practically controlled the public affairs of St. Louis." He was the
agent usually sought by franchise-seekers, and he said that had the
Suburban Company dealt with him instead of with the members of the
Assembly, they might have avoided exposure. He was indicted four times
in the upheaval, twice for attempting to bribe the Board of Health
in the garbage deal--he was a stockholder in the company seeking the
contract--and twice for bribery in the lighting contract.

Cincinnati inherited from the Civil War the domestic excitements and
political antagonisms of a border city. Its large German population gave
it a conservative political demeanor, slow to accept changes, loyal
to the Republican party as it was to the Union. This reduced partizan
opposition to a docile minority, willing to dicker for public spoils
with the intrenched majority.

George B. Cox was for thirty years the boss of this city. Events had
prepared the way for him. Following closely upon the war, Tom Campbell,
a crafty criminal lawyer, was the local leader of the Republicans, and
John R. McLean, owner of the Cincinnati Enquirer, a very rich man, of
the Democrats. These two men were cronies: they bartered the votes
of their followers. For some years crime ran its repulsive course:
brawlers, thieves, cutthroats escaped conviction through the defensive
influence of the lawyer-boss. In 1880, Cox, who had served an
apprenticeship in his brother-in-law's gambling house, was elected
to the city council. Thence he was promoted to the decennial board of
equalization which appraised all real estate every ten years. There
followed a great decrease in the valuation of some of the choicest
holdings in the city. In 1884 there were riots in Cincinnati. After the
acquittal of two brutes who had murdered a man for a trifling sum of
money, exasperated citizens burned the criminal court house. The barter
in justice stopped, but the barter in offices and in votes continued.
The Blaine campaign then in progress was in great danger. Cox, already
a master of the political game, promised the Republican leaders that
if they would give him a campaign fund he would turn in a Republican
majority from Cincinnati. He did; and for many years thereafter the
returns from Hamilton County, in which Cincinnati is situated, brought
cheer to Republican State headquarters on election night.

Cox was an unostentatious, silent man, giving one the impression
of sullenness, and almost entirely lacking in those qualities of
comradeship which one usually seeks in the "Boss" type. From a barren
little room over the "Mecca" saloon, with the help of a telephone,
he managed his machine. He never obtruded himself upon the public.
He always remained in the background. Nor did he ever take vast sums.
Moderation was the rule of his loot.

By 1905 a movement set in to rid the city of machine rule. Cox saw this
movement growing in strength. So he imported boatloads of floaters from
Kentucky. These floaters registered "from dives, and doggeries, from
coal bins and water closets; no space was too small to harbor a man."
For once he threw prudence to the winds. Exposure followed; over 2800
illegal voters were found. The newspapers, so long docile, now provided
the necessary publicity. A little paper, the Citizen's Bulletin, which
had started as a handbill of reform, when all the dailies seemed closed
to the facts, now grew into a sturdy weekly. And, to add the capstone
to Cox's undoing, William H. Taft, the most distinguished son of
Cincinnati, then Secretary of War in President Roosevelt's cabinet, in
a campaign speech in Akron, Ohio, advised the Republicans to repudiate
him. This confounded the "regulars," and Cox was partially beaten. The
reformers elected their candidate for mayor, but the boss retained his
hold on the county and the city council. And, in spite of all that was
done, Cox remained an influence in politics until his death, May 20,
1916.

San Francisco has had a varied and impressive political experience. The
first legislature of California incorporated the mining town into the
city of San Francisco, April 15, 1850. Its government from the outset
was corrupt and inefficient. Lawlessness culminated in the murder of
the editor of the Bulletin, J. King of William, on May 14, 1856, and a
vigilance committee was organized to clean up the city, and watch the
ballot-box on election day.

Soon the legislature was petitioned to change the charter. The petition
recites: "Without a change in the city government which shall diminish
the weight of taxation, the city will neither be able to discharge
the interest on debts already contracted, nor to meet the demands for
current disbursements.... The present condition of the streets and
public improvements of the city abundantly attest the total inefficiency
