part by the Pennsylvania Dutch and was so famous for its rich milk
that it was called by many travelers the "Bonnyclabber Country." Most
Englishmen were delighted with this region because they found here the
good old English breed of horses, that is, the English hunter developed
into a stout coach-horse. Of native breeds, Baily found animals of all
degrees of strength and size down to hackneys of fourteen hands, as well
as the "vile dog-horses," or packhorses, whose faithful service to the
frontier could in no wise be appreciated by a foreigner.

This region of Pennsylvania was as noted for its wagons as for
its horses. It was this wheat-bearing belt that made the common
freight-wagon in its colors of red and blue a national institution. It
was in this region of rich, well-watered land that the maple tree gained
its reputation. Men even prophesied that its delightful sap would prove
a cure for slavery, for, if one family could make fifteen hundred pounds
of maple sugar in a season, eighty thousand families could, at the same
rate, equal the output of cane sugar each year from Santo Domingo!

The traveler at the beginning of the century noticed a change in
the temper of the people as well as a change in the soil when the
Bonnyclabber Country was reached. The time-serving attitude of the good
people of the East now gave place to a "consciousness of independence"
due, Baily remarks, to the fact that each man was self-sufficient and
passed his life "without regard to the smiles and frowns of men in
power." This spirit was handsomely illustrated in the case of one burly
Westerner who was "churched" for fighting. Showing a surly attitude
to the deacon-judges who sat on his case, he was threatened with civil
prosecution and imprisonment. "I don't want freedom," he is said to have
replied, bitterly; "I don't even want to live if I can't knock down a
man who calls me a liar."

Pushing on westward by way of historic Sideling Hill and Bedford to
Statlers, Baily found here a prosperous millstone quarry, which sold its
stones at from fifteen to thirty dollars a pair. Twelve years earlier
Washington had prophesied that the Alleghanies would soon be furnishing
millstones equal to the best English burr. As he crossed the mountains
Baily found that taverns charged the following schedule: breakfast,
eighteen pence; dinner and supper from two shillings to two shillings
and sixpence each. Traversing Laurel Hill, he reached Pittsburgh just at
the time when it was awakening to activity as the trading center of the
West.

In order to descend the Ohio, Baily obtained a flatboat, thirty-six feet
long and twelve feet broad, which drew eighteen inches of water and was
of ten tons burden. On the way downstream, Charleston and Wheeling were
the principal settlements which Baily first noted. Ebenezer Zane, the
founder of Wheeling, had just opened across Ohio the famous landward
route from the Monongahela country to Kentucky, which it entered at
Limestone, the present Maysville. This famous road, passing through
Zanesville, Lancaster, and Chillicothe, though at that time safe only
for men in parties, was a common route to and from Kentucky.

On such inland pathways as this, early travelers came to take for
granted a hospitality not to be found on more frequented thoroughfares.
In this hospitality, roughness and good will, cleanliness and filth,
attempts to ape the style of Eastern towns and habits of the most
primitive kind, were singularly blended. In one instance, the traveler
might be cordially assigned by the landlord to a good position in "the
first rush for a chance at the head of the table"; at the next stopping
place he might be coldly turned away because the proprietor "had the
gout" and his wife the "delicate blue-devils"; farther on, where "soap
was unknown, nothing clean but birds, nothing industrious but pigs, and
nothing happy but squirrels," Daniel Boone's daughter might be seen in
high-heeled shoes, attended by white servants whose wages were a dollar
a week, skirting muddy roads under a ten-dollar bonnet and a six-dollar
parasol. Or, he might emerge from a lonely forest in Ohio or Indiana and
come suddenly upon a party of neighbors at a dreary tavern, enjoying a
corn shucking or a harvest home. Immediately dubbed "Doctor," "Squire,"
or "Colonel" by the hospitable merrymakers, the passer-by would be
informed that he "should drink and lack no good thing." After he had
retired, as likely as not his quarters would be invaded at one or
two o'clock in the morning by the uproarious company, and the best
refreshment of the house would be forced upon him with a hilarity
"created by omnipotent whiskey." Sometimes, however, the traveler would
encounter pitiful instances of loneliness in the widespreading forests.
One man in passing a certain isolated cabin was implored by the woman
who inhabited it to rest awhile and talk, since she was, she confessed,
completely overwhelmed by "the lone!"

Every traveler has remarked upon the yellow pallor of the first
inhabitants of the western forests and doubtless correctly attributed
this sickly appearance to the effects of malaria and miasma. The psychic
influences of the forest wilderness also weighed heavily upon the
spirits of the settlers, although, as Baily notes, it was the newcomers
who felt the depression to an exaggerated degree. As he says:

"It is a feeling of confinement, which begins to damp the spirits, from
this complete exclusion of distant objects. To travel day after day,
among trees of a hundred feet high, is oppressive to a degree which
those cannot conceive who have not experienced it; and it must depress
the spirits of the solitary settler to pass years in this state. His
visible horizon extends no farther than the tops of the trees which
bound his plantation--perhaps five hundred yards. Upwards he sees the
sun, and sky, and stars, but around him an eternal forest, from which
he can never hope to emerge:---not so in a thickly settled district; he
cannot there enjoy any freedom of prospect, yet there is variety, and
some scope for the imprisoned vision. In a hilly country a little more
range of view may occasionally be obtained; and a river is a stream
of light as well as of water, which feasts the eye with a delight
inconceivable to the inhabitants of open countries."

In direct contradiction to this longing for society was the passion
which the first generation of pioneers had for the wilderness. When the
population of one settlement became too thick, they were seized by an
irresistible impulse to "follow the migration," as the expression went.
The easy independence of the first hunter-agriculturalist was upset
by the advance of immigration. His range was curtailed, his freedom
limited. His very breath seems to have become difficult. So he sold out
at a phenomenal profit, put out his fire, shouldered his gun, called his
dog, and set off again in search of the solitude he craved.

Severe winter weather overtook Baily as he descended the Ohio River,
until below Grave Creek floating ice wrecked his boat and drove him
ashore. Here in the primeval forest, far from "Merrie England," Baily
spent the Christmas of 1796 in building a new flatboat. This task
completed, he resumed his journey. Passing Marietta, where the bad
condition of the winter roads prevented a visit to a famous Indian
mound, he reached Limestone. In due time he sighted Columbia, the
metropolis of the Miami country. According to Baily, the sale of
European goods in this part of the Ohio Valley netted the importers a
hundred per cent. Prices varied with the ease of navigation. When ice
blocked the Ohio the price of flour went up until it was eight dollars a
barrel; whiskey was a dollar a gallon; potatoes, a dollar a bushel; and
bacon, twelve cents a pound. At these prices, the total produce which
went by Fort Massac in the early months of 1800 would have been worth on
the Ohio River upwards of two hundred thousand dollars! In the preceding
summer Baily quoted flour at Norfolk as selling at sixty-three shillings
a barrel of 196 pounds, or double the price it was bringing on the
ice-gorged Ohio. It is by such comparisons that we get some inkling of
the value of western produce and of the rates in western trade.

After a short stay at Cincinnati, Baily set out for the South on an
"Orleans boat" loaded with four hundred barrels of flour. At the
mouth of Pigeon Creek he noted the famous path to "Post St. Vincent's"
(Vincennes), over which he saw emigrants driving cattle to that ancient
town on the Wabash. At Fort Massac he met Captain Zebulon M. Pike, whose
tact in dealing with intoxicated Indians he commended. At New Madrid
Baily made a stay of some days. This settlement, consisting of some two
hundred and fifty houses, was in the possession of Spain. It was within
the province of Louisiana, soon to be ceded to Napoleon. New Orleans
supplied this district with merchandise, but smuggling from the United
States was connived at by the Spanish officials.

From New Madrid Baily proceeded to Natchez, which then contained about
eighty-five houses. The town did not boast a tavern, but, as was true
of other places in the interior, this lack was made up for by the
hospitality of its inhabitants. Rice and tobacco were being grown, Baily
notes, and Georgian cotton was being raised in the neighborhood. Several
jennies were already at work, and their owners received a royalty of
one-eighth of the product. The cotton was sent to New Orleans, where it
usually sold for twenty dollars a hundred weight. From Natchez to New
Orleans the charge for transportation by flatboat was a dollar and a
half a bag. The bags contained from one hundred and fifty to two hundred
and fifty pounds, and each flatboat carried about two hundred and
fifty bags. Baily adds two items to the story of the development of the
mechanical operation of watercraft. He tells us that in the fall of 1796
a party of "Dutchmen," in the Pittsburgh region, fashioned a boat with
side paddle wheels which were turned by a treadmill worked by eight
horses under the deck. This strange boat, which passed Baily when he was
wrecked on the Ohio near Grave Creek, appeared "to go with prodigious
swiftness." Baily does not state how much business the boat did on its
downward trip to New Orleans but contents, himself with remarking that
the owners expected the return trip to prove very profitable. When
he met the boat on its upward voyage at Natchez, it had covered three
hundred miles in six days. It was, however, not loaded, "so little
occasion was there for a vessel of this kind." As this run between New
Orleans and Natchez came to be one of the most profitable in the United
States in the early days of steamboating, less than fifteen years later,
the experience of these "Flying Dutchmen" affords a very pretty proof
that something more than a means of transportation is needed to create
commerce. The owners abandoned their craft at Natchez in disgust and
returned home across country, wiser and poorer.

Baily also noted that a Dr. Waters of New Madrid built a schooner "some
few years since" at the head of the Ohio and navigated it down the Ohio
and Mississippi and around to Philadelphia, "where it is now employed
in the commerce of the United States." It is thus apparent, solely
from this traveler's record, that an ocean-going vessel and a
side-paddle-wheel boat had been seen on the Western Waters of the United
States at least four years before the nineteenth century arrived.

Baily finally reached New Orleans. The city then contained about a
thousand houses and was not only the market for the produce of the river
plantations but also the center of an extensive Indian trade. The goods
for this trade were packed in little barrels which were carried into the
interior on pack-horses, three barrels to a horse. The traders traveled
for hundreds of miles through the woods, bartering with the Indians on
the way and receiving, in exchange for their goods, bear and deer skins,
beaver furs, and wild ponies which had been caught by lariat in the
neighboring Apalousa country.

Baily had intended to return to New York by sea, but on his arrival
at New Orleans he was unable to find a ship sailing to New York. He
therefore decided to proceed northward by way of the long and dangerous
Natchez Trace and the Tennessee Path. Though few Europeans had made this
laborious journey before 1800, the Natchez Trace had been for many years
the land route of thousands of returning rivermen who had descended the
Mississippi in flatboat and barge. In practically all cases these men
carried with them the proceeds of their investment, and, as on every
thoroughfare in the world traveled by those returning from market, so
here, too, highwaymen and desperadoes, red and white, built their lairs
and lay in wait. Some of the most revolting crimes of the American
frontier were committed on these northward pathways and their branches.

Joining a party bound for Natchez, a hundred and fifty miles distant
overland, Baily proceeded to Lake Pontchartrain and thence "north by
west through the woods," by way of the ford of the Tangipahoa, Cooper's
Plantation, Tickfaw River, Amite River, and the "Hurricane" (the path of
a tornado) to the beginning of the Apalousa country. This tangled region
of stunted growth was reputed to be seven miles in width from "shore to
shore" and three hundred miles in length. It took the party half a day
to reach the opposite "shore," and they had to quench their thirst on
the way with dew.

At Natchez, Baily organized a party which included the five "Dutchmen"
whose horse boat had proved a failure. For their twenty-one days'
journey to Nashville the party laid in the following provisions: 15
pounds of biscuit, 6 pounds of flour, 12 pounds of bacon, 10 pounds of
dried beef, 8 pounds of rice, 1 1/2 pounds of coffee, 4 pounds of sugar,
and a quantity of pounded corn, such as the Indians used on all their
journeys. After celebrating the Fourth of July, 1797, with "all the
inhabitants who were hostile to the Spanish Government," and bribing the
baker at the Spanish fort to bake them a quarter of a hundredweight of
bread, the party started on their northward journey.

They reached without incident the famous Grindstone Ford of Bayou
Pierre, where crayfishes had destroyed a pioneer dam. Beyond, at the
forks of the path where the Choctaw Trail bore off to the cast the party
pursued the alternate Chickasaw Trail by Indian guidance, and soon noted
the change in the character of the soil from black loam to sandy gravel,
which indicated that they had reached the Piedmont region. Indian
marauders stole one horse from the camp, and three of the party fell
ill. The others, pressed for food, were compelled to leave the sick men
in an improvised camp and to hasten on, promising to send to their
aid the first Indian they should meet "who understood herbs." After
appalling hardships, they crossed the Tennessee and entered the
Nashville country, where the roads were good enough for coaches, for
they met two on the way. Thence Baily proceeded to Knoxville, seeing, as
he went, droves of cattle bound for the settlements of west Tennessee.
With his arrival at Knoxville, his journal ends abruptly; but from other
sources we learn that he sailed from New York on his return to England
in January, 1798. His interesting record, however, remained unpublished
until after his death in 1844.

Not only to Francis Baily but to scores of other travelers, even those
of unfriendly eyes, do modern readers owe a debt of gratitude. These men
have preserved a multitude of pictures and a wealth of data which would
otherwise have been lost. The men of America in those days were writing
the story of their deeds not on parchment or paper but on the virgin
soil of the wilderness. But though the stage driver, the tavern keeper,
and the burly riverman left no description of the life of their highways
and their commerce, these visitors from other lands have bequeathed
to us their thousands of pages full of the enterprising life of these
pioneer days in the history of American commerce.



CHAPTER VII. The Birth Of The Steamboat

The crowds who welcomed the successive stages in the development of
American transportation were much alike in essentials--they were all
optimistic, self-congratulatory, irrepressible in their enthusiasm, and
undaunted in their outlook. Dickens, perhaps, did not miss the truth
widely when, in speaking of stage driving, he said that the cry of "Go
Ahead!" in America and of "All Right!" in England were typical of the
civilizations of the two countries. Right or wrong, "Go Ahead!"
has always been the underlying passion of all men interested in the
development of commerce and transportation in these United States.

During the era of river improvement already described, men of
imagination were fascinated with the idea of propelling boats by
mechanical means. Even when Washington fared westward in 1784, he met
at Bath, Virginia, one of these early experimenters, James Rumsey, who
haled him forthwith to a neighboring meadow to watch a secret trial of
a boat moved by means of machinery which worked setting-poles similar to
the ironshod poles used by the rivermen to propel their boats upstream.
"The model," wrote Washington, "and its operation upon the water, which
had been made to run pretty swift, not only convinced me of what I
before thought next to, if not quite impracticable, but that it might
be to the greatest possible utility in inland navigation." Later he
mentions the "discovery" as one of those "circumstances which have
combined to render the present epoch favorable above all others for
securing a large portion of the produce of the western settlements, and
of the fur and peltry of the Lakes, also."

From that day forward, scarcely a week passed without some new
development in the long and difficult struggle to improve the means of
navigation. Among the scores of men who engaged in this engrossing but
discouraging work, there is one whom the world is coming to honor more
highly than in previous years--John Fitch, of Connecticut, Pennsylvania,
and Kentucky. As early as August, 1785, Fitch launched on a rivulet in
Bucks County, Pennsylvania, a boat propelled by an engine which moved
an endless chain to which little paddles were attached. The next year,
Fitch's second boat, operated by twelve paddles, six on a side--an
arrangement suggesting the "side-wheeler" of the future--successfully
plied the Delaware off "Conjuror's Point," as the scene of Fitch's
labors was dubbed in whimsical amusement and derision. In 1787 Rumsey,
encouraged by Franklin, fashioned a boat propelled by a stream of water
taken in at the prow and ejected at the stern. In 1788 Fitch's third
boat traversed the distance from Philadelphia to Burlington on numerous
occasions and ran as a regular packet in 1790, covering over a thousand
miles. In this model Fitch shifted the paddles from the sides to the
rear, thus anticipating in principle the modern stern-wheeler.

It was doubtless Fitch's experiments in 1785 that led to the first plan
in America to operate a land vehicle by steam. Oliver Evans, a neighbor
and acquaintance of Fitch's, petitioned the Pennsylvania Legislature
in 1786 for the right of operating wagons propelled by steam on the
highways of that State. This petition was derisively rejected; but
a similar one made to the Legislature of Maryland was granted on the
ground that such action could hurt nobody. Evans in 1802 took fiery
revenge on the scoffers by actually running his little five-horse-power
carriage through Philadelphia. The rate of speed, however, was so slow
that the idea of moving vehicles by steam was still considered useless
for practical purposes. Eight years later, Evans offered to wager $3000
that, on a level road, he could make a carriage driven by steam equal
the speed of the swiftest horse, but he found no response. In 1812
he asserted that he was willing to wager that he could drive a steam
carriage on level rails at a rate of fifteen miles an hour. Evans thus
anticipated the belief of Stephenson that steam-driven vehicles would
travel best on railed tracks.

In the development of the steamboat almost all earlier means of
propulsion, natural and artificial, were used as models by the
inventors. The fins of fishes, the webbed feet of amphibious birds, the
paddles of the Indian, and the poles and oars of the riverman, were all
imitated by the patient inventors struggling with the problem. Rumsey's
first effort was a copy of the old setting-pole idea. Fitch's model of
1785 had side paddle wheels operated by an endless chain. Fitch's second
and third models were practically paddle-wheel models, one having the
paddles at the side and the other at the stern. Ormsbee of Connecticut
made a model, in 1792, on the plan of a duck's foot. Morey made what may
be called the first real stern-wheeler in 1794. Two years later Fitch
ran a veritable screw propeller on Collect Pond near New York City.
Although General Benjamin Tupper of Massachusetts had been fashioning
devices of this character eight years previously, Fitch was the first to
apply the idea effectively. In 1798 he evolved the strange, amphibious
creation known as his "model of 1798," which has never been adequately
explained. It was a steamboat on iron wheels provided with flanges, as
though it was intended to be run on submerged tracks. What may have been
the idea of its inventor, living out his last gloomy days in Kentucky,
may never be known; but it is possible to see in this anomalous machine
an anticipation of the locomotive not approached by any other American
of the time. Thus, prior to 1800 almost every type of mechanism for
the propulsion of steamboats had been suggested and tried; and in 1804,
Stevens's twin-screw propeller completed the list.

It is not alone Fitch's development of the devices of the endless chain,
paddle wheel, and screw propeller and of his puzzling earth-and-water
creature that gives luster to his name. His prophetic insight into the
future national importance of the steamboat and his conception, as
an inventor, of his moral obligations to the people at large were as
original and striking in the science of that age as were his models.

The early years of the national life of the United States were the
golden age of monopoly. Every colony, as a matter of course, had granted
to certain men special privileges, and, as has already been pointed out,
the questions of monopolies and combinations in restraint of trade
had arisen even so early as the beginning of the eighteenth century.
Interwoven inextricably with these problems was the whole problem of
colonial rivalry, which in its later form developed into an insistence
on state rights. Every improvement in the means of transportation, every
development of natural resources, every new invention was inevitably
considered from the standpoint of sectional interests and with a view to
its monopolistic possibilities. This was particularly true in the case
of the steamboat, because of its limitation to rivers and bays which
could be specifically enumerated and defined. For instance, Washington
in 1784 attests the fact that Rumsey operated his mechanical boat at
Bath in secret "until he saw the effect of an application he was about
to make to the Assembly of this State, for a reward." The application
was successful, and Rumsey was awarded a monopoly in Virginia waters for
ten years.

Fitch, on the other hand, when he applied to Congress in 1785, desired
merely to obtain official encouragement and intended to allow his
invention to be used by all comers. Meeting only with rebuff, he
realized that his only hope of organizing a company that could provide
working capital lay in securing monopolistic privileges. In 1786 he
accordingly applied to the individual States and secured the sole right
to operate steamboats on the waterways of New Jersey, Delaware, New
York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. How different would have been the
story of the steamboat if Congress had accepted Fitch at his word and
created a precedent against monopolistic rights on American rivers!

Fitch, in addition to the high purpose of devoting his new invention to
the good of the nation without personal considerations, must be credited
with perceiving at the very beginning the peculiar importance of the
steamboat to the American West. His original application to Congress in
1785 opened: "The subscriber begs leave to lay at the feet of Congress,
an attempt he has made to facilitate the internal Navigation of the
United States, adapted especially to the Waters of the Mississippi." At
another time with prophetic vision he wrote: "The Grand and Principle
object must be on the Atlantick, which would soon overspread the wild
forests of America with people, and make us the most oppulent Empire on
Earth. Pardon me, generous public, for suggesting ideas that cannot be
dijested at this day."

Foremost in exhibiting high civic and patriotic motives, Fitch was
also foremost in appreciating the importance of the steamboat in
the expansion of American trade. This significance was also clearly
perceived by his brilliant successor, Robert Fulton. That the West and
its commerce were always predominant in Fulton's great schemes is proved
by words which he addressed in 1803 to James Monroe, American Ambassador
to Great Britain: "You have perhaps heard of the success of my
experiments for navigating boats by steam engines and you will feel
the importance of establishing such boats on the Mississippi and other
rivers of the United States as soon as possible." Robert Fulton had been
interested in steamboats for a period not definitely known, possibly
since his sojourn in Philadelphia in the days of Fitch's early efforts.
That he profited by the other inventor's efforts at the time, however,
is not suggested by any of his biographers. He subsequently went to
London and gave himself up to the study and practice of engineering.
There he later met James Rumsey, who came to England in 1788, and by him
no doubt was informed, if he was not already aware, of the experiments
and models of Rumsey and Fitch. He obtained the loan of Fitch's plans
and drawings and made his own trial of various existing devices, such
as oars, paddles, duck's feet, and Fitch's endless chain with
"resisting-boards" attached. Meanwhile Fulton was also devoting his
attention to problems of canal construction and to the development
of submarine boats and submarine explosives. He was engaged in these
researches in France in 1801 when the new American minister, Robert R.
Livingston, arrived, and the two men soon formed a friendship destined
to have a vital and enduring influence upon the development of steam
navigation on the inland waterways of America.

Livingston already had no little experience in the same field of
invention as Fulton. In 1798 he had obtained, for a period of twenty
years, the right to operate steamboats on all the waters of the State of
New York, a monopoly which had just lapsed owing to the death of Fitch.
In the same year Livingston had built a steamboat which had made three
miles an hour on the Hudson. He had experimented with most of the models
then in existence--upright paddles at the side, endless-chain paddles,
and stern paddle wheels. Fulton was soon inspired to resume his efforts
by Livingston's account of his own experiments and of recent advances in
England, where a steamboat had navigated the Thames in 1801 and a year
later the famous sternwheeler Charlotte Dundas had towed boats of 140
