Princes Street, as they passed briskly to and fro--met, greeted, and
bowed to each other--or entered and left the shops, which are in that
quarter, and, for a town of the Britannic provinces, particularly fine.
My mind being busy upon other things, the course of my eye was the more
random; and it chanced that I followed, for some time, the advance of a
young gentleman with a red head and a white great-coat, for whom I cared
nothing at the moment, and of whom it is probable I shall be gathered to
my fathers without learning more.  He seemed to have a large
acquaintance: his hat was for ever in his hand; and I daresay I had
already observed him exchanging compliments with half a dozen, when he
drew up at last before a young man and a young lady whose tall persons
and gallant carriage I thought I recognised.

It was impossible at such a distance that I could be sure, but the
thought was sufficient, and I craned out of the embrasure to follow them
as long as possible.  To think that such emotions, that such a concussion
of the blood, may have been inspired by a chance resemblance, and that I
may have stood and thrilled there for a total stranger!  This distant
view, at least, whether of Flora or of some one else, changed in a moment
the course of my reflections.  It was all very well, and it was highly
needful, I should see my uncle; but an uncle, a great-uncle at that, and
one whom I had never seen, leaves the imagination cold; and if I were to
leave the castle, I might never again have the opportunity of finding
Flora.  The little impression I had made, even supposing I had made any,
how soon it would die out! how soon I should sink to be a phantom memory,
with which (in after days) she might amuse a husband and children!  No,
the impression must be clenched, the wax impressed with the seal, ere I
left Edinburgh.  And at this the two interests that were now contending
in my bosom came together and became one.  I wished to see Flora again;
and I wanted some one to further me in my flight and to get me new
clothes.  The conclusion was apparent.  Except for persons in the
garrison itself, with whom it was a point of honour and military duty to
retain me captive, I knew, in the whole country of Scotland, these two
alone.  If it were to be done at all, they must be my helpers.  To tell
them of my designed escape while I was still in bonds, would be to lay
before them a most difficult choice.  What they might do in such a case,
I could not in the least be sure of, for (the same case arising) I was
far from sure what I should do myself.  It was plain I must escape first.
When the harm was done, when I was no more than a poor wayside fugitive,
I might apply to them with less offence and more security.  To this end
it became necessary that I should find out where they lived and how to
reach it; and feeling a strong confidence that they would soon return to
visit me, I prepared a series of baits with which to angle for my
information.  It will be seen the first was good enough.

Perhaps two days after, Master Ronald put in an appearance by himself.  I
had no hold upon the boy, and pretermitted my design till I should have
laid court to him and engaged his interest.  He was prodigiously
embarrassed, not having previously addressed me otherwise than by a bow
and blushes; and he advanced to me with an air of one stubbornly
performing a duty, like a raw soldier under fire.  I laid down my
carving; greeted him with a good deal of formality, such as I thought he
would enjoy; and finding him to remain silent, branched off into
narratives of my campaigns such as Goguelat himself might have scrupled
to endorse.  He visibly thawed and brightened; drew more near to where I
sat; forgot his timidity so far as to put many questions; and at last,
with another blush, informed me he was himself expecting a commission.

'Well,' said I, 'they are fine troops, your British troops in the
Peninsula.  A young gentleman of spirit may well be proud to be engaged
at the head of such soldiers.'

'I know that,' he said; 'I think of nothing else.  I think shame to be
dangling here at home and going through with this foolery of education,
while others, no older than myself, are in the field.'

'I cannot blame you,' said I.  'I have felt the same myself.'

'There are--there are no troops, are there, quite so good as ours?' he
asked.

'Well,' said I, 'there is a point about them: they have a defect,--they
are not to be trusted in a retreat.  I have seen them behave very ill in
a retreat.'

'I believe that is our national character,' he said--God forgive
him!--with an air of pride.

'I have seen your national character running away at least, and had the
honour to run after it!' rose to my lips, but I was not so ill advised as
to give it utterance.  Every one should be flattered, but boys and women
without stint; and I put in the rest of the afternoon narrating to him
tales of British heroism, for which I should not like to engage that they
were all true.

'I am quite surprised,' he said at last.  'People tell you the French are
insincere.  Now, I think your sincerity is beautiful.  I think you have a
noble character.  I admire you very much.  I am very grateful for your
kindness to--to one so young,' and he offered me his hand.

'I shall see you again soon?' said I.

'Oh, now!  Yes, very soon,' said he.  'I--I wish to tell you.  I would
not let Flora--Miss Gilchrist, I mean--come to-day.  I wished to see more
of you myself.  I trust you are not offended: you know, one should be
careful about strangers.'

I approved his caution, and he took himself away: leaving me in a mixture
of contrarious feelings, part ashamed to have played on one so gullible,
part raging that I should have burned so much incense before the vanity
of England; yet, in the bottom of my soul, delighted to think I had made
a friend--or, at least, begun to make a friend--of Flora's brother.

As I had half expected, both made their appearance the next day.  I
struck so fine a shade betwixt the pride that is allowed to soldiers and
the sorrowful humility that befits a captive, that I declare, as I went
to meet them, I might have afforded a subject for a painter.  So much was
high comedy, I must confess; but so soon as my eyes lighted full on her
dark face and eloquent eyes, the blood leaped into my cheeks--and that
was nature!  I thanked them, but not the least with exultation; it was my
cue to be mournful, and to take the pair of them as one.

'I have been thinking,' I said, 'you have been so good to me, both of
you, stranger and prisoner as I am, that I have been thinking how I could
testify to my gratitude.  It may seem a strange subject for a confidence,
but there is actually no one here, even of my comrades, that knows me by
my name and title.  By these I am called plain Champdivers, a name to
which I have a right, but not the name which I should bear, and which
(but a little while ago) I must hide like a crime.  Miss Flora, suffer me
to present to you the Vicomte Anne de Keroual de Saint-Yves, a private
soldier.'

'I knew it!' cried the boy; 'I knew he was a noble!'

And I thought the eyes of Miss Flora said the same, but more
persuasively.  All through this interview she kept them on the ground, or
only gave them to me for a moment at a time, and with a serious
sweetness.

'You may conceive, my friends, that this is rather a painful confession,'
I continued.  'To stand here before you, vanquished, a prisoner in a
fortress, and take my own name upon my lips, is painful to the proud.
And yet I wished that you should know me.  Long after this, we may yet
hear of one another--perhaps Mr. Gilchrist and myself in the field and
from opposing camps--and it would be a pity if we heard and did not
recognise.'

They were both moved; and began at once to press upon me offers of
service, such as to lend me books, get me tobacco if I used it, and the
like.  This would have been all mighty welcome, before the tunnel was
ready.  Now it signified no more to me than to offer the transition I
required.

'My dear friends,' I said--'for you must allow me to call you that, who
have no others within so many hundred leagues--perhaps you will think me
fanciful and sentimental; and perhaps indeed I am; but there is one
service that I would beg of you before all others.  You see me set here
on the top of this rock in the midst of your city.  Even with what
liberty I have, I have the opportunity to see a myriad roofs, and I dare
to say, thirty leagues of sea and land.  All this hostile!  Under all
these roofs my enemies dwell; wherever I see the smoke of a house rising,
I must tell myself that some one sits before the chimney and reads with
joy of our reverses.  Pardon me, dear friends, I know that you must do
the same, and I do not grudge at it!  With you, it is all different.
Show me your house then, were it only the chimney, or, if that be not
visible, the quarter of the town in which it lies!  So, when I look all
about me, I shall be able to say: "_There is one house in which I am not
quite unkindly thought of_."'

Flora stood a moment.

'It is a pretty thought,' said she, 'and, as far as regards Ronald and
myself, a true one.  Come, I believe I can show you the very smoke out of
our chimney.'

So saying, she carried me round the battlements towards the opposite or
southern side of the fortress, and indeed to a bastion almost immediately
overlooking the place of our projected flight.  Thence we had a view of
some foreshortened suburbs at our feet, and beyond of a green, open, and
irregular country rising towards the Pentland Hills.  The face of one of
these summits (say two leagues from where we stood) is marked with a
procession of white scars.  And to this she directed my attention.

'You see these marks?' she said.  'We call them the Seven Sisters.
Follow a little lower with your eye, and you will see a fold of the hill,
the tops of some trees, and a tail of smoke out of the midst of them.
That is Swanston Cottage, where my brother and I are living with my aunt.
If it gives you pleasure to see it, I am glad.  We, too, can see the
castle from a corner in the garden, and we go there in the morning
often--do we not, Ronald?--and we think of you, M. de Saint-Yves; but I
am afraid it does not altogether make us glad.'

'Mademoiselle!' said I, and indeed my voice was scarce under command, 'if
you knew how your generous words--how even the sight of you--relieved the
horrors of this place, I believe, I hope, I know, you would be glad.  I
will come here daily and look at that dear chimney and these green hills,
and bless you from the heart, and dedicate to you the prayers of this
poor sinner.  Ah!  I do not say they can avail!'

'Who can say that, M. de Saint-Yves?' she said softly.  'But I think it
is time we should be going.'

'High time,' said Ronald, whom (to say the truth) I had a little
forgotten.

On the way back, as I was laying myself out to recover lost ground with
the youth, and to obliterate, if possible, the memory of my last and
somewhat too fervent speech, who should come past us but the major?  I
had to stand aside and salute as he went by, but his eyes appeared
entirely occupied with Flora.

'Who is that man?' she asked.

'He is a friend of mine,' said I.  'I give him lessons in French, and he
has been very kind to me.'

'He stared,' she said,--'I do not say, rudely; but why should he stare?'

'If you do not wish to be stared at, mademoiselle, suffer me to recommend
a veil,' said I.

She looked at me with what seemed anger.  'I tell you the man stared,'
she said.

And Ronald added.  'Oh, I don't think he meant any harm.  I suppose he
was just surprised to see us walking about with a pr--- with M.
Saint-Yves.'

But the next morning, when I went to Chevenix's rooms, and after I had
dutifully corrected his exercise--'I compliment you on your taste,' said
he to me.

'I beg your pardon?' said I.

'Oh no, I beg yours,' said he.  'You understand me perfectly, just as I
do you.'

I murmured something about enigmas.

'Well, shall I give you the key to the enigma?' said he, leaning back.
'That was the young lady whom Goguelat insulted and whom you avenged.  I
do not blame you.  She is a heavenly creature.'

'With all my heart, to the last of it!' said I.  'And to the first also,
if it amuses you!  You are become so very acute of late that I suppose
you must have your own way.'

'What is her name?' he asked.

'Now, really!' said I.  'Do you think it likely she has told me?'

'I think it certain,' said he.

I could not restrain my laughter.  'Well, then, do you think it likely I
would tell you?' I cried.

'Not a bit.' said he.  'But come, to our lesson!'




CHAPTER VI--THE ESCAPE


The time for our escape drew near, and the nearer it came the less we
seemed to enjoy the prospect.  There is but one side on which this castle
can be left either with dignity or safety; but as there is the main gate
and guard, and the chief street of the upper city, it is not to be
thought of by escaping prisoners.  In all other directions an abominable
precipice surrounds it, down the face of which (if anywhere at all) we
must regain our liberty.  By our concurrent labours in many a dark night,
working with the most anxious precautions against noise, we had made out
to pierce below the curtain about the south-west corner, in a place they
call the _Devil's Elbow_.  I have never met that celebrity; nor (if the
rest of him at all comes up to what they called his elbow) have I the
least desire of his acquaintance.  From the heel of the masonry, the
rascally, breakneck precipice descended sheer among waste lands,
scattered suburbs of the city, and houses in the building.  I had never
the heart to look for any length of time--the thought that I must make
the descent in person some dark night robbing me of breath; and, indeed,
on anybody not a seaman or a steeple-jack, the mere sight of the _Devil's
Elbow_ wrought like an emetic.

I don't know where the rope was got, and doubt if I much cared.  It was
not that which gravelled me, but whether, now that we had it, it would
serve our turn.  Its length, indeed, we made a shift to fathom out; but
who was to tell us how that length compared with the way we had to go?
Day after day, there would be always some of us stolen out to the
_Devil's Elbow_ and making estimates of the descent, whether by a bare
guess or the dropping of stones.  A private of pioneers remembered the
formula for that--or else remembered part of it and obligingly invented
the remainder.  I had never any real confidence in that formula; and even
had we got it from a book, there were difficulties in the way of the
application that might have daunted Archimedes.  We durst not drop any
considerable pebble lest the sentinels should hear, and those that we
dropped we could not hear ourselves.  We had never a watch--or none that
had a second-hand; and though every one of us could guess a second to a
nicety, all somehow guessed it differently.  In short, if any two set
forth upon this enterprise, they invariably returned with two opinions,
and often with a black eye in the bargain.  I looked on upon these
proceedings, although not without laughter, yet with impatience and
disgust.  I am one that cannot bear to see things botched or gone upon
with ignorance; and the thought that some poor devil was to hazard his
bones upon such premises, revolted me.  Had I guessed the name of that
unhappy first adventurer, my sentiments might have been livelier still.

The designation of this personage was indeed all that remained for us to
do; and even in that we had advanced so far that the lot had fallen on
Shed B.  It had been determined to mingle the bitter and the sweet; and
whoever went down first, the whole of his shed-mates were to follow next
in order.  This caused a good deal of joy in Shed B, and would have
caused more if it had not still remained to choose our pioneer.  In view
of the ambiguity in which we lay as to the length of the rope and the
height of the precipice--and that this gentleman was to climb down from
fifty to seventy fathoms on a pitchy night, on a rope entirely free, and
with not so much as an infant child to steady it at the bottom, a little
backwardness was perhaps excusable.  But it was, in our case, more than a
little.  The truth is, we were all womanish fellows about a height; and I
have myself been put, more than once, _hors de combat_ by a less affair
than the rock of Edinburgh Castle.

We discussed it in the dark and between the passage of the rounds; and it
was impossible for any body of men to show a less adventurous spirit.  I
am sure some of us, and myself first among the number, regretted
Goguelat.  Some were persuaded it was safe, and could prove the same by
argument; but if they had good reasons why some one else should make the
trial, they had better still why it should not be themselves.  Others,
again, condemned the whole idea as insane; among these, as ill-luck would
have it, a seaman of the fleet; who was the most dispiriting of all.  The
height, he reminded us, was greater than the tallest ship's mast, the
rope entirely free; and he as good as defied the boldest and strongest to
succeed.  We were relieved from this dead-lock by our sergeant-major of
dragoons.

'Comrades,' said he, 'I believe I rank you all; and for that reason, if
you really wish it, I will be the first myself.  At the same time, you
are to consider what the chances are that I may prove to be the last, as
well.  I am no longer young--I was sixty near a month ago.  Since I have
been a prisoner, I have made for myself a little _bedaine_.  My arms are
all gone to fat.  And you must promise not to blame me, if I fall and
play the devil with the whole thing.'

'We cannot hear of such a thing!' said I.  'M. Laclas is the oldest man
here; and, as such, he should be the very last to offer.  It is plain, we
must draw lots.'

'No,' said M. Laclas; 'you put something else in my head!  There is one
here who owes a pretty candle to the others, for they have kept his
secret.  Besides, the rest of us are only rabble; and he is another
affair altogether.  Let Champdivers--let the noble go the first.'

I confess there was a notable pause before the noble in question got his
voice.  But there was no room for choice.  I had been so ill-advised,
when I first joined the regiment, as to take ground on my nobility.  I
had been often rallied on the matter in the ranks, and had passed under
the by-names of _Monseigneur_ and _the Marquis_.  It was now needful I
should justify myself and take a fair revenge.

Any little hesitation I may have felt passed entirely unnoticed, from the
lucky incident of a round happening at that moment to go by.  And during
the interval of silence there occurred something that sent my blood to
the boil.  There was a private in our shed called Clausel, a man of a
very ugly disposition.  He had made one of the followers of Goguelat;
but, whereas Goguelat had always a kind of monstrous gaiety about him,
Clausel was no less morose than he was evil-minded.  He was sometimes
called _the General_, and sometimes by a name too ill-mannered for
repetition.  As we all sat listening, this man's hand was laid on my
shoulder, and his voice whispered in my ear: 'If you don't go, I'll have
you hanged, Marquis!'

As soon as the round was past--'Certainly, gentlemen!' said I.  'I will
give you a lead, with all the pleasure in the world.  But, first of all,
there is a hound here to be punished.  M. Clausel has just insulted me,
and dishonoured the French army; and I demand that he run the gauntlet of
