found was the profession of this our fellow-traveller).

About this time I fell asleep, and enjoyed a comfortable nap till such
time as we arrived at the inn where we put up. Here, having alighted
from the waggon, I had an opportunity of viewing the passengers in order
as they entered. The first who appeared was a brisk, airy girl, about
twenty years old, with a silver-laced hat on her head instead of a cap,
a blue stuff riding-suit, trimmed with silver very much tarnished, and
a whip in her hand. After her came, limping, an old man, with a worsted
nightcap buttoned under his chin, and a broad-brimmed hat slouched over
it, an old rusty blue cloak tied about his neck, under which appeared a
brown surtout, that covered a threadbare coat and waistcoat, and, as
he afterwards discerned, a dirty flannel jacket. His eyes were hollow,
bleared, and gummy; his face was shrivelled into a thousand wrinkles,
his gums were destitute of teeth, his nose sharp and drooping, his chin
peaked and prominent, so that, when he mumped or spoke, they approached
one another like a pair of nutcrackers: he supported himself on an
ivory-headed cane and his whole figure was a just emblem of winter,
famine, and avarice. But how was I surprised, when I beheld the
formidable captain in the shape of a little thin creature, about the age
of forty, with a long withered visage, very much resembling that of a
baboon, through the upper part of which two little gray eyes peeped: he
wore his own hair in a queue that reached to his rump, which immoderate
length, I suppose, was the occasion of a baldness that appeared on the
crown of his head when he deigned to take off his hat, which was very
much of the size and cock of Pistol's.

Having laid aside his great-coat, I could not help admiring the
extraordinary make of this man of war: he was about five feet and three
inches high, sixteen inches of which went to his face and long scraggy
neck: his thighs were about six inches in length, his legs resembling
spindles or drumsticks, five feet and a half, and his body, which put me
in mind of extension without substance, engrossed the remainder: so that
on the whole, he appeared like a spider or grasshopper erect, and was
almost a vox et praeterea nihil. His dress consisted of a frock of what
is called bearskin, the skirts of which were about half a foot long, an
hussar waistcoat, scarlet breeches reaching half way down his thighs,
worsted stockings rolled up almost to his groin, and shoes with wooden
heels at least two inches high; he carried a sword very near as long as
himself in one hand, and with the other conducted his lady, who seemed
to be a woman of his own age, and still retained some remains of an
agreeable person, but so ridiculously affected, that, had I not been a
novice in the world, I might have easily perceived in her the deplorable
vanity and second-hand airs of a lady's woman.

We were all assembled in the kitchen, when Captain Weazel (for that was
his name) desired a room with a fire for himself and spouse, and told
the landlord they would up by themselves. The innkeeper replied that he
could not afford them a room by themselves; and as for supping, he had
prepared victuals for the passengers in the waggon, without respect of
persons, but if he could prevail on the rest to let him have his choice
in a separate manner, he should be very well pleased. This was no sooner
said than all of us declared against the proposal, and Miss Jenny (our
other female passenger), observed that, if Captain Weazel and his lady
had a mind to sup by themselves, they might wait until we should have
done. At this hint the captain put on a martial frown, and looked very
big, without speaking; while his yokefellow, with a disdainful toss
of her nose, muttered something about "Creature!" which Miss Jenny
overhearing, stepped up to her, saying, "None of your names, good Mrs.
Abigail. Creature, quotha--I'll assure you no such creature as you
neither--no ten-pound sneaker--no quality-coupler." Here the captain
interposed, with a "D--e, madam, what do you mean by that?" "D--n you
sir, who are you?" replied Miss Jenny, "who made you a captain, you
pitiful, trencher-scraping, pimping curler? 'Sdeath! the army is come to
a fine pass, when such fellows as you get commissions. What, I suppose
you think I don't know you? Egad, you and your helpmate are well met--a
cast-off mistress and a bald valet-de-chambre are well yoked together."
"Blood and wounds!" cried Weazel, "d'ye question the honour of my wife,
madam? Hell and d-ion! No man in England durst say so much--I would flay
him, carbonado him! Fury and destruction! I would have his liver for
my supper." So saying, he drew his sword and flourished with it, to the
great terror of Strap; while Miss Jenny, snapping her fingers, told him
she did not value his resentment a louse.

In the midst of this quarrel the master of the waggon alighted, who,
understanding the cause of the disturbance, and fearing the captain and
his lady would take umbrage and leave his carriage, was at great pains
to have everything made up, which he at last accomplished, and we sat
down to supper altogether. At bedtime we were shown to our apartments;
the old usurer, Strap, and I, to one room; the captain, his wife, and
Miss Jenny, to another. About midnight, my companion's bowels being
disordered, he got up, in order to go backward, but in his return,
mistaking one door for another, entered Weazel's chamber, and without
any hesitation went to bed to his wife, who was fast asleep, the captain
being at another end of the room groping for some empty vessel, in lieu
of his own chamberpot, which was leaky: as he did not perceive
Strap coming in, he went towards his own bed, after having found a
convenience; but no sooner did he feel a rough head, covered with a
cotton nightcap, than it came into his mind that he had mistaken Miss
Jenny's bed instead of his own, and that the head he felt was that
of some gallant, with whom she had made an assignation. Full of his
conjecture, and scandalised at the prostitution of his apartment, he
snatched up the vessel he had just before filled, and emptied it at once
on the astonished barber and his own wife, who waking at that instant,
broke forth into lamentable cries, which not only alarmed the husband
beyond measure, but frighted poor Strap almost out of his senses; for he
verily believed himself bewitched, especially when the incensed captain
seized him by the throat, with a volley of oaths, asking him how he
durst have the presumption to attempt the chastity of his wife. Poor
Strap was so amazed and confounded, that he could say nothing but--"I
take God to witness she's a virgin for me."

Mrs. Weazel, enraged to find herself in such a pickle through the
precipitation of her husband, arose in her shift, and with the heel of
her shoe which she found by the bedside, belaboured the captain's bald
pate till he roared "Murder." "I'll teach you to empty your stinkpots
on me," cried she, "you pitiful hop-o'-my-thumb coxcomb. What, I warrant
you're jealous, you man of lath. Was it for this I condescended to take
you to my bed, you poor, withered, sapless twig?"

The noise occasioned by this adventure had brought the master of the
waggon and me to the door, where we overheard all that passed with great
satisfaction. In the meantime we were alarmed with the cry of "Rape!
Murder! Rape!" which Jenny pronounced with great vociferation. "Oh! You
vile abominable old villain," said she, "would you rob me of my virtue?
But I'll be revenged of you, you old goat! I will! Help! for heaven's
sake! help! I shall be ravished! ruined! help!" Some servants of the
inn, hearing this cry, came running upstairs with lights, and such
weapons as chance afforded; when we beheld a very diverting scene. In
one corner stood the poor captain shivering in his shirt, which was all
torn to rags: with a woeful visage, scratched all over by his wife, who
had by this time wrapped the counterpane about her, and sat sobbing on
the side of her bed. At the other end lay the old usurer, sprawling on
Miss Jenny's bed, with his flannel jacket over his shirt, and his tawny
meagre limbs exposed to the air; while she held him fast by the two
ears, and loaded him with execrations. When he asked what was the
matter, she affected to weep, told us she was afraid that wicked rogue
had ruined her in her sleep, and bade us take notice of what we saw, for
she intended to make use of our evidence against him. The poor wretch
looked like one more dead than alive, and begged to be released; a
favour which he had no sooner obtained than he protested she was no
woman, but a devil incarnate--that she had first seduced his flesh to
rebel, and then betrayed him. "Yes, cockatrice," continued he, "you
know you laid this snare fur me--but you shan't succeed--for I will hang
myself before you shall get a farthing of me." So saying, he crawled to
his own bed, groaning all the way. We then advanced to the Captain, who
told us, "Gentlemen, here has been a d--d mistake; but I'll be revenged
on him who was the cause of it. That Scotchman who carries the knapsack
shall not breathe this vital air another day, if my name be Weazel. My
dear, I ask you ten thousand pardons; you are sensible, I could mean no
harm to you." "I know not what you meant," replied she, sighing, "but
I know I have got enough to send me to my grave." At length they were
reconciled. The wife was complimented with a share of Miss Jenny's bed
(her own being overflowed), and the master of the waggon invited Weazel
to sleep the remaining part of the night with him. I retired to mine,
where I found Strap mortally afraid, he having stolen away in the dark
while the captain and his lady were at loggerheads.






CHAPTER XII

Captain Weazel challenges Strap, who declines the Combat--an Affair
between the Captain and me--the Usurer is fain to give Miss Jenny five
Guineas for a Release--we are in Danger of losing a Meal--the Behaviour
of Weazel, Jenny, and Joey, on that Occasion--an Account of Captain
Weazel and his Lady--the Captain's Courage tried--Isaac's mirth at the
Captain's Expense

Next morning I agreed to give the master of the waggon ten shillings for
my passage to London, provided Strap should be allowed to take my place
when I should be disposed to walk. At the same time I desired him to
appease the incensed captain, who had entered the kitchen with a drawn
sword in his hand, and threatened with many oaths to sacrifice the
villain who attempted to violate his bed; but it was to no purpose for
the master to explain the mistake, and assure him of the poor lad's
innocence, who stood trembling behind me all the while: the more
submission that appeared in Strap, the more implacable seemed the
resentment of Weazel, who swore he must either fight him or he would
instantly put him to death. I was extremely provoked at this insolence,
and told him, it could not be supposed that a poor barber lad would
engage a man of the sword at his own weapon; but I was persuaded he
would wrestle or box with him. To which proposal Strap immediately gave
assent, by saying, "he would box with him for a guinea." Weazel replied
with a look of disdain, that it was beneath any gentleman of his
character to fight like a porter, or even to put himself on a footing,
in any respect, with such a fellow as Strap. "Odds bodikins!" cries
Joey, "sure, coptain, yaw would not commit moorder! Here's a poor lad
that is willing to make atonement for his offence; and an that woan't
satisfie yaw, offers to fight yaw fairly. And yaw woan't box, I dare
say, he will coodgel with yaw. Woan't yaw, my lad?" Strap, after
some hesitation, answered, "Yes, yes, I'll cudgel with him." But this
expedient being also rejected by the captain, I began to smell his
character, and, tipping Strap the wink, told the captain that I had
always heard it said, the person who receives a challenge should have
the choice of the weapons; this therefore being the rule in point of
honour, I would venture to promise on the head of my companion, that he
would even fight Captain Weazel at sharps; but it should be with
such sharps as Strap was best acquainted with, namely, razors. At my
mentioning razors: I could perceive the captain's colour change while
Strap, pulling me by the sleeve, whispered with great eagerness: "No,
no, no; for the love of God, don't make any such bargain." At length,
Weazel, recovering himself, turned towards me, and with a ferocious
countenance asked, "Who the devil are you? Will you fight me?" With
these words, putting himself in a posture, I was grievously alarmed
at seeing the point of a sword within half a foot of my breast;
and, springing to one side, snatched up a spit that stood in the
chimney-corner, with which I kept my formidable adversary at bay, who
made a great many half-longes, skipping backward at every push, till
at last I pinned him up in a corner, to the no small diversion of the
company. While he was in this situation his wife entered, and, seeing
her husband in these dangerous circumstances, uttered a dreadful scream:
in this emergency, Weazel demanded a cessation, which was immediately
granted; and at last was contented with the submission of Strap,
who, falling on his knees before him, protested the innocence of his
intention, and asked pardon for the mistake he had committed. This
affair being ended without bloodshed, we went to breakfast, but missed
two of our company, namely, Miss Jenny and the usurer. As for the first,
Mrs. Weazel informed us, that she had kept her awake all night with her
groans; and that when she rose in the morning, Miss Jenny was so much
indisposed that she could not proceed on her journey. At that instant, a
message came from her to the master of the waggon, who immediately went
into her chamber, followed by us all. She told him in a lamentable tone,
that she was afraid of a miscarriage, owing to the fright she received
last night from the brutality of Isaac; and, as the event was uncertain,
desired the usurer might be detained to answer for the consequence.
Accordingly, this ancient Tarquin was found in the waggon, whither he
had retired to avoid the shame of last night's disgrace, and brought by
force into her presence. He no sooner appeared than she began to weep
and sigh most piteously, and told us, if she died, she would leave her
blood upon the head of that ravisher. Poor Isaac turned up his eyes and
hands to heaven, prayed that God would deliver him from the machinations
of that Jezebel; and assured us, with tears in his eyes, that his
being found in bed with her was the result of her own invitation. The
waggoner, understanding the case, advised Isaac to make it up, by giving
her a sum of money: to which advice he replied with great vehemence, "A
sum of money!--a halter for the cockatrice!" "Oh! 'tis very well," said
Miss Jenny; "I see it is in vain to attempt that flinty heart of his by
fair means. Joey, be so good as to go to the justice, and tell him
there is a sick person here, who wants to see him on an affair of
consequence." At the name of justice Isaac trembled, and bidding Joey
stay, asked with a quavering voice, "What she would have? She told
him that, as he had not perpetrated his wicked purpose, she would be
satisfied with a small matter. And though the damage she might sustain
in her health might be irreparable, she would give him a release for
a hundred guineas." "A hundred guineas!" cried he in an ecstacy, "a
hundred furies! Where should a poor old wretch like me have a hundred
guineas? If I had so much money, d'ya think I should be found travelling
in a waggon, at this season of the year?" "Come, come," replied Jenny,
"none of your miserly artifice here. You think I don't know Isaac
Rapine, the money-broker, in the Minories. Ah! you old rogue! many a
pawn have you had of me and my acquaintance, which was never redeemed."
Isaac, finding it was in vain to disguise himself, offered twenty
shillings for a discharge, which she absolutely refused under fifty
pounds: at last, however, she was brought down to five, which he paid
with great reluctancy, rather than be prosecuted for a rape. After which
accommodation, the sick person made a shift to get into the waggon,
and we set forward in great tranquillity; Strap being accommodated
with Joey's horse, the driver himself choosing to walk. The morning and
forenoon we were entertained with an account of the valour of Captain
Weazel, who told us he had once knocked down a soldier that made game of
him; tweaked a drawer by the nose, who found fault with his picking his
teeth with a fork, at another time; and that he had moreover challenged
a cheesemonger, who had the presumption to be his rival: for the truth
of which exploits he appealed to his wife. She confirmed whatever he
said, and observed, "The last affair happened that very day on which I
received a love-letter from Squire Gobble, and don't you remember, my
dear, I was prodigiously sick that very night with eating ortolans, when
my Lord Diddle took notice of my complexion's being altered, and my lady
was so alarmed that she had well nigh fainted?" "Yes, my dear," replied
the captain, "you know my lord said to me, with a sneer, 'Billy, Mrs.
Weazel is certainly breeding.' And I answered cavalierly, 'My lord, I
wish I could return the compliment.' Upon which the whole company
broke out into an immoderate fit of laughter; and my lord, who loves a
repartee dearly, came round and bussed me." We travelled in this manner
five days, without interruption or meeting anything worth notice: Miss
Jenny, who soon recovered her spirits, entertaining us every day with
diverting songs, of which she could sing a great number; and rallying
her own gallant, who, notwithstanding, would never be reconciled to
her. On the sixth day, while we were about to sit down to dinner, the
innkeeper came and told us, that three gentlemen, just arrived, had
ordered the victuals to be carried to their apartment, although he had
informed them that they were bespoke by the passengers in the waggon. To
which information they had replied, "the passengers in the waggon might
be d--d, their betters must be served before them; they supposed it
would be no hardship on such travellers to dine upon bread and cheese
for one day." This was a terrible disappointment to us all; and we
laid our heads together how to remedy it; when Miss Jenny observed that
Captain Weazel, being by profession a soldier, ought in this case to
protect and prevent us from being insulted. But the Captain excused
himself, saying, he would not for all the world be known to have
travelled in a waggon! swearing at the same time, that could he appear
with honour, they should eat his sword sooner than his provision. Upon
this declaration, Miss Jenny, snatching his weapon, drew it, and ran
immediately into the kitchen, where she threatened to put the cook to
death if he did not send the victuals into our chamber immediately. The
noise she made brought the three strangers down, one of whom no sooner
perceived her than he cried, "Ha! Jenny Ramper! what the devil brought
thee hither?" "My dear Jack Rattle!" replied she, running into his arms,
"is it you? Then Weazel may go to hell for a dinner--I shall dine with
you."

They consented to this proposal with a great deal of joy; and we were
on the point of being reduced to a very uncomfortable meal, when Joey,
understanding the whole affair, entered the kitchen with a pitchfork in
his hand, and swore he would be the death of any man who should pretend
to seize the victuals prepared for the waggon. The menace had like to
have produced fatal consequences; the three strangers drawing their
swords, and being joined by their servants, and we ranging ourselves on
the side of Joey; when the landlord, interposing, offered to part with
his own dinner to keep the peace, which was accepted by the strangers;
and we sat down at table without any further molestation. In the
afternoon, I chose to walk along with Joey, and Strap took my place.
Having entered into a conversation with this driver, I soon found him
to be a merry, facetious, good-natured fellow, and withal very arch;
he informed me, that Miss Jenny was a common girl upon the town, who,
falling into company with a recruiting officer, he carried her down in
the stage coach from London to Newcastle, where he had been arrested for
debt, and was now in prison; upon which she was fain to return to her
former way of life, by this conveyance. He told me likewise, that one of
the gentleman's servants, who were left at the inn, having accidentally
seen Weazel, immediately knew him, and acquainted Joey with some
particulars of his character. That he had served my Lord Frizzle in
quality of valet-de-chambre many years, while he lived separate from
his lady; but, upon their reconciliation, she expressly insisted upon
Weazel's being turned off, as well as the woman he kept: when his
lordship, to get rid of them both with a good grace, proposed that he
should marry his Mistress, and he would procure a commission for him
in the army: this expedient was agreed to, and Weazel is now, by his
lordship's interest, ensigned in --'s regiment. I found he and I had the
same sentiments with regard to Weazel's courage, which he resolved
to put to the trial, by alarming the passengers with the cry of a
'highwayman!' as soon as a horseman should appear.

This scheme we put in practice, towards the dusk, when we descried a man
on horseback approaching us. Joey had no sooner intimated to the people
in the waggon, that he was afraid we should be all robbed than a general
consternation arose: Strap jumped out of the waggon, and hid himself
behind a hedge. The usurer put forth ejaculations, and made a rustling
among the straw, which made us conjecture he had hid something under
it. Mrs. Weazel, wringing her hands uttered lamentable cries: and the
captain, to our great amazement, began to snore; but this artifice did
not succeed; for Miss Jenny, shaking him by the shoulder, bawled out,
"Sdeath! captain, is this a time to snore, when we are going to be
robbed? Get up for shame, and behave like a soldier and man of honour!"
Weazel pretended to be in a great passion for being disturbed, and swore
he would have his nap out if all the highwaymen in England surrounded
him. "D--n my blood! what are you afraid of?" continued he; at the same
time trembling with such agitation that the whole carriage shook. This
singular piece of behaviour incensed Miss Ramper so much that she cried,
"D--n your pitiful soul, you are as arrant a poltroon, as ever was
drummed out of a regiment. Stop the waggon, Joey--let me out, and by
G--d, if I have rhetoric enough, the thief shall not only take your
purse, but your skin also." So saying she leaped out with great agility.
By this time the horseman came up and happened to be a gentleman's
servant well known to Joey, who communicated the scheme, and desired
him to carry it on a little further, by going into the waggon, and
questioning those within. The stranger, consenting for the sake of
diversion, approached it, and in a terrible tone demanded, "Who have
we got here?" Isaac replied, with a lamentable voice, "Here's a poor
miserable sinner, who has got a small family to maintain, and nothing in
the world wherewithal, but these fifteen shillings which if you rob
me of we must all starve together." "Who's that sobbing in the other
corner?" said the supposed highwayman. "A poor unfortunate woman,"
answered Mrs. Weazle, "upon whom I beg you, for Christ's sake, to have
compassion." "Are you maid or wife," said he. "Wife, to my sorrow,"
said she. "Who, or where is your husband?" continued he. "My husband,"
replied Mrs. Weazel, "is an officer in the army and was left sick at the
last inn where we dined." "You must be mistaken, madam," said he, "for
I myself saw him get into the waggon this afternoon. But pray what smell
is that? Sure your lapdog has befouled himself; let me catch hold of the
nasty cur, I'll teach him better manners." Here he laid hold of one of
Weazel's legs, and pulled him out from under his wife's petticoat, where
he had concealed himself. The poor trembling captain, being detected in
his inglorious situation, rubbed his eyes, and affecting to wake out of
sleep, cried, "What's the matter? What's the matter?" "The matter is not
much," answered the horseman; "I only called in to inquire after your
health, and so adieu, most noble captain." He clapped spurs to his
horse, and was out of sight in a moment.

It was some time before Weazel could recollect himself, but at length
reassuming the big look, he said, "D--n the fellow! why did he ride
away before I had time to ask him how his lord and lady do I? Don't you
remember Tom, my dear?" addressing himself to his wife. "Yes," replied
she, "I think I do remember something of the fellow, but you know I
seldom converse with people of his station." "Hey-day!" cried Joey, "do
yaw knaw the young mon, coptain?" "Know him," said Weazel, "many a time
has he filled a glass of Burgundy for me, at my Lord Trippett's table."
"And what may his name be, coptain?" said Joey. "His name!--his name,"
replied Weazel, "is Tom Rinser." "Waunds," cried Joey, "a has changed
his own neame then! for I'se lay a wager he was christened John
Trotter." This observation raised a laugh against the captain, who
seemed very much disconcerted; when Isaac broke silence, and said, "It
is no matter who or what he was, since he has not proved the robber
we suspected, and we ought to bless God for our narrow escape." "Bless
God," said Weazel, "bless the devil! for what? Had he been a highwayman,
I should have eaten his blood, body, and guts, before he had robbed
me, or any one in this diligence." "Ha, ha, ha," cried Miss Jenny, "I
believe you will eat all you kill, indeed, captain." The usurer was so
well pleased at the event of this adventure, that he could not refrain
from being severe, and took notice that Captain Weazel seemed to be a
good Christian, for he had armed himself with patience and resignation,
instead of carnal weapons; and worked out his salvation with fear and
trembling. This piece of satire occasioned a great deal of mirth at
Weazel's expense, who muttered a great many oaths, and threatened to cut
Isaac's throat. The usurer, taking hold of this menace, said, "Gentlemen
and ladies, I take you all to witness, that in my life is in danger from
this bloody-minded officer; I'll have him bound over to the peace."
This second sneer produced another laugh against him, and he remained
crestfallen during the remaining part of our journey.






CHAPTER XIII

Strap and I are terrified by an Apparition--Strap's Conjecture--the
Mystery explained by Joey--we arrive in London--our Dress and
Appearance described--we are insulted in the Street--an Adventure in an
Alehouse--we are imposed upon by a waggish Footman--set to rights by
a Tobacconist--take Lodgings--dive for a Dinner--an Accident at our
Ordinary

We arrived at our inn, supped, and went to bed; but Strap's distemper
continuing, he was obliged to rise in the middle of the night, and
taking the candle in his hand, which he had left burning for the
purpose, he went down to the house of office, whence in a short time
he returned in a great hurry, with his hair standing on end, and a look
betokening horror and astonishment. Without speaking a word, he set down
the light and jumped into bed behind me, where he lay and trembled with
great violence. When I asked him what was the matter, he replied, with a
broken accent, "God have mercy on us! I have seen the devil!" Though my
prejudice was not quite so strong as his, I was not a little alarmed
at this exclamation, and much more so when I heard the sound of bells
approaching our chamber, and felt my bedfellow cling close to me,
uttering these words, "Christ have mercy upon us; there he comes!" At
that instance a monstrous overgrown raven entered our chamber, with
bells at his feet, and made directly towards our bed. As this creature
is reckoned in our country a common vehicle for the devil and witches
to play their pranks in, I verily believed we were haunted; and, in a
violent fright, shrank under the bedclothes. This terrible apparition
leaped upon the bed, and after giving us several severe dabs with
its beak through the blankets, hopped away, and vanished. Strap and I
recommended ourselves to the protection of heaven with great devotion,
and, when we no longer heard the noise, ventured to peep up and take
breath. But we had not been long freed from this phantom, when another
appeared, that had well nigh deprived us both of our senses. We
perceived an old man enter the room, with a long white beard that
reached to his middle; there was a certain wild peculiarity in his
eyes and countenance that did not savour of this world; and his dress
consisted of a brown stuff coat, buttoned behind and at the wrists, with
an odd-fashioned cap of the same stuff upon his head. I was so amazed
that I had not power to move my eyes from such a ghastly object, but lay
motionless and saw him come straight up to me: when he reached the bed,
he wrung his hands, and cried, with a voice that did not seem to belong
to a human creature, "Where is Ralph?" I made no reply: upon which he
repeated, in an accent still more preternatural, "Where is Ralpho?" He
had no sooner pronounced these words than I heard the sound of the bells
at a distance; which the apparition, having listened to, tripped away,
and left me almost petrified with fear. It was a good while before I
could recover myself so far as to speak; and, when at length I turned to
Strap, I found him in a fit, which, however, did not last long. When
he came to himself, I asked his opinion of what had happened; and he
assured me that the first must certainly be the soul of some person
damned, which appeared by the chain about his legs (for his fears had
magnified the creature to the bigness of a horse, and the sound of small
morice-bells to the clanking of massy chains). As for the old man, he
took it to be the spirit of somebody murdered long ago in this place,
which had power granted to forment the assassin in the shape of a raven,
and that Ralpho was the name of the said murderer. Although I had not
much faith in this interpretation, I was too much troubled to enjoy any
sleep: and in all my future adventures never passed a night so ill.

In the morning Strap imparted the whole affair to Joey, who, after an
immoderate fit of laughter, explained the matter, by telling him that
the old man was the landlord's father, who had been an idiot some years,
and diverted himself with a tame raven, which, it seems, had hopped away
from his apartment in the night, and induced him to follow it to our
chamber, where he had inquired after it under the name of Ralpho.

Nothing remarkable happened during the remaining part of our journey,
which continued six or seven days longer: at length we entered the great
city, and lodged all night at the inn where the waggon put up. Next
morning all the passengers parted different ways, while my companion and
I sallied out to inquire for the member of parliament, to whom I had a
letter of recommendation from Mr. Crab. As we had discharged our lodging
at the inn, Strap took up our baggage and, marched behind me in the
street with the knapsack on his back, as usual, so that we made a very
whimsical appearance. I had dressed myself to the greatest advantage;
that is, put on a clean ruffled shirt, and my best thread stockings: my
hair (which was of the deepest red) hung down upon my shoulders, as lank
and straight as a pound of candles; and the skirts of my coat reached to
the middle of my leg; my waistcoat and breeches were of the same piece,
and cut in the same taste; and my hat very much resembled a barber's
basin, in the shallowness of the crown and narrowness of the brim. Strap
was habited in a much less awkward manner: but a short crop-eared wig,
that very much resembled Scrub's in the play, and the knapsack on his
back, added to what is called a queer phiz, occasioned by a long chin, a
hook nose, and high cheek bones, rendered him, on the whole, a very
fit subject of mirth and pleasantry. As he walked along, Strap, at
my desire, inquired of a carman, whom we met, whereabouts Mr. Cringer
lived: and was answered by a stare, accompanied with the word "Anan!"
Upon which I came up, in order to explain the question, but had the
misfortune to be unintelligible likewise, the carman damning us for a
lousy Scotch guard, whipping his horses with a "Gee ho!" which nettled
me to the quick, and roused the indignation of Strap so far that, after
the fellow was gone a good way, he told me he would fight him for a
farthing.

While we were deliberating upon what was to be done, a hackney coachman,
driving softly along, and perceiving us standing by the kennel, came up
close to us, and calling, "A coach, master!" by a dexterous management
of the reins made his horses stumble in the wet, and bedaub us all over
with mud. After which exploit he drove on, applauding himself with a
hearty laugh, in which several people joined, to my great mortification;
but one, more compassionate than the rest, seeing us strangers, advised
me to go into an alehouse, and dry myself. I thanked him for his advice,
which I immediately complied with; and, going into the house he pointed
out, called for a pot of beer, and sat down by a fire in the public room
where we cleaned ourselves as well as we could. In the meantime, a wag,
who sat in a box, smoking his pipe, understanding, by our dialect, that
we were from Scotland, came up to me and, with a grave countenance
asked how long I had been caught. As I did not know the meaning of this
question, I made no answer; and he went on, saying it could not be a
great while, for my tail was not yet cut; at the same time taking hold
of my hair, and tipping the wink to the rest of the company, who seemed
highly entertained with his wit. I was incensed at this usage, but
afraid of resenting it, because I happened to be in a strange place,
and perceived the person who spoke to me was a brawny fellow, for whom
I thought myself by no means a match. However, Strap, having either more
courage or less caution, could not put up with the insults I suffered,
but told him in a peremptory tone, "He was an uncivil fellow for making
so free with his betters." Then the wit going toward him, asked him what
he had got in his knapsack? "Is it oatmeal or brimstone, Sawney?"
said he, seizing him by the chin, which he shook, to the inexpressible
diversion of all present. My companion, feeling himself assaulted in
such an opprobrious manner, disengaged himself in a trice, and lent his
antagonist such a box on the ear as made him stagger to the other side
of the room; and, in a moment, a ring was formed for the combatants.
Seeing Strap beginning to strip, and my blood being heated with
indignation, which banished all other thoughts, I undressed myself
to the skin in an instant, and declared, that as the affront that
occasioned the quarrel was offered to me, I would fight it out myself;
upon which one or two cried out, "That's a brave Scotch boy; you shall
have fair play." His assurance gave me fresh spirits, and, going up to
my adversary, who by his pale countenance did not seem much inclined to
the battle, I struck him so hard on the stomach, that he reeled over
a bench, and fell to the ground. Then I attempted to keep him down, in
order to improve my success, according to the manner of my own country,
but was restrained by the spectators, one of whom endeavoured to raise
up my opponent, but in vain; for he protested he would not fight, for he
was not quite recovered of a late illness. I was very well pleased with
this excuse, and immediately dressed myself, having acquired the good
opinion of the company for my bravery, as well as of my comrade Strap,
who shook me by the hand, and wished me joy of the victory.

After having drunk our pot, and dried our clothes, we inquired of the
landlord if he knew Mr. Cringer, the member of parliament, and were
amazed at his replying in the negative; for we imagined he must be
altogether as conspicuous here as in the borough he represented; but
he told us we might possibly hear of him as we passed along. We betook
ourselves therefore to the street, where seeing a footman standing
at the door, we made up to him, and asked if he knew where our patron
lived? This member of the particoloured fraternity, surveying us both
very minutely, said he knew Mr. Cringer very well, and bade us turn down
the first street on our left, then turn to the right, and then to the
left again, after which perambulation we would observe a lane, through
which we must pass, and at the other end we should find an alley that
leads to another street, where we should see the sign of the Thistle and
Three Pedlars, and there he lodged. We thanked him for his information,
and went forwards, Strap telling me, that he knew this person to be an
honest friendly man by his countenance, before he opened his mouth; in
which opinion I acquiesced, ascribing his good manners to the company he
daily saw in the house where he served.

We followed his directions punctually, in turning to the left, and to
the right, and to the left again; but instead of seeing a lane before
us, found ourselves at the side of the river, a circumstance that
perplexed us not a little; and my fellow-traveller ventured to
pronounce, that we had certainly missed our way. By this time we were
pretty much fatigued with our walk, and not knowing how to proceed,
I went into a small snuff-shop hard by, encouraged by the sign of
the Highlander, where I found, to my inexpressible satisfaction,
the shopkeeper was my countryman. He was no sooner informed of our
peregrination, and the directions we had received from the footman, than
