barricades fronting the city gates had been battered down by nightfall;
they were restored within an hour.  Their defenders entered the houses
right and left during the cannonade, waiting to meet the charge; but the
Austrians held off.  "They have no plan," Romara said on his second visit
of inspection; "they are waiting on Fortune, and starve meanwhile.  We
can beat them at that business."

Romara took Angelo and his Swiss away with him.  The interior of the city
was abandoned by the Imperialists, who held two or three of the principal
buildings and the square of the Duomo.  Clouds were driving thick across
the cold-gleaming sky when the storm-bells burst out with the wild
Jubilee-music of insurrection--a carol, a jangle of all discord, savage
as flame.  Every church of the city lent its iron tongue to the peal; and
now they joined and now rolled apart, now joined again and clanged like
souls shrieking across the black gulfs of an earthquake; they swam aloft
with mournful delirium, tumbled together, were scattered in spray,
dissolved, renewed, died, as a last worn wave casts itself on an unfooted
shore, and rang again as through rent doorways, became a clamorous host,
an iron body, a pressure as of a down-drawn firmament, and once more a
hollow vast, as if the abysses of the Circles were sounded through and
through.  To the Milanese it was an intoxication; it was the howling of
madness to the Austrians--a torment and a terror: they could neither
sing, nor laugh, nor talk under it.  Where they stood in the city, the
troops could barely hear their officers' call of command.  No sooner had
the bells broken out than the length of every street and Corso flashed
with the tri-coloured flag; musket-muzzles peeped from the windows; men
with great squares of pavement lined the roofs.  Romara mounted a stiff
barricade and beheld a scattered regiment running the gauntlet of storms
of shot and missiles, in full retreat upon the citadel.  On they came,
officers in front for the charge, as usual with the Austrians; fire on
both flanks, a furious mob at their heels, and the barricade before them.
They rushed at Romara, and were hurled back, and stood in a riddled lump.
Suddenly Romara knocked up the rifles of the couching Swiss; he yelled to
the houses to stop firing.  "Surrender your prisoners,--you shall pass,"
he called.  He had seen one dear head in the knot of the soldiery.  No
answer was given.  Romara, with Angelo and his Swiss and the ranks of the
barricade, poured over and pierced the streaming mass, steel for steel.

"Ammiani!  Ammiani!" Romara cried; a roar from the other side, "Barto!
Barto! the Great Cat!"  met the cry.  The Austrians struck up a cheer
under the iron derision of the bells; it was ludicrous, it was as if a
door had slammed on their mouths, ringing tremendous echoes in a vaulted
roof.  They stood sweeping fire in two oblong lines; a show of military
array was preserved like a tattered robe, till Romara drove at their
centre and left the retreat clear across the barricade.  Then the
whitecoats were seen flowing over, the motley surging hosts from the city
in pursuit--foam of a storm-torrent hurled forward by the black tumult of
precipitous waters.  Angelo fell on his brother's neck; Romara clasped
Carlo Ammiani.  These two were being marched from the prison to the
citadel when Barto Rizzo, who had prepared to storm the building,
assailed the troops.  To him mainly they were indebted for their rescue.

Even in that ecstasy of meeting, the young men smiled at the
preternatural transport on his features as he bounded by them, mad for
slaughter, and mounting a small brass gun on the barricade, sent the
charges of shot into the rear of the enemy.  He kissed the black lip of
his little thunderer in, a rapture of passion; called it his wife, his
naked wife; the best of mistresses, who spoke only when he charged her to
speak; raved that she was fair, and liked hugging; that she was true, and
the handsomest daughter of Italy; that she would be the mother of big
ones--none better than herself, though they were mountains of sulphur big
enough to make one gulp of an army.

His wife in the flesh stood at his feet with a hand-grenade and a rifle,
daggers and pistols in her belt.  Her face was black with powder-smoke as
the muzzle of the gun.  She looked at Rinaldo once, and Rinaldo at her;
both dropped their eyes, for their joy at seeing one another alive was
mighty.

Dead Austrians were gathered in a heap.  Dead and wounded Milanese were
taken into the houses.  Wine was brought forth by ladies and household
women.  An old crutched beggar, who had performed a deed of singular
intrepidity in himself kindling a fire at the door of one of the
principal buildings besieged by the people, and who showed perforated
rags with a comical ejaculation of thanks to the Austrians for knowing
how to hit a scarecrow and make a beggar holy, was the object of
particular attention.  Barto seated him on his gun, saying that his
mistress and beauty was honoured; ladies were proud in waiting on the
fine frowzy old man.  It chanced during that morning that Wilfrid Pierson
had attached himself to Lieutenant Jenna's regiment as a volunteer.  He
had no arms, nothing but a huge white umbrella, under which he walked dry
in the heavy rain, and passed through the fire like an impassive
spectator of queer events.  Angelo's Swiss had captured them, and the mob
were maltreating them because they declined to shout for this valorous
ancient beggarman.  "No doubt he's a capital fellow," said Jenna; "but
'Viva Scottocorni' is not my language;" and the spirited little subaltern
repeated his "Excuse me," with very good temper, while one knocked off
his shako, another tugged at his coat-skirts.  Wilfrid sang out to the
Guidascarpi, and the brothers sprang to him and set them free; but the
mob, like any other wild beast gorged with blood, wanted play, and urged
Barto to insist that these victims should shout the viva in exaltation of
their hero.

"Is there a finer voice than mine?" said Barto, and he roared the 'viva'
like a melodious bull.  Yet Wilfrid saw that he had been recognized.  In
the hour of triumph Barto Rizzo had no lust for petty vengeance.  The
magnanimous devil plumped his gorge contentedly on victory.  His ardour
blazed from his swarthy crimson features like a blown fire, when scouts
came running down with word that all about the Porta Camosina, Madonna
del Carmine, and the Gardens, the Austrians were reaping the white flag
of the inhabitants of that district.  Thitherward his cry of "Down with
the Tedeschi!" led the boiling tide.  Rinaldo drew Wilfrid and Jenna to
an open doorway, counselling the latter to strip the gold from his coat
and speak his Italian in monosyllables.  A woman of the house gave her
promise to shelter and to pass them forward.  Romara, Ammiani, and the
Guidascarpi, went straight to the Casa Gonfalonieri, where they hoped to
see stray members of the Council of War, and hear a correction of certain
unpleasant rumours concerning the dealings of the Provisional Government
with Charles Albert.

The first crack of a division between the patriot force and the
aristocracy commenced this day; the day following it was a breach.

A little before dusk the bells of the city ceased their hammering, and
when they ceased, all noises of men and musketry seemed childish.  The
woman who had promised to lead Wilfrid and Jenna to the citadel, feared
no longer either for herself or them, and passed them on up the Corso
Francesco past the Contrada del Monte.  Jenna pointed out the Duchess of
Graatli's house, saying, "By the way, the Lenkensteins are here; they
left Venice last week.  Of course you know, or don't you?--and there they
must stop, I suppose."  Wilfrid nodded an immediate good-bye to him, and
crossed to the house-door.  His eccentric fashion of acting had given him
fame in the army, but Jenna stormed at it now, and begged him to come on
and present himself to General Schoneck, if not to General Pierson.
Wilfrid refused even to look behind him.  In fact, it was a part of the
gallant fellow's coxcombry (or nationality) to play the Englishman.  He
remained fixed by the housedoor till midnight, when a body of men in the
garb of citizens, volubly and violently Italian in their talk, struck
thrice at the door.  Wilfrid perceived Count Lenkenstein among them.
The ladies Bianca, Anna, and Lena issued mantled and hooded between the
lights of two barricade watchfires.  Wilfrid stepped after them.  They
had the password, for the barricades were crossed.  The captain of the
head-barricade in the Corso demurred, requiring a counter-sign.
Straightway he was cut down.  He blew an alarm-call, when up sprang a
hundred torches.  The band of Germans dashed at the barricade as at the
tusks of a boar.  They were picked men, most of them officers, but a
scanty number in the thick of an armed populace.  Wilfrid saw the lighted
passage into the great house, and thither, throwing out his arms, he bore
the affrighted group of ladies, as a careful shepherd might do.
Returning to Count Lenkenstein's side, "Where are they?"  the count said,
in mortal dread.  "Safe," Wilfrid replied.  The count frowned at him
inquisitively.  "Cut your way through, and on!" he cried to three or four
who hung near him; and these went to the slaughter.

"Why do you stand by me, sir?" said the count.  Interior barricades were
pouring their combatants to the spot; Count Lenkenstein was plunged upon
the door-steps.  Wilfrid gained half-a-minute's parley by shouting in his
foreign accent, "Would you hurt an Englishman?"  Some one took him by the
arm, and helping to raise the count, hurried them both into the house.

"You must make excuses for popular fury in times like these," the
stranger observed.

The Austrian nobleman asked him stiffly for his name.  The name of Count
Ammiani was given.  "I think you know it," Carlo added.

"You escaped from your lawful imprisonment this day, did you not?--you
and your cousin, the assassin.  I talk of law!  I might as justly talk of
honour.  Who lives here?"  Carlo contained himself to answer, "The
present occupant is, I believe, if I have hit the house I was seeking,
the Countess d'Isorella."

"My family were placed here, sir?" Count Lenkenstein inquired of Wilfrid.
But Wilfrid's attention was frozen by the sight of Vittoria's lover.  A
wifely call of "Adalbert" from above quieted the count's anxiety.

"Countess d'Isorella," he said.  "I know that woman.  She belongs to the
secret cabinet of Carlo Alberto--a woman with three edges.  Did she not
visit you in prison two weeks ago?  I speak to you, Count Ammiani.  She
applied to the Archduke and the Marshal for permission to visit you.  It
was accorded.  To the devil with our days of benignity!  She was from
Turin.  The shuffle has made her my hostess for the nonce.  I will go to
her.  You, sir," the count turned to Wilfrid--"you will stay below.  Are
you in the pay of the insurgents?"

Wilfrid, the weakest of human beings where women were involved with him,
did one of the hardest things which can task a young man's fortitude: he
looked his superior in the face, and neither blenched, nor frowned, nor
spoke.

Ammiani spoke for him.  "There is no pay given in our ranks."

"The licence to rob is supposed to be an equivalent," said the count.

Countess d'Isorella herself came downstairs, with profuse apologies for
the absence of all her male domestics, and many delicate dimples about
her mouth in uttering them.  Her look at Ammiani struck Wilfrid as having
a peculiar burden either of meaning or of passion in it.  The count
grimaced angrily when he heard that his sister Lena was not yet able to
bear the fatigue of a walk to the citadel.  "I fear you must all be my
guests, for an hour at least," said the countess.

Wilfrid was left pacing the hall.  He thought he had never beheld so
splendid a person, or one so subjugatingly gracious.  Her speech and
manner poured oil on the uncivil Austrian nobleman.  What perchance had
stricken Lena?

He guessed; and guessed it rightly.  A folded scrap of paper signed by
the Countess of Lenkenstein was brought to him.

It said:--"Are you making common cause with the rebels?  Reply.  One asks
who should be told."

He wrote:--"I am an outcast of the army.  I fight as a volunteer with the
K. K.  troops.  Could I abandon them in their peril?"

The touch of sentiment he appended for Lena's comfort.  He was too
strongly impressed by the new vision of beauty in the house for his
imagination to be flushed by the romantic posture of his devotion to a
trailing flag.

No other message was delivered.  Ammiani presently descended and obtained
a guard from the barricade; word was sent on to the barricades in advance
toward the citadel.  Wilfrid stood aside as Count Lenkenstein led the
ladies to the door, bearing Lena on his arm.  She passed her lover
veiled.  The count said, "You follow."  He used the menial second person
plural of German, and repeated it peremptorily.

"I follow no civilian," said Wilfrid.

"Remember, sir, that if you are seen with arms in your hands, and are not
in the ranks, you run the chances of being hanged."

Lena broke loose from her brother; in spite of Anna's sharp remonstrance
and the count's vexed stamp of the foot, she implored her lover:--"Come
with us; pardon us; protect me--me!  You shall not be treated harshly.
They shall not Oh! be near me.  I have been ill; I shrink from danger.
Be near me!"

Such humble pleading permitted Wilfrid's sore spirit to succumb with the
requisite show of chivalrous dignity.  He bowed, and gravely opened his
enormous umbrella, which he held up over the heads of the ladies, while
Ammiani led the way.  All was quiet near the citadel.  A fog of plashing
rain hung in red gloom about the many watchfires of the insurgents, but
the Austrian head-quarters lay sombre and still.  Close at the gates,
Ammiani saluted the ladies.  Wilfrid did the same, and heard Lena's call
to him unmoved.

"May I dare to hint to you that it would be better for you to join your
party?"  said Ammiani.

Wilfrid walked on.  After appearing to weigh the matter, he answered,
"The umbrella will be of no further service to them to-night."

Ammiani laughed, and begged to be forgiven; but he could have done
nothing more flattering.

Sore at all points, tricked and ruined, irascible under the sense of his
injuries, hating everybody and not honouring himself, Wilfrid was fast
growing to be an eccentric by profession.  To appear cool and careless
was the great effort of his mind.

"We were introduced one day in the Piazza d'Armi," said Ammiani.
"I would have found means to convey my apologies to you for my behaviour
on that occasion, but I have been at the mercy of my enemies.  Lieutenant
Pierson, will you pardon me?  I have learnt how dear you and your family
should be to me.  Pray, accept my excuses and my counsel.  The Countess
Lena was my friend when I was a boy.  She is in deep distress."

"I thank you, Count Ammiani, for your extremely disinterested advice,"
said Wilfrid; but the Italian was not cut to the quick by his irony; and
he added: "I have hoisted, you perceive, the white umbrella instead of
wearing the white coat.  It is almost as good as an hotel in these times;
it gives as much shelter and nearly as much provision, and, I may say,
better attendance.  Good-night.  You will be at it again about daylight,
I suppose?"

"Possibly a little before," said Ammiani, cooled by the false ring of
this kind of speech.

"It's useless to expect that your infernal bells will not burst out like
