
'I beg pardon, Colonel Mannering,' said Glossin, making a wretched
attempt at an easy demeanour; 'you are a man of the world; there are
some cases in which it is most prudent for all parties to treat with
principals.'

'Then,' replied Mannering, with a repulsive air, 'if Mr. Glossin will
take the trouble to state his object in a letter, I will answer that
Miss Bertram pays proper attention to it.'

'Certainly,' stammered Glossin; 'but there are cases in which a viva
voce conference--Hem! I perceive--I know--Colonel Mannering has adopted
some prejudices which may make my visit appear intrusive; but I submit
to his good sense, whether he ought to exclude me from a hearing
without knowing the purpose of my visit, or of how much consequence it
may be to the young lady whom he honours with his protection.'

'Certainly, sir, I have not the least intention to do so,' replied the
Colonel. 'I will learn Miss Bertram's pleasure on the subject, and
acquaint Mr. Glossin, if he can spare time to wait for her answer.' So
saying, he left the room.

Glossin had still remained standing in the midst of the apartment.
Colonel Mannering had made not the slightest motion to invite him to
sit, and indeed had remained standing himself during their short
interview. When he left the room, however, Glossin seized upon a chair,
and threw himself into it with an air between embarrassment and
effrontery. He felt the silence of his companions disconcerting and
oppressive, and resolved to interrupt it.

'A fine day, Mr. Sampson.'

The Dominie answered with something between an acquiescent grunt and an
indignant groan.

'You never come down to see your old acquaintance on the Ellangowan
property, Mr. Sampson. You would find most of the old stagers still
stationary there. I have too much respect for the late family to
disturb old residenters, even under pretence of improvement. Besides,
it's not my way, I don't like it; I believe, Mr. Sampson, Scripture
particularly condemns those who oppress the poor, and remove landmarks.'

'Or who devour the substance of orphans,' subjoined the Dominie.
'Anathema, Maranatha!' So saying, he rose, shouldered the folio which
he had been perusing, faced to the right about, and marched out of the
room with the strides of a grenadier.

Mr. Glossin, no way disconcerted, or at least feeling it necessary not
to appear so, turned to young Hazlewood, who was apparently busy with
the newspaper.--' Any news, sir?' Hazlewood raised his eyes, looked at
him, and pushed the paper towards him, as if to a stranger in a
coffee-house, then rose, and was about to leave the room. 'I beg
pardon, Mr. Hazlewood, but I can't help wishing you joy of getting so
easily over that infernal accident.' This was answered by a sort of
inclination of the head, as slight and stiff as could well be imagined.
Yet it encouraged our man of law to proceed.--' I can promise you, Mr.
Hazlewood, few people have taken the interest in that matter which I
have done, both for the sake of the country and on account of my
particular respect for your family, which has so high a stake in it;
indeed, so very high a stake that, as Mr. Featherhead is 'turning old
now, and as there's a talk, since his last stroke, of his taking the
Chiltern Hundreds, it might be worth your while to look about you. I
speak as a friend, Mr. Hazlewood, and as one who understands the roll;
and if in going over it together--'

'I beg pardon, sir, but I have no views in which your assistance could
be useful.'

'O, very well, perhaps you are right; it's quite time enough, and I
love to see a young gentleman cautious. But I was talking of your
wound. I think I have got a clue to that business--I think I have, and
if I don't bring the fellow to condign punishment--!'

'I beg your pardon, sir, once more; but your zeal outruns my wishes. I
have every reason to think the wound was accidental; certainly it was
not premeditated. Against ingratitude and premeditated treachery,
should you find any one guilty of them, my resentment will be as warm
as your own.' This was Hazlewood's answer.

'Another rebuff,' thought Glossin; 'I must try him upon the other
tack.' 'Right, sir; very nobly said! I would have no more mercy on an
ungrateful man than I would on a woodcock. And now we talk of sport
(this was a sort of diverting of the conversation which Glossin had
learned from his former patron), I see you often carry a gun, and I
hope you will be soon able to take the field again. I observe you
confine yourself always to your own side of the Hazleshaws burn. I
hope, my dear sir, you will make no scruple of following your game to
the Ellangowan bank; I believe it is rather the best exposure of the
two for woodcocks, although both are capital.'

As this offer only excited a cold and constrained bow, Glossin was
obliged to remain silent, and was presently afterwards somewhat
relieved by the entrance of Colonel Mannering.

'I have detained you some time, I fear, sir,' said he, addressing
Glossin; 'I wished to prevail upon Miss Bertram to see you, as, in my
opinion, her objections ought to give way to the necessity of hearing
in her own person what is stated to be of importance that she should
know. But I find that circumstances of recent occurrence, and not
easily to be forgotten, have rendered her so utterly repugnant to a
personal interview with Mr. Glossin that it would be cruelty to insist
upon it; and she has deputed me to receive his commands, or proposal,
or, in short, whatever he may wish to say to her.'

'Hem, hem! I am sorry, sir--I am very sorry, Colonel Mannering, that
Miss Bertram should suppose--that any prejudice, in short--or idea that
anything on my part--'

'Sir,' said the inflexible Colonel, 'where no accusation is made,
excuses or explanations are unnecessary. Have you any objection to
communicate to me, as Miss Bertram's temporary guardian, the
circumstances which you conceive to interest her?'

'None, Colonel Mannering; she could not choose a more respectable
friend, or one with whom I, in particular, would more anxiously wish to
communicate frankly.'

'Have the goodness to speak to the point, sir, if you please.'

'Why, sir, it is not so easy all at once--but Mr. Hazlewood need not
leave the room,--I mean so well to Miss Bertram that I could wish the
whole world to hear my part of the conference.'

'My friend Mr. Charles Hazlewood will not probably be anxious, Mr.
Glossin, to listen to what cannot concern him. And now, when he has
left us alone, let me pray you to be short and explicit in what you
have to say. I am a soldier, sir, somewhat impatient of forms and
introductions.' So saying, he drew himself up in his chair and waited
for Mr. Glossin's communication.

'Be pleased to look at that letter,' said Glossin, putting Protocol's
epistle into Mannering's hand, as the shortest way of stating his
business.

The Colonel read it and returned it, after pencilling the name of the
writer in his memorandum-book. 'This, sir, does not seem to require
much discussion. I will see that Miss Bertram's interest is attended
to.'

'But, sir,--but, Colonel Mannering,' added Glossin, 'there is another
matter which no one can explain but myself. This lady--this Mrs.
Margaret Bertram, to my certain knowledge, made a general settlement of
her affairs in Miss Lucy Bertram's favour while she lived with my old
friend Mr. Bertram at Ellangowan. The Dominie--that was the name by
which my deceased friend always called that very respectable man Mr.
Sampson--he and I witnessed the deed. And she had full power at that
time to make such a settlement, for she was in fee of the estate of
Singleside even then, although it was life rented by an elder sister.
It was a whimsical settlement of old Singleside's, sir; he pitted the
two cats his daughters against each other, ha, ha, ha!'

'Well, sir,' said Mannering, without the slightest smile of sympathy,
'but to the purpose. You say that this lady had power to settle her
estate on Miss Bertram, and that she did so?'

'Even so, Colonel,' replied Glossin. 'I think I should understand the
law, I have followed it for many years; and, though I have given it up
to retire upon a handsome competence, I did not throw away that
knowledge which is pronounced better than house and land, and which I
take to be the knowledge of the law, since, as our common rhyme has it,

     'Tis most excellent,
     To win the land that's gone and spent.

No, no, I love the smack of the whip: I have a little, a very little
law yet, at the service of my friends.'

Glossin ran on in this manner, thinking he had made a favourable
impression on Mannering. The Colonel, indeed, reflected that this might
be a most important crisis for Miss Bertram's interest, and resolved
that his strong inclination to throw Glossin out at window or at door
should not interfere with it. He put a strong curb on his temper, and
resolved to listen with patience at least, if without complacency. He
therefore let Mr. Glossin get to the end of his self-congratulations,
and then asked him if he knew where the deed was.

'I know--that is, I think--I believe I can recover it. In such cases
custodiers have sometimes made a charge.'

'We won't differ as to that, sir,' said the Colonel, taking out his
pocket-book.

'But, my dear sir, you take me so very short. I said SOME PERSONS MIGHT
make such a claim, I mean for payment of the expenses of the deed,
trouble in the affair, etc. But I, for my own part, only wish Miss
Bertram and her friends to be satisfied that I am acting towards her
with honour. There's the paper, sir! It would have been a satisfaction
to me to have delivered it into Miss Bertram's own hands, and to have
wished her joy of the prospects which it opens. But, since her
prejudices on the subject are invincible, it only remains for me to
transmit her my best wishes through you, Colonel Mannering, and to
express that I shall willingly give my testimony in support of that
deed when I shall be called upon. I have the honour to wish you a good
morning, sir.'

This parting speech was so well got up, and had so much the tone of
conscious integrity unjustly suspected, that even Colonel Mannering was
staggered in his bad opinion. He followed him two or three steps, and
took leave of him with more politeness (though still cold and formal)
than he had paid during his visit. Glossin left the house half pleased
with the impression he had made, half mortified by the stern caution
and proud reluctance with which he had been received. 'Colonel
Mannering might have had more politeness,' he said to himself. 'It is
not every man that can bring a good chance of 400 Pounds a year to a
penniless girl. Singleside must be up to 400 Pounds a year now; there's
Reilageganbeg, Gillifidget, Loverless, Liealone, and the Spinster's
Knowe--good 400 Pounds a year. Some people might have made their own of
it in my place; and yet, to own the truth, after much consideration, I
don't see how that is possible.'

Glossin was no sooner mounted and gone than the Colonel despatched a
groom for Mr. Mac-Morlan, and, putting the deed into his hand,
requested to know if it was likely to be available to his friend Lucy
Bertram. Mac-Morlan perused it with eyes that sparkled with delight,
snapped his fingers repeatedly, and at length exclaimed, 'Available!
it's as tight as a glove; naebody could make better wark than Glossin,
when he didna let down a steek on purpose. But (his countenance
falling) the auld b---, that I should say so, might alter at pleasure!'

'Ah! And how shall we know whether she has done so?'

'Somebody must attend on Miss Bertram's part when the repositories of
the deceased are opened.'

'Can you go?' said the Colonel.

'I fear I cannot,' replied Mac-Morlan; 'I must attend a jury trial
before our court.'

'Then I will go myself,' said the Colonel; 'I'll set out to-morrow.
Sampson shall go with me; he is witness to this settlement. But I shall
want a legal adviser.'

'The gentleman that was lately sheriff of this county is high in
reputation as a barrister; I will give you a card of introduction to
him.'

'What I like about you, Mr. Mac-Morlan,' said the Colonel, 'is that you
always come straight to the point. Let me have it instantly. Shall we
tell Miss Lucy her chance of becoming an heiress?'

'Surely, because you must have some powers from her, which I will
instantly draw out. Besides, I will be caution for her prudence, and
that she will consider it only in the light of a chance.'

Mac-Morlan judged well. It could not be discerned from Miss Bertram's
manner that she founded exulting hopes upon the prospect thus
unexpectedly opening before her. She did, indeed, in the course of the
evening ask Mr. Mac-Morlan, as if by accident, what might be the annual
income of the Hazlewood property; but shall we therefore aver for
certain that she was considering whether an heiress of four hundred a
year might be a suitable match for the young Laird?




CHAPTER XXXVI

     Give me a cup of sack, to make mine eyes look red. For I must
     speak in passion, and I will do it in King Cambyses' vein.

          --Henry IV, part I.


Mannering, with Sampson for his companion, lost no time in his journey
to Edinburgh. They travelled in the Colonel's post-chariot, who,
knowing his companion's habits of abstraction, did not choose to lose
him out of his own sight, far less to trust him on horseback, where, in
all probability, a knavish stable-boy might with little address have
contrived to mount him with his face to the tail. Accordingly, with the
aid of his valet, who attended on horseback, he contrived to bring Mr.
Sampson safe to an inn in Edinburgh--for hotels in those days there
were none--without any other accident than arose from his straying
twice upon the road. On one occasion he was recovered by Barnes, who
understood his humour, when, after engaging in close colloquy with the
schoolmaster of Moffat respecting a disputed quantity in Horace's 7th
Ode, Book II, the dispute led on to another controversy concerning the
exact meaning of the word malobathro in that lyric effusion. His second
escapade was made for the purpose of visiting the field of Rullion
Green, which was dear to his Presbyterian predilections. Having got out
of the carriage for an instant, he saw the sepulchral monument of the
slain at the distance of about a mile, and was arrested by Barnes in
his progress up the Pentland Hills, having on both occasions forgot his
friend, patron, and fellow-traveller as completely as if he had been in
the East Indies. On being reminded that Colonel Mannering was waiting
for him, he uttered his usual ejaculation of 'Prodigious! I was
oblivious,' and then strode back to his post. Barnes was surprised at
his master's patience on both occasions, knowing by experience how
little he brooked neglect or delay; but the Dominie was in every
respect a privileged person. His patron and he were never for a moment
in each other's way, and it seemed obvious that they were formed to be
companions through life. If Mannering wanted a particular book, the
Dominie could bring it; if he wished to have accounts summed up or
checked, his assistance was equally ready; if he desired to recall a
particular passage in the classics, he could have recourse to the
Dominie as to a dictionary; and all the while this walking statue was
neither presuming when noticed nor sulky when left to himself. To a
proud, shy, reserved man, and such in many respects was Mannering, this
sort of living catalogue and animated automaton had all the advantages
of a literary dumb-waiter.

As soon as they arrived in Edinburgh, and were established at the
George Inn, near Bristo Port, then kept by old Cockburn (I love to be
particular), the Colonel desired the waiter to procure him a guide to
Mr. Pleydell's, the advocate, for whom he had a letter of introduction
from Mr. Mac-Morlan. He then commanded Barnes to have an eye to the
Dominie, and walked forth with a chairman, who was to usher him to the
man of law.

The period was near the end of the American war. The desire of room, of
air, and of decent accommodation had not as yet made very much progress
in the capital of Scotland. Some efforts had been made on the south
side of the town towards building houses WITHIN THEMSELVES, as they are
emphatically termed; and the New Town on the north, since so much
extended, was then just commenced. But the great bulk of the better
classes, and particularly those connected with the law, still lived in
flats or dungeons of the Old Town. The manners also of some of the
veterans of the law had not admitted innovation. One or two eminent
lawyers still saw their clients in taverns, as was the general custom
fifty years before; and although their habits were already considered
as old-fashioned by the younger barristers, yet the custom of mixing
wine and revelry with serious business was still maintained by those
senior counsellors who loved the old road, either because it was such
or because they had got too well used to it to travel any other. Among
those praisers of the past time, who with ostentatious obstinacy
affected the manners of a former generation, was this same Paulus
Pleydell, Esq., otherwise a good scholar, an excellent lawyer, and a
worthy man.

Under the guidance of his trusty attendant, Colonel Mannering, after
threading a dark lane or two, reached the High Street, then clanging
with the voices of oyster-women and the bells of pye-men; for it had,
as his guide assured him, just' chappit eight upon the Tron.' It was
long since Mannering had been in the street of a crowded metropolis,
which, with its noise and clamour, its sounds of trade, of revelry, and
of license, its variety of lights, and the eternally changing bustle of
its hundred groups, offers, by night especially, a spectacle which,
though composed of the most vulgar materials when they are separately
considered, has, when they are combined, a striking and powerful effect
on the imagination. The extraordinary height of the houses was marked
by lights, which, glimmering irregularly along their front, ascended so
high among the attics that they seemed at length to twinkle in the
middle sky. This coup d'aeil, which still subsists in a certain degree,
was then more imposing, owing to the uninterrupted range of buildings
on each side, which, broken only at the space where the North Bridge
joins the main street, formed a superb and uniform place, extending
from the front of the Lucken-booths to the head of the Canongate, and
