throw down his pick-axe, and spread out his arms--but only to drop them
with a deep groan, and wipe the sweat from his brow.

The overseers did not know what to think of this powerful youth, who
often was as gentle as a child, and then seemed possessed of that demon
to which so many of the convicts fell victims.  He had indeed become a
riddle to himself; for how was it that he--the gardener's son, brought up
in the peaceful temple of Seti--ever since that night by the house of the
paraschites had had such a perpetual craving for conflict and struggle?

The weary gangs were gone to rest; a bright fire still blazed in front of
the house of the superintendent of the mines, and round it squatted in a
circle the overseers and the subalterns of the troops.

"Put the wine-jar round again," said the captain, "for we must hold grave
council.  Yesterday I had orders from the Regent to send half the guard
to Pelusium.  He requires soldiers, but we are so few in number that if
the convicts knew it they might make short work of us, even without arms.
There are stones enough hereabouts, and by day they have their hammer and
chisel.  Things are worst among the Hebrews in the copper-mines; they are
a refractory crew that must be held tight.  You know me well, fear is
unknown to me--but I feel great anxiety.  The last fuel is now burning in
this fire, and the smelting furnaces and the glass-foundry must not stand
idle.  Tomorrow we must send men to Raphidim

     [The oasis at the foot of Horeb, where the Jews under Joshua's
     command conquered the Amalekites, while Aaron and Hur held up Moses'
     arms.  Exodus 17, 8.]

to obtain charcoal from the Amalekites.  They owe us a hundred loads
still.  Load the prisoners with some copper, to make them tired and the
natives civil.  What can we do to procure what we want, and yet not to
weaken the forces here too much?"

Various opinions were given, and at last it was settled that a small
division, guarded by a few soldiers, should be sent out every day to
supply only the daily need for charcoal.

It was suggested that the most dangerous of the convicts should be
fettered together in pairs to perform their duties.

The superintendent was of opinion that two strong men fettered together
would be more to be feared if only they acted in concert.

"Then chain a strong one to a weak one," said the chief accountant of the
mines, whom the Egyptians called the 'scribe of the metals.'  "And fetter
those together who are enemies."

"The colossal Huni, for instance, to that puny spat row, the stuttering
Nebsecht," said a subaltern.

"I was thinking of that very couple," said the accountant laughing.

Three other couples were selected, at first with some laughter, but
finally with serious consideration, and Uarda's father was sent with the
drivers as an escort.

On the following morning Pentaur and Nebsecht were fettered together with
a copper chain, and when the sun was at its height four pairs of
prisoners, heavily loaded with copper, set out for the Oasis of the
Amalekites, accompanied by six soldiers and the son of the paraschites,
to fetch fuel for the smelting furnaces.

They rested near the town of Alus, and then went forward again between
bare walls of greyish-green and red porphyry.  These cliffs rose higher
and higher, but from time to time, above the lower range, they could see
the rugged summit of some giant of the range, though, bowed under their
heavy loads, they paid small heed to it.

The sun was near setting when they reached the little sanctuary of the
'Emerald-Hathor.'

A few grey and black birds here flew towards them, and Pentaur gazed at
them with delight.

How long be had missed the sight of a bird, and the sound of their chirp
and song!  Nebsecht said: "There are some birds--we must be near water."

And there stood the first palm-tree!

Now the murmur of the brook was perceptible, and its tiny sound touched
the thirsty souls of the travellers as rain falls on dry grass.

On the left bank of the stream an encampment of Egyptian soldiers formed
a large semicircle, enclosing three large tents made of costly material
striped with blue and white, and woven with gold thread.  Nothing was to
be seen of the inhabitants of these tents, but when the prisoners had
passed them, and the drivers were exchanging greetings with the out-
posts, a girl, in the long robe of an Egyptian, came towards them, and
looked at them.

Pentaur started as if he had seen a ghost; but Nebsecht gave expression
to his astonishment in a loud cry.

At the same instant a driver laid his whip across their shoulders, and
cried laughing:

"You may hit each other as hard as you like with words, but not with your
hands."

Then be turned to his companions, and said: "Did you see the pretty girl
there, in front of the tent?"

"It is nothing to us!"  answered the man he addressed.  "She belongs to
the princess's train.  She has been three weeks here on a visit to the
holy shrine of Hathor."

"She must have committed some heavy sin," replied the other.  "If she
were one of us, she would have been set to sift sand in the diggings, or
grind colors, and not be living here in a gilt tent.  Where is our red-
beard?"

Uarda's father had lingered a little behind the party, for the girl had
signed to him, and exchanged a few words with him.

"Have you still an eye for the fair ones?"  asked the youngest of the
drivers when be rejoined the gang.

"She is a waiting maid of the princess," replied the soldier not without
embarrassment.  "To-morrow morning we are to carry a letter from her to
the scribe of the mines, and if we encamp in the neighborhood she will
send us some wine for carrying it."

"The old red-beard scents wine as a fox scents a goose.  Let us encamp
here; one never knows what may be picked up among the Mentu, and the
superintendent said we were to encamp outside the oasis.  Put down your
sacks, men!  Here there is fresh water, and perhaps a few dates and sweet
Manna for you to eat with it.

     ["Man" is the name still given by the Bedouins of Sinai to the sweet
     gum which exudes from the Tamarix mannifera.  It is the result of
     the puncture of an insect, and occurs chiefly in May.  By many it is
     supposed to be the Manna of the Bible.]

But keep the peace, you two quarrelsome fellows--Huni and Nebsecht."

Bent-Anat's journey to the Emerald-Hathor was long since ended.  As far
as Keft she had sailed down the Nile with her escort, from thence she had
crossed the desert by easy marches, and she had been obliged to wait a
full week in the port on the Red Sea, which was chiefly inhabited by
Phoenicians, for a ship which had finally brought her to the little
seaport of Pharan.  From Pharan she had crossed the mountains to the
oasis, where the sanctuary she was to visit stood on the northern side.

The old priests, who conducted the service of the Goddess, had received
the daughter of Rameses with respect, and undertook to restore her to
cleanness by degrees with the help of the water from the mountain-stream
which watered the palm-grove of the Amalekites, of incense-burning, of
pious sentences, and of a hundred other ceremonies.  At last the Goddess
declared herself satisfied, and Bent-Anat wished to start for the north
and join her father, but the commander of the escort, a grey-headed
Ethiopian field officer--who had been promoted to a high grade by Ani--
explained to the Chamberlain that he had orders to detain the princess in
the oasis until her departure was authorized by the Regent himself.

Bent-Anat now hoped for the support of her father, for her brother
Rameri, if no accident had occurred to him, might arrive any day.
But in vain.

The position of the ladies was particularly unpleasant, for they felt
that they had been caught in a trap, and were in fact prisoners.  In
addition to this their Ethiopian escort had quarrelled with the natives
of the oasis, and every day skirmishes took place under their eyes--
indeed lately one of these fights had ended in bloodshed.

Bent-Anat was sick at heart.  The two strong pinions of her soul, which
had always borne her so high above other women--her princely pride and
her bright frankness--seemed quite broken; she felt that she had loved
once, never to love again, and that she, who had sought none of her
happiness in dreams, but all in work, had bestowed the best half of her
identity on a vision.  Pentaur's image took a more and more vivid, and at
the same time nobler and loftier, aspect in her mind; but he himself had
died for her, for only once had a letter reached them from Egypt, and
that was from Katuti to Nefert.  After telling her that late intelligence
established the statement that her husband had taken a prince's daughter,
who had been made prisoner, to his tent as his share of the booty, she
added the information that the poet Pentaur, who had been condemned to
forced labor, had not reached the mountain mines, but, as was supposed,
had perished on the road.

Nefert still held to her immovable belief that her husband was faithful
to his love for her, and the magic charm of a nature made beautiful by
its perfect mastery over a deep and pure passion made itself felt in
these sad and heavy days.

It seemed as though she had changed parts with Bent-Anat.  Always
hopeful, every day she foretold help from the king for the next; in truth
she was ready to believe that, when Mena learned from Rameri that she was
with the princess, he himself would come to fetch them if his duties
allowed it.  In her hours of most lively expectation she could go so far
as to picture how the party in the tents would be divided, and who would
bear Bent-Anat company if Mena took her with him to his camp, on what
spot of the oasis it would be best to pitch it, and much more in the same
vein.

Uarda could very well take her place with Bent-Anat, for the child had
developed and improved on the journey.  The rich clothes which the
princess had given her became her as if she had never worn any others;
she could obey discreetly, disappear at the right moment, and, when she
was invited, chatter delightfully.  Her laugh was silvery, and nothing
consoled Bent-Anat so much as to hear it.

Her songs too pleased the two friends, though the few that she knew were
grave and sorrowful.  She had learned them by listening to old Hekt, who
often used to play on a lute in the dusk, and who, when she perceived
that Uarda caught the melodies, had pointed out her faults, and given her
advice.

"She may some day come into my hands," thought the witch, "and the better
she sings, the better she will be paid."

Bent-Anat too tried to teach Uarda, but learning to read was not easy to
the girl, however much pains she might take.  Nevertheless, the princess
would not give up the spelling, for here, at the foot of the immense
sacred mountain at whose summit she gazed with mixed horror and longing,
she was condemned to inactivity, which weighed the more heavily on her in
proportion as those feelings had to be kept to herself which she longed
to escape from in work.  Uarda knew the origin of her mistress's deep
grief, and revered her for it, as if it were something sacred.  Often she
would speak of Pentaur and of his father, and always in such a manner
that the princess could not guess that she knew of their love.

When the prisoners were passing Bent-Anat's tent, she was sitting within
with Nefert, and talking, as had become habitual in the hours of dusk, of
her father, of Mena, Rameri, and Pentaur.

"He is still alive," asserted Nefert.  "My mother, you see, says that no
one knows with certainty what became of him.  If he escaped, he beyond a
doubt tried to reach the king's camp, and when we get there you will find
