ready for each of his followers, and the charioteer had to choose before
all the others."

"Well?"  said the dwarf.

"Well!"  echoed Katuti.  "Well! how did the worthy householder care for
his belongings at home, how did he seek to relieve his indebted estate?
It is disgraceful, hideous!  He passed by the silver, the gold, the
jewels, with a laugh; and took the captive daughter of the Danaid
princes, and led her into his tent."

"Shameful!"  muttered the dwarf.

"Poor, poor Nefert!"  cried Katuti, covering her face with her hands.

"And what more?"  asked Nemu hastily.

"That," said Katuti, "that is--but I will keep calm--quite calm and
quiet.  You know my son.  He is heedless, but he loves me and his sister
more than anything in the world.  I, fool as I was, to persuade him to
economy, had vividly described our evil plight, and after that
disgraceful conduct of Mena he thought of us and of our anxieties.  His
share of the booty was small, and could not help us.  His comrades threw
dice for the shares they had obtained--he staked his to win more for us.
He lost--all--all--and at last against an enormous sum, still thinking of
us, and only of us, he staked the mummy of his dead father.

     [It was a king of the fourth dynasty, named Asychis by Herodotus,
     who it is admitted was the first to pledge the mummies of his
     ancestors.  "He who stakes this pledge and fails to redeem the debt
     shall, after his death, rest neither in his father's tomb nor in any
     other, and sepulture shall be denied to his descendants."  Herod.
     11. 136.]

He lost.  If he does not redeem the pledge before the expiration of the
third month, he will fall into infamy, the mummy will belong to the
winner, and disgrace and ignominy will be my lot and his."

Katuti pressed her hands on her face, the dwarf muttered to himself, "The
gambler and hypocrite!"  When his mistress had grown calmer, he said:

"It is horrible, yet all is not lost.  How much is the debt?"

It sounded like a heavy curse, when Katuti replied, "Thirty Babylonian
talents."--[L7000 sterling in 1881.]

The dwarf cried out, as if an asp had stung him.  "Who dared to bid
against such a mad stake?"

"The Lady Hathor's son, Antef," answered Katuti, "who has already gambled
away the inheritance of his fathers, in Thebes."

"He will not remit one grain of wheat of his claim," cried the dwarf.
"And Mena?"

"How could my son turn to him after what had happened?  The poor child
implores me to ask the assistance of the Regent."

"Of the Regent?"  said the dwarf, shaking his big head.  "Impossible!"

"I know, as matters now stand; but his place, his name."

"Mistress," said the dwarf, and deep purpose rang in the words, "do not
spoil the future for the sake of the present.  If thy son loses his honor
under King Rameses, the future King, Ani, may restore it to him.  If the
Regent now renders you all an important service, he will regard you as
amply paid when our efforts have succeeded, and he sits on the throne.
He lets himself be led by thee now because thou hast no need of his help,
and dost seem to work only for his sake, and for his elevation.  As soon
as thou hast appealed to him, and he has assisted thee, all thy
confidence and freedom will be gone, and the more difficult he finds it
to raise so large a sum of money at once, the angrier he will be to think
that thou art making use of him.  Thou knowest his circumstances."

"He is in debt," said Katuti.  "I know that."

"Thou should'st know it," cried the dwarf, "for thou thyself hast forced
him to enormous expenses.  He has won the people of Thebes with dazzling
festive displays; as guardian of Apis

     [When Apis (the sacred bull) died under Ptolemy I.  Soter, his
     keepers spent not only the money which they had received for his
     maintenance, in his obsequies but borrowed 50 talents of silver from
     the king.  In the time of Diodurus 100 talents were spent for the
     same purpose.]

he gave a large donation to Memphis; he bestowed thousands on the leaders
of the troops sent into Ethiopia, which were equipped by him; what his
spies cost him at, the camp of the king, thou knowest.  He has borrowed
sums of money from most of the rich men in the country, and that is well,
for so many creditors are so many allies.  The Regent is a bad debtor;
but the king Ani, they reckon, will be a grateful payer."

Katuti looked at the dwarf in astonishment.  "You know men!"  she said.

"To my sorrow!"  replied Nemu.  "Do not apply to the Regent, and before
thou dost sacrifice the labor of years, and thy future greatness, and
that of those near to thee, sacrifice thy son's honor."

"And my husband's, and my own?"  exclaimed Katuti.  "How can you know
what that is!  Honor is a word that the slave may utter, but whose
meaning he can never comprehend; you rub the weals that are raised on you
by blows; to me every finger pointed at me in scorn makes a wound like an
ashwood lance with a poisoned tip of brass.  Oh ye holy Gods!  who can
help us?"

The miserable woman pressed her hands over her eyes, as if to shut out
the sight of her own disgrace.  The dwarf looked at her compassionately,
and said in a changed tone:

"Dost thou remember the diamond which fell out of Nefert's handsomest
ring?  We hunted for it, and could not find it.  Next day, as I was going
through the room, I trod on something hard; I stooped down and found the
stone.  What the noble organ of sight, the eye, overlooked, the callous
despised sole of the foot found; and perhaps the small slave, Nemu, who
knows nothing of honor, may succeed in finding a mode of escape which is
not revealed to the lofty soul of his mistress!"

"What are you thinking of?"  asked Katuti.

"Escape," answered the dwarf.  "Is it true that thy sister Setchem has
visited thee, and that you are reconciled?"

"She offered me her hand, and I took it?"

"Then go to her.  Men are never more helpful than after a reconciliation.
The enmity they have driven out, seems to leave as it were a freshly-
healed wound which must be touched with caution; and Setchem is of thy
own blood, and kind-hearted."

"She is not rich," replied Katuti.  "Every palm in her garden comes from
her husband, and belongs to her children."

"Paaker, too, was with you?"

"Certainly only by the entreaty of his mother--he hates my son-in-law."

"I know it," muttered the dwarf, "but if Nefert would ask him?"

The widow drew herself up indignantly.  She felt that she had allowed the
dwarf too much freedom, and ordered him to leave her alone.

Nemu kissed her robe and asked timidly:

"Shall I forget that thou hast trusted me, or am I permitted to consider
further as to thy son's safety?"  Katuti stood for a moment undecided,
then she said:

"You were clever enough to find what I carelessly dropped; perhaps some
God may show you what I ought to do.  Now leave me."

"Wilt thou want me early to-morrow?"

"No."

"Then I will go to the Necropolis, and offer a sacrifice."

"Go!"  said Katuti, and went towards the house with the fatal letter in
her hand.

Nemu stayed behind alone; he looked thoughtfully at the ground, murmuring
to himself.

"She must not lose her honor; not at present, or indeed all will be
lost.  What is this honor?  We all come into the world without it,
and most of us go to the grave without knowing it, and very good folks
notwithstanding.  Only a few who are rich and idle weave it in with the
homely stuff of their souls, as the Kuschites do their hair with grease
and oils, till it forms a cap of which, though it disfigures them, they
are so proud that they would rather have their ears cut off than the
monstrous thing.  I see, I see--but before I open my mouth I will go to
my mother.  She knows more than twenty prophets."




CHAPTER XII.

Before the sun had risen the next morning, Nemu got himself ferried over
the Nile, with the small white ass which Mena's deceased father had given
him many years before.  He availed himself of the cool hour which
precedes the rising of the sun for his ride through the Necropolis.

Well acquainted as he was with every stock and stone, he avoided the high
roads which led to the goal of his expedition, and trotted towards the
hill which divides the valley of the royal tombs from the plain of the
Nile.

Before him opened a noble amphitheatre of lofty lime-stone peaks, the
background of the stately terrace-temple which the proud ancestress of
two kings of the fallen family, the great Hatasu, had erected to their
memory, and to the Goddess Hathor.

Nemu left the sanctuary to his left, and rode up the steep hill-path
which was the nearest way from the plain to the valley of the tombs.

Below him lay a bird's eye view of the terrace-building of Hatasu, and
before him, still slumbering in cool dawn, was the Necropolis with its
houses and temples and colossal statues, the broad Nile glistening with
white sails under the morning mist; and, in the distant east, rosy with
the coming sun, stood Thebes and her gigantic temples.

But the dwarf saw nothing of the glorious panorama that lay at his feet;
absorbed in thought, and stooping over the neck of his ass, he let the
panting beast climb and rest at its pleasure.

When he had reached half the height of the hill, he perceived the sound
of footsteps coming nearer and nearer to him.

The vigorous walker had soon reached him, and bid him good morning, which
he civilly returned.

The hill-path was narrow, and when Nemu observed that the man who
followed him was a priest, he drew up his donkey on a level spot, and
said reverently:

"Pass on, holy father; for thy two feet carry thee quicker than my four."

"A sufferer needs my help," replied the leech Nebsecht, Pentaur's friend,
whom we have already seen in the House of Seti, and by the bed of the
paraschites' daughter; and he hastened on so as to gain on the slow pace
of the rider.

Then rose the glowing disk of the sun above the eastern horizon, and from
the sanctuaries below the travellers rose up the pious many-voiced chant
of praise.

Nemu slipped off his ass, and assumed an attitude of prayer; the priest
did the same; but while the dwarf devoutly fixed his eyes on the new
birth of the Sun-God from the eastern range, the priest's eyes wandered
to the earth, and his raised hand fell to pick up a rare fossil shell
which lay on the path.

In a few minutes Nebsecht rose, and Nemu followed him.

"It is a fine morning," said the dwarf; "the holy fathers down there seem
more cheerful to-day than usual."

The surgeon laughed assent.  "Do you belong to the Necropolis?"  he said.
"Who here keeps dwarfs?"

"No one," answered the little man.  "But I will ask thee a question.
Who that lives here behind the hill is of so much importance, that a
leech from the House of Seti sacrifices his night's rest for him?"

"The one I visit is mean, but the suffering is great," answered Nebsecht.

Nemu looked at him with admiration, and muttered, "That is noble, that is
----" but he did not finish his speech; he struck his brow and exclaimed,
"You are going, by the desire of the Princess Bent-Anat, to the child of
the paraschites that was run over.  I guessed as much.  The food must
have an excellent after-taste, if a gentleman rises so early to eat it.
How is the poor child doing?"

There was so much warmth in these last words that Nebsecht, who had
thought the dwarf's reproach uncalled for, answered in a friendly tone:

"Not so badly; she may be saved."

"The Gods be praised!"  exclaimed Nemu, while the priest passed on.

Nebsecht went up and down the hillside at a redoubled pace, and had long
taken his place by the couch of the wounded Uarda in the hovel of the
paraschites, when Nemu drew near to the abode of his Mother Hekt, from
whom Paaker had received the philter.

The old woman sat before the door of her cave.  Near her lay a board,
fitted with cross pieces, between which a little boy was stretched in
such a way that they touched his head and his feet.

Hekt understood the art of making dwarfs; playthings in human form were
well paid for, and the child on the rack, with his pretty little face,
promised to be a valuable article.

As soon as the sorceress saw some one approaching, she stooped over the
child, took him up board and all in her arms, and carried him into the
cave.  Then she said sternly:
