It was dark:  Uarda ceased weeping and said to the surgeon:

"Can it be possible that he has gone into the city to borrow the great
sum of money that thou--or thy temple--demanded for thy medicine?  But
there is the princess's golden bracelet, and half of father's prize, and
in the chest two years' wages that grandmother had earned by wailing lie
untouched.  Is all that not enough?"

The girl's last question was full of resentment and reproach, and
Nebsecht, whose perfect sincerity was part of his very being, was silent,
as he would not venture to say yes.  He had asked more in return for his
help than gold or silver.  Now he remembered Pentaur's warning, and when
the jackals began to bark he took up the fire-stick,

     [The hieroglyphic sign Sam seems to me to represent the wooden stick
     used to produce fire (as among some savage tribes) by rapid friction
     in a hollow piece of wood.]

and lighted some fuel that was lying ready.  Then he asked himself what
Uarda's fate would be without her grandparents, and a strange plan which
had floated vaguely before him for some hours, began now to take a
distinct outline and intelligible form.  He determined if the old man did
not return to ask the kolchytes or embalmers to admit him into their
guild--and for the sake of his adroitness they were not likely to refuse
him--then he would make Uarda his wife, and live apart from the world,
for her, for his studies, and for his new calling, in which he hoped to
learn a great deal.  What did he care for comfort and proprieties, for
recognition from his fellow-men, and a superior position!

He could hope to advance more quickly along the new stony path than on
the old beaten track.  The impulse to communicate his acquired knowledge
to others he did not feel.  Knowledge in itself amply satisfied him, and
be thought no more of his ties to the House of Seti.  For three whole
days he had not changed his garments, no razor had touched his chin or
his scalp, not a drop of water had wetted his hands or his feet.  He felt
half bewildered and almost as if he had already become an embalmer, nay
even a paraschites, one of the most despised of human beings.  This self-
degradation had an infinite charm, for it brought him down to the level
of Uarda, and she, lying near him, sick and anxious, with her dishevelled
hair, exactly suited the future which he painted to himself.

"Do you hear nothing?"  Uarda asked suddenly.  He listened.  In the
valley there was a barking of dogs, and soon the paraschites and his wife
appeared, and, at the door of their hut, took leave of old Hekt, who had
met them on her return from Thebes.

"You have been gone a long time," cried Uarda, when her grandmother once
more stood before her.  "I have been so frightened."

"The doctor was with you," said the old woman going into the house to
prepare their simple meal, while the paraschites knelt down by his
granddaughter, and caressed her tenderly, but yet with respect, as if he
were her faithful servant rather than her blood-relation.

Then he rose, and gave to Nebsecht, who was trembling with excitement,
the bag of coarse linen which he was in the habit of carrying tied to him
by a narrow belt.

"The heart is in that," he whispered to the leech; "take it out, and give
me back the bag, for my knife is in it, and I want it."

Nebsecht took the heart out of the covering with trembling hands and laid
it carefully down.  Then he felt in the breast of his dress, and going up
to the paraschites he whispered:

"Here, take the writing, hang it round your neck, and when you die I will
have the book of scripture wrapped up in your mummy cloths like a great
man.  But that is not enough.  The property that I inherited is in the
hands of my brother, who is a good man of business, and I have not
touched the interest for ten years.  I will send it to you, and you and
your wife shall enjoy an old age free from care."

"The paraschites had taken the little bag with the strip of papyrus, and
heard the leech to the end.  Then he turned from him saying: "Keep thy
money; we are quits.  That is if the child gets well," he added humbly.

"She is already half cured," stammered Nebsecht.  "But why will you--why
won't you accept--"

"Because till to day I have never begged nor borrowed," said the
paraschites, "and I will not begin in my old age.  Life for life.  But
what I have done this day not Rameses with all his treasure could repay."

Nebsecht looked down, and knew not how to answer the old man.

His wife now came out; she set a bowl of lentils that she had hastily
warmed before the two men, with radishes and onions,

     [Radishes, onions, and garlic were the hors-d'oeuvre of an Egyptian
     dinner.  1600 talents worth were consumed, according to Herodotus.
     during the building of the pyramid of Cheops--L360,000 (in 1881.)]

then she helped Uarda, who did not need to be carried, into the house,
and invited Nebsecht to share their meal.  He accepted her invitation,
for he had eaten nothing since the previous evening.

When the old woman had once more disappeared indoors, he asked the
paraschites:

"Whose heart is it that you have brought me, and how did it come into
your hands?"

"Tell me first," said the other, "why thou hast laid such a heavy sin
upon my soul?"

"Because I want to investigate the structure of the human heart," said
Nebsecht, "so that, when I meet with diseased hearts, I may be able to
cure them."

The paraschites looked for a long time at the ground in silence; then he
said:

"Art thou speaking the truth?"

"Yes," replied the leech with convincing emphasis.  "I am glad," said the
old man, "for thou givest help to the poor."

"As willingly as to the rich!"  exclaimed Nebsecht.  "But tell me now
where you got the heart."

"I went into the house of the embalmer," said the old man, after he had
selected a few large flints, to which, with crafty blows, he gave the
shape of knives, "and there I found three bodies in which I had to make
the eight prescribed incisions with my flint-knife.  When the dead lie
there undressed on the wooden bench they all look alike, and the begger
lies as still as the favorite son of a king.  But I knew very well who
lay before me.  The strong old body in the middle of the table was the
corpse of the Superior of the temple of Hatasu, and beyond, close by each
other, were laid a stone-mason of the Necropolis, and a poor girl from
the strangers' quarter, who had died of consumption--two miserable wasted
figures.  I had known the Prophet well, for I had met him a hundred times
in his gilt litter, and we always called him Rui, the rich.  I did my
duty by all three, I was driven away with the usual stoning, and then I
arranged the inward parts of the bodies with my mates.  Those of the
Prophet are to be preserved later in an alabaster canopus,

     [This vase was called canopus at a later date.  There were four of
     them for each mummy.]

those of the mason and the girl were put back in their bodies.

"Then I went up to the three bodies, and I asked myself, to which I
should do such a wrong as to rob him of his heart.  I turned to the two
poor ones, and I hastily went up to the sinning girl.  Then I heard the
voice of the demon that cried out in my heart 'The girl was poor and
despised like you while she walked on Seb,

     [Seb is the earth; Plutarch calls Seb Chronos.  He is often spoken
     of as the "father of the gods" on the monuments.  He is the god of
     time, and as the Egyptians regarded matter as eternal, it is not by
     accident that the sign which represented the earth was also used for
     eternity.]

perhaps she may find compensation and peace in the other world if you do
not mutilate her; and when I turned to the mason's lean corpse, and
looked at his hands, which were harder and rougher than my own, the demon
whispered the same.  Then I stood before the strong, stout corpse of the
prophet Rui, who died of apoplexy, and I remembered the honor and the
riches that he had enjoyed on earth, and that he at least for a time had
known happiness and ease.  And as soon as I was alone, I slipped my hand
into the bag, and changed the sheep's heart for his.

"Perhaps I am doubly guilty for playing such an accursed trick with the
heart of a high-priest; but Rui's body will be hung round with a hundred
amulets, Scarabaei

     [Imitations of the sacred beetle Scarabaeus made of various
     materials were frequently put into the mummies in the place of the
     heart.  Large specimens have often the 26th, 30th, and 64th chapters
     of the Book of the Dead engraved on them, as they treat of the
     heart.

will be placed over his heart, and holy oil and sacred sentences will
preserve him from all the fiends on his road to Amenti,--[Underworld]--
while no one will devote helping talismans to the poor.  And then! thou
hast sworn, in that world, in the hall of judgment, to take my guilt on
thyself."

Nebsecht gave the old man his hand.

"That I will," said he, "and I should have chosen as you did.  Now take
this draught, divide it in four parts, and give it to Uarda for four
evenings following.  Begin this evening, and by the day after to-morrow
I think she will be quite well.  I will come again and look after her.
Now go to rest, and let me stay a while out here; before the star of Isis
is extinguished I will be gone, for they have long been expecting me at
the temple."

When the paraschites came out of his but the next morning, Nebsecht had
vanished; but a blood-stained cloth that lay by the remains of the fire
showed the old man that the impatient investigator had examined the heart
of the high-priest during the night, and perhaps cut it up.

Terror fell upon him, and in agony of mind he threw himself on his knees
as the golden bark of the Sun-God appeared on the horizon, and he prayed
fervently, first for Uarda, and then for the salvation of his imperilled
soul.

He rose encouraged, convinced himself that his granddaughter was
progressing towards recovery, bid farewell to his wife, took his flint
knife and his bronze hook,

     [The brains of corpses were drawn out of the nose with a hook.
     Herodotus II. 87.]

and went to the house of the embalmer to follow his dismal calling.

The group of buildings in which the greater number of the corpses from
Thebes went through the processes of mummifying, lay on the bare desert-
land at some distance from his hovel, southwards from the House of Seti
at the foot of the mountain.  They occupied by themselves a fairly large
space, enclosed by a rough wall of dried mud-bricks.

The bodies were brought in through the great gate towards the Nile, and
delivered to the kolchytes,--[The whole guild of embalmers]--while the
priests, paraschites, and tariclleutes,--[Salter of the bodies]--
