sculptured from one block and by one hand, though Telekles is to carve
the lower half at Ephesus, and I the upper here in Sais, and under the
eye of Amasis."

     [These numbers, and the story which immediately follows, are taken
     from Diodorus I. 98.  Plato tells us that, in his time, a law
     existed binding the Egyptian artists to execute their works with
     exactly the same amount of beauty or its reverse, as those which had
     been made more than a thousand years before.  This statement is
     confirmed by the monuments; but any one well acquainted with
     Egyptian art can discern a marked difference in the style of each
     epoch.  At the time of the ancient kingdom the forms were compressed
     and stunted; under Seti I. beauty of proportion reached its highest
     point.  During, and after the 20th dynasty, the style declined in
     beauty; in the 26th, under the descendants of Psammetichus, we meet
     with a last revival of art, but the ancient purity of form was never
     again attained.]

"And shall you win your wager?"

"Undoubtedly.  I am just going to begin this trick of art; it will as
little deserve the name of a work of art, as any Egyptian statue."

"And yet there are single sculptures here which are of exquisite
workmanship; such, for instance, as the one Amasis sent to Samos as a
present to Polykrates.  In Memphis I saw a statue said to be about three
thousand years old, and to represent a king  who built the great Pyramid,
which excited my admiration in every respect.  With what certainty and
precision that unusually hard stone has been wrought! the muscles, how
carefully carved! especially in the breast, legs and feet; the harmony of
the features too, and, above all, the polish of the whole, leave nothing
to be desired."

"Unquestionably.  In all the mechanism of art, such as precision and
certainty in working even the hardest materials, the Egyptians, though
they have so long stood still in other points, are still far before us;
but to model form with freedom, to breathe, like Prometheus, a soul into
the stone, they will never learn until their old notions on this subject
have been entirely abandoned.  Even the pleasing varieties of corporeal
life cannot be represented by a system of mere proportions, much less
those which are inner and spiritual.  Look at the countless statues which
have been erected during the last three thousand years, in all the
temples and palaces from Naukratis up to the Cataracts.  They are all of
one type, and represent men of middle age, with grave but benevolent
countenances.  Yet they are intended, some as statues of aged monarchs,
others to perpetuate the memory of young princes.  The warrior and the
lawgiver, the blood-thirsty tyrant and the philanthropist are only
distinguished from each other by a difference in size, by which the
Egyptian sculptor expresses the idea of power and strength.  Amasis
orders a statue just as I should a sword.  Breadth and length being
specified, we both of us know quite well, before the master has begun his
work, what we shall receive when it is finished.  How could I possibly
fashion an infirm old man like an eager youth? a pugilist like a runner
in the foot-race? a poet like a warrior?  Put Ibykus and our Spartan
friend side by side, and tell me what you would say, were I to give to
the stern warrior the gentle features and gestures of our heart-ensnaring
poet."

"Well, and how does Amasis answer your remarks on this stagnation in
art?"

"He deplores it; but does not feel himself strong enough to abolish the
restrictive laws of the priests."

"And yet,"  said the Delphian, "he has given a large sum towards the
embellishment of our new temple, expressly, (I use his own words) for the
promotion of Hellenic art!"

"That is admirable in him," exclaimed Croesus.  "Will the Alkmaeonidae
soon have collected the three hundred talents necessary for the
completion of the temple?  Were I as rich as formerly I would gladly
undertake the entire cost; notwithstanding that your malicious god so
cruelly deceived me, after all my offerings at his shrine.  For when I
sent to ask whether I should begin the war with Cyrus, he returned this
answer: I should destroy a mighty kingdom by crossing the river Halys.
I trusted the god, secured the friendship of Sparta according to his
commands, crossed the boundary stream, and, in so doing, did indeed
destroy a mighty kingdom; not however that of the Medes and Persians, but
my own poor Lydia, which, as a satrapy of Cambyses, finds its loss of
independence a hard and uncongenial yoke."

"You blame the god unjustly," answered Phryxus.  It cannot be his fault
that you, in your human conceit, should have misinterpreted his oracle.
The answer did not say 'the kingdom of Persia,' but  'a kingdom' should
be destroyed through your desire for war.  Why did you not enquire what
kingdom was meant?  Was not your son's fate truly prophesied by the
oracle? and also that on the day of misfortune he would regain his
speech?  And when, after the fall of Sardis, Cyrus granted your wish to
enquire at Delphi whether the Greek gods made a rule of requiting their
benefactors by ingratitude, Loxias answered that he had willed the best
for you, but was controlled by a mightier power than himself, by that
inexorable fate which had foretold to thy great ancestor, that his fifth
successor was doomed to destruction."

"In the first days of my adversity I needed those words far more than
now," interrupted Croesus.  "There was a time when I cursed your god and
his oracles; but later, when with my riches my flatterers had left me,
and I became accustomed to pronounce judgment on my own actions, I saw
clearly that not Apollo, but my own vanity had been the cause of my ruin.
How could 'the kingdom to be destroyed' possibly mean mine, the mighty
realm of the powerful Croesus, the friend of the gods, the hitherto
unconquered leader?  Had a friend hinted at this interpretation of the
ambiguous oracle, I should have derided, nay, probably caused him to be
punished.  For a despotic ruler is like a fiery steed; the latter
endeavors to kick him who touches his wounds with intent to heal; the
former punishes him who lays a hand on the weak or failing points of his
diseased mind.  Thus I missed what, if my eyes had not been dazzled, I
might easily have seen; and now that my vision is clearer, though I have
nothing to lose, I am far more often anxious than in the days when none
could possibly lose more than I.  In comparison with those days, Phryxus,
I may be called a poor man now, but Cambyses does not leave me to famish,
and I can still raise a talent for your temple."

Phryxus expressed his thanks, and Phanes remarked "The Alkmaeonida; will
be sure to erect a beautiful edifice, for they are rich and ambitious,
and desirous of gaining favor with the Amphiktyons, in order, by their
aid, to overthrow the tyrants, secure to themselves a higher position
than that of the family to which I belong, and with this, the guidance of
state-affairs."

"Is it true, as people say," asked Ibykus, "that next to Agarista with
whom Megakles received so rich a dowry, you, Croesus, have been the
largest contributor to the wealth of the Alkmaeonidae?"

"True enough," answered Croesus laughing.

"Tell us the story, I beg," said Rhodopis.

"Well," answered Croesus, "Alkmaeon of Athens once appeared at my court;
his cheerfulness and cultivation pleased me well, and I retained him near
me for some time.  One day I showed him my treasure-chambers, at the
sight of which he fell into despair, called himself a common beggar and
declared that one good handful of these precious things would make him
a happy man.  I at once allowed him to take as much gold away as he could
carry.  What think you did Alkaemmon on this? sent for high Lydian
riding-boots, an apron and a basket, had the one secured behind him, put
the others on, and filled them all with gold, till they could hold no
more.  Not content with this, he strewed gold-dust in his hair and beard
and filled his mouth to that extent that he appeared in the act of
choking.  In each hand he grasped a golden dish, and thus laden dragged
himself out of the treasure-house, falling exhausted as he crossed the
threshold.  Never have I laughed so heartily as at this sight."

"But did you grant him all these treasures?"  said Rhodopis.

"Yes, yes, my friend; and did not think even then, that I had paid too
dearly for the experience that gold can make fools even of clever men."

"You were the most generous of monarchs," cried Phanes.

"And make a tolerably contented beggar," answered Croesus.  "But tell me,
Phryxus, how much has Amasis contributed to your collection?"

"He gave fifty tons of alum."

"A royal gift!"

"And the prince Psamtik?"

"On my appealing to him by his father's munificence, he turned his back
on me, and answered with a bitter laugh: 'Collect money for the
destruction of your temple, and I am ready to double my father's
donation!'"

"The wretch!"

"Say rather: the true Egyptian!  to Psamtik everything foreign is an
abomination."

"How much have the Greeks in Naukratis contributed?"

"Beside munificent private donations, each community has given twenty
minae."

"That is much."

"Philoinus, the Sybarite, alone sent me a thousand drachmm," and
accompanied his gift with a most singular epistle.  May I read it aloud,
Rhodopis?"

"Certainly," answered she, "it will show you that the drunkard has
repented of his late behaviour."

The Delphian began: "Philoinus to Phryxus: It grieves me that at
Rhodopis' house the other night I did not drink more; for had I done so
I should have lost consciousness entirely, and so have been unable to
offend even the smallest insect.  My confounded abstemiousness is
therefore to blame, that I can no longer enjoy a place at the best table
in all Egypt.  I am thankful, however, to Rhodopis for past enjoyment,
and in memory of her glorious roastbeef (which has bred in me the wish to
buy her cook at any price) I send twelve large spits for roasting oxen,
--[Rhodopis is said to have sent such a gift to Delphi.  Herod.]--and beg
they may be placed in some treasure-house at Delphi as an offering from
Rhodopis.  As for myself, being a rich man, I sign my name for a thousand
drachmae, and beg that my gift may be publicly announced at the next
Pythian games.  To that rude fellow, Aristomachus of Sparta, express my
thanks for the effectual manner in which he fulfilled my intention in
coming to Egypt.  I came hither for the purpose of having a tooth
extracted by an Egyptian dentist said to take out teeth without causing
much pain.

     [The Egyptian dentists must have been very skilful.  Artificial
     teeth have been discovered in the jaws of mummies.  See Blumenbach
     on the teeth of the ancient Egyptians, and on mummies.]

Aristomachus, however, knocked out the defective tooth and so saved me
from an operation, the thought of which had often made me tremble.  On
recovering consciousness, I found that three teeth had been knocked into
my mouth, the diseased one and two others, which though healthy, would
probably at some future time have caused me pain.  Salute Rhodopis and
the handsome Phanes from me.  You I invite to an entertainment at my
house in Sybaris, this day year.  We are accustomed to issue invitations
somewhat early, on account of my necessary preparations.  I have caused
this epistle to be written by my slave Sophotatus in an adjoining
chamber, as merely to behold the labor of writing causes cramp in my
fingers."

A burst of laughter arose at these words, but Rhodopis said: "This letter
gives me pleasure; it proves that Philoinus is not bad at heart.  Brought
up a Sybarite" .  .  .  She was suddenly interrupted by the voice of a
stranger, who had entered unperceived, and, after apologizing to the
venerable hostess and her guests for appearing without invitation among
them, continued thus: "I am Gyges the son of Croesus; and it has not been
merely for pastime, that I have ridden over from Sais in two hours lest I
should arrive too late!"

"Menon, a cushion for our guest!" cried Rhodopis.  "Be welcome to my
house and take some repose after your wild, thoroughly Lydian, ride."

"By the dog, Gyges!" exclaimed Croesus.

     [An oath of Rhadamanthus used in order to avoid mentioning the names
     of the gods.  Schol.  Aristoph.  Aves.  520.]

"What brings thee here at this hour?  I begged thee not to quit Bartja's
