
"Really, you son of Hystaspes," he said, "I believe you must be meant for
something great.  It was not by chance that, when you were still a mere
child, the gods sent their favorite Cyrus that dream which induced him to
order you into safe keeping."

"And yet my wings have never appeared."

"No bodily ones, certainly; but mental ones, likely enough.  Young man,
young man, you're on a dangerous road."

"Have winged creatures any need to be afraid of precipices?"

"Certainly; when their strength fails them."

"But I am strong."

"Stronger creatures than you will try to break your pinions."

"Let them.  I want nothing but what is right, and shall trust to my
star."

"Do you know its name?"

"It ruled in the hour of my birth, and its name is Anahita."

"I think I know better.  A burning ambition is the sun, whose rays guide
all your actions.  Take care; I tried that way myself once; it leads to
fame or to disgrace, but very seldom to happiness.  Fame to the ambitious
is like salt water to the thirsty; the more he gets, the more he wants.
I was once only a poor soldier, and am now Cambyses' ambassador.  But
you, what can you have to strive for?  There is no man in the kingdom
greater than yourself, after the sons of Cyrus .  .  .  Do my eyes
deceive me?  Surely those two men riding to meet us with a troop of
horsemen must be Gyges and Zopyrus.  The Angare, who left the inn before
us, must have told them of our coming."

"To be sure.  Look at that fellow Zopyrus, how he's waving and beckoning
with that palm-leaf."

"Here, you fellows, cut us a few twigs from those bushes-quick.  We'll
answer his green palm-leaf with a purple pomegranate-branch."

In a few minutes the friends had embraced one another, and the two bands
were riding together into the populous town, through the gardens
surrounding the lake Gygaeus, the Sardians' place of recreation.  It was
now near sunset, a cooler breeze was beginning to blow, and the citizens
were pouring through the gates to enjoy themselves in the open air.
Lydian and Persian warriors, the former wearing richly-ornamented
helmets, the latter tiaras in the form of a cylinder, were following
girls who were painted and wreathed.  Children were being led to the lake
by their nurses, to see the swans fed.  An old blind man was seated under
a plane-tree, singing sad ditties to a listening crowd and accompanying
them on the Magadis, the twenty-stringed Lydian lute.  Youths were
enjoying themselves at games of ball, ninepins, and dice, and half-grown
girls screaming with fright, when the ball hit one of their group or
nearly fell into the water.

The travellers scarcely noticed this gay scene, though at another time it
would have delighted them.  They were too much interested in enquiring
particulars of Bartja's illness and recovery.

At the brazen gates of the palace which had formerly belonged to Croesus,
they were met by Oroetes, the satrap of Sardis, in a magnificent court-
dress overloaded with ornaments.  He was a stately man, whose small
penetrating black eyes looked sharply out from beneath a bushy mass of
eyebrow.  His satrapy was one of the most important and profitable in the
entire kingdom, and his household could bear a comparison with that of
Cambyses in richness and splendor.  Though he possessed fewer wives and
attendants than the king, it was no inconsiderable troop of guards,
slaves, eunuchs and gorgeously-dressed officials, which appeared at the
palace-gates to receive the travellers.

The vice-regal palace, which was still kept up with great magnificence,
had been, in the days when Croesus occupied it, the most splendid of
royal residences; after the taking of Sardis, however, the greater part
of the dethroned king's treasures and works of art had been sent to
Cyrus's treasure-house in Pasargadae.  When that time of terror had
passed, the Lydians brought many a hidden treasure into the light of day
once more, and, by their industry and skill in art during the peaceful
years which they enjoyed under Cyrus and Cambyses, recovered their old
position so far, that Sardis was again looked upon as one of the
wealthiest cities of Asia Minor, and therefore, of the world.

Accustomed as Darius and Prexaspes were to royal splendor, they were
still astonished at the beauty and brilliancy of the satrap's palace.
The marble work, especially, made a great impression on them, as nothing
of the kind was to be found in Babylon, Susa or Ecbatane, where burnt
brick and cedar-wood supply the place of the polished marble.

     [The palace of Persepolis did not exist at the date of our story.
     It was built partly of black stone from Mount Rachmed, and partly of
     white marble; it was probably begun by Darius.  The palace of Susa
     was built of brick, (Strabo p. 728) that of Ecbatana of wood
     overlaid with plates of gold of immense value, and roofed with tiles
     made of the precious metals.]

They found Bartja lying on a couch in the great hall; he looked very
pale, and stretched out his arms towards them.

The friends supped together at the satrap's table and then retired to
Bartja's private room, in order to enjoy an undisturbed conversation.

"Well, Bartja, how did you come by this dangerous illness?"  was Darius'
first question after they were seated.

"I was thoroughly well, as you know," said Bartja, "when we left Babylon,
and we reached Germa, a little town on the Sangarius, without the
slightest hindrance.  The ride was long and we were very tired, burnt too
by the scorching May sun, and covered with dust; the river flows by the
station, and its waves looked so clear and bright--so inviting for a
bathe--that in a minute Zopyrus and I were off our horses, undressed, and
in the water.  Gyges told us we were very imprudent, but we felt
confident that we were too much inured to such things to get any harm,
and very much enjoyed our swim in the cool, green water.  Gyges,
perfectly calm as usual, let us have our own way, waited till our bath
was over, and then plunged in himself.

"In two hours we were in our saddles again, pushing on as if for our very
lives, changing horses at every station, and turning night into day.

"We were near Ipsus, when I began to feel violent pains in the head and
limbs.  I was ashamed to say anything about it and kept upright on my
saddle, until we had to take fresh horses at Bagis.  Just as I was in the
very act of mounting, I lost my senses and strength, and fell down on the
ground in a dead faint."

"Yes, a pretty fright you gave us,"  interrupted Zopyrus, "by dropping
down in that fashion.  It was fortunate that Gyges was there, for I lost
my wits entirely; he, of course, kept his presence of mind, and after
relieving his feelings in words not exactly flattering to us two, he
behaved like a circumspect general.--A fool of a doctor came running up
and protested that it was all over with poor Bart, for which I gave him a
good thrashing."

"Which he didn't particularly object to," said the satrap, laughing,
"seeing that you told them to lay a gold stater on every stripe."

"Yes, yes, my pugnacity costs me very dear sometimes.  But to our story.
As soon as Bartja had opened his eyes, Gyges sent me off to Sardis to
fetch a good physician and an easy travelling-carriage.  That ride won't
so soon be imitated.  An hour before I reached the gates my third horse
knocked up under me, so I had to trust to my own legs, and began running
as fast as I could.  The people must all have thought me mad.  At last I
saw a man on horseback--a merchant from Kelaenze--dragged him from his
horse, jumped into the saddle, and, before the next morning dawned, I was
back again with our invalid, bringing the best physician in Sardis, and
Oroetes' most commodious travelling-carriage.  We brought him to this
house at a slow footpace, and here a violent fever came on, he became
delirious, talked all the nonsense that could possibly come into a human
brain, and made us so awfully anxious, that the mere remembrance of that
time brings the big drops of perspiration to my forehead."

Bartja took his friend's hand: "I owe my life to him and Gyges," said he,
turning to Darius.  "Till to-day, when they set out to meet you, they
have never left me for a minute; a mother could not have nursed her sick
child more carefully.  And Oroetes, I am much obliged to you too; doubly
so because your kindness subjected you to annoyance."

"How could that be?"  asked Darius.

"That Polykrates of Samos, whose name we heard so often in Egypt, has the
best physician that Greece has ever produced.  While I was lying here
ill, Oroetes wrote to this Democedes, making him immense promises, if he
would only come to Sardis directly.  The Sainian pirates, who infest the
whole Ionian coast, took the messenger captive and brought Oroetes'
letter to their master Polykrates.  He opened it, and sent the messenger
back with the answer, that Democedes was in his pay, and that if Oroetes
needed his advice he must apply to Polykrates himself.  Our generous
friend submitted for my sake, and asked the Samian to send his physician
to Sardis."

"Well," said Prexaspes, "and what followed?"  The proud island-prince
sent him at once.  He cured me, as you see, and left us a few days ago
loaded with presents."

"Well," interrupted Zopyrus, "I can quite understand, that Polykrates
likes to keep his physician near him.  I assure you, Darius, it would not
be easy to find his equal.  He's as handsome as Minutscher, as clever as
Piran Wisa, as strong as Rustem, and as benevolent and helpful as the god
Soma. I wish you could have seen how well he threw those round metal
plates he calls discs.  I am no weakling, but when we wrestled he soon
threw me.  And then he could tell such famous stories--stories that made
a man's heart dance within him."

     [This very Oroetes afterwards succeeded in enticing Polykrates to
     Sardis and there crucified him.  Herod. III. 120-125.  Valerius
     Maximus VI.  9. 5.]

"We know just such a fellow too," said Darius, smiling at his friend's
enthusiasm.  "That Athenian Phanes, who came to prove our innocence."

"The physician Democedes is from Crotona, a place which must he somewhere
very near the setting sun."

"But is inhabited by Greeks, like Athens."  added Oroetes.  "Ah, my young
friends, you must beware of those fellows; they're as cunning, deceitful,
and selfish, as they are strong, clever, and handsome."

"Democedes is generous and sincere," cried Zopyrus.

"And Croesus himself thinks Phanes not only an able, but a virtuous man,"
added Darius.

"Sappho too has always, and only spoken well of the Athenian," said
Bartja, in confirmation of Darius's remark.  "But don't let us talk any
more about these Greeks," he went on.  "They give Oroetes so much trouble
by their refractory and stubborn conduct, that he is not very fond of
them."

"The gods know that," sighed the satrap.  "It's more difficult to keep
one Greek town in order, than all the countries between the Euphrates and
the Tigris."

While Oroetes was speaking, Zopyrus had gone to the window.  "The stars
are already high in the heavens," he said, "and Bartja is tired; so make
haste, Darius, and tell us something about home."

The son of Hystaspes agreed at once, and began by relating the events
which we have heard already.  Bartja, especially, was distressed at
hearing of Nitetis' sad end, and the discovery of Amasis' fraud filled
them all with astonishment.  After a short pause, Darius went on:

"When once Nitetis' descent had been fully proved, Cambyses was like a
changed man.  He called a council of war, and appeared at table in the
royal robes instead of his mourning garments.  You can fancy what
universal joy the idea of a war with Egypt excited.  Even Croesus, who
you know is one of Amasis' well-wishers, and advises peace whenever it is
possible, had not a word to say against it.  The next morning, as usual,
what had been resolved on in intoxication was reconsidered by sober
heads; after several opinions had been given, Phanes asked permission to
speak, and spoke I should think for an hour.  But how well!  It was as if
every word he said came direct from the gods.  He has learnt our language
in a wonderfully short time, but it flowed from his lips like honey.
Sometimes he drew tears from every eye, at others excited stormy shouts
of joy, and then wild bursts of rage.  His gestures were as graceful as
those of a dancing-girl, but at the same time manly and dignified.  I
can't repeat his speech; my poor words, by the side of his, would sound
like the rattle of a drum after a peal of thunder.  But when at last,
inspired and carried away by his eloquence, we had unanimously decided on
war, he began to speak once more on the best ways and means of
prosecuting it successfully."

Here Darius was obliged to stop, as Zopyrus had fallen on his neck in an
ecstasy of delight.  Bartja, Gyges and Oroetes were not less delighted,
and they all begged him to go on with his tale.

"Our army," began Darius afresh, "ought to be at the boundaries of Egypt
by the month Farwardin, (March) as the inundation of the Nile, which
would hinder the march of our infantry, begins in Murdad (July).  Phanes
is now on his way to the Arabians to secure their assistance; in hopes
that these sons of the desert may furnish our army with water and guides
through their dry and thirsty land.  He will also endeavor to win the
rich island of Cyprus, which he once conquered for Amasis, over to our
side.  As it was through his mediation that the kings of the island were
allowed to retain their crowns, they will be willing to listen to his
