"Yes."

"I love the daughter of Cyrus, your sister and the king's, Atossa."

"Have I understood you rightly?  you love Atossa?  Be praised for this,
O ye pure Amescha cpenta!  Now I shall never believe in your stars again,
for instead of the danger with which they threatened me, here comes an
unexpected happiness.  Embrace me, my brother, and tell me the whole
story, that I may see whether I can help you to turn this hopeless dream,
as you call it, into a reality."

"You will remember that before our journey to Egypt, we went with the
entire court from Ecbatana to Susa.  I was in command of the division of
the "Immortals" appointed to escort the carriages containing the king's
mother and sister, and his wives.  In going through the narrow pass which
leads over the Orontes, the horses of your mother's carriage slipped.
The yoke to which the horses were harnessed broke from the pole, and the
heavy, four-wheeled carriage fell over the precipice without obstruction.

     [There was a yoke at the end of the shaft of a Persian carriage,
     which was fastened on to the backs of the horses and took the place
     of our horse-collar and pole-chain.]

On seeing it disappear, we were horrified and spurred our horses to the
place as quickly as possible.  We expected of course to see only
fragments of the carriages and the dead bodies of its inmates, but the
gods had taken them into their almighty protection, and there lay the
carriage, with broken wheels, in the arms of two gigantic cypresses which
had taken firm root in the fissures of the slate rocks, and whose dark
tops reached up to the edge of the carriage-road.

"As quick as thought I sprang from my horse and scrambled down one of the
cypresses.  Your mother and sister stretched their arms to me, crying for
help.  The danger was frightful, for the sides of the carriage had been
so shattered by the fall, that they threatened every moment to give way,
in which case those inside it must inevitably have fallen into the black,
unfathomable abyss which looked like an abode for the gloomy Divs, and
stretched his jaws wide to crush its beautiful victims.

"I stood before the shattered carriage as it hung over the precipice
ready to fall to pieces every moment, and then for the first time I met
your sister's imploring look.  From that moment I loved her, but at the
time I was much too intent on saving them, to think of anything else, and
had no idea what had taken place within me.  I dragged the trembling
women out of the carriage, and one minute later it rolled down the abyss
crashing into a thousand pieces.  I am a strong man, but I confess that
all my strength was required to keep myself and the two women from
falling over the precipice until ropes were thrown to us from above.
Atossa hung round my neck, and Kassandane lay on my breast, supported by
my left arm; with the right I fastened the rope round my waist, we were
drawn up, and I found myself a few minutes later on the high-road--your
mother and sister were saved.

"As soon as one of the Magi had bound up the wounds cut by the rope in my
side, the king sent for me, gave me the chain I am now wearing and the
revenues of an entire satrapy, and then took me to his mother and sister.
They expressed their gratitude very warmly; Kassandane allowed me to kiss
her forehead, and gave me all the jewels she had worn at the time of the
accident, as a present for my future wife.  Atossa took a ring from her
finger, put it on mine and kissed my hand in the warmth of her emotion--
you know how eager and excitable she is.  Since that happy day--the
happiest in my life--I have never seen your sister, till yesterday
evening, when we sat opposite to each other at the banquet.  Our eyes
met.  I saw nothing but Atossa, and I think she has not forgotten the man
who saved her.  Kassandane .  .  ."

"Oh, my mother would be delighted to have you for a son-in-law; I will
answer for that.  As to the king, your father must apply to him; he is
our uncle and has a right to ask the hand of Cyrus's daughter for his
son."

"But have you forgotten your father's dream?  You know that Cambyses has
always looked on me with suspicion since that time."

"Oh, that has been long forgotten.  My father dreamt before his death
that you had wings, and was misled by the soothsayers into the fancy that
you, though you were only eighteen then, would try to gain the crown.
Cambyses thought of this dream too; but, when you saved my mother and
sister, Croesus explained to him that this must have been its fulfilment,
as no one but Darius or a winged eagle could possibly have possessed
strength and dexterity enough to hang suspended over such an abyss."

"Yes, and I remember too that these words did not please your brother.
He chooses to be the only eagle in Persia; but Croesus does not spare his
vanity--"

"Where can Croesus be all this time?"

"In the hanging-gardens.  My father and Gobryas have very likely detained
him."

Just at that moment the voice of Zopyrus was heard exclaiming, "Well, I
call that polite!  Bartja invites us to a wine-party and leaves us
sitting here without a host, while he talks secrets yonder."

"We are coming, we are coming," answered Bartja.  Then taking the hand of
Darius heartily, he said: "I am very glad that you love Atossa.  I shall
stay here till the day after to-morrow, let the stars threaten me with
all the dangers in the world.  To-morrow I will find out what Atossa
feels, and when every thing is in the right track I shall go away, and
leave my winged Darius to his own powers."

So saying Bartja went back into the arbor, and his friend began to watch
the stars again.  The longer he looked the sadder and more serious became
his face, and when the Tistar-star set, he murmured, "Poor Bartja!"  His
friends called him, and he was on the point of returning to them, when he
caught sight of a new star, and began to examine its position carefully.
His serious looks gave way to a triumphant smile, his tall figure seemed
to grow taller still, he pressed his hand on his heart and whispered:
"Use your pinions, winged Darius; your star will be on your side," and
then returned to his friends.

A few minutes after, Croesus came up to the arbor.  The youths sprang
from their seats to welcome the old man, but when he saw Bartja's face by
the bright moonlight, he stood as if transfixed by a flash of lightning.

"What has happened, father?"  asked Gyges, seizing his hand anxiously.

"Nothing, nothing," he stammered almost inaudibly, and pushing his son on
one side, whispered in Bartja's ear: "Unhappy boy, you are still here?
don't delay any longer,--fly at once! the whip-bearers are close at my
heels, and I assure you that if you don't use the greatest speed, you
will have to forfeit your double imprudence with your life."

"But Croesus, I have .  .  ."

"You have set at nought the law of the land and of the court, and, in
appearance at least, have done great offence to your brother's honor...."

"You are speaking .  .  ."

"Fly, I tell you--fly at once; for if your visit to the hanging-gardens
was ever so innocently meant, you are still in the greatest danger.  You
know Cambyses' violent temper so well; how could you so wickedly disobey
his express command?"

"I don't understand."

"No excuses,--fly!  don't you know that, Cambyses has long been jealous
of you, and that your visit to the Egyptian to-night .  .  ."

"I have never once set foot in the hanging-gardens, since Nitetis has
been here."

"Don't add a lie to your offence, I .  .  ."

"But I swear to you .  .  ."

"Do you wish to turn a thoughtless act into a crime by adding the guilt
of perjury?  The whip-bearers are coming, fly!"

"I shall remain here, and abide by my oath."

"You are infatuated!  It is not an hour ago since I myself, Hystaspes,
and others of the Achaemenidae saw you in the hanging-gardens .  .  ."

In his astonishment Bartja had, half involuntarily, allowed himself to be
led away, but when he heard this he stood still, called his friends and
said "Croesus says he met me an hour ago in the hanging-gardens, you know
that since the sun set I have not been away from you.  Give your
testimony, that in this case an evil Div must have made sport of our
friend and his companions."

"I swear to you, father," cried Gyges, "that Bartja has not left this
garden for some hours."

"And we confirm the same," added Araspes, Zopyrus and Darius with one
voice.

"You want to deceive me?"  said Croesus getting very angry, and looking
at each of them reproachfully: "Do you fancy that I am blind or mad?  Do
you think that your witness will outweigh the words of such men as
Hystaspes, Gobryas, Artaphernes and the high priest, Oropastes?  In spite
of all your false testimony, which no amount of friendship can justify,
Bartja will have to die unless he flies at once."

"May Angramainjus destroy me," said Araspes interrupting the old man, "if
Bartja was in the hanging-gardens two hours ago!"  and Gyges added:

"Don't call me your son any longer, if we have given false testimony."

Darius was beginning to appeal to the eternal stars, but Bartja put an
end to this confusion of voices by saying in a decided tone: "A division
of the bodyguard is coming into the garden.  I am to be arrested; I
cannot escape because I am innocent, and to fly would lay me open to
suspicion.  By the soul of my father, the blind eyes of my mother, and
the pure light of the sun, Croesus, I swear that I am not lying."

"Am I to believe you, in spite of my own eyes which have never yet
deceived me?  But I will, boy, for I love you.  I do not and I will not
know whether you are innocent or guilty, but this I do know, you must
fly, and fly at once.  You know Cambyses.  My carriage is waiting at the
gate.  Don't spare the horses, save yourself even if you drive them to
death.  The Soldiers seem to know what they have been sent to do; there
can be no question that they delay so long only in order to give their
favorite time to escape.  Fly, fly, or it is all over with you."

Darius, too, pushed his friend forward, exclaiming: "Fly, Bartja, and
remember the warning that the heavens themselves wrote in the stars for
you."

Bartja, however, stood silent, shook his handsome head, waved his friends
back, and answered: "I never ran away yet, and I mean to hold my ground
to-day.  Cowardice is worse than death in my opinion, and I would rather
suffer wrong at the hands of others than disgrace myself.  There are the
soldiers!  Well met, Bischen.  You've come to arrest me, haven't you?
Wait one moment, till I have said good-bye to my friends."

Bischen, the officer he spoke to, was one of Cyrus's old captains; he had
given Bartja his first lessons in shooting and throwing the spear, had
fought by his side in the war with the Tapuri, and loved him as if he
were his own son.  He interrupted him, saying: "There is no need to take
leave of your friends, for the king, who is raging like a madman, ordered
me not only to arrest you, but every one else who might be with you."

And then he added in a low voice: "The king is beside himself with rage
and threatens to have your life.  You must fly.  My men will do what I
tell them blindfold; they will not pursue you; and I am so old that it
would be little loss to Persia, if my head were the price of my
disobedience."

"Thanks, thanks, my friend," said Bartja, giving him his hand; "but I
cannot accept your offer, because I am innocent, and I know that though
Cambyses is hasty, he is not unjust.  Come friends, I think the king will
give us a hearing to-day, late as it is."




CHAPTER III.

Two hours later Bartja and his friends were standing before the king.
The gigantic man was seated on his golden throne; he was pale and his
eyes looked sunken; two physicians stood waiting behind him with all
kinds of instruments and vessels in their hands.  Cambyses had, only a
few minutes before, recovered consciousness, after lying for more than an
hour in one of those awful fits, so destructive both to mind and body,
which we call epileptic.

     [The dangerous disease to which Herodotus says Cambyses had been
     subject from his birth, and which was called "sacred" by some, can
     scarcely be other than epilepsy.  See Herod, III. 33.]

Since Nitetis' arrival he had been free from this illness; but it had
seized him to-day with fearful violence, owing to the overpowering mental
excitement he had gone through.

If he had met Bartja a few hours before, he would have killed him with
his own hand; but though the epileptic fit had not subdued his anger it
had at least so far quieted it, that he was in a condition to hear what
was to be said on both sides.

At the right hand of the throne stood Hystaspes, Darius's grey-haired
father, Gobryas, his future father-in-law, the aged Intaphernes, the
grandfather of that Phaedime whose place in the king's favor had been
given to Nitetis, Oropastes the high-priest, Croesus, and behind them
Boges, the chief of the eunuchs.  At its left Bartja, whose hands were
heavily fettered, Araspes, Darius, Zopyrus and Gyges.  In the background
stood some hundred officials and grandees.
