workshop any one can open it who sticks a nail into the hole above the
bar, and any one can shut it inside who pushes the iron bolt. Send to
call me before the performance with the lights begins; I will come in
spite of my wretched feet. As I have undertaken the thing I will carry
it out, but for no other reason, for it is my opinion that even without
such means of deception--"

"We use no deception," interrupted the high-priest, sternly rebuking his
colleague. "We only present to short-sighted mortals the creative power
of the divinity in a form perceptible and intelligible to their senses."

With these words the tall priest turned his back on the smith and
quitted the hall by a side door; Krates opened the brazen door, and as
he gathered together his tools he said to himself, but loud enough for
Klea to hear him distinctly in her hiding-place:

"It may be right for me, but deceit is deceit, whether a god deceives a
king or a child deceives a beggar."

"Deceit is deceit," repeated Klea after the smith when he had left the
hall and she had emerged from her corner.

She stood still for a moment and looked round her. For the first time
she observed the shabby colors on the walls, the damage the pillars had
sustained in the course of years, and the loose slabs in the pavement.

The sweetness of the incense sickened her, and as she passed by an old
man who threw up his arms in fervent supplication, she looked at him
with a glance of compassion.

When she had passed out beyond the pylons enclosing the temple she
turned round, shaking her head in a puzzled way as she gazed at it; for
she knew that not a stone had been changed within the last hour, and yet
it looked as strange in her eyes as some landscape with which we have
become familiar in all the beauty of spring, and see once more in winter
with its trees bare of leaves; or like the face of a woman which we
thought beautiful under the veil which hid it, and which, when the veil
is raised, we see to be wrinkled and devoid of charm.

When she had heard the smith's words, "Deceit is deceit," she felt her
heart shrink as from a stab, and could not check the tears which started
to her eyes, unused as they were to weeping; but as soon as she had
repeated the stern verdict with her own lips her tears had ceased, and
now she stood looking at the temple like a traveller who takes leave of
a dear friend; she was excited, she breathed more freely, drew herself
up taller, and then turned her back on the sanctuary of Serapis, proudly
though with a sore heart.

Close to the gate-keeper's lodge a child came tottering towards her with
his arms stretched up to her. She lifted him up, kissed him, and then
asked the mother, who also greeted her, for a piece of bread, for her
hunger was becoming intolerable. While she ate the dry morsel the child
sat on her lap, following with his large eyes the motion of her hand and
lips. The boy was about five years old, with legs so feeble that they
could scarcely support the weight of his body, but he had a particularly
sweet little face; certainly it was quite without expression, and it was
only when he saw Klea coming that tiny Philo's eyes had lighted up with
pleasure.

"Drink this milk," said the child's mother, offering the young girl an
earthen bowl. "There is not much and I could not spare it if Philo would
eat like other children, but it seems as if it hurt him to swallow. He
drinks two or three drops and eats a mouthful, and then will take no
more even if he is beaten."

"You have not been beating him again?" said Klea reproachfully, and
drawing the child closer to her. "My husband--" said the woman, pulling
at her dress in some confusion. "The child was born on a good day and
in a lucky hour, and yet he is so puny and weak and will not learn to
speak, and that provokes Pianchi."

"He will spoil everything again!" exclaimed Klea annoyed. "Where is he?"

"He was wanted in the temple."

"And is he not pleased that Philo calls him 'father,' and you 'mother,'
and me by my name, and that he learns to distinguish many things?" asked
the girl.

"Oh, yes of course," said the woman. "He says you are teaching him to
speak just as if he were a starling, and we are very much obliged to
you."

"That is not what I want," interrupted Klea. "What I wish is that you
should not punish and scold the boy, and that you should be as glad as
I am when you see his poor little dormant soul slowly waking up. If
he goes on like this, the poor little fellow will be quite sharp and
intelligent. What is my name, my little one?"

"Ke-ea," stammered the child, smiling at his friend. "And now taste
this that I have in my hand; what is it?--I see you know. It is
called--whisper in my ear. That's right, mil--mil-milk! to be sure, my
tiny, it is milk. Now open your little mouth and say it prettily after
me--once more--and again--say it twelve times quite right and I will
give you a kiss--Now you have earned a pretty kiss--will you have it
here or here? Well, and what is this? your ea-? Yes, your ear. And
this?--your nose, that is right."

The child's eyes brightened more and more under this gentle teaching,
and neither Klea nor her pupil were weary till, about an hour later, the
re-echoing sound of a brass gong called her away. As she turned to
go the little one ran after her crying; she took him in her arms and
carried him back to his mother, and then went on to her own room to
dress herself and her sister for the procession. On the way to the
Pastophorium she recalled once more her expedition to the temple and her
prayer there.

"Even before the sanctuary," said she to herself, "I could not succeed
in releasing my soul from its burden--it was not till I set to work to
loosen the tongue of the poor little child. Every pure spot, it seems to
me, may be the chosen sanctuary of some divinity, and is not an infant's
soul purer than the altar where truth is mocked at?"

In their room she found Irene; she had dressed her hair carefully and
stuck the pomegranate-flower in it, and she asked Klea if she thought
she looked well.

"You look like Aphrodite herself," replied Klea kissing her forehead.
Then she arranged the folds of her sister's dress, fastened on the
ornaments, and proceeded to dress herself. While she was fastening
her sandals Irene asked her, "Why do you sigh so bitterly?" and Klea
replied, "I feel as if I had lost my parents a second time."




CHAPTER V.

The procession was over.

At the great service which had been performed before him in the Greek
Serapeum, Ptolemy Philometor had endowed the priests not with the whole
but with a considerable portion of the land concerning which they
had approached him with many petitions. After the court had once more
quitted Memphis and the procession was broken up, the sisters returned
to their room, Irene with crimson cheeks and a smile on her lips, Klea
with a gloomy and almost threatening light in her eyes.

As the two were going to their room in silence a temple-servant called
to Klea, desiring her to go with him to the high-priest, who wished to
speak to her. Klea, without speaking, gave her water-jar to Irene and
was conducted into a chamber of the temple, which was used for keeping
the sacred vessels in. There she sat down on a bench to wait. The two
men who in the morning had visited the Pastophorium had also followed
in the procession with the royal family. At the close of the solemnities
Publius had parted from his companion without taking leave, and without
looking to the right or to the left, he had hastened back to the
Pastophorium and to the cell of Serapion, the recluse.

The old man heard from afar the younger man's footstep, which fell
on the earth with a firmer and more decided tread than that of the
softly-stepping priests of Serapis, and he greeted him warmly with signs
and words.

Publius thanked him coolly and gravely, and said, dryly enough and with
incisive brevity:

"My time is limited. I propose shortly to quit Memphis, but I promised
you to hear your request, and in order to keep my word I have come to
see you; still--as I have said--only to keep my word. The water-bearers
of whom you desired to speak to me do not interest me--I care no more
about them than about the swallows flying over the house yonder."

"And yet this morning you took a long walk for Klea's sake," returned
Serapion.

"I have often taken a much longer one to shoot a hare," answered the
Roman. "We men do not pursue our game because the possession of it is
any temptation, but because we love the sport, and there are sporting
natures even among women. Instead of spears or arrows they shoot with
flashing glances, and when they think they have hit their game they
turn their back upon it. Your Klea is one of this sort, while the pretty
little one I saw this morning looks as if she were very ready to be
hunted, I however, no more wish to be the hunter of a young girl than
to be her game. I have still three days to spend in Memphis, and then I
shall turn my back forever on this stupid country."

"This morning," said Serapion, who began to suspect what the grievance
might be which had excited the discontent implied in the Roman's speech,
"This morning you appeared to be in less hurry to set out than now, so
to me you seem to be in the plight of game trying to escape; however, I
know Klea better than you do. Shooting is no sport of hers, nor will she
let herself be hunted, for she has a characteristic which you, my friend
Publius Scipio, ought to recognize and value above all others--she is
proud, very proud; aye, and so she may be, scornful as you look--as if
you would like to say 'how came a water-carrier of Serapis by her pride,
a poor creature who is ill-fed and always engaged in service, pride
which is the prescriptive right only of those, whom privilege raises
above the common herd around them?--But this girl, you may take my word
for it, has ample reason to hold her head high, not only because she
is the daughter of free and noble parents and is distinguished by rare
beauty, not because while she was still a child she undertook, with
the devotion and constancy of the best of mothers, the care of another
child--her own sister, but for a reason which, if I judge you rightly,
you will understand better than many another young man; because she
must uphold her pride in order that among the lower servants with whom
unfortunately she is forced to work, she may never forget that she is
a free and noble lady. You can set your pride aside and yet remain what
you are, but if she were to do so and to learn to feel as a servant,
she would presently become in fact what by nature she is not and by
circumstances is compelled to be. A fine horse made to carry burdens
becomes a mere cart-horse as soon as it ceases to hold up its head and
lift its feet freely. Klea is proud because she must be proud; and
if you are just you will not contemn the girl, who perhaps has cast a
kindly glance at you--since the gods have so made you that you cannot
fail to please any woman--and yet who must repel your approaches because
she feels herself above being trifled with, even by one of the Cornelia
gens, and yet too lowly to dare to hope that a man like you should ever
stoop from your height to desire her for a wife. She has vexed you, of
that there can be no doubt; how, I can only guess. If, however, it has
been through her repellent pride, that ought not to hurt you, for
a woman is like a soldier, who only puts on his armor when he is
threatened by an opponent whose weapons he fears."

The recluse had rather whispered than spoken these words, remembering
that he had neighbors; and as he ceased the drops stood on his brow, for
whenever any thing disturbed him he was accustomed to allow his powerful
voice to be heard pretty loudly, and it cost him no small effort to
moderate it for so long.

Publius had at first looked him in the face, and then had gazed at the
ground, and he had heard Serapion to the end without interrupting him;
but the color had flamed in his cheeks as in those of a schoolboy, and
yet he was an independent and resolute youth who knew how to conduct
himself in difficult straits as well as a man in the prime of life.
In all his proceedings he was wont to know very well, exactly what he
wanted, and to do without any fuss or comment whatever he thought right
and fitting.

During the anchorite's speech the question had occurred to him, what
did he in fact expect or wish of the water-bearer; but the answer was
wanting, he felt somewhat uncertain of himself, and his uncertainty and
dissatisfaction with himself increased as all that he heard struck him
more and more. He became less and less inclined to let himself be thrown
over by the young girl who for some days had, much against his will,
been constantly in his thoughts, whose image he would gladly have
dismissed from his mind, but who, after the recluse's speech, seemed
more desirable than ever. "Perhaps you are right," he replied after
a short silence, and he too lowered his voice, for a subdued tone
generally provokes an equally subdued answer. "You know the maiden
better than I, and if you describe her correctly it would be as well
that I should abide by my decision and fly from Egypt, or, at any rate,
from your protegees, since nothing lies before me but a defeat or a
victory, which could bring me nothing but repentance. Klea avoided my
eye to-day as if it shed poison like a viper's tooth, and I can have
nothing more to do with her: still, might I be informed how she came
into this temple? and if I can be of any service to her, I will-for your
sake. Tell me now what you know of her and what you wish me to do."

The recluse nodded assent and beckoned Publius to come closer to him,
and bowing down to speak into the Roman's ear, he said softly: "Are you
in favor with the queen?" Publius, having said that he was, Serapion,
with an exclamation of satisfaction, began his story.

"You learned this morning how I myself came into this cage, and that
my father was overseer of the temple granaries. While I was wandering
abroad he was deposed from his office, and would probably have died in
prison, if a worthy man had not assisted him to save his honor and his
liberty. All this does not concern you, and I may therefore keep it to
myself; but this man was the father of Klea and Irene, and the enemy
by whose instrumentality my father suffered innocently was the villain
Eulaeus. You know--or perhaps indeed you may not know--that the priests
have to pay a certain tribute for the king's maintenance; you know? To
be sure, you Romans trouble yourselves more about matters of law
and administration than the culture of the arts or the subtleties of
thought. Well, it was my father's duty to pay these customs over to
Eulaeus, who received them; but the beardless effeminate vermin,
the glutton--may every peach he ever ate or ever is to eat turn to
poison!--kept back half of what was delivered to him, and when the
accountants found nothing but empty air in the king's stores where
they hoped to find corn and woven goods, they raised an alarm, which of
course came to the ears of the powerful thief at court before it reached
those of my poor father. You called Egypt a marvellous country, or
something like it; and so in truth it is, not merely on account of the
great piles there that you call Pyramids and such like, but because
things happen here which in Rome would be as impossible as moonshine
at mid-day, or a horse with his tail at the end of his nose! Before a
complaint could be laid against Eulaeus he had accused my father of the
peculation, and before the Epistates and the assessor of the district
had even looked at the indictment, their judgment on the falsely accused
man was already recorded, for Eulaeus had simply bought their verdict
just as a man buys a fish or a cabbage in the market. In olden times the
goddess of justice was represented in this country with her eyes shut,
but now she looks round on the world like a squinting woman who winks
at the king with one eye, and glances with the other at the money in
the hand of the accuser or the accused. My poor father was of course
condemned and thrown into prison, where he was beginning to doubt the
justice of the gods, when for his sake the greatest wonder happened,
ever seen in this land of wonders since first the Greeks ruled in
Alexandria. An honorable man undertook without fear of persons the
lost cause of the poor condemned wretch, and never rested till he
had restored him to honor and liberty. But imprisonment, disgrace and
indignation had consumed the strength of the ill-used man as a worm eats
into cedar wood, and he fell into a decline and died. His preserver,
Klea's father, as the reward of his courageous action fared even worse;
for here by the Nile virtues are punished in this world, as crimes are
with you. Where injustice holds sway frightful things occur, for the
gods seem to take the side of the wicked. Those who do not hope for
a reward in the next world, if they are neither fools nor
philosophers--which often comes to the same thing--try to guard
themselves against any change in this.

"Philotas, the father of the two girls, whose parents were natives of
Syracuse, was an adherent of the doctrines of Zeno--which have many
supporters among you at Rome too--and he was highly placed as an
official, for he was president of the Chrematistoi, a college of judges
which probably has no parallel out of Egypt, and which has been kept
up better than any other. It travels about from province to province
stopping in the chief towns to administer justice. When an appeal is
brought against the judgment of the court of justice belonging to any
place--over which the Epistates of the district presides--the case is
brought before the Chrematistoi, who are generally strangers alike to
the accuser and accused; by them it is tried over again, and thus
the inhabitants of the provinces are spared the journey to Alexandria
or--since the country has been divided--to Memphis, where, besides, the
supreme court is overburdened with cases.

"No former president of the Chrematistoi had ever enjoyed a higher
reputation than Philotas. Corruption no more dared approach him than a
sparrow dare go near a falcon, and he was as wise as he was just, for
he was no less deeply versed in the ancient Egyptian law than in that of
the Greeks, and many a corrupt judge reconsidered matters as soon as it
became known that he was travelling with the Chrematistoi, and passed a
just instead of an unjust sentence.

"Cleopatra, the widow of Epiphanes, while she was living and acting as
guardian of her sons Philometor and Euergetes--who now reign in Memphis
and Alexandria--held Philotas in the highest esteem and conferred on
him the rank of 'relation to the king'; but she was just dead when this
worthy man took my father's cause in hand, and procured his release from
prison.

"The scoundrel Eulaeus and his accomplice Lenaeus then stood at the
height of power, for the young king, who was not yet of age, let himself
be led by them like a child by his nurse.

"Now as my father was an honest man, no one but Eulaeus could be the
rascal, and as the Chrematistoi threatened to call him before their
tribunal the miserable creature stirred up the war in Caelo-Syria
against Antiochus Epiphanes, the king's uncle.

"You know how disgraceful for us was the course of that enterprise,
how Philometor was defeated near Pelusium, and by the advice of Eulaeus
escaped with his treasure to Samothrace, how Philometor's brother
Euergetes was set up as king in Alexandria, how Antiochus took Memphis,
and then allowed his elder nephew to continue to reign here as though he
were his vassal and ward.

"It was during this period of humiliation, that Eulaeus was able to
evade Philotas, whom he may very well have feared, as though his own
conscience walked the earth on two legs in the person of the judge, with
the sword of justice in his hand, and telling all men what a scoundrel
he was.

"Memphis had opened her gates to Antiochus without offering much
resistance, and the Syrian king, who was a strange man and was fond of
mixing among the people as if he himself were a common man, applied to
Philotas, who was as familiar with Egyptian manners and customs as with
those of Greece, in order that he might conduct him into the halls of
