"And ought that to redound to the discredit of my faith?" asked Wolf.
"So far as I have learned to know men, the majority, at least, will not
hasten to attain our Ursel's complete understanding with one's self.
I should even fear that there are many among you who no longer feel
a desire to heed little sins and their forgiveness----"

Here Ursel again interrupted him with an exclamation of dissent,
accompanied by a gesture of denial from her thin old hand; but Wolf
glanced at the clock which the precentor had received as a testimonial
of affection from the members of the cathedral choir, which he had led
for years.

It was already half past one, and for the sake of Ursel, who was still
obliged to take care of herself, he urged departure, adding gaily that he
had not the ability to "defend himself against two."  Erasmus, too, was
surprised to find it so late, and, after shaking hands with the old woman
and promising to visit her soon again, seized his cap.  Wolf accompanied
him.

The May night was sultry, and the air in the low room had been hot and
oppressive.

He would gladly have dropped the useless discussion, but Erasmus's heart
was set upon winning his schoolmate to the doctrine which he believed
with his whole soul.  He toiled with the utmost zeal, but during their
nocturnal walk also he failed to convince his opponent.  Both were true
to their religion.  Erasmus saw in his faith the return to the pure
teachings of Christ and the liberation of the human soul from ancient
fetters; Wolf, who had had them pointed out to him at school by a
Protestant teacher, by no means denied the abuses that had crept into
his, but he clung with warm love to Holy Church, which offered his soul
an abundance of what it needed.

His art certainly also owed to her its best development--from the
inexhaustible spring of faith which is formed from thousands of rivulets
and tributaries in the holy domain of the Catholic Church, and in it
alone, the most sublime of all material flowed to the musician, and not
to him only, but to the artist, the architect, and the sculptor.  The
fullest stream--he was well aware of it--came from ancient pagan times,
but from whatever sources the spring was fed, the Church had understood
how to assimilate, preserve, and sanctify it.

Erasmus listened silently while Wolf eagerly made these statements; but
when the latter closed with the declaration that the evangelical faith
would never attain the same power of elevating hearts, he interrupted the
knight with the exclamation, "We shall have to wait for that!"

Luther, he went on, had given the most powerful encouragement to music,
and the German Protestant composers even now were not so very far behind
the Netherland ones.  The Catholic Church could no longer claim the great
Albrecht Durer, and, if art ceased to create images of the saints, with
which the childish minds of the common people practised idolatry, so much
the better.  The Infinite and Eternal was no subject for the artist.  The
humanization of God only belittled his infinite and illimitable nature.
Earthly life offered art material enough.  Man himself would be the
worthiest model for imitation, and perhaps no earlier epoch had created
handsomer likenesses of men and women than would now be produced by
evangelical artists.

To their own surprise, during this conversation they had reached the
Hiltner house, and Erasmus invited his friend to come to his room and
over a glass of wine answer him, as he had had the last word.  But Wolf
had already drunk at his own home more of the fiery Wurzburg from the
precentor's cellar than usual.  Besides, much as he still had to say in
reply to Erasmus, the sensible young man deemed it advisable to avoid the
syndic's house for the present.  The confessor's suspicion had been
aroused, and De Soto was a Dominican, who certainly did not stand far
from the Holy Inquisition.

Therefore while Erasmus, with burning head and great excitement, was
still urging his friend to come in, Wolf unexpectedly bade him a hasty
and resolute farewell.




CHAPTER XXIII.

Wolf left the Hiltner house behind him with the feeling that he had
upheld the cause of his Church against the learned opponent to the best
of his ability, and had not been defeated.  Yet he was not entirely
satisfied.  In former years he had read the Hutten dialogues, and, though
he disapproved of their assaults upon the Holy Father in Rome, he had
warmly sympathized with the fiery knight's love for his native land.

Far as, at the court of Charles, the German ranked below the
Netherlander, the Spaniard, and the Italian, Wolf was proud of being a
German, and it vexed him that he had not at least made the attempt to
repel the theologian's charge that the Catholic, to whom the authority of
Rome was the highest, would be inferior to the Protestant in patriotism.

But he would have succeeded no better in convincing Erasmus than the
learned theologians who, at the Emperor's instance, had held an earnest
religious discussion in Ratisbon a short time before, had succeeded in
arriving at even a remote understanding.

As he reached the Haidplatz new questions of closer interest were casting
these of supreme importance into the shade.

He was to enter his home directly, and then the woman whom he loved would
rest above him, and alone, unwatched, and unguarded, perhaps dream of
another.

Who was the man for whose sake she withdrew from him the heart to whose
possession he had the best and at any rate the oldest right?

Certainly not Baron Malfalconnet.

Neither could he believe it to be Peter Schlumperger or young Crafft.

Yet perhaps the fortunate man belonged to the court.  If that was the
case, how easy would the game now be made for him with the girl, who was
guarded by no faithful eye!

His heart throbbed faster as he entered Red Cock Street.

The moon was still in the cloudless, starry sky, shining with her calm,
silver radiance upon one side of the street.  Barbara's bow-window was
touched by it, and--what did it mean?--a small lamp must still be burning
in her room, for the window was illuminated, though but dimly.  Perhaps
she had kept the light because she felt timid in her lonely chamber.  Now
Wolf crossed obliquely toward his house.

Just at that moment he saw the tall figure of a man.

What was he doing there at this hour?  Was it a thief or a burglar?
There was no lack of evil-disposed folk in this time of want.

Wolf still wore his court costume, and the short dress sword which
belonged to it hung in its sheath.

His heart beat quicker as he loosed the blade and advanced toward the
suspicious night-bird.

Just then he saw the other calmly turn the big key and take it out of the
door.

That could be no thief!  No, certainly not!

It was a gentleman of tall stature, whose aristocratic figure and Spanish
court costume were partially covered by a long cloak.

There was no doubt!  Wolf could not be mistaken, for, while the former
was putting the key in his pocket, the mantle had slipped from one
shoulder.

"Malfalconnet," muttered Wolf, grasping the hilt of his short sword more
firmly.

But at the same moment the moonlight showed him the Spaniard's face.
A chill ran through his frame, followed by a feverish heat, for the
nocturnal intruder into his house was not the baron, but Quijada, the
noble Don Luis, his patron, who had just been lauding to the skies the
virtues, the beauty, the goodness of the peerless Dona Magdalena de
Ulloa, his glorious wife.  He had intended to send Wolf, the friend and
housemate of his victim, to Spain to become the instructor of his
deceived wife.

He saw through the game, and it seemed as if he could not help laughing
aloud in delight at his own penetration, in rage and despair.

How clearly, and yet how coarsely and brutally, it had all been planned!

The infamous scoundrel, who possessed so much influence over the Emperor,
had first sent old Blomberg away; now he, Wolf, was to follow, that no
one might stand between the game and the pursuer.

Barbara's lover must be Quijada.  For the Spaniard's sake she had given
him up, and perhaps even played the part of adviser in this abominable
business.  It must be so, for who else could know what she was to him?

Yet no!  He himself had aided the guilty passion of this couple, for how
warmly he had sung Barbara's praises to Don Luis!  And then in how many a
conversation with Barbara had Quijada's name been mentioned, and he had
always spoken of this man with warm regard.  Hence her remark that he
himself deemed her lover worthy of esteem.

In a few seconds these thoughts darted through his heated brain with the
speed of lightning.

The street began to whirl around him, and a deep loathing of the base
traitor, a boundless hatred of the destroyer of his happiness, of the
betrayed girl, and the life which led through such abysses overpowered
the deluded man.

The infamous girl had just left her lover's arms, her kiss was doubtless
still glowing on his faithless lips!

Wolf groaned aloud like a sorely stricken deer, and for a moment it
seemed to him that the best course would be to put an end to his own
ruined life.  But rage and hate urged him upon another victim, and,
unable to control himself, he rushed with uplifted blade upon the
hypocritical seducer.

This utterly unexpected attack did not give Don Luis time to draw his
sword, but, with ready presence of mind, he forced the hand wielding the
