Loni, sure of being heard by no unbidden ear, called to her from the
window:

"Art is honoured to-day, my girl."

The clown added jocosely:

"Who else was ever permitted to walk over the anointed head of our lord
the Emperor?"

But Kuni would not have needed such encouragement.  Doubtless she felt
flattered by the consciousness of attracting even the sovereign's glance,
but what she intended to do immediately was for the purpose of compelling
another person to watch her steps with fear and admiration.  Crossing her
feet, she threw back her garlanded head and drew a long breath.  Then she
hastily straightened herself, and with the bird cage in one hand and the
winged staff of Mercury, which the clown had handed to her, in the other,
she advanced to the centre of the rope.  There she opened the cage as
steadily as if she had been standing on the floor of her own room.  The
birds fluttered through the little door and went, with a swift flight,
directly to their goal.  Then, below and beside her, from every place
occupied by spectators, and from hundreds of windows, rose thunders of
applause; but it seemed to her as if the roaring of the surging sea was
in her ears.  Her heart throbbed under her pink silk bodice like an iron
hammer, and in the proud consciousness of having probably attained
already what she desired, and, besides thousands of other eyes, fixed
Lienhard's upon her as if with chains and bonds, she was seized with the
ambitious desire to accomplish something still more amazing.  The man to
whom her heart clung, the Emperor, the countless multitude below, were
all at this time subject to her in heart and mind.  They could think and
feel nothing except what concerned her, her art, and her fate.  She could
and would show to Lienhard, to the Emperor, to all, what they had never
witnessed.  They should turn faint with sympathizing anxiety.  She would
make then realize what genuine art, skill, and daring could accomplish.
Everything else, even the desire for applause, was forgotten.  Though her
performance might be called only a perilous feat, she felt it to be true,
genuine art.  Her whole soul was merged in the desire to execute, boldly
and yet gracefully, the greatest and most perfect performance attainable
by a ropedancer.  With beads of perspiration on her brow, and eyes
uplifted, she threw the cage aside, swung her Mercury staff aloft, and
danced along the rope in waltz time, as though borne by the gods of the
wind.  Whirling swiftly around, her slender figure darted in graceful
curves from one end of the narrow path to the other.  Then the applause
reached the degree of enthusiastic madness which she desired; even Loni
clapped his hands from the steeple window.  She had never seen him do
this to any of the company.  Yes, she must have accomplished her purpose
well; but she would show him and the others something still more
wonderful.  What she had just done was capable of many additional feats;
she had tried it.

With fluttering hands and pulses she instantly loosed from her panting
bosom and her hips the garland of roses and leaves twined about the upper
portion of her body, and swung it around her in graceful curves as she
knelt and rose on the rope.

She had often jumped rope on the low rope, turning completely around so
that she faced the other way.  To repeat this performance on the one
stretched to the steeple would certainly not be expected from her or from
any other.  Suppose she should use the garland as a rope and venture to
leap over it on this giddy height?  Suppose she should even succeed in
turning around?  The rope was firm.  If her plan was successful, she
would have accomplished something unprecedented; if she failed--if, while
turning, she lost her balance--her scanty stock of pleasure here below
would be over, and also her great grief and insatiable yearning.  One
thing was certain: Lienhard would watch her breathlessly, nay, tremble
for her.  Perhaps it was too much to hope that he would mourn her
sincerely, should the leap cost her life; but he would surely pity her,
and he could never forget the moment of the fall, and therefore herself.
Loni would tear the gold circlet from his dyed black locks and, in his
exaggerated manner, call himself a son of misfortune, and her the
greatest artist who had ever trodden the rope.  All Augsburg, all the
dignitaries of the realm, even the Emperor, would pity her, and the end
of her life would be as proud and as renowned as that of the chivalrous
hero who dies victor on the stricken field.  If the early part of her
life had been insignificant and wretched, its close should be grand and
beautiful.

Long consideration was foreign to Kuni's nature.  While these thoughts
were darting with the speed of lightning through her excited brain, she
stripped from the garland, with the presence of mind which her calling
teaches even in serious peril, the roses which might have caught her
feet, and swung it in a wide circle above her.  Then nimbly, yet careful
to maintain in every movement the grace without which the most difficult
feat would have seemed to her valueless, she summoned all the strength
and caution she possessed, went forward at a run, and--she did not know
herself just how it was done--dared the leap over the rope once, twice,
and the third and fourth time even accomplished the turn successfully.
It had not once cost her an effort to maintain her balance.

Again she saw Loni clapping his hands at the window, and the acclamations
of the crowd, which echoed like peals of thunder from the lofty, gable-
roofed houses, informed her that the boldness of the venture and the
skill with which she had performed it were appreciated by these
spectators.  True, she could not distinguish the voice of any individual,
but she thought she knew that Lienhard was one of those who shouted
"Bravo!" and clapped most loudly.  He must have perceived now that she
was something more than a poor thief of a rosary, a useless bread-eater
in the Schurstab household.

She straightened the garland again and, while preparing to take another
run, repeat the feat, and, if her buoyancy held out, try to whirl around
twice, which she had never failed to accomplish on the low rope, she
could not resist the temptation of casting a hasty glance at Lienhard;
she had never ascended to the steeple without looking at him.

Secure of herself, in the glad conciousness of success, she gazed down.

There sat the illustrious Maximilian, still clapping his hands.
Gratefully, yet with a passionate desire for fresh applause, the resolve
to show him the very best which she could accomplish was strengthened.
But the next moment the blood faded from her slightly rouged cheeks, for
Lienhard--was it possible, was it imaginable?--Lienhard Groland was not
looking up at her!  Without moving his hands or vouchsafing her a single
glance, he was gazing into the face of the little wearer of the laurel
wreath, with whom he was eagerly talking.  He was under her thrall, body
and soul.  Yet it could not be, she could not have seen distinctly.  She
must look down once more, to correct the error.  She did so, and a
torturing anguish seized her heart.  He was chatting with the child as
before; nay, with still more warmth.  As he now saw nothing which was
happening upon the rope, he had probably also failed to heed what she had
performed, dared, accomplished, mainly for his sake, at the peril of her
life, on the dizzy height.  His wife was still clapping her hands at his
side, but Lienhard, as though deaf and blind to everything else, was
gazing at the page which the miserable little elf was just giving him.
There was certainly writing on it--perhaps a charm which rendered him
subject to her.  How else could he have brought himself to overlook so
unkindly herself and her art--the best she had to bestow--for the sake of
this child?

Then, besides the keenest sorrow, a fierce, burning hate took possession
of her soul.

She had not appealed to her saint for years; but now, in a brief,
ejaculatory prayer, she besought her to drive this child from Lienhard,
punish her with misery, suffering, and destruction.  A sharp pang which
she had never before experienced pierced her to the heart.  The pure,
sunny air which she inhaled on her lofty height seemed like acrid smoke,
and forced tears into the eyes which had not wept for many a long day.

As, not knowing exactly what she was doing, with her ears deafened by the
shouts of the crowd, among whom Lienhard now, with anxious suspense,
watched her every movement, she again raised the rope and prepared to
spring, she fancied that her narrow path rose higher and higher.  One
more step, and suddenly, with Loui's shriek of horror and the clown's
terrified "Jesus and Mary, she is falling!" ringing on the air, she felt
as if the rope had parted directly in front of her.  Then a hurricane
appeared to howl around her, bearing her away she knew not whither.  It
seemed as though the tempest had seized the ends of the rope, and was
dealing terrible blows with them upon her shoulders, her back, and her
feet.  Meanwhile the little wearer of the wreath was lying on a black
cloud opposite to her at Lienhard's feet.

She still held the sheet in her hand, and was shouting to the angry
elements the magic formulas which it contained.  Their power Kuni knew
it--had unchained them.  Lienhard's deep voice mingled with her furious
cries until the roar of the sea, on whose rocky shore the hurricane must
have dashed her, drowned every other sound, and rolled over her,
sometimes in scorching crimson, sometimes in icy crystal waves.  Then,
for a long time, she saw and heard nothing more.

When her deadened imagination again began to stir, she fancied that she
was struggling with a huge crab, which was cutting her foot with shears.
The little elf was urging it on, as the huntsmen cheer the hounds.  The
pain and hate she felt would have been intolerable if Lienhard had made
common cause with the terrible child.  But he reproved her conduct, and
even struggled with the kobold who tried to prevent his releasing her
from the crab.  The elf proved stronger than he.  The terrible shears
continued to torture her.  The more she suffered, the more eagerly
Lienhard seemed trying to help her, and this soothed her and blended a
sweet sense of comfort with the burning pain.




CHAPTER VI.

Kuni remained under the spell of these delusions for many days and
nights.  When she at last regained her senses, she was lying on a plain
couch in a long, whitewashed hall.  The well-scoured floor was strewn
with sand and pine needles.  Other beds stood beside hers.  On one wall
hung a large wooden crucifix, painted with glaring colours; on the other
a touching picture of the Mater Dolorosa, with the swords in her heart,
looked down upon her.

Beside Kuni's pallet stood a Gray Sister and an elderly man, evidently a
physician.  His long black robe, tall dark cap, and gold headed cane bore
witness to it.  Bending forward, with eyeglasses on his prominent nose,
he gazed intently into her face.

Her return to consciousness seemed to please him, and he showed himself
to be a kind, experienced leech.  With tireless solicitude he strove to
cure the numerous injuries which she had received, and she soon learned
through him and the nun, that she had fallen from the rope and escaped
death as if by a miracle.  The triumphal arch under her, and the garlands
which decorated the wooden structure, had caught her before she touched
the pavement.  True, her right leg was broken, and it had been necessary
to amputate her left foot in order to save her life.  Many a wound and
slash on her breast and head also needed healing, and her greatest
