
And then this wild headstrong youth actually sank into a chair, hid his
face on the table, and sobbed as if his heart would break.

I had no time for weeping then. I sent for the first physician in Nancy,
and offered him any sum in the world to accompany me; I had to make
almost wild efforts to procure a horse, and at last had to force one
from the governor by my importunities. I collected wine and cordials,
and whatever could be of service, and after his first outburst my young
brother-in-law helped me in a way I can never forget. No doubt the
pestiferous air caused by the horrible carnage of Freiburg had poisoned
the wound. As soon as possible my husband was removed; but the mischief
had been already done; the wound was in a bad state, fever had set in,
and though he struggled on stage after stage, declaring that he should
be well when he saw me, the agony had been such on the last day that
they barely got him to Brisach, and he there became delirious, so that
M. de Solivet decided on remaining with him, while the Count came on to
fetch me. He had ridden ever since four o'clock in the morning, and yet
was ready to set out again as soon as my preparations were complete. Oh,
I can never overlook what he was to me on that journey!

Hope kept us up through that dismal country--the path of war, where
instead of harvest on the August day we saw down-trodden, half-burned
wheat fields, where a few wretched creatures were trying to glean a few
ears of wheat. Each village we passed showed only blackened walls,
save where at intervals a farmhouse had been repaired to serve as an
estafette for couriers from the French army. The desolation of the scene
seemed to impress itself on my soul, and destroy the hopes with which
I had set forth; but on and on we went, till the walls of Brisach rose
before us.

He was in the governor's quarters, and only at the door, I perceived
the M. d'Aubepine had much doubted whether we should find him alive.
However, that one consolation was mine. He knew me; he smiled again on
me; he called me by all his fondest names; he said that now he could
rest. For twenty-four hours we really thought that joy was working
a cure. Alas! then he grew worse again, and when the pain left him,
mortification had set in, and we could only send for a priest to
administer the last Sacraments.

I am an old woman now, and what was then the cruelest anguish touches
me with pleasure when I think how he called me his guardian angel, and
thanked me for having been his shield from temptation, placing his
son in my sole charge, and commending his sister and his old uncle to
me--his poor little sister whose lot seemed to grieve him so much. He
talked to the Count, who wept, tore his hair, and made promises, which
he really then intended to execute, and which at least comforted my
Philippe.

The good priest who attended him said, he had never seen anything more
edifying or beautiful, and that he had never heard the confession of a
military man showing a purer heart, more full of holy love, trust, and
penitence. There was a great peace upon us all, as his life ebbed away,
and even the Count stood silent and awestruck. They took me away at
last. I remember nothing but the priest telling me that my husband was
in Paradise.

I felt as if it were all a dream, and when presently my brother came
and took my hand, I cried out: 'Oh, wake me! Wake me!' And when he burst
into tears I asked what he meant.

Looking back now I can see how very kind he was to me, though I made
little return, being altogether bewildered by the sudden strangeness of
my first grief. Poor M. de Solivet! he must have had a heavy charge for
Armand d'Aubepine was altogether frantic with grief, and did nothing to
help him, while I could not weep, and sat like a statue, hardly knowing
what they said to me. Nay, when the tidings came that my father had been
killed in the battle of Marston Moor three weeks before, I was too dull
and dead to grieve. Eustace had written to my husband in order that
he might prepare me; I opened the letter, and all that I can remember
feeling was that I had no one to shield me.

I had but one wish and sense of duty at that moment, namely, to carry
home those dear remains to the resting-place of his father in Anjou,
where I hope myself to rest. It was of no use to tell me that all places
would be alike to my Philippe when we should awake on the Resurrection
day. I was past reason, and was possessed with a feeling that I would be
sacrilege to leave him among the countless unnamed graves of the wounded
who, like him, had struggled as far as Brisach to die. I fancied I
should not be able to find him, and, besides, it was an enemy's country!
I believe opposition made me talk wildly and terrify my brother; at
any rate, he swore to me that the thing should be done, if only I would
return to Nancy and to my child. I fancied, most unjustly, that this
was meant to deceive me, and get me out of the way while they buried him
whom I loved so much, and I refused to stir without the coffin.

How my brother contrived it, I do not know, but the thing was done,
and though I was but a cart that carried the coffin to Nancy, I was
pacified.

At Nancy he arranged matters more suitably. Here M. d'Aubepine, in
floods of tears, took leave of me to return to the army, and M. de
Solivet, whose wound disabled him from active service, undertook to
escort me and my precious to Anjou.

It was a long tedious journey, and my heart beats with gratitude to him
when I think what he undertook for me, and how dreary it must have been
for him, while I was too dead and dull to thank him, though I hope my
love and confidence evinced my gratitude in after life.

My dearest went first in a hearse drawn by mules, as was also my large
carriage,--that which we had so joyously bought together, saying it
would be like a kind of tent on our travels. I traveled in it with my
child and my women, and M. de Solivet rode with our men-servants. Our
pace was too slow for the fatigue to be too much for him, and he always
preceded me to every place where we halted to eat, or where we lodged
for the night, and had everything ready without a thought or a word
being needful from me. He always stood ready to give me his arm to take
me to hear mass before we set out each day. The perfect calm, and the
quiet moving on, began to do me good. I felt as if the journey had
always been going on, and only wished it were endless, for when it
was over I should feel my desolation, and have no more to do for
my Philippe. But I began to respond to my poor boy's caresses and
playfulness a little more; I was not so short and maussade with my women
or with my good brother, and I tried to pray at mass. My brother has
since told me that he never felt more relieved in his life than once
when he made little Gaspard bring me some blue corn-flowers and wheat,
which reminded me of my English home, so that I began to weep so
profusely, that he carried away the poor frightened child, and left me
to Tryphena.

One afternoon at a little village there was a look of festival; the
bells were ringing, everybody was hurrying to the church, and when we
stopped at the door of the inn my brother came to the carriage-window
and said he was afraid that we should not find it easy to proceed at
once, for a mission priest was holding a station, and no one seemed able
to attend to anything else.

'He is a true saint! he is just about to preach,' said the landlady, who
had come out with her gayest apron, her whitest cap, and all her gold
chains. 'Ah! the poor lady, it would do her heart good to hear him
preach; and by that time the roast would be ready--an admirable piece of
venison, sent for the occasion. There he is, the blessed man!'

And as I had just alighted from the carriage, for our mules had made a
double stage and could not go farther, I saw coming from the prebytere
three or four priests, with the sexton and the serving boys. One of
them, a spare thin man, with a little bronze crucifix in his hand,
paused as he saw the hearse drawn up, clasped his hands in prayer, and
then lifted them in benediction of him who lay within. I saw his face,
and there was in it an indescribable heavenly sweetness and pity which
made me say to my brother: 'I must go and hear him.'

My brother was so glad to hear me express any wish, that I believe, if
I had asked to go and dance on the village green, he would almost have
permitted it; and leaving my little one to play in the garden under
Tryphena's care, he gave me his arm, and we went into the church,
crowded--crowded so that we could hardly find room; but my deep mourning
made the good people respectfully make place for us and give us chairs.

Ah! that sermon! I cannot tell you it in detail; I only know that it
gave the strongest sense of healing balm to my sore heart, and seemed in
a wonderful way to lift me up into the atmosphere where my Philippe
was gone, making me feel that what kept me so far--far from him was not
death, nor his coffin, but my own thick husk of sin and worldliness.
Much more there was, which seems now to have grown into my very soul;
and by the time it was over I was weeping tears no longer bitter, and
feeling nothing so much as the need to speak to that priest.

M. de Solivet promised that I should, but we had long to wait, for the
saintly Abbe de Paul would not postpone the poor to the rich; nor could
my grief claim the precedence, for I was not the only broken-hearted
young widow in France, nor even in that little village.

I cannot be grateful enough to my brother that he put up with all the
inconveniences of sleeping at this little village, that I might carry
out what he though a mere woman's enthusiastic fancy: but in truth it
was everything to me. After vespers the holy man was able to give me
an hour in the church, and verily it was the opening of new life to
me. Since my light had been taken from me, all had been utter desolate
darkness before me. He put a fresh light before me, which now, after
fifty years, I know to have been the dawn of better sunshine than even
that which had brightened my youth--and I thank my good God, who has
never let me entirely lose sight of it.

Very faint, almost disappointing, it seemed to me then. I came away from
my interview feeling as if it had been vain to think there could be any
balm for a crushed heart, and yet when I awoke the next morning, and
dressed myself to hear mass before resuming my journey, it was with the
sense that there I should meet a friend and comforter. And when I looked
at my little son, it was not only with dreary passionate pity for the
unconscious orphan, but with a growing purpose to bring him up as his
father's special charge,--nay, as that from even a greater and nearer
than my Philippe.

While, as we journeyed on, I gradually dwelt less on how piteous my
arrival would be for myself, and thought more and more of its sadness
for the poor old Marquis who had loved his nephew so much, till, instead
of merely fearing to reach Nid de Merle, I began to look forward to it,
and consider how to comfort the poor old man; for had not my husband
begged me to be the staff of his old age, and to fill a daughter's place
to him?




CHAPTER VII. -- WIDOW AND WIFE



We had avoided Paris, coming through Troyes and Orleans, and thus our
sad strange journey lasted a full month. Poor old M. de Nidemerle had,
of course, been prepared for our coming, and he came out in his coach
to meet us at the cross-roads. My brother saw the mourning liveries
approaching, and gave me notice. I descended from my carriage, intending
to go to him in his, but he anticipated me; and there, in the middle
of the road, the poor old man embraced me, weeping floods of passionate
tears of grief. He was a small man, shrunk with age, and I found him
clinging to me so like a child that I felt an almost motherly sense of
protection and tenderness towards his forlorn old age; but my English
shyness was at the moment distressed at the sense of all the servants
staring at such a meeting, and I cried out: 'Oh, sir! you should not
have come thus.' 'What can I do, but show all honour to the heroic wife
of my dear child?' sobbed he; and, indeed, I found afterwards that my
persistence in bringing home my dearest to the tombs of his forefathers
had won for me boundless gratitude and honour. They took the hearse to
the church of the convent at Bellaise, where its precious burthen was
to rest. The obsequies, requiem, and funeral mass were to take place the
next day, and in the meantime I accompanied the Marquis to the chateau,
and we spent the evening and great part of the night in talking of him
whom we had both loved so dearly, and in weeping together.

Then came the solemn and mournful day of the funeral. I was taken early
to the convent, where, among the nuns behind the grille, I might assist
at these last rites.

Thickly veiled, I looked at no one except that I curtsied my thanks to
the Abbess before kneeling down by the grating looking into the choir.
My grief had always been too deep for tears, and on that day I was
blessed in a certain exaltation of thoughts which bore me onward amid
the sweet chants to follow my Philippe, my brave, pure-hearted, loving
warrior, onto his rest in Paradise, and to think of the worship that he
was sharing there.

So I knelt quite still, but by and by I was sensible of a terrible
paroxysm of weeping from some one close to me. I could scarcely see more
than a black form when I glanced round, but it seemed to me that it was
sinking; I put out my arm in support, and I found a head on my
shoulder. I knew who it must be--my husband's poor little sister, Madame
d'Aubepine, and I held my arm round her with an impulse of affection, as
something that was his; but before all was over, I was sure that she was
becoming faint, and at last I only moved just in time to receive her in
my lap and arms, as she sank down nearly, if not quite, unconscious.

I tore back the heavy veil that was suffocating her, and saw a tiny thin
white face, not half so large as my little Gaspard's round rosy one.
Numbers of black forms hovered about with water and essences; and one
tall figure bent to lift the poor child from me, apologizing with a
tone of reproof, and declaring that Madame la Comtesse was ashamed to
inconvenience Madame.

'No,' I said; 'one sister could not inconvenience another,' and I felt
the feeble hand stealing round my waist, and saw a sort of smile on the
thin little lips, which brought back one look of my Philippe's. I threw
off my own veil, and raised her in my arms so as to kiss her, and in
that embrace I did indeed gain a sister.

I did not heed the scolding and the murmuring; I lifted her; she was
very small, and light as a feather; and I was not merely tall, but very
strong, so I carried her easily to a chamber, which one of the nuns
opened for us, and laid her on the bed. She clung to me, and when some
one brought wine, I made her drink it, and prayed that they would leave
us to ourselves a little while.

I know now that nothing but the privileges of my position on that day
would have prevailed to get that grim and terrible dame de compagnie out
of the room. However, we were left alone, and the first thing the poor
young thing did when she could speak or move, was to throw herself into
my arms and cry:

'Tell me of him!'

'He sent his love. He commended you to me,' I began.

'Did he? Oh, my dear hero! And how is he looking?'

So it was of her husband, not her brother, that she was thinking. I
gave me a pang, and yet I could not wonder; and alas, d'Aubepine had not
given me any message at all for her. However, I told her what I thought
would please her--of his handsome looks, and his favour with the Duke of
Enghien, and her great dark eyes began to shine under their tear-swollen
lids; but before long, that terrible woman knocked at the door again to
say that Madame la Comtesse's carriage was ready, and that M. le Marquis
awaited Madame la Vicomtesse.

We arranged our disordered dress, and went down hand-in-hand. The
Marquis and the Abbess both embraced the poor little Countess, and I
assured her that we would meet again, and be much together.

'Madame la Comtesse will do herself the honour of paying her respects
to Madame la Vicomtesse,' said the dame de compagnie with the elder M.
d'Aubepine, and had regulated her household of late years.

'I congratulate myself on not belonging to that respectable household,'
said my brother.

M. de Nidemerle laughed, and said the good lady had brought with her
a fair share of Calvinist severity. In fact, it was reported that her
conversion had been stimulated by the hope that she should be endowed
with her family property, and bestowed in marriage on the young
d'Aubepine, the father of the present youth, and that disappointment in
both these expectations had embittered her life. I was filled with pity
for my poor little sister-in-law, who evidently was under her yoke;
and all the more when, a day or two later, the tow ladies came in great
state to pay me a visit of ceremony, and I saw how pale and thin was the
little Countess, and how cowed she seemed by the tall and severe duenna.

Little Gaspard was trotting about. The Marquis was delighted with the
child, and already loved him passionately; and the little fellow was
very good, and could amuse himself without troubling any one.

He took refuge with me from Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau; but as I held
him to kiss his aunt, her eyes filled with tears; and when I asked
whether her little girl could walk as well as he did, she faltered so
that I was startled, fearing that the child might have died and I not
have heard of it.

'She is out at nurse,' at last she murmured.

'Children are best at farms,' said Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau; 'Madame
la Comtesse Douariere is not to be incommoded.' The old man held out
his arms to my little boy, and said something of his being a pleasure
instead of an inconvenience; but though the lady answered politely, she
looked so severe that my poor child hid his face on my bosom and began
to cry, by way of justifying her.

However, when she was gone, both the gentlemen agreed that the little
fellow was quite right, and showed his sense, and that if they had been
only two years old, they would have cried too.

That was all in my favour when I entreated M. de Nidemerle to let me
have a visit from my sister-in-law,--not a mere call of ceremony, but a
stay at the chateau long enough for me to get acquainted with her. Not
only was she the only sister of my dear Philippe, but the Marquis, her
uncle, was her guardian and only near relative, so that he had a
right to insist, more especially as the old Countess was imbecile and
bedridden.

I think he felt towards me much as he would have done if he had been
shut up in a room with Gaspard, ready to give me anything I begged for,
provided I would not cry. He was very good to me, and I could not but be
sorry for the poor, bereaved, broken old man, and try to be a daughter
to him; and thus our relations were very different from what they had
been on our journey to Paris together in the coach. At any rate, he
promised me that I should be gratified, and the day after my brother
left us, he actually went over to Chateau d'Aubepine, and brought off
his niece in the carriage with him, presenting her to me in the hall
like the spoils of war. She was frightened, formal, and ceremonious all
super time, but I thought she was beginning to thaw, and was more afraid
of the Marquis than of me. We played at cards all the evening, the Cure
being sent for to make up the set, and now and then I caught her great
eyes looking at me wistfully; indeed, I was obliged to avoid them lest
they should make me weep; for it was almost the look that my Philippe
used to cast on me in those early days when we had not begun to know one
another.

At last we went up to bed. The rooms were all en suite, and I had given
her one opening into mine, telling her we would never shut the door save
when she wished it. I saw her gazing earnestly at her brother's portrait
and all the precious little objects consecrated to his memory, which I
had arranged by my benitier and crucifix, but I did not expect her firs
exclamation, when our woman had left us: 'Ah! Madame, how happy you
are!'

'I was once!' I sighed.

'Ah! but you ARE happy. You have your child, and your husband loved
you.'

'But your husband lives, and your children are well.'

'That may be. I never see them. I have only seen my daughter twice, and
my son once, since they were born. They will not let them come to the
chateau, and they say there is no road to the farms.'

'We will see to that,' I said, and I made her tell me where they were;
but she knew no more of distances than I did, never going anywhere save
in the great family coach. Poor child! When I called her Cecile, she
burst into tears, and said no one had called her by that name since
she had left her friend Amelie in the convent, and as to calling me
Marguerite, Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau would be sure to say it was
bourgeois and ill-bred to use familiar names, but then we need never let
her hear us.

I took the poor little forlorn creature to sleep with me, and then, and
in the course of the next day or two, the whole sad state of things came
before me.

The little Cecile de Bellaise had been carried to a convent at Angers
from the farm that she could just remember. Here she had spent all the
happy days of her life. The nuns ere not strict, and they must have been
very ignorant, for they had taught her nothing but her prayers, a little
reading, some writing, very bad orthography, embroidery, and heraldry;
but they were very good-natured, and had a number of pensionnaires who
seemed to have all run wild together in the corridors and gardens, and
played all sorts of tricks on the nuns. Sometimes Cecile told me some
of these, and very unedifying they were,--acting ghosts in the passages,
fastening up the cell doors, ringing the bells at unearthly hours,
putting brushes or shoes in the beds, and the like practical jokes.

Suddenly, from the midst of these wild sports, while still a mere child
under fourteen, Cecile was summoned to be married to Armand d'Aubepine,
who was two years older, and was taken at once to Chateau d'Aubepine.

There was no more play for her; she had to sit upright embroidering
under the eyes of Madame la Comtesse and of Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau;
nor did she ever go out of doors except for a turn on the terrace
with the ladies, or a drive in the great coach. Of course they were
disappointed in having such a little unformed being on their hands, but
they must have forgotten that they had ever been young themselves, when
they forced her to conform rigidly to the life that suited them, and
which they thought the only decorous thing for a lady of any age.

There was nothing else that was young near her except her husband,
and he thought her an ugly little thing, and avoided her as much as
possible. He had expected to be freed from his tutor on his marriage,
and when he was disappointed, he was extremely displeased, and
manifested his wrath by neglect of her. His governor must have been a
very different one from my dear husband's beloved abbe, fro I know that
if I had been five times as ugly and stupid as I was, my Philippe would
have tried to love me, because it was his duty--and have been kind
to me, because he could not be unkind to any one. But the Chevalier
d'Aubepine had never learnt to care for any one's pleasure but his own;
he was angry at, and ashamed of, the wife who had been imposed on him;
he chafed and raged at not being permitted to join the army and see the
world; and in the meantime he, with the connivance of his governor, from
time to time escaped at night to Saumur, and joined in the orgies of the
young officers in garrison there.

Nevertheless, through all his neglect, Cecile loved him with a
passionate, faithful adoration, surpassing all words, just as I have
seen a poor dog follow faithfully a savage master who gives him nothing
but blows. She never said a word of complaint to me of him. All I
gathered of this was from her simple self-betrayals, or from others, or
indeed what I knew of himself; but the whole sustenance of that young
heart had been his few civil words at times when he could make her
useful to him. I am persuaded, too, that Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau
exercised her spite in keeping the two young creatures from any childish
or innocent enjoyments that might have drawn them together. If etiquette
