"He was her husband. She committed no fault."

"I was thinking of the quilted petticoat, and the two braids; for who
now dresses so extravagantly and so magnificently as Madame Hyde? She
has an Indian shawl that cost two hundred pounds. Aunt Angelica says
John Embree told her 'THAT much at the very least'--and as for the
General! is there any man in New York so proud, and so full of
dignity--and morality? He is in St. Paul's Chapel every Sunday, and
when you see him there, how could you imagine that he had fought
half-a-dozen duels, for half-a-dozen beauties?"

"Half-a-dozen duels! Oh, Arenta!"

"About that number--more or less--before and after the Van Heemskirk
incident. Look at him next Sunday, and then try and believe that he was
the topmost leader in all the fashionable follies, until he went to the
war. People say it is General Washington--"

"General Washington?"

"That has changed him so much. They have been a great deal together,
and I do believe the proprieties are catching. If evil is to be taken
in bad company, why not good in the presence of all that is moral and
respectable? At any rate, who is now more proper than General Hyde?
Indeed, as Aunt Angelica says, we must all pay our respects to the
Hydes, if we desire our own caps to set straight. Cornelia, shall I
tell you why you are working so close to the window this afternoon?"

"You are going to say something I would rather not hear, Arenta."

"Truth is wholesome, if not agreeable; and the truth is, you expect
Lieutenant Hyde to pass. But he will not do so. I saw him booted and
spurred, on a swift horse, going up the river road. He was bound for
Hyde Manor, I am sure. Now, Cornelia, you need not move your frame; for
no one will disturb you, and I wish to tell you some of my affairs."

"About your lovers?"

"Yes. I have met a certain French marquis, who is attached to the Count
de Moustier's embassy. I met him at intervals all last winter, and
to-day, I have a love letter from him--a real love letter--and he
desires to ask my father for my hand. I shall now have something to say
to Madame Kippon."

"But you would not marry a Frenchman? That is an impossible thought,
Arenta."

"No more so than an Englishman. In fact, Englishmen are not to be
thought of at all; while Frenchmen are the fashion. Just consider the
drawing-rooms of our great American ladies; they are full of French
nobles."

"But they are exiles, for the most part very poor, and devoted to the
idea of monarchy."

"Ah, but my Frenchman is different. He is rich, he is in the confidence
of the present French government, and he adores republican principles.
Indeed he wore at Lady Griffin's, last week, his red cap of Liberty,
and looked quite distinguished in it."

"I am astonished that Lady Griffin permitted such a spectacle. I am
sure it was a vulgar thing to do. Only the san-culottes, make such
exhibition of their private feelings."

"I think it was a very brave thing to do--and Lady Griffin, with her
English prejudices and aristocratic notions, had to tolerate it. He is
very tall and dark, and he was dressed in scarlet, with a long black
satin vest; and you may believe that the scarlet cap on his black
curling hair was very imposing."

"Imposing! How could it possibly be that? It is only associated with
mobs, and mob law--and guillotining."

"I shall not contradict you--though I could do so easily. I will say,
then, that it was very picturesque. He asked me to dance a minuet with
him, and when I did not refuse he was beside himself with pleasure and
gratitude. And after I had opened the way, several of the best ladies
in the town followed. After all, it was a matter of political opinion;
and it is against our American ideas to send any man to Jersey for his
politics. Mr. Jefferson was in red also."

"I wish to dance with Mr. Jefferson, but I now think of waiting till he
gets a new suit."

"I am sure that no one ever made a finer figure in a dance than I, in
my white satin and pearls, and the Marquis Athanase de Tounnerre in his
scarlet dress and Liberty cap. Every one regarded us. He tells me,
to-day, that the emotion I raised in his soul that hour has not been
stilled for a moment."

"Have you thought of your father? He would never consent to such a
marriage--and what will Rem say?"

"My father will storm, and speak words he should not speak; but I am
not afraid of words. Rem is more to be dreaded. He will not talk his
anger away. Yes, I should be afraid of Rem."

"But you have not really decided to accept the Marquis Tounnerre?"

"No. I have not quite decided. I like to stand between Yes and No. I
like to be entreated to marry, and then again, to be entreated NOT to
marry. I like to hesitate between the French and the Dutch. I am not in
the least sure on which side I shall finally range myself."

"Then do not decide in a hurry."

"Have I not told you I like to waver, and vacillate, and oscillate, and
make scruples? These are things a woman can do, both with privilege and
inclination. I think myself to be very clever in such ways."

"I would not care, nor dare, to venture--"

"You are a very baby yet. I am two years older than you. But indeed you
are progressing with some rapidity. What about George Hyde?"

"You said he had gone out of town."

"And I am glad of it. He will not now be insinuating himself with
violets, and compelling you to take walks with him on the Battery. Oh,
Cornelia! you see I am not to be put out of your confidence. Why did
you not tell me?"

"You have given me no opportunity; and, as you know all, why should I
say any more about it?"

"Cornelia, my dear companion, I fear you are inclined to concealment
and to reticence, qualities a young girl should not cultivate--I am now
speaking for dear Sister Maria Beroth--and I hope you will carefully
consider the advantages you will derive from cultivating a more open
disposition."

"You are making a mockery of the good Sisters; and I do not wish to
hear you commit such a great fault. Indeed, I would be pleased to
return to their peaceful care again."

"And wear the little linen cap and collar, and all the other
simplicities? Cornelia! Cornelia! You are as fond as I am of French
fashions and fripperies. Let us be honest, if we die for it. And you
may as well tell me all your little coquetries with George Hyde; for I
shall be sure to find them out. Now I am going home; for I must look
after the tea-table. But you will not be sorry, for it will leave you
free to think of--"

"Please, Arenta!"

"Very well. I will have 'considerations.' Good-bye!"

Then the door closed, and Cornelia was left alone. But the atmosphere
of the room was charged with Arenta's unrest, and a feeling of
disappointment was added to it. She suddenly realized that her lover's
absence from the city left a great vacancy. What were all the thousands
in its streets, if he was not there? She might now indeed remove her
frame from the window; if Hyde was an impossibility, there was no one
else she wished to see pass. And her heart told her the report was a
true one; she did not doubt for a moment Arenta's supposition, that he
had gone to Hyde Manor. But the thought made her lonely. Something, she
knew not what, had altered her life. She had a new strange happiness,
new hopes, new fears and new wishes; but they were not an unmixed
delight; for she was also aware of a vague trouble, a want that nothing
in her usual duties satisfied:--in a word, she had crossed the
threshold of womanhood and was no longer a girl,

  "Singing alone in the morning of life,
   In the happy morning of life, and May."




CHAPTER IV

THROWING THINGS INTO CONFUSION


Prudence declares that whenever a person is in that disagreeable
situation which compels him to ask "what shall I do?" that the wisest
answer is, "nothing." But such answer did not satisfy George Hyde. He
was too young, too sure of his own good fortune, too restless and
impulsive, to accept Prudence as a councillor. He might have
considered, that, hitherto, affairs had happened precisely as he wished
them; and that it would be good policy to trust to his future
opportunities. But he was so much in earnest, so honestly in love, that
he felt his doubts and anxieties could only be relieved by action.
Sympathy, at least, he must have; and he knew no man, to whom he would
willingly talk of Cornelia. The little jests and innuendoes sure to
follow his confidence would be intolerable if associated with a
creature so pure and so ingenuous.

"I will go to my mother!" he thought. And this resolution satisfied him
so well, that he carried it out at once. But it was after dark when he
reached the tall stone portals of Hyde Manor House. The ride, however,
had given him back his best self. For when we leave society and come
into the presence of Nature, we become children again; and the fictions
of thought and action assumed among men drop off like a garment. The
beauty of the pale green hills, and the flowing river, and the budding
trees, and the melody of birds singing as if they never would grow old,
were all but charming accessories and horizons to his constant pictures
of Cornelia. It was she who gave life and beauty to all he saw; for as
a rule, if men notice nature at all, it is ever through some painted
window of their own souls. Few indeed are those who hear--

"The Ancient Word,
 That walked among the silent trees."

Yet Hyde was keenly conscious of some mystical sympathy between himself
and the lovely scenes through which he passed--conscious still more of
it when the sun had set and the moon rose--dim and inscrutable--over
the lonely way, and filled the narrow glen which was at the entrance to
the Manor House full of brooding power.

The great building loomed up dark and silent; there was but one light
visible. It was in his mother's usual sitting-room, and as soon as he
saw it, he began to whistle. She heard him afar off, and was at the
door to give him a welcome.

"Joris, my dear one, we were talking of you!" she cried, as he leaped
from the saddle to her arms. "So glad are we! Come in quickly! Such a
good surprise! It is our hearts' wish granted! Well, are you? Quite
well? Now, then, I am happy. Happy as can be! Look now, Richard!" she
called, as she flung the door open, and entered with the handsome,
smiling youth at her side.

In his way the father was just as much pleased. He pushed some papers
he had been busy with impatiently aside, and stood up with outstretched
hand to meet his son.

"Kate, my dear heart," he cried, "let us have something to eat. The boy
will be hungry as a hunter after his ride. And George, what brings you
home? We were just telling each other--your mother and I--that you were
in the height of the city's follies."

"Indeed, sir, there will be few follies for some days. Mr. Franklin is
dead, and the city goes into mourning."

"'Tis a fate that all must meet," said the General; "but death and
Franklin would look each other in the face as friends--He had a work to
do, he did it well, and it is finished. That is all. What other news do
you bring?"

"It is said that Mirabeau is arrested somewhere, for something. I did
not hear the particulars."

"Probably, for the very least of his crimes. Marat hates him; and Marat
represents the fury of the Revolution. The monster wished to erect
eight hundred gibbets, and hang Mirabeau first."

"And the deputies are returning to the Provinces, drunk with their own
importance. They have abolished titles, and coats of arms, and
liveries; and published a list of the names the nobles are to
assume--as if people did not know their own names. Mr. Hamilton says
'Revolution in France has gone raving mad, and converted twenty-four
millions of people into savages.'"

"I hate the French!" said the General passionately. "It is a natural
instinct with me, just as tame animals are born with an antipathy to
wild beasts. If I thought I had one drop of French blood in me, I would
let it out with a dagger."

George winced a little. He remembered that the Morans were of French
extraction; and he answered--

"After all, father, we must judge people individually. Mere race is not
much."

"George Hyde! What are you saying? RACE is everything. It is the
strongest and deepest of all human feelings. Nothing conquers its
prejudices."

"Except love. I have heard, father, that Love never asks 'of what race
art thou?' or even 'whose son, or daughter, art thou?'"

"You have heard many foolish things, George; that is one of them. Men
and women marry out of their own nationality, AT THEIR PERIL. I took my
life in my hand for your mother's love."

"She was worthy of the peril."

"God knows it."

At this moment Mrs. Hyde entered the room, her fair face alight with
love. A servant carrying a tray full of good things to eat, followed
her; and it was delightful to watch her eager happiness as she arranged
meats, and sweetmeats, in tempting order for the hungry young man. He
thoroughly enjoyed this provision for his comfort; and as he ate, he
talked to his father of those things interesting to him, answering all
questions with that complaisant positiveness of youth which decides
everything at once, and without reservation. No one understood this
better than General Hyde, but it pleased him to draw out his son's
opinions; and it also pleased him to watch the pride of the fond
mother, who evidently considered her boy a paragon of youthful judgment.

"And pray," he asked, "what can you tell me about the seat of
government? Will New York be chosen?"

"I am sure it will be Philadelphia; and, indeed, I care not. It would,
however, amuse you to hear some of the opinions on the matter; for
every one hangs his judgment on the peg of his own little interests or
likings. Young De Witt says New York wants no government departments;
that she is far too busy a city, to endure government idlers hanging
around her best streets. Doctor Rush says the government is making our
city a sink of political vice. Mr. Wolcott says honesty is the fashion
in New York. Some of the clergy think Wall Street as wicked as the most
fashionable streets in Tyre and Sodom; and the street-singers--thanks
to Mr. Freneau--have each, and all, their little audiences on the
subject. As I came up Broadway, a man was shouting a rhyme advising the
Philadelphians to 'get ready their dishcloths and brooms, and begin
scouring their knockers, and scrubbing their rooms.' Perhaps the most
sensible thing on the subject came from one of the New England
senators. He thought the seat of government ought to be 'in some
