remain under his guardianship.

"Good, kind man," she said in her indifferent French, "you have saved
both mother and child."

The father, meanwhile, with mercantile deliberation, placed in Mr.
Lawford's hands notes and bills to the amount of a thousand pounds,
which he stated was to be vested for the child's use, and advanced in
such portions as his board and education might require. In the event of
any correspondence on his account being necessary, as in case of death
or the like, he directed that communication should be made to Signor
Matthias Moncada, under cover to a certain banking house in London.

"But beware," he said to Gray, "how you trouble me about these concerns,
unless in case of absolute necessity."

"You need not fear, sir," replied Gray; "I have seen nothing to-day
which can induce me to desire a more intimate correspondence with you
than may be indispensable."

While Lawford drew up a proper minute of this transaction, by which he
himself and Gray were named trustees for the child, Mr. Gray attempted
to restore to the lady the balance of the considerable sum of money
which Tresham (if such was his real name) had formally deposited with
him. With every species of gesture, by which hands, eyes, and even
feet, could express rejection, as well as in her own broken French, she
repelled the reimbursement, while she entreated that Gray would consider
the money as his own property; and at the same time forced upon him a
ring set with brilliants, which seemed of considerable value. The father
then spoke to her a few stern words, which she heard with an air of
mingled agony and submission.

"I have given her a few minutes to see and weep over the miserable being
which has been the seal of her dishonour," said the stern father. "Let
us retire and leave her alone.--You," to the messenger, "watch the door
of the room on the outside."

Gray, Lawford, and Moncada, retired to the parlour accordingly, where
they waited in silence, each busied with his own reflections, till,
within the space of half an hour, they received information that the
lady was ready to depart.

"It is well," replied Moncada; "I am glad she has yet sense enough left
to submit to that which needs must be."

So saying, he ascended the stair, and returned leading down his
daughter, now again masked and veiled. As she passed Gray, she uttered
the words--"My child, my child!" in a tone of unutterable anguish; then
entered the carriage, which was drawn up as close to the door of the
doctor's house as the little enclosure would permit. The messenger,
mounted on a led horse, and accompanied by a servant and assistant,
followed the carriage, which drove rapidly off, taking the road which
leads to Edinburgh. All who had witnessed this strange scene, now
departed to make their conjectures, and some to count their gains; for
money had been distributed among the females who had attended on the
lady, with so much liberality, as considerably to reconcile them to the
breach of the rights of womanhood inflicted by the precipitate removal
of the patient.




CHAPTER THE SECOND.


The last cloud of dust which the wheels of the carriage had raised was
dissipated, when dinner, which claims a share of human thoughts even in
the midst of the most marvellous and affecting incidents, recurred to
those of Mrs. Gray.

"Indeed, Doctor, you will stand glowering out of the window till some
other patient calls for you, and then have to set off without your
dinner;--and I hope Mr. Lawford will take pot-luck with us, for it
is just his own hour; and indeed we had something rather better than
ordinary for this poor lady--lamb and spinage, and a veal Florentine."

The surgeon started as from a dream, and joined in his wife's hospitable
request, to which Lawford willingly assented.

We will suppose the meal finished, a bottle of old and generous Antigua
upon the table, and a modest little punch-bowl, judiciously replenished
for the accommodation of the Doctor and his guest. Their conversation
naturally turned on the strange scene which they had witnessed, and the
Townclerk took considerable merit for his presence of mind.

"I am thinking, Doctor," said he, "you might have brewed a bitter browst
to yourself if I had not come in as I did."

"Troth, and it might very well so be," answered Gray; "for, to tell you
the truth, when I saw yonder fellow vapouring with his pistols among the
woman-folk in my own house, the old Cameronian spirit began to rise in
me, and little thing would have made me cleek to the poker."

"Hoot, hoot! that would never have done. Na, na," said the man of law,
"this was a case where a little prudence was worth all the pistols and
pokers in the world."

"And that was just what I thought when I sent to you, Clerk Lawford,"
said the Doctor.

"A wiser man he could not have called on to a difficult case," added
Mrs. Gray, as she sat with her work at a little distance from the table.

"Thanks t'ye, and here's t'ye, my good neighbour," answered the scribe;
"will you not let me help you to another glass of punch, Mrs. Gray?"
This being declined, he proceeded. "I am jalousing that the messenger
and his warrant were just brought in to prevent any opposition. Ye saw
how quietly he behaved after I had laid down the law--I'll never believe
the lady is in any risk from him. But the father is a dour chield;
depend upon it, he has bred up the young filly on the curb-rein, and
that has made the poor thing start off the course. I should not be
surprised that he took her abroad, and shut her up in a convent."

"Hardly," replied Doctor Gray, "if it be true, as I suspect, that both
the father and daughter are of the Jewish persuasion."

"A Jew!" said Mrs. Gray; "and have I been taking a' this fyke about a
Jew?--I thought she seemed to gie a scunner at the eggs and bacon that
Nurse Simson spoke about to her. But I thought Jews had aye had lang
beards, and yon man's face is just like one of our ain folk's--I have
seen the Doctor with a langer beard himsell, when he has not had leisure
to shave."

"That might have been Mr. Moncada's case," said Lawford, "for he seemed
to have had a hard journey. But the Jews are often very respectable
people, Mrs. Gray--they have no territorial property, because the law
is against them there, but they have a good hank in the money
market--plenty of stock in the funds, Mrs. Gray, and, indeed, I think
this poor young woman is better with her ain father, though he be a Jew
and a dour chield into the bargain, than she would have been with the
loon that wranged her, who is, by your account, Dr. Gray, baith a papist
and a rebel. The Jews are well attached to government; they hate the
Pope, the Devil, and the Pretender, as much as any honest man among
ourselves."

"I cannot admire either of the gentlemen," said Gideon. "But it is but
fair to say, that I saw Mr. Moncada when he was highly incensed, and to
all appearance not without reason. Now, this other man Tresham, if that
be his name, was haughty to me, and I think something careless of the
poor young woman, just at the time when he owed her most kindness, and
me some thankfulness. I am, therefore, of your opinion, Clerk Lawford,
that the Christian is the worse bargain of the two."

"And you think of taking care of this wean yourself, Doctor? That is
what I call the good Samaritan."

"At cheap cost. Clerk; the child, if it lives, has enough to bring it up
decently, and set it out in life, and I can teach it an honourable and
useful profession. It will be rather an amusement than a trouble to me,
and I want to make some remarks on the childish diseases, which, with
God's blessing, the child must come through under my charge; and since
Heaven has sent us no children"----

"Hoot, hoot!" said the Town-Clerk, "you are in ower great hurry now--you
have na been sae lang married yet.--Mrs. Gray, dinna let my daffing
chase you away--we will be for a dish of tea believe, for the Doctor and
I are nae glass-breakers."

Four years after this conversation took place, the event happened,
at the possibility of which the Town-Clerk had hinted; and Mrs. Gray
presented her husband with an infant daughter. But good and evil are
strangely mingled in this sublunary world. The fulfilment of his anxious
longing for posterity was attended with the loss of his simple and
kind-hearted wife; one of the most heavy blows which fate could inflict
on poor Gideon, and, his house was made desolate even by the event which
had promised for months before to add new comforts to its humble roof.
Gray felt the shock as men of sense and firmness feel a decided
blow, from the effects of which they never hope again fully to raise
themselves. He discharged the duties of his profession with the same
punctuality as ever, was easy, and even to appearance, cheerful in his
intercourse with society; but the sunshine of existence was gone. Every
morning he missed the affectionate charges which recommended to him to
pay attention to his own health while he was labouring to restore that
blessing to his patients. Every evening, as he returned from his weary
round, it was without the consciousness of a kind and affectionate
reception from one eager to tell, and interested to hear, all the little
events of the day. His whistle, which used to arise clear and strong so
soon as Middlemas steeple was in view, was now for ever silenced, and
the rider's head drooped, while the tired horse, lacking the stimulus
of his master's hand and voice, seemed to shuffle along as if it
experienced a share of his despondency. There were times when he was so
much dejected as to be unable to endure even the presence of his little
Menie, in whose infant countenance he could trace the lineaments of the
mother, of whose loss she had been the innocent and unconscious cause.
"Had it not been for this poor child"--he would think; but, instantly
aware that the sentiment was sinful, he would snatch the infant to his
breast, and load it with caresses--then hastily desire it to be removed
from the parlour.

The Mahometans have a fanciful idea, that the true believer, in his
passage to Paradise, is under the necessity of passing barefooted over a
bridge composed of red-hot iron. But on this occasion, all the pieces
of paper which the Moslem has preserved during his life, lest some holy
thing being written upon them might be profaned, arrange themselves
between his feet and the burning metal, and so save him from injury.
In the same manner, the effects of kind and benevolent actions are
sometimes found, even in this world, to assuage the pangs of subsequent
afflictions.

Thus, the greatest consolation which poor Gideon could find after his
heavy deprivation, was in the frolic fondness of Richard Middlemas, the
child who was in so singular a manner thrown upon his charge. Even at
this early age he was eminently handsome. When silent or out of humour,
his dark eyes and striking countenance presented some recollections of
the stern character imprinted on the features of his supposed father;
but when he was gay and happy, which was much more frequently the
case, these clouds were exchanged for the most frolicsome, mirthful
expression, that ever dwelt on the laughing and thoughtless aspect of
a child. He seemed to have a tact beyond his years in discovering and
conforming to the peculiarities of human character. His nurse, one prime
object of Richard's observance, was Nurse Jamieson, or, as she was more
commonly called for brevity, and _par excellence_, Nurse. This was the
person who had brought him up from infancy. She had lost her own child,
and soon after her husband, and being thus a lone woman, had, as used to
be common in Scotland, remained a member of Dr. Gray's family. After the
death of his wife, she gradually obtained the principal superintendence
of the whole household; and being an honest and capable manager, was a
person of very great importance in the family.

She was bold in her temper, violent in her feelings, and, as often
happens with those in her condition, was as much attached to Richard
Middlemas, whom she had once nursed at her bosom, as if he had been her
own son. This affection the child repaid by all the tender attentions of
which his age was capable.

Little Dick was also distinguished by the fondest and kindest attachment
to his guardian and benefactor Dr. Gray. He was officious in the right
time and place, quiet as a lamb when his patron seemed inclined to study
or to muse, active and assiduous to assist or divert him whenever it
seemed to be wished, and, in choosing his opportunities, he seemed to
display an address far beyond his childish years.

As time passed on, this pleasing character seemed to be still more
refined. In everything like exercise or amusement, he was the pride and
the leader of the boys of the place, over the most of whom his strength
and activity gave him a decided superiority. At school his abilities
were less distinguished, yet he was a favourite with the master, a
sensible and useful teacher.

"Richard is not swift," he used to say to his patron, Dr. Gray, "but
then he is sure; and it is impossible not to be pleased with a child who
is so very desirous to give satisfaction."

Young Middlemas's grateful affection to his patron seemed to increase
with the expanding of his faculties, and found a natural and pleasing
mode of displaying itself in his attentions to little Menie [Footnote:
Marion.] Gray. Her slightest hint was Richard's law, and it was in vain
that he was summoned forth by a hundred shrill voices to take the lead
in hye-spye, or at foot-ball, if it was little Menie's pleasure that he
should remain within, and build card-houses for her amusement. At other
times he would take the charge of the little damsel entirely under
his own care, and be seen wandering with her on the borough common,
collecting wild flowers, or knitting caps made of bulrushes. Menie
was attached to Dick Middlemas, in proportion to his affectionate
assiduities; and the father saw with pleasure every new mark of
attention to his child on the part of his protege.

During the time that Richard was silently advancing from a beautiful
child into a fine boy, and approaching from a fine boy to the time when
he must be termed a handsome youth, Mr. Gray wrote twice a-year with
much regularity to Mr. Moncada, through the channel that gentleman had
pointed out. The benevolent man thought, that if the wealthy grandfather
could only see his relative, of whom any family might be proud, he would
be unable to persevere in his resolution of treating as an outcast one
so nearly connected with him in blood, and so interesting in person and
disposition. He thought it his duty, therefore, to keep open the slender
and oblique communication with the boy's maternal grandfather, as that
which might, at some future period, lead to a closer connexion. Yet the
correspondence could not, in other respects, be agreeable to a man of
spirit like Mr. Gray. His own letters were as short as possible, merely
rendering an account of his ward's expenses, including a moderate board
to himself, attested by Mr. Lawford, his co-trustee; and intimating
Richard's state of health, and his progress in education, with a few
words of brief but warm eulogy upon his goodness of head and heart.
But the answers he received were still shorter. "Mr. Moncada," such
was their usual tenor, "acknowledges Mr. Gray's letter of such a date,
notices the contents, and requests Mr. Gray to persist in the plan which
he has hitherto prosecuted on the subject of their correspondence." On
occasions where extraordinary expenses seemed likely to be incurred, the
remittances were made with readiness.

That day fortnight after Mrs. Gray's death, fifty pounds were received,
with a note, intimating that it was designed to put the child R. M. into
proper mourning. The writer had added two or three words, desiring that
the surplus should be at Mr. Gray's disposal, to meet the additional
expenses of this period of calamity; but Mr. Moncada had left the phrase
unfinished, apparently in despair of turning it suitably into English.
Gideon, without farther investigation, quietly added the sum to the
account of his ward's little fortune, contrary to the opinion of Mr.
Lawford,--who, aware that he was rather a loser than a gainer by the
boy's residence in his house, was desirous that his friend should not
omit an opportunity of recovering some part of his expenses on that
score. But Gray was proof against all remonstrances.

As the boy advanced towards his fourteenth year, Dr. Gray wrote a more
elaborate account of his ward's character, acquirements, and capacity.
He added that he did this for the purpose of enabling Mr. Moncada to
judge how the young man's future education should be directed. Richard,
he observed, was arrived at the point where education, losing its
original and general character, branches off into different paths of
knowledge, suitable to particular professions, and when it was therefore
become necessary to determine which of them it was his pleasure that
young Richard should be trained for; and he would, on his part, do all
he could to carry Mr. Moncada's wishes into execution, since the amiable
qualities of the boy made him as dear to him, though but a guardian, as
he could have been to his own father.

The answer, which arrived in the course of a week or ten days, was
fuller than usual, and written in the first person.--"Mr. Gray," such
was the tenor, "our meeting has been under such circumstances as could
not make us favourably known to each other at the time. But I have
the advantage of you, since, knowing your motives for entertaining an
indifferent opinion of me, I could respect them, and you at the same
time; whereas you, unable to comprehend the motives--I say, you, being
unacquainted with the infamous treatment I had received, could not
understand the reasons that I have for acting as I have done. Deprived,
sir, by the act of a villain, of my child, and she despoiled of honour,
I cannot bring myself to think of beholding the creature, however
innocent, whose look must always remind me of hatred and of shame. Keep
the poor child by you--educate him to your own profession, but take heed
that he looks no higher than to fill such a situation in life as you
yourself worthily occupy, or some other line of like importance. For the
condition of a farmer, a country lawyer, a medical practitioner, or some
such retired course of life, the means of outfit and education shall be
amply supplied. But I must warn him and you, that any attempt to intrude
himself on me further than I may especially permit, will be attended
with the total forfeiture of my favour and protection. So, having made
known my mind to you, I expect you will act accordingly."

The receipt of this letter determined Gideon to have some explanation
with the boy himself, in order to learn if he had any choice among the
professions thus opened to him; convinced at the same time, from his
docility of temper, that he would refer the selection to his (Dr.
Gray's) better judgment.

He had previously, however, the unpleasing task of acquainting Richard
Middlemas with the mysterious circumstances attending his birth, of
which he presumed him to be entirely ignorant, simply because he himself
had never communicated them, but had let the boy consider himself as the
orphan child of a distant relation. But though the Doctor himself was
silent, he might have remembered that Nurse Jamieson had the handsome
enjoyment of her tongue, and was disposed to use it liberally.

From a very early period, Nurse Jamieson, amongst the variety of
legendary lore which she instilled into her foster-son, had not
forgotten what she called the awful season of his coming into the
world--the personable appearance of his father, a grand gentleman, who
looked as if the whole world lay at his feet--the beauty of his mother,
and the terrible blackness of the mask which she wore, her een that
glanced like diamonds, and the diamonds she wore on her fingers, that
could be compared to nothing but her own een, the fairness of her skin,
and the colour of her silk rokelay, with much proper stuff to the same
purpose. Then she expatiated on the arrival of his grandfather, and
the awful man, armed with pistol, dirk, and claymore, (the last
weapons existed only in Nurse's imagination,) the very Ogre of a fairy
tale--then all the circumstances of the carrying off his mother, while
bank-notes were flying about the house like screeds of brown paper,
and gold guineas were as plenty as chuckie-stanes. All this, partly
to please and interest the boy, partly to indulge her own talent for
amplification, Nurse told with so many additional circumstances, and
gratuitous commentaries, that the real transaction, mysterious and odd
as it certainly was sunk into tameness before the Nurse's edition, like
humble prose contrasted with the boldest nights of poetry.

To hear all this did Richard seriously incline, and still more was
he interested with the idea of his valiant father coming for him
unexpectedly at the head of a gallant regiment, with music playing and
colours flying, and carrying his son away on the most beautiful pony
eyes ever beheld; Or his mother, bright as the day, might suddenly
appear in her coach-and-six, to reclaim her beloved child; or his
