domestic affairs. And what has been going on here, Berenice?"

"Nothing," the girl said; "at least I have been doing nothing. I
went to the footraces the other day, and saw the propraetor, but
I don't like him. I think that he is a bad man, and I hear stories
among the ladies of his being cruel and greedy; and there have been
mad women going about at night shrieking and crying; I have heard
them several times myself. Some of the ladies said they wish that
my father was back here with his legion, for that there are but few
soldiers, and if Decianus continues to treat the people so badly
there may be trouble. What do you think, Beric?"

"I cannot say," he replied. "It seems to me that the Romans are
bent upon crushing us down altogether. They have just captured our
Holy Island, slaying the priests and priestesses, and overthrowing
the altars, while Nero's officers wring from the people the last
coin and the last animal they possess. I fear that there will be
trouble, Berenice. No men worthy of the name could see their gods
insulted and themselves despoiled of all they possess without
striking a blow in defence."

"But they will only bring more trouble upon themselves," the girl
said gravely. "I have heard my father lament that they forced us to
fight against them, though you know he held that it was our fault
more than theirs, and that if they were ruled kindly and wisely,
as were the people in Southern Gaul, where the legion was stationed
before it came over here, they would settle down and live peaceably,
and be greatly benefited by our rule."

"If you treat a man as you would a dog you must not be surprised
if he bites you," Beric said. "Some of your people not only think
that we are dogs, but that we are toothless ones. Mayhap they will
find their mistake some day."

"But you will never fight against us, Beric," the girl said anxiously,
"after living so long among us?"

"I would not fight against your father or against those who have
treated me well," he replied; "but against those who ill treat and
abuse us I would fight when my countrymen fought. Yet if I could
ever do you a service, Berenice, I would lay down my life to do
it."

The event seemed so improbable to the girl that she passed over
the promise without comment.

"So you are a chief, Beric! But I thought chiefs wore golden
bracelets and ornaments, and you are just as you were when you came
here last."

"Because I come here only as a visitor. If I came on a mission from
the queen, or as one of a deputation of chiefs, I should wear my
ornaments. I wear them at home now, those that my father had."

Beric stayed for some hours chatting with Berenice, and his old
instructor, who had been left by Caius in charge of the household.
As he walked home he wondered over the careless security of
the Romans, and vowed that should opportunity occur he would save
Berenice from the fate that was likely to fall upon all in Camalodunum
should the Britons rise.



CHAPTER IV: AN INFURIATED PEOPLE


"A fresh misfortune has occurred," was the greeting with which
Beric's mother met him on his return home. "Prasutagus is dead; and
this is not the worst, he has left half his estates to the Roman
Emperor."

"To the Roman Emperor!" Beric repeated; "is it possible, mother?"

"It is true, Beric. You know he has always tried to curry favour
with the Romans, and has kept the Iceni from joining when other
tribes rose against Rome. He has thought of nothing but amassing
wealth, and in all Britain there is no man who could compare with
him in riches. Doubtless he felt that the Romans only bided their
time to seize what he had gathered, and so, in order that Boadicea
and his daughters should enjoy in peace a portion of his stores,
he has left half to Nero. The man was a fool as well as a traitor.
The peasant who throws a child out of the door to the wolves knows
that it does but whet their appetite for blood, and so it will be
in this case. I hear Prasutagus died a week since, though the news
has come but slowly, and already a horde of Roman officials have
arrived in Norfolk, and are proceeding to make inventories of the
king's possessions, and to bear themselves as insolently as if they
were masters of all. Trouble must come, and that soon. Boadicea is
of different stuff to her husband; she will not bear the insolence
of the Romans. It would have been well for the Iceni had Prasutagus
died twenty years ago and she had ruled our country."

"The gods have clearly willed, mother, that we should rise as one
people against the Romans. It may be that it was for this that they
did not defend their shrines from the impious hands of the invaders.
Nought else stirred the Britons to lay aside their jealousies and
act as one people. Now from end to end of the island all are burning
for vengeance. Just at this moment, comes the death of the Romans'
friend Prasutagus, and the passing of the rule of the Iceni into
the hands of Boadicea. With the Romans in her capital the occasion
will assuredly not long be wanting, and then there will be such a
rising as the Romans have never yet seen; and then, their purpose
effected, the gods may well fight on our side. I would that there
had been five more years in which to prepare for the struggle, but
if it must come it must. This Catus Decianus is just the man to
bring it on. Haughty, arrogant, and greedy, he knows nothing of
us, and has never faced the Britons in arms. Had Suetonius been
here he would not have acted thus with regard to the affairs of
Prasutagus. Had Caius Muro not been absent his voice might have been
raised in warning to the tyrant; but everything seems to conspire
together, mother, to bring on the crisis."

"The sooner the better," Parta exclaimed vehemently. "It is true
that in time you might teach the whole Iceni to fight in Roman
methods, but what is good for the Romans may not be good for us.
Moreover, every year that passes strengthens their hold on the
land. Their forts spring up everywhere, their cities grow apace;
every month numbers flock over here. Another five years, my son,
and their hold might be too strong to shake off."

"That is so, mother. Thinking of ourselves I thought not of them;
it may be that it were better to fight now than to wait. Well,
whenever the signal is given, and from wheresoever it comes, we
are ready."

Since the news of the capture of Mona had arrived, the tribesmen
had drilled with increased alacrity and eagerness. Every man saw
that the struggle with Rome must ere long take place, and was eager
to take a leading share in the conflict. It was upon them that the
blow had fallen most heavily in the former partial rising, and they
knew that the other tribes of the Iceni held that their defence of
their camp should not have been overborne by the Romans as it was;
hence they had something of a private wrong as well as a national
one to avenge. Another fortnight was spent in constant work, until
one day the news came that Boadicea's daughters had been most
grossly insulted by the Roman officers, and that the queen herself
had started for Camalodunum to demand from Decianus a redress of
their wrongs and the punishment of the offenders. The excitement
was intense. Every man felt the outrage upon the daughters of their
queen as a personal injury, and when Beric took his place before
the men of the tribe, who were drawn up in military order, a shout
arose: "Lead us to Camalodunum! Let us take vengeance!"

"Not yet," Beric cried. "The queen has gone there; we must wait
the issue. Not until she gives the orders must we move. A rising
now would endanger her safety. We must wait, my friends, until all
are as ready as we are; when the time comes you will not find me
backward in leading you."

Three days later came news that seemed at first incredible, but
which was speedily confirmed. Decianus had received the queen, had
scoffed at her complaints, and when, fired with indignation, she
had used threats, he had ordered his soldiers to strip and scourge
her, and the sentence had actually been carried into effect. Then
the rage of the tribesmen knew no bounds, and it needed the utmost
persuasions of Parta herself to induce them to wait until news came
from the north.

"Fear not," she said, "that your vengeance will be baulked. Boadicea
will not submit to this double indignity, of that you maybe sure.
Wait until you hear from her. When measures are determined upon
in this matter the Iceni must act as one man. We are all equally
outraged in the persons of our queen and her daughters; all have
a right to a share in avenging her insults. We might spoil all
by moving before the others are ready. When we move it must be as
a mighty torrent to overwhelm the invaders. Not Camalodunum only,
but every Roman town must be laid in ruins. It must be a life
and death struggle between us and Rome; we must conquer now or be
enslaved for ever."

It was not long before messengers arrived from Boadicea, bidding
the Sarci prepare for war, and summoning Parta and her son to a
council of the chiefs of the tribe, to be held under a well known
sacred oak in the heart of the forest, near Norwich. Parta's chariot
was at once prepared, together with a second, which was to carry
Boduoc and a female attendant of Parta, and as soon as the horses
were harnessed they started. Two long days' journey brought them
to the place of meeting. The scene was a busy one. Already fully
two score of the chiefs had arrived. Parta was received with great
marks of respect. The Sarci were the tribe lying nearest to the
Romans, and upon them the brunt of the Roman anger would fall, as
it had done before; but her appearance in answer to the summons
showed, it was thought, their willingness to join in the general
action of the tribe.

Beric was looked at curiously. His four years' residence among the
Romans caused him to be regarded with a certain amount of suspicion,
which had been added to by rumours that he had been impressing
upon the tribe the greatness and power of Rome. Of late there had
been reports brought by wandering bards that the Sarci were being
practised in the same exercises as those of the Roman soldiers,
and there were many who thought that Beric, like Cogidinus, a chief
of the Regi of Sussex, had joined himself heart and soul to Rome,
and was preparing his tribe to fight side by side with the legions.
On the other hand many, knowing that Parta had lost her husband at
the hands of the Romans, and hated them with all her heart, held
that she would never have divided her power with Beric, or suffered
him to take military command of the tribe, had she not been assured
of his fidelity to the cause of Britain.

Beric was dressed in the full panoply of a chief. He wore a short
skirt or kilt reaching to his knees. Above it a loose vest or
shirt, girt in by a gold belt, while over his shoulders he wore
the British mantle, white in colour and worked with gold. Around
his neck was the torque, the emblem of chieftainship. On his left
arm he carried a small shield of beaten brass, and from a baldric
covered with gold plates hung the straight pointless British sword
that had been carried by his father in battle. Even those most
suspicious of him could not deny that he was a stalwart and well
built youth, with a full share of pith and muscle, and that his
residence among the Romans had not given him any airs of effeminacy.
The only subject of criticism was that his hair was shorter than
that of his countrymen, for although he had permitted it to grow
since he left Camalodunum, where he had worn it short, in Roman
fashion, it had not yet attained its full length.

Beric felt a stranger among the others. Since his return home there
had been no great tribal gathering, for Prasutagus had for some
time been ill, and had always discouraged such assemblages both
because they were viewed with jealousy by the Romans and because he
begrudged the expenses of entertaining. Parta, who was personally
known to almost all present, introduced Beric to them.

"My son is none the less one of the Iceni for his Roman training,"
she said; "he has learned much, but has forgotten nothing. He is
young, but you will find him a worthy companion in arms when the
day of battle comes."

"I am glad to hear what you say, Parta," Aska, one of the older
chiefs, said. "It would be unfair to impute blame to him for what
assuredly was not his fault, but I feared that they might have
taught him to despise his countrymen."

"It is not so, sir," Beric said firmly. "Happily I fell into good
hands. Caius Muro, the commander of the 12th Legion, in whose charge
I was, is a just as well as a valiant man, and had me instructed
as if I had been his own son, and I trust that I am none the less
a true Briton because I except him and his from the hatred I bear
the Romans. He never said a word to me against my countrymen, and
indeed often bewailed that we were not treated more wisely and
gently, and were not taught to regard the Romans as friends and
teachers rather than oppressors."

"Well spoken, young chief!" the other said; "ingratitude is, of
all sins, the most odious, and you do well to speak up boldly for
those who were kind to you. Among all men there are good and evil,
and we may well believe, even among the Romans, there are some who
are just and honourable. But I hear that you admire them greatly,
and that you have been telling to your tribe tales of their greatness
in war and of their virtues."

"I have done so," Beric replied. "A race could not conquer the
world as the Romans have done unless they had many virtues; but
those that I chiefly told of are the virtues that every Briton
should lay to heart. I spoke of their patriotism, of the love of
country that never failed, of the stern determination that enabled
them to pass through the gravest dangers without flinching, and to
show a dauntless face to the foe even when dangers were thickest
and the country was menaced with destruction. Above all, how in
Rome, though there might be parties and divisions, there were none
in the face of a common enemy. Then all acted as one man; there
was no rivalry save in great deeds. Each was ready to give life
and all he possessed in defence of his country. These were lessons
which I thought it well that every Briton should learn and take to
heart. Rome has conquered us so far because she has been one while
we are rent into tribes having no common union; content to sit with
our arms folded while our neighbours are crushed, not seeing that
our turn will come next. It was so when they first came in the time
of our forefathers, it has been so in these latter times; tribe
after tribe has been subdued; while, had we been all united, the
Romans would never have obtained a footing on our shore. No wonder
the gods have turned away their faces from a people so blind and
so divided when all was at stake. Yes, I have learned much from
the Romans. I have not learned to love them, but I have learned to
admire them and to regret that in many respects my own countrymen
did not resemble them."

There was a murmur of surprise among the chiefs who had by this
time gathered round, while angry exclamations broke from some of
the younger men; but Aska waved his hand.

"Beric speaks wisely and truly," he said; "our dissensions have
been our ruin. Still more, perhaps, the conduct of those who should
have led us, but who have made terms with Rome in order to secure
their own possessions. Among these Prasutagus was conspicuous, and
we ourselves were as much to blame as he was that we suffered it.
If he knows what is passing here he himself will see how great are
the misfortunes that he has brought upon his queen, his daughters,
and the tribe. Had we joined our whole forces with those of Caractacus
the Brigantes too might have risen. It took all the strength of
the Romans to conquer Caractacus alone. What could they have done
had the Brigantes and we from the north, and the whole of the
southern tribes, then unbroken, closed down upon them? It is but
yesterday since Prasutagus was buried. The grass has not yet begun
to shoot upon his funeral mound and yet his estates have been seized
by the Romans, while his wife and daughters have been insulted
beyond measure.

"The young chief of the Sarci has profited by his sojourn among
the Romans. The Druids have told me that the priest who has visited
the Sarci prophesies great things of him, and for that reason
decided that, young as he was, he should share his mother's power
and take his place as leader of the tribe in battle, and that
he foresaw that, should time be given him to ripen his wisdom and
establish his authority, he might some day become a British champion
as powerful as Cunobeline, as valiant as Caractacus. These were
the words of one of the wisest of the Druids. They have been passed
round among the Druids, and even now throughout Britain there are
many who never so much as heard of the name of the Sarci, who yet
believe that, in this young chief of that tribe, will some day be
found a mighty champion of his country. Prasutagus knew this also,
for as soon as Beric returned from Camalodunum he begged the Druids
to find out whether good or evil was to be looked for from this
youth, who had been brought up among the Romans, and their report
to him tallied with that which I myself heard from them. It was for
that reason that Boadicea sent for him with his mother, although
so much younger than any here, and belonging to a tribe that is
but a small one among the Iceni. I asked these questions of him,
knowing that among some of you there were doubts whether his stay
with the Romans had not rendered him less a Briton. He answered as
I expected from him, boldly and fearlessly, and, as you have heard
wisely, and I for one believe in the predictions of the Druids.
But here comes the queen."

As he spoke a number of chariots issued from the path through the
forest into the circular clearing, in the centre of which stood
the majestic oak, and at the same moment, from the opposite side,
appeared a procession of white robed Druids singing a loud chant.
As the chariots drew up, the queen and her two daughters alighted
from them, with a number of chiefs of importance from the branches
of the tribe near her capital. Beric had never seen her before,
and was struck with her aspect. She was a tall and stately woman,
large in her proportions, with her yellow hair falling below her
waist. She wore no ornaments or insignia of her high rank; her dress
and those of her daughters were careless and disordered, indicative
of mourning and grief, but the expression of her face was that of
indignation and passion rather than of humiliation.

Upon alighting she acknowledged the greeting of the assembled chiefs
with a slight gesture, and then remained standing with her eyes
fixed upon the advancing Druids. When these reached the sacred tree
they encircled it seven times, still continuing their chanting, and
then ranged themselves up under its branches with the chief Druid
standing in front. They had already been consulted privately by
the queen and had declared for war; but it was necessary that the
decision should be pronounced solemnly beneath the shade of the
sacred oak.

"Why come you here, woman?" the chief priest asked, addressing the
queen.

"I come as a supplicant to the gods," she said; "as an outraged
queen, a dishonoured woman, and a broken hearted mother, and in each
of these capacities I call upon my country's gods for vengeance."
Then in passionate words she poured out the story of the indignities
that she and her daughters had suffered, and suddenly loosening
her garment, and suffering it to drop to her waist, she turned
and showed the marks of the Roman rods across her back, the sight
eliciting a shout of fury from the chiefs around her.

"Let all retire to the woods," the Druids said, "and see that no
eye profanes our mysteries. When the gods have answered we will
summon you."

The queen, followed by all the chiefs, retired at once to the
forest, while the Druids proceeded to carry out the sacred mysteries.
Although all knew well what the decision would be, they waited with
suppressed excitement the summons to return and hear the decision
that was to embark them in a desperate struggle with Rome. Some threw
themselves down under the trees, some walked up and down together
discussing in low tones the prospects of a struggle, and the question
what tribes would join it. The queen and her daughters sat apart,
none venturing to approach them. Parta and three other female chiefs
sat a short distance away talking together, while two or three of
the younger chiefs, their attitude towards Beric entirely altered
by the report of the Druids' predictions concerning him, gathered
round him and asked questions concerning the Romans' methods of
fighting, their arms and power. An hour after they had retired a
deep sound of a conch rose in the air. The queen and her daughters
at once moved forward, followed by the four female chiefs, behind
whom came the rest in a body. Issuing from the forest they advanced
to the sacred oak and stood in an attitude of deep respect, while
the chief Druid announced the decision of the gods.

"The gods have spoken," he said. "Too long have the Iceni stood
aloof from their countrymen, therefore have the gods withdrawn
their faces from them; therefore has punishment and woe fallen upon
them. Prasutagus is dead; his queen and his daughters have suffered
the direst indignities; a Roman has seized the wealth heaped up
by inglorious cowardice. But the moment has come; the gods have
suffered their own altars to be desecrated in order that over the
whole length and breadth of the land the cry for vengeance shall
arise simultaneously. The cup is full; vengeance is at hand upon
the oppressors and tyrants, the land reeks with British blood. Not
content with grasping our possessions, our lives and the honour
of our women are held as nought by them, our altars are cold, our
priests slaughtered. The hour of vengeance is at hand. I see the
smoke of burning cities ascending in the air. I hear the groans of
countless victims to British vengeance. I see broken legions and
flying men.

"To arms! the gods have spoken. Strike for vengeance. Strike for
the gods. Strike for your country and outraged queen. Chiefs of
the Iceni, to arms! May the curse of the gods fall upon an enemy
who draws back in the day of battle! May the gods give strength to
your arms and render you invincible in battle! The gods have spoken."

A mighty shout was raised by his hearers; swords were brandished,
and spears shaken, and the cry "To arms! the gods have spoken,"
was repeated unanimously. As the Druids closed round their chief,
who had been seized with strong convulsions as soon as he had uttered
the message of the gods, Boadicea turned to the chiefs and raised
her arm for silence.

"I am a queen again; I reign once more over a race of men. No
longer do I feel the smart of my stripes, for each shall ere long
be washed out in Roman blood; but before action, counsel, and before
counsel, food, for you have, many of you, come from afar. I have
ordered a feast to be prepared in the forest."

She led the way across the opposite side of the glade, where,
a few hundred yards in the forest, a number of the queen's slaves
had prepared a feast of roasted sheep, pig, and ox, with bread and
jars of drink formed of fermented honey, and a sort of beer. As
soon as the meal was concluded the queen called the chiefs round
her, and the assembly was joined by the Druids.

"War is declared," she said; "the question is shall we commence at
once, or shall we wait?"

There was a general response "At once!" but the chief Druid stepped
forward and said: "My sons, we must not risk the ruin of all by
undue haste; this must be a national movement if it is to succeed.
For a fortnight we must keep quiet, preparing everything for war,
so that we may take the field with every man capable of bearing
arms in the tribe. In the meantime we, with the aid of the bards,
will spread the news of the outrages that the Romans have committed
upon the queen and her daughters far and wide over the land. Already
the tribes are burning with indignation at the insults to our gods
and the slaughter of our priests at Mona, and this news will arouse
them to madness, for what is done here today may be done elsewhere
tomorrow, and all men will see that only in the total destruction
of the Romans is there a hope of freedom. All will be bidden to
prepare for war, and, when the news comes that the Iceni have taken
up arms, to assemble and march to join us. On this day fortnight,
then, let every chief with his following meet at Cardun, which
is but a short march from Camalodunum. Then we will rush upon the
Roman city, the scene of the outrage to your queen, and its smoke
shall tell Britain that she is avenged, and Rome that her day of
oppression is over."

The decision was received with satisfaction. A fortnight was none
too long for making preparations, assembling the tribesmen, and
marching to the appointed spot.

"One thing I claim," Boadicea said, "and that is the right to fall
upon and destroy instantly the Romans who installed themselves in
my capital, and who are the authors of the outrages upon my daughters.
So long as they live and lord it there I cannot return."

"That is right and just," the Druid said. "Slay all but ten, and
hand them over bound to us to be sacrificed on the altars of the
gods they have insulted."

"I will undertake that task, as my tribe lies nearest the capital,"
one of the chiefs said. "I will assemble them tonight and fall upon
the Romans at daybreak."

"See that none escape," the Druid said. "Kill them and all their slaves
and followers. Let not one live to carry the news to Camalodunum."

"I shall be at the meeting place and march at your head," the queen
said to the chiefs; "that victory will be ours I do not doubt;
but if the gods will it otherwise I swear that I shall not survive
defeat. Ye gods, hear my vow."

The council was now over, and the queen mingled with the chiefs,
saying a few words to each. Beric was presented to her by his mother,
and Boadicea was particularly gracious to him. "I have heard great
things predicted of you, Beric. The gods have marked you out for
favour, and their priests tell me that you will be one day a great
champion of the Britons. So may it be. I shall watch you on the
day of battle, and am assured that none among the Iceni will bear
themselves more worthily."

An hour later the meeting broke up, and Parta and Beric returned
to Cardun, where they at once began to make preparations for the
approaching conflict. Every man in the tribe was summoned to attend,
and the exercises went on from daybreak till dusk, while the women
cooked and waited upon the men. Councils were held nightly in the
hall, and to each of the chiefs was assigned a special duty, the
whole tribe being treated as a legion, and every chief and fighting
man having his place and duty assigned to him.

In Camalodunum, although nothing was known of the preparations
that were being made, a feeling of great uneasiness prevailed. The
treatment of Boadicea had excited grave disapproval upon the part
of the great majority of the inhabitants, although new arrivals
from Gaul or Rome and the officials in the suite of Decianus lauded
his action as an act of excellent policy.

