their choice of clothes. They liked to be clean and well groomed, to
have their hair and beards neatly cut, to feel their bodies strong with
the exercise and the swimming of the gymnasium, but they never followed
the Asiatic fashion which prescribed loud colours and strange patterns.
They wore a long white coat and they managed to look as smart as a
modern Italian officer in his long blue cape.

They loved to see their wives wear ornaments but they thought it very
vulgar to display their wealth (or their wives) in public and whenever
the women left their home they were as inconspicuous as possible.

In short, the story of Greek life is a story not only of moderation but
also of simplicity. "Things," chairs and tables and books and houses and
carriages, are apt to take up a great deal of their owner's time. In the
end they invariably make him their slave and his hours are spent looking
after their wants, keeping them polished and brushed and painted. The
Greeks, before everything else, wanted to be "free," both in mind and
in body. That they might maintain their liberty, and be truly free in
spirit, they reduced their daily needs to the lowest possible point.




THE GREEK THEATRE

THE ORIGINS OF THE THEATRE, THE FIRST FORM OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT


AT a very early stage of their history the Greeks had begun to collect
the poems, which had been written in honor of their brave ancestors who
had driven the Pelasgians out of Hellas and had destroyed the power of
Troy. These poems were recited in public and everybody came to listen to
them. But the theatre, the form of entertainment which has become almost
a necessary part of our own lives, did not grow out of these recited
heroic tales. It had such a curious origin that I must tell you
something about it in a separate chapter

The Greeks had always been fond of parades. Every year they held solemn
processions in honor of Dionysos the God of the wine. As everybody in
Greece drank wine (the Greeks thought water only useful for the purpose
of swimming and sailing) this particular Divinity was as popular as a
God of the Soda-Fountain would be in our own land.

And because the Wine-God was supposed to live in the vineyards, amidst a
merry mob of Satyrs (strange creatures who were half man and half goat),
the crowd that joined the procession used to wear goat-skins and to
hee-haw like real billy-goats. The Greek word for goat is "tragos" and
the Greek word for singer is "oidos." The singer who meh-mehed like a
goat therefore was called a "tragos-oidos" or goat singer, and it is
this strange name which developed into the modern word "Tragedy," which
means in the theatrical sense a piece with an unhappy ending, just as
Comedy (which really means the singing of something "comos" or gay) is
the name given to a play which ends happily.

But how, you will ask, did this noisy chorus of masqueraders, stamping
around like wild goats, ever develop into the noble tragedies which have
filled the theatres of the world for almost two thousand years?

The connecting link between the goat-singer and Hamlet is really very
simple as I shall show you in a moment.

The singing chorus was very amusing in the beginning and attracted large
crowds of spectators who stood along the side of the road and laughed.
But soon this business of tree-hawing grew tiresome and the Greeks
thought dullness an evil only comparable to ugliness or sickness. They
asked for something more entertaining. Then an inventive young poet
from the village of Icaria in Attica hit upon a new idea which proved a
tremendous success. He made one of the members of the goat-chorus step
forward and engage in conversation with the leader of the musicians who
marched at the head of the parade playing upon their pipes of Pan.
This individual was allowed to step out of line. He waved his arms and
gesticulated while he spoke (that is to say he "acted" while the others
merely stood by and sang) and he asked a lot of questions, which the
bandmaster answered according to the roll of papyrus upon which the poet
had written down these answers before the show began.

This rough and ready conversation--the dialogue--which told the story
of Dionysos or one of the other Gods, became at once popular with the
crowd. Henceforth every Dionysian procession had an "acted scene" and
very soon the "acting" was considered more important than the procession
and the meh-mehing.

AEschylus, the most successful of all "tragedians" who wrote no less
than eighty plays during his long life (from 526 to 455) made a
bold step forward when he introduced two "actors" instead of one. A
generation later Sophocles increased the number of actors to three. When
Euripides began to write his terrible tragedies in the middle of the
fifth century, B.C., he was allowed as many actors as he liked and
when Aristophanes wrote those famous comedies in which he poked fun
at everybody and everything, including the Gods of Mount Olympus, the
chorus had been reduced to the role of mere bystanders who were lined up
behind the principal performers and who sang "this is a terrible world"
while the hero in the foreground committed a crime against the will of
the Gods.

This new form of dramatic entertainment demanded a proper setting, and
soon every Greek city owned a theatre, cut out of the rock of a nearby
hill. The spectators sat upon wooden benches and faced a wide circle
(our present orchestra where you pay three dollars and thirty cents for
a seat). Upon this half-circle, which was the stage, the actors and the
chorus took their stand. Behind them there was a tent where they made
up with large clay masks which hid their faces and which showed the
spectators whether the actors were supposed to be happy and smiling or
unhappy and weeping. The Greek word for tent is "skene" and that is the
reason why we talk of the "scenery" of the stage.

When once the tragedy had become part of Greek life, the people took
it very seriously and never went to the theatre to give their minds a
vacation. A new play became as important an event as an election and
a successful playwright was received with greater honors than those
bestowed upon a general who had just returned from a famous victory.




THE PERSIAN WARS

HOW THE GREEKS DEFENDED EUROPE AGAINST ASIATIC INVASION AND DROVE THE
PERSIANS BACK ACROSS THE AEGEAN SEA


THE Greeks had learned the art of trading from the AEgeans who had
been the pupils of the Phoenicians. They had founded colonies after the
Phoenician pattern. They had even improved upon the Phoenician methods
by a more general use of money in dealing with foreign customers. In
the sixth century before our era they had established themselves firmly
along the coast of Asia Minor and they were taking away trade from the
Phoenicians at a fast rate. This the Phoenicians of course did not
like but they were not strong enough to risk a war with their Greek
competitors. They sat and waited nor did they wait in vain.

In a former chapter, I have told you how a humble tribe of Persian
shepherds had suddenly gone upon the warpath and had conquered the
greater part of western Asia. The Persians were too civilised to plunder
their new subjects. They contented themselves with a yearly tribute.
When they reached the coast of Asia Minor they insisted that the Greek
colonies of Lydia recognize the Persian Kings as their over-Lords and
pay them a stipulated tax. The Greek colonies objected. The Persians
insisted. Then the Greek colonies appealed to the home-country and the
stage was set for a quarrel.

For if the truth be told, the Persian Kings regarded the Greek
city-states as very dangerous political institutions and bad examples
for all other people who were supposed to be the patient slaves of the
mighty Persian Kings.

Of course, the Greeks enjoyed a certain degree of safety because their
country lay hidden beyond the deep waters of the AEgean. But here their
old enemies, the Phoenicians, stepped forward with offers of help and
advice to the Persians. If the Persian King would provide the soldiers,
the Phoenicians would guarantee to deliver the necessary ships to carry
them to Europe. It was the year 492 before the birth of Christ, and Asia
made ready to destroy the rising power of Europe.

As a final warning the King of Persia sent messengers to the Greeks
asking for "earth and water" as a token of their submission. The Greeks
promptly threw the messengers into the nearest well where they would
find both "earth and water" in large abundance and thereafter of course
peace was impossible.

But the Gods of High Olympus watched over their children and when the
Phoenician fleet carrying the Persian troops was near Mount Athos, the
Storm-God blew his cheeks until he almost burst the veins of his brow,
and the fleet was destroyed by a terrible hurricane and the Persians
were all drowned.

Two years later they returned. This time they sailed straight across
the AEgean Sea and landed near the village of Marathon. As soon as the
Athenians heard this they sent their army of ten thousand men to guard
the hills that surrounded the Marathonian plain. At the same time they
despatched a fast runner to Sparta to ask for help. But Sparta was
envious of the fame of Athens and refused to come to her assistance.
The other Greek cities followed her example with the exception of tiny
Plataea which sent a thousand men. On the twelfth of September of the
year 490, Miltiades, the Athenian commander, threw this little army
against the hordes of the Persians. The Greeks broke through the Persian
barrage of arrows and their spears caused terrible havoc among the
disorganised Asiatic troops who had never been called upon to resist
such an enemy.

That night the people of Athens watched the sky grow red with the flames
of burning ships. Anxiously they waited for news. At last a little
cloud of dust appeared upon the road that led to the North. It was
Pheidippides, the runner. He stumbled and gasped for his end was near.
Only a few days before had he returned from his errand to Sparta. He had
hastened to join Miltiades. That morning he had taken part in the attack
and later he had volunteered to carry the news of victory to his beloved
city. The people saw him fall and they rushed forward to support him.
"We have won," he whispered and then he died, a glorious death which
made him envied of all men.

As for the Persians, they tried, after this defeat, to land near Athens
but they found the coast guarded and disappeared, and once more the land
of Hellas was at peace.

Eight years they waited and during this time the Greeks were not idle.
They knew that a final attack was to be expected but they did not agree
upon the best way to avert the danger. Some people wanted to increase
the army. Others said that a strong fleet was necessary for success. The
two parties led by Aristides (for the army) and Themistocles (the leader
of the bigger-navy men) fought each other bitterly and nothing was done
until Aristides was exiled. Then Themistocles had his chance and he
built all the ships he could and turned the Piraeus into a strong naval
base.

In the year 481 B.C. a tremendous Persian army appeared in Thessaly, a
province of northern Greece. In this hour of danger, Sparta, the
great military city of Greece, was elected commander-in-chief. But the
Spartans cared little what happened to northern Greece provided their
own country was not invaded, They neglected to fortify the passes that
led into Greece.

A small detachment of Spartans under Leonidas had been told to guard
the narrow road between the high mountains and the sea which connected
Thessaly with the southern provinces. Leonidas obeyed his orders. He
fought and held the pass with unequalled bravery. But a traitor by the
name of Ephialtes who knew the little byways of Malis guided a regiment
of Persians through the hills and made it possible for them to attack
Leonidas in the rear. Near the Warm Wells--the Thermopylae--a terrible
battle was fought.

When night came Leonidas and his faithful soldiers lay dead under the
corpses of their enemies.

But the pass had been lost and the greater part of Greece fell into the
hands of the Persians. They marched upon Athens, threw the garrison from
the rocks of the Acropolis and burned the city. The people fled to the
Island of Salamis. All seemed lost. But on the 20th of September of the
year 480 Themistocles forced the Persian fleet to give battle within the
narrow straits which separated the Island of Salamis from the mainland
and within a few hours he destroyed three quarters of the Persian ships.

In this way the victory of Thermopylae came to naught. Xerxes was forced
to retire. The next year, so he decreed, would bring a final decision.
He took his troops to Thessaly and there he waited for spring.

But this time the Spartans understood the seriousness of the hour.
They left the safe shelter of the wall which they had built across the
isthmus of Corinth and under the leadership of Pausanias they marched
against Mardonius the Persian general. The united Greeks (some one
hundred thousand men from a dozen different cities) attacked the three
hundred thou-sand men of the enemy near Plataea. Once more the heavy
Greek infantry broke through the Persian barrage of arrows. The Persians
were defeated, as they had been at Marathon, and this time they left for
good. By a strange coincidence, the same day that the Greek armies won
their victory near Plataea, the Athenian ships destroyed the enemy's
fleet near Cape Mycale in Asia Minor.

Thus did the first encounter between Asia and Europe end. Athens had
covered herself with glory and Sparta had fought bravely and well. If
these two cities had been able to come to an agreement, if they had been
willing to forget their little jealousies, they might have become the
leaders of a strong and united Hellas.

But alas, they allowed the hour of victory and enthusiasm to slip by,
and the same opportunity never returned.




ATHENS vs. SPARTA

HOW ATHENS AND SPARTA FOUGHT A LONG AND DISASTROUS WAR FOR THE
LEADERSHIP OF GREECE


ATHENS and Sparta were both Greek cities and their people spoke a common
language. In every other respect they were different. Athens rose high
from the plain. It was a city exposed to the fresh breezes from the sea,
willing to look at the world with the eyes of a happy child. Sparta, on
the other hand, was built at the bottom of a deep valley, and used the
surrounding mountains as a barrier against foreign thought. Athens was a
city of busy trade. Sparta was an armed camp where people were soldiers
for the sake of being soldiers. The people of Athens loved to sit in the
sun and discuss poetry or listen to the wise words of a philosopher.
The Spartans, on the other hand, never wrote a single line that was
considered literature, but they knew how to fight, they liked to fight,
and they sacrificed all human emotions to their ideal of military
preparedness.

No wonder that these sombre Spartans viewed the success of Athens with
malicious hate. The energy which the defence of the common home had
developed in Athens was now used for purposes of a more peaceful nature.
The Acropolis was rebuilt and was made into a marble shrine to the
Goddess Athena. Pericles, the leader of the Athenian democracy, sent far
and wide to find famous sculptors and painters and scientists to make
the city more beautiful and the young Athenians more worthy of their
home. At the same time he kept a watchful eye on Sparta and built high
walls which connected Athens with the sea and made her the strongest
fortress of that day.

An insignificant quarrel between two little Greek cities led to the
final conflict. For thirty years the war between Athens and Sparta
continued. It ended in a terrible disaster for Athens.

During the third year of the war the plague had entered the city. More
than half of the people and Pericles, the great leader, had been killed.
The plague was followed by a period of bad and untrustworthy leadership.
A brilliant young fellow by the name of Alcibiades had gained the favor
of the popular assembly. He suggested a raid upon the Spartan colony of
Syracuse in Sicily. An expedition was equipped and everything was ready.
But Alcibiades got mixed up in a street brawl and was forced to flee.
The general who succeeded him was a bungler. First he lost his ships and
then he lost his army, and the few surviving Athenians were thrown into
the stone-quarries of Syracuse, where they died from hunger and thirst.

The expedition had killed all the young men of Athens. The city was
doomed. After a long siege the town surrendered in April of the year
404. The high walls were demolished. The navy was taken away by the
Spartans. Athens ceased to exist as the center of the great colonial
empire which it had conquered during the days of its prosperity. But
that wonderful desire to learn and to know and to investigate which
had distinguished her free citizens during the days of greatness and
prosperity did not perish with the walls and the ships. It continued to
live. It became even more brilliant.

Athens no longer shaped the destinies of the land of Greece. But now, as
the home of the first great university the city began to influence the
minds of intelligent people far beyond the narrow frontiers of Hellas.




ALEXANDER THE GREAT

ALEXANDER THE MACEDONIAN ESTABLISHES A GREEK WORLD-EMPIRE, AND WHAT
BECAME OF THIS HIGH AMBITION


WHEN the Achaeans had left their homes along the banks of the Danube to
look for pastures new, they had spent some time among the mountains of
Macedonia. Ever since, the Greeks had maintained certain more or
less formal relations with the people of this northern country. The
Macedonians from their side had kept themselves well informed about
conditions in Greece.

Now it happened, just when Sparta and Athens had finished their
disastrous war for the leadership of Hellas, that Macedonia was ruled
by an extraordinarily clever man by the name of Philip. He admired
the Greek spirit in letters and art but he despised the Greek lack of
self-control in political affairs. It irritated him to see a perfectly
good people waste its men and money upon fruitless quarrels. So he
settled the difficulty by making himself the master of all Greece and
then he asked his new subjects to join him on a voyage which he meant to
pay to Persia in return for the visit which Xerxes had paid the Greeks
one hundred and fifty years before.

Unfortunately Philip was murdered before he could start upon this
well-prepared expedition. The task of avenging the destruction of Athens
was left to Philip's son Alexander, the beloved pupil of Aristotle,
wisest of all Greek teachers.

Alexander bade farewell to Europe in the spring of the year 334 B.C.
Seven years later he reached India. In the meantime he had destroyed
Phoenicia, the old rival of the Greek merchants. He had conquered Egypt
and had been worshipped by the people of the Nile valley as the son
and heir of the Pharaohs. He had defeated the last Persian king--he had
overthrown the Persian empire he had given orders to rebuild Babylon--he
had led his troops into the heart of the Himalayan mountains and had
made the entire world a Macedonian province and dependency. Then he
stopped and announced even more ambitious plans.

The newly formed Empire must be brought under the influence of the Greek
mind. The people must be taught the Greek language--they must live in
cities built after a Greek model. The Alexandrian soldier now turned
school-master. The military camps of yesterday became the peaceful
centres of the newly imported Greek civilisation. Higher and higher
did the flood of Greek manners and Greek customs rise, when suddenly
Alexander was stricken with a fever and died in the old palace of King
Hammurabi of Babylon in the year 323.

Then the waters receded. But they left behind the fertile clay of a
higher civilisation and Alexander, with all his childish ambitions and
his silly vanities, had performed a most valuable service. His Empire
did not long survive him. A number of ambitious generals divided the
territory among themselves. But they too remained faithful to the dream
of a great world brotherhood of Greek and Asiatic ideas and knowledge.

They maintained their independence until the Romans added western
Asia and Egypt to their other domains. The strange inheritance of this
Hellenistic civilisation (part Greek, part Persian, part Egyptian
and Babylonian) fell to the Roman conquerors. During the following
centuries, it got such a firm hold upon the Roman world, that we feel
its influence in our own lives this very day.


A SUMMARY

A SHORT SUMMARY OF CHAPTERS 1 to 20


THUS far, from the top of our high tower we have been looking eastward.
But from this time on, the history of Egypt and Mesopotamia is going
to grow less interesting and I must take you to study the western
landscape.

Before we do this, let us stop a moment and make clear to ourselves what
we have seen.

First of all I showed you prehistoric man--a creature very simple in his
habits and very unattractive in his manners. I told you how he was
the most defenceless of the many animals that roamed through the early
wilderness of the five continents, but being possessed of a larger and
better brain, he managed to hold his own.

Then came the glaciers and the many centuries of cold weather, and life
on this planet became so difficult that man was obliged to think three
times as hard as ever before if he wished to survive. Since, however,
that "wish to survive" was (and is) the mainspring which keeps every
living being going full tilt to the last gasp of its breath, the brain
of glacial man was set to work in all earnestness. Not only did these
hardy people manage to exist through the long cold spells which killed
many ferocious animals, but when the earth became warm and comfortable
once more, prehistoric man had learned a number of things which gave
him such great advantages over his less intelligent neighbors that the
danger of extinction (a very serious one during the first half million
years of man's residence upon this planet) became a very remote one.

I told you how these earliest ancestors of ours were slowly plodding
along when suddenly (and for reasons that are not well understood) the
people who lived in the valley of the Nile rushed ahead and almost over
night, created the first centre of civilisation.

Then I showed you Mesopotamia, "the land between the rivers," which was
the second great school of the human race. And I made you a map of the
little island bridges of the AEgean Sea, which carried the knowledge and
the science of the old east to the young west, where lived the Greeks.

Next I told you of an Indo-European tribe, called the Hellenes, who
thousands of years before had left the heart of Asia and who had in
the eleventh century before our era pushed their way into the rocky
peninsula of Greece and who, since then, have been known to us as the
Greeks. And I told you the story of the little Greek cities that
were really states, where the civilisation of old Egypt and Asia was
transfigured (that is a big word, but you can "figure out" what it
means) into something quite new, something that was much nobler and
finer than anything that had gone before.

When you look at the map you will see how by this time civilisation has
described a semi-circle. It begins in Egypt, and by way of Mesopotamia
and the AEgean Islands it moves westward until it reaches the European
continent. The first four thousand years, Egyptians and Babylonians and
Phoenicians and a large number of Semitic tribes (please remember that
the Jews were but one of a large number of Semitic peoples) have carried
the torch that was to illuminate the world. They now hand it over to the
