mine blinded and overwhelmed it.  From my infancy, even while I loved
you most, you awed me; and years, in deepening the impression, had made
it indelible.  I could not confront the thought of your knowing all, and
of meeting you after that knowledge.  And this fear, while it unnerved
me at some moments, at others only maddened my ferocity the more by the
stings of shame and self-contempt.

I fled from you: you pursued; you gained upon me; you remember how I was
preserved.  I dashed through the inebriated revellers who obstructed
your path, and reached my own lodging, which was close at hand; for the
same day on which I learned Isora's change of residence I changed my own
in order to be near it.  Did I feel joy for my escape? No: I could have
gnawed the very flesh from my bones in the agony of my shame.  "I could
brave," I said, "I could threat, I could offer violence to the woman who
rejected me, and yet I could not face the rival for whom I am scorned!"
At that moment a resolution flashed across my mind, exactly as if a
train of living fire had been driven before it.  Morton, I resolved to
murder you, and in that very hour!  A pistol lay on my table; I took it,
concealed it about my person, and repaired to the shelter of a large
portico, beside which I knew that you must pass to your own home in the
same street.  Scarcely three minutes had elapsed between the reaching my
house and the leaving it on this errand.  I knew, for I had heard swords
clash, that you would be detained some time in the street by the
rioters; I thought it probable also that you might still continue the
search for me; and I knew even that, had you hastened at once to your
home, you could scarcely have reached it before I reached my shelter.  I
hurried on; I arrived at the spot; I screened myself and awaited your
coming.  You came, borne in the arms of two men; others followed in the
rear; I saw your face destitute of the hue and aspect of life, and your
clothes streaming with blood.  I was horror-stricken.  I joined the
crowd; I learned that you had been stabbed, and it was feared mortally.

I did not return home: no, I went into the fields, and lay out all
night, and lifted up my heart to God, and wept aloud, and peace fell
upon me,--at least, what was peace compared to the tempestuous darkness
which had before reigned in my breast.  The sight of you, bleeding and
insensible,--you, against whom I had harboured a fratricide's
purpose,--had stricken, as it were, the weapon from my hand and the
madness from my mind.  I shuddered at what I had escaped; I blessed God
for my deliverance; and with the gratitude and the awe came repentance;
and repentance brought a resolution to fly, since I could not wrestle
with my mighty and dread temptation: the moment that resolution was
formed, it was as if an incubus were taken from my breast.  Even the
next morning I did not return home: my anxiety for you was such that I
forgot all caution; I went to your house myself; I saw one of your
servants to whom I was personally unknown.  I inquired respecting you,
and learned that your wound had not been mortal, and that the servant
had overheard one of the medical attendants say you were not even in
danger.

At this news I felt the serpent stir again within me, but I resolved to
crush it at the first: I would not even expose myself to the temptation
of passing by Isora's house; I went straight in search of my horse; I
mounted, and fled resolutely from the scene of my soul's peril.  "I will
go," I said, "to the home of our childhood; I will surround myself by
the mute tokens of the early love which my brother bore me; I will
think,--while penance and prayer cleanse my soul from its black
guilt,--I will think that I am also making a sacrifice to that brother."

I returned then to Devereux Court, and I resolved to forego all
hope--all persecution--of Isora!  My brother--my brother, my heart
yearns to you at this moment, even though years and distance, and, above
all, my own crimes, place a gulf between us which I may never pass; it
yearns to you when I think of those quiet shades, and the scenes where,
pure and unsullied, we wandered together, when life was all verdure and
freshness, and we dreamed not of what was to come!  If even now my heart
yearns to you, Morton, when I think of that home and those days, believe
that it had some softness and some mercy for you then.  Yes, I repeat, I
resolved to subdue my own emotions, and interpose no longer between
Isora and yourself.  Full of this determination, and utterly melted
towards you, I wrote you a long letter; such as we would have written to
each other in our first youth.  Two days after that letter all my new
purposes were swept away, and the whole soil of evil thoughts which they
had covered, not destroyed, rose again as the tide flowed from it, black
and rugged as before.

The very night on which I had writ that letter, came Montreuil secretly
to my chamber.  He had been accustomed to visit Gerald by stealth and at
sudden moments; and there was something almost supernatural in the
manner in which he seemed to pass from place to place, unmolested and
unseen.  He had now conceived a villanous project; and he had visited
Devereux Court in order to ascertain the likelihood of its success; he
there found that it was necessary to involve me in his scheme.  My
uncle's physician had said privately that Sir William could not live
many months longer.  Either from Gerald or my mother Montreuil learned
this fact; and he was resolved, if possible, that, the family estates
should not glide from all chance of his influence over them into your
possession.  Montreuil was literally as poor as the rigid law of his
order enjoins its disciples to be; all his schemes required the disposal
of large sums, and in no private source could he hope for such pecuniary
power as he was likely to find in the coffers of any member of our
family, yourself only excepted.  It was this man's boast to want, and
yet to command, all things; and he was now determined that if any craft,
resolution, or guilt could occasion the transfer of my uncle's wealth
from you to Gerald or to myself, it should not be wanting.

Now, then, he found the advantage of the dissensions with each other
which he had either sown or mellowed in our breasts.  He came to turn
those wrathful thoughts which when he last saw me I had expressed
towards you to the favor and success of his design.  He found my mind
strangely altered, but he affected to applaud the change.  He questioned
me respecting my uncle's health, and I told him what had really
occurred; namely, that my uncle had on the preceding day read over to me
some part of a will which he had just made, and in which the vast bulk
of his property was bequeathed to you.  At this news Montreuil must have
perceived at once the necessity of winning my consent to his project;
for, since I had seen the actual testament, no fraudulent transfer of
the property therein bequeathed could take place without my knowledge
that some fraud had been recurred to.  Montreuil knew me well; he knew
that avarice, that pleasure, that ambition, were powerless words with
me, producing no effect and affording no temptation: but he knew that
passion, jealousy, spiritual terrors, were the springs that moved every
part and nerve of my moral being.  The two former, then, he now put into
action; the last he held back in reserve.  He spoke to me no further
upon the subject he had then at heart; not a word further on the
disposition of the estates: he spoke to me only of Isora and of you; he
aroused, by hint and insinuation, the new sleep into which all those
emotions--the furies of the heart--had been for a moment lulled.  He
told me he had lately seen Isora; he dwelt glowingly on her beauty; he
commended my heroism in resigning her to a brother whose love for her
was little in comparison to mine, who had, in reality, never loved
/me/,--whose jests and irony had been levelled no less at myself than at
others.  He painted your person and your mind, in contrast to my own, in
colors so covertly depreciating as to irritate more and more that vanity
with which jealousy is so woven, and from which, perhaps (a Titan son of
so feeble a parent), it is born.  He hung lingeringly over all the
treasure that you would enjoy and that I--I, the first discoverer, had
so nobly and so generously relinquished.

"Relinquished!" I cried, "no, I was driven from it; I left it not while
a hope of possessing it remained."  The priest affected astonishment.
"How! was I sure of that?  I had, it is true, wooed Isora; but would
she, even if she had felt no preference for Morton, would she have
surrendered the heir to a princely wealth for the humble love of the
younger son?  I did not know women: with them all love was either
wantonness, custom, or pride; it was the last principle that swayed
Isora.  Had I sought to enlist it on my side?  Not at all.  Again, I had
only striven to detach Isora from Morton; had I ever attempted the much
easier task of detaching Morton from Isora?  No, never;" and Montreuil
repeated his panegyric on my generous surrender of my rights.  I
interrupted him; I had not surrendered: I never would surrender while a
hope remained.  But, where was that hope, and how was it to be
realized?  After much artful prelude, the priest explained.  He
proposed to use every means to array against your union with Isora all
motives of ambition, interest, and aggrandizement.  "I know Morton's
character," said he, "to its very depths.  His chief virtue is honour;
his chief principle is ambition.  He will not attempt to win this girl
otherwise than by marriage; for the very reasons that would induce most
men to attempt it, namely, her unfriended state, her poverty, her
confidence in him, and her love, or that semblance of love which he
believes to be the passion itself.  This virtue,--I call it so, though
it is none, for there is no virtue out of religion,--this virtue, then,
will place before him only two plans of conduct, either to marry her or
to forsake her.  Now, then, if we can bring his ambition, that great
lever of his conduct, in opposition to the first alternative, only the
last remains: I say that we /can/ employ that engine in your behalf;
leave it to me, and I will do so.  Then, Aubrey, in the moment of her
pique, her resentment, her outraged vanity, at being thus left, you
shall appear; not as you have hitherto done in menace and terror, but
soft, subdued, with looks all love, with vows all penitence; vindicating
all your past vehemence by the excess of your passion, and promising all
future tenderness by the influence of the same motive, the motive which
to a woman pardons every error and hallows every crime.  Then will she
contrast your love with your brother's: then will the scale fall from
her eyes; then will she see what hitherto she has been blinded to, that
your brother, to yourself, is a satyr to Hyperion; then will she blush
and falter, and hide her cheek in your bosom."  "Hold, hold!" I cried
"do with me what you will; counsel, and I will act!"


Here again the manuscript was defaced by a sudden burst of execration
upon Montreuil, followed by ravings that gradually blackened into the
most gloomy and incoherent outpourings of madness; at length the history
proceeded.


"You wrote to ask me to sound our uncle on the subject of your intended
marriage.  Montreuil drew up my answer; and I constrained myself,
despite my revived hatred to you, to transcribe its expressions of
affection.  My uncle wrote to you also; and we strengthened his dislike
to the step you had proposed, by hints from myself disrespectful to
Isora, and an anonymous communication dated from London and to the same
purport.  All this while I knew not that Isora had been in your house;
your answer to my letter seemed to imply that you would not disobey my
uncle.  Montreuil, who was still lurking in the neighbourhood and who at
night privately met or sought me, affected exultation at the incipient
success of his advice.  He pretended to receive perpetual intelligence
of your motions and conduct, and he informed me now that Isora had come
to your house on hearing of your wound; that you had not (agreeably,
Montreuil added to his view of your character) taken advantage of her
indiscretion; that immediately on receiving your uncle's and my own
letters, you had separated yourself from her; and, that though you still
visited her, it was apparently with a view of breaking off all
connection by gradual and gentle steps; at all events, you had taken no
measures towards marriage.  "Now, then," said Montreuil, "for one
finishing stroke, and the prize is yours.  Your uncle cannot, you find,
live long: could he but be persuaded to leave his property to Gerald or
to you, with only a trifling legacy (comparatively speaking) to Morton,
that worldly-minded and enterprising person would be utterly prevented
from marrying a penniless and unknown foreigner.  Nothing but his own
high prospects, so utterly above the necessity of fortune in a wife, can
excuse such a measure now, even to his own mind; if therefore, we can
effect this transfer of property, and in the meanwhile prevent Morton
from marrying, your rival is gone forever, and with his brilliant
advantages of wealth will also vanish his merits in the eyes of Isora.
Do not be startled at this thought: there is no crime in it; I, your
confessor, your tutor, the servant of the Church, am the last person to
counsel, to hint even, at what is criminal; but the end sanctifies all
means.  By transferring this vast property, you do not only insure your
object, but you advance the great cause of Kings, the Church, and of the
Religion which presides over both.  Wealth, in Morton's possession, will
be useless to this cause, perhaps pernicious: in your hands or in
Gerald's, it will be of inestimable service.  Wealth produced from the
public should be applied to the uses of the public, yea, even though a
petty injury to one individual be the price."

Thus, and in this manner, did Montreuil prepare my mind for the step he
meditated; but I was not yet ripe for it.  So inconsistent is guilt,
that I could commit murder, wrong, almost all villany that passion
dictated, but I was struck aghast by the thought of fraud.  Montreuil
perceived that I was not yet wholly his, and his next plan was to remove
me from a spot where I might check his measures.  He persuaded me to
travel for a few weeks.  "On your return," said he, "consider Isora
yours; meanwhile, let change of scene beguile suspense."  I was passive
in his hands, and I went whither he directed.

Let me be brief here on the black fraud that ensued.  Among the other
arts of Jean Desmarais, was that of copying exactly any handwriting.  He
was then in London, in your service.  Montrenil sent for him to come to
the neighbourhood of Devereux Court.  Meanwhile, the priest had procured
from the notary who had drawn up, and who now possessed, the will of my
unsuspecting uncle, that document.  The notary had been long known to,
and sometimes politically employed by, Montreuil, for he was
half-brother to that Oswald, whom I have before mentioned as the early
comrade of the priest and Desmarais.  This circumstance, it is probable,
first induced Montreuil to contemplate the plan of a substituted will.
Before Desmarais arrived, in order to copy those parts of the will which
my uncle's humour had led him to write in his own hand, you, alarmed by
a letter from my uncle, came to the Court, and on the same day Sir
William (taken ill the preceding evening) died.  Between that day and
the one on which the funeral occurred the will was copied by Desmarais;
only Gerald's name was substituted for yours, and the forty thousand
pounds left to him--a sum equal to that bestowed on myself--was cut down
into a legacy of twenty thousand pounds to you.  Less than this
Montreuil dared not insert as the bequest to you: and it is possible
that the same regard to probabilities prevented all mention of himself
in the substituted will.  This was all the alteration made.  My uncle's
writing was copied exactly; and, save the departure from his apparent
intentions in your favour, I believe not a particle in the effected
fraud was calculated to excite suspicion.  Immediately on the reading of
the will, Montreuil repaired to me and confessed what had taken place.

"Aubrey," he said, "I have done this for your sake partly; but I have
had a much higher end in view than even your happiness or my
affectionate wishes to promote it.  I live solely for one object,--the
aggrandizement of that holy order to which I belong; the schemes of that
order are devoted only to the interests of Heaven, and by serving them I
serve Heaven itself.  Aubrey, child of my adoption and of my earthly
hopes, those schemes require carnal instruments, and work, even through
Mammon, unto the goal of righteousness.  What I have done is just before
God and man.  I have wrested a weapon from the hand of an enemy, and
placed it in the hand of an ally.  I have not touched one atom of this
wealth, though, with the same ease with which I have transferred it from
Morton to Gerald, I might have made my own private fortune.  I have not
touched one atom of it; nor for you, whom I love more than any living
being, have I done what my heart dictated.  I might have caused the
inheritance to pass to you.  I have not done so.  Why?  Because then I
should have consulted a selfish desire at the expense of the interests
of mankind.  Gerald is fitter to be the tool those interests require
than you are.  Gerald I have made that tool.  You, too, I have spared
the pangs which your conscience, so peculiarly, so morbidly acute, might
suffer at being selected as the instrument of a seeming wrong to Morton.
All required of you is silence.  If your wants ever ask more than your
legacy, you have, as I have, a claim to that wealth which your pleasure
allows Gerald to possess.  Meanwhile, let us secure to you that treasure
dearer to you than gold."

If Montreuil did not quite blind me by speeches of this nature, my
engrossing, absorbing passion required little to make it cling to any
hope of its fruition.  I assented, therefore, though not without many
previous struggles, to Montreuil's project, or rather to its
concealment; nay, I wrote some time after, at his desire and his
dictation, a letter to you, stating feigned reasons for my uncle's
alteration of former intentions, and exonerating Gerald from all
connivance in that alteration, or abetment in the fraud you professed
that it was your open belief had been committed.  This was due to
Gerald; for at that time, and for aught I know, at the present, he was
perfectly unconscious by what means he had attained his fortune: he
believed that your love for Isora had given my uncle offence, and hence
your disinheritance; and Montreuil took effectual care to exasperate him
against you, by dwelling on the malice which your suspicions and your
proceedings against him so glaringly testified.  Whether Montreuil
really thought you would give over all intention of marrying Isora upon
your reverse of fortune, which is likely enough from his estimate of
your character; or whether he only wished by any means to obtain my
acquiescence in a measure important to his views, I know not, but he
never left me, nor ever ceased to sustain my fevered and unhallowed
hopes, from the hour in which he first communicated to me the fraudulent
substitution of the will till we repaired together to London.  This we
did not do so long as he could detain me in the country by assurances
that I should ruin all by appearing before Isora until you had entirely
deserted her.

Morton, hitherto I have written as if my veins were filled with water,
instead of the raging fire that flows through them until it reaches my
brain, and there it stops, and eats away all things,--even memory, that
once seemed eternal!  Now I feel as I approach the consummation
of--ha--of what--ay, of what?  Brother, did you ever, when you thought
yourself quite alone, at night, not a breath stirring,--did you ever
raise your eyes, and see exactly opposite to you a devil?--a dread
thing, that moves not, speaks not, but glares upon you with a fixed,
dead, unrelenting eye?--that thing is before me now and witnesses every
word I write.  But it deters me not! no, nor terrifies me.  I have said
that I would fulfil this task, and I have nearly done it; though at
times the gray cavern yawned, and I saw its rugged walls
stretch--stretch away, on either side, until they reached hell; and
there I beheld--but I will not tell you till we meet there!  Now I am
calm again: read on.

We could not discover Isora nor her home: perhaps the priest took care
that it should be so; for, at that time, what with his devilish whispers
and my own heart, I often scarcely knew what I was or what I desired;
and I sat for hours and gazed upon the air, and it seemed so soft and
still that I longed to make an opening in my forehead that it might
enter there, and so cool and quiet the dull, throbbing, scorching
anguish that lay like molten lead in my brain; at length we found the
house.  "To-morrow," said the Abbe, and he shed tears over me,--for
there were times when that hard man did feel,--"to-morrow, my child,
thou shalt see her; but be soft and calm."  To-morrow came; but
Montreuil was pale, paler than I had ever seen him, and he gazed upon me
and said, "Not to-day, Son, not to-day; she has gone out, and will not
return till nightfall."  My brother, the evening came, and with it came
Desmarais; he came in terror and alarm.  "The villain Oswald," he said,
"has betrayed all; he drew me aside and told me so.  'Hark ye, Jean,' he
whispered, 'hark ye: your master has my brother's written confession and
the real will; but I have provided for your safety, and if he pleases
it, for Montreuil's.  The packet is not to be opened till the seventh
day; fly before then.  But I know," added Desmarais, "where the packet
is placed;" and he took Montreuil aside, and for a while I heard not
what they said; but I did overhear Desmarais at last, and I learned that
it was your /bridal night/.

What felt I then?  The same tempestuous fury,--the same whirlwind and
storm of heart that I had felt before, at the mere anticipation of such
an event?  No; I felt a bright ray of joy flash through me.  Yes, joy;
but it was that joy which a conqueror feels when he knows his mortal foe
is in his power and when he dooms that enemy to death.  "They shall
perish, and on this night," I said inly.  "I have sworn it; I swore to
Isora that the bridal couch should be stained with blood, and I will
keep the oath!"  I approached the pair; they were discussing the means
for obtaining the packet.  Montreuil urged Desmarais to purloin it from
the place where you had deposited it, and then to abscond; but to this
plan Desmarais was vehemently opposed.  He insisted that there would be
no possible chance of his escape from a search so scrutinizing as that
which would necessarily ensue, and he evidently resolved not /alone/ to
incur the danger of the theft.  "The Count," said he, "saw that I was
present when he put away the packet.  Suspicion will fall solely on me.
Whither should I fly?  No: I will serve you with my talents, but not
with my life."  "Wretch," said Montreuil, "if that packet is opened, thy
life is already gone."  "Yes," said Desmarais; "but we may yet purloin
the papers, and throw the guilt upon some other quarter.  What if I
admit you when the Count is abroad?  What if you steal the packet, and
carry away other articles of more seeming value?  What, too, if you
wound me in the arm or the breast, and I coin some terrible tale of
robbers, and of my resistance, could we not manage then to throw
suspicion upon common housebreakers,--nay, could we not throw it upon
Oswald himself?  Let us silence that traitor by death, and who shall
contradict our tale?  No danger shall attend this plan.  I will give you
the key of the escritoire: the theft will not be the work of a moment."
Montreuil at first demurred to this proposal, but Desmarais was, I
repeat, resolved not to incur the danger of the theft alone; the stake
was great, and it was not in Montreuil's nature to shrink from peril,
when once it became necessary to confront it.  "Be it so," he said, at
last, "though the scheme is full of difficulty and of danger: be it so.
We have not a day to lose.  To-morrow the Count will place the document
in some place of greater safety, and unknown to us: the deed shall be
done to-night.  Procure the key of the escritoire; admit me this night;
I will steal disguised into the chamber; I will commit the act from
which you, who alone could commit it with safety, shrink.  Instruct me
exactly as to the place where the articles you speak of are placed.  I
will abstract them also.  See that if the Count wake, he has no weapon
at hand.  Wound yourself, as you say, in some place not dangerous to
life, and to-morrow, or within an hour after my escape, tell what tale
you will.  I will go, meanwhile, at once to Oswald; I will either bribe
his silence--ay, and his immediate absence from England--or he shall
die.  A death that secures our own self-preservation is excusable in the
reading of all law, divine or human."  I heard, but they deemed me
insensible: they had already begun to grow unheeding of my presence.
Montreuil saw me, and his countenance grew soft.  "I know all," I said,
as I caught his eye which looked on me in pity, "I know all: they are
married.  Enough!--with my hope ceases my love: care not for me."

Montreuil embraced and spoke to me in kindness and in praise.  He
assured me that you had kept your wedding so close a secret that he knew
it not, nor did even Desmarais, till the evening before,--till after he
had proposed that I should visit Isora that very day.  I know not, I
care not, whether he was sincere in this.  In whatever way one line in
the dread scroll of his conduct be read, the scroll was written in
guile, and in blood was it sealed.  I appeared not to notice Montreuil
or his accomplice any more.  The latter left the house first.  Montreuil
stole forth, as he thought, unobserved; he was masked, and in complete
disguise.  I, too, went forth.  I hastened to a shop where such things
were procured; I purchased a mask and cloak similar to the priest's.  I
had heard Montreuil agree with Desmarais that the door of the house
should be left ajar, in order to give greater facility to the escape of
the former; I repaired to the house in time to see Montreuil enter it.
A strange, sharp sort of cunning, which I had never known before, ran
through the dark confusion of my mind.  I waited for a minute, till it
was likely that Montreuil had gained your chamber; I then pushed open
the door, and ascended the stairs.  I met no one; the moonlight fell
around me, and its rays seemed to me like ghosts, pale and shrouded, and
gazing upon me with wan and lustreless eyes.  I know not how I found
your chamber, but it was the only one I entered.  I stood in the same
room with Isora and yourself: ye lay in sleep; Isora's face--O God!  I
know no more--no more of that night of horror--save that I fled from the
house reeking with blood,--a murderer,--and the murderer of Isora!

Then came a long, long dream.  I was in a sea of blood,--blood-red was
the sky, and one still, solitary star that gleamed far away with a
sickly and wan light was the only spot, above and around, which was not
of the same intolerable dye.  And I thought my eyelids were cut off, as
those of the Roman consul are said to have been, and I had nothing to
shield my eyes from that crimson light, and the rolling waters of that
