of her voice made me look full in her face, which was one deep blush,
"know that I am not insensible--"

I heard no more: my lips pressed themselves involuntarily to hers,--a
long, long kiss,--burning, intense, concentrating emotion, heart, soul,
all the rays of life's light into a single focus; and she tore herself
away from me,--and I was alone.



CHAPTER IX.

A DISCOVERY AND A DEPARTURE.

I HASTENED home after my eventful interview with Isora, and gave myself
up to tumultuous and wild conjecture. Aubrey sought me the next morning:
I narrated to him all that had occurred: he said little, but that little
enraged me, for it was contrary to the dictates of my own wishes. The
character of Morose in the "Silent Woman" is by no means an uncommon
one. Many men--certainly many lovers--would say with equal truth, always
provided they had equal candour, "All discourses but my own afflict
me; they seem harsh, impertinent, and irksome." Certainly I felt that
amiable sentiment most sincerely with regard to Aubrey. I left him
abruptly: a resolution possessed me. "I will see," said I, "this
Barnard; I will lie in wait for him; I will demand and obtain, though
it be by force, the secret which evidently subsists between him and this
exiled family."

Full of this idea, I drew my cloak round me, and repaired on foot to the
neighbourhood of the Spaniard's cottage. There was no place near it very
commodious for accommodation both of vigil and concealment. However, I
made a little hill, in a field opposite the house, my warder's station,
and, lying at full length on the ground, wrapt in my cloak, I trusted to
escape notice. The day passed: no visitor appeared. The next morning I
went from my own rooms, through the subterranean passage into the castle
cave, as the excavation I have before described was generally termed.
On the shore I saw Gerald by one of the small fishing-boats usually kept
there. I passed him with a sneer at his amusements, which were always
those of conflicts against fish or fowl. He answered me in the same
strain, as he threw his nets into the boat, and pushed out to sea. "How
is it that you go alone?" said I; "is there so much glory in the capture
of mackerel and dogfish that you will allow no one to share it?"

"There are other sports besides those for men," answered Gerald,
colouring indignantly: "my taste is confined to amusements in which he
is but a fool who seeks companionship; and if you could read character
better, my wise brother, you would know that the bold rover is ever less
idle and more fortunate than the speculative dreamer."

As Gerald said this, which he did with a significant emphasis, he rowed
vigorously across the water, and the little boat was soon half way to
the opposite islet. My eyes followed it musingly as it glided over the
waves, and my thoughts painfully revolved the words which Gerald had
uttered. "What can he mean?" said I, half aloud; "yet what matters it?
Perhaps some low amour, some village conquest, inspires him with that
becoming fulness of pride and vain-glory; joy be with so bold a rover!"
and I strode away along the beach towards my place of watch; once only I
turned to look at Gerald; he had then just touched the islet, which
was celebrated as much for the fishing it afforded as the smuggling it
protected.

I arrived at last at the hillock, and resumed my station. Time passed
on, till, at the dusk of evening, the Spaniard came out. He walked
slowly towards the town; I followed him at a distance. Just before he
reached the town, he turned off by a path which led to the beach. As the
evening was unusually fresh and chill, I felt convinced that some cause,
not wholly trivial, drew the Spaniard forth to brave it. My pride a
little revolted at the idea of following him; but I persuaded myself
that Isora's happiness, and perhaps her father's safety, depended on my
obtaining some knowledge of the character and designs of this Barnard,
who appeared to possess so dangerous an influence over both daughter and
sire; nor did I doubt but that the old man was now gone forth to meet
him. The times were those of mystery and of intrigue: the emissaries of
the House of Stuart were restlessly at work among all classes; many of
them, obscure and mean individuals, made their way the more dangerously
from their apparent insignificance. My uncle, a moderate Tory, was
opposed, though quietly and without vehemence, to the claims of the
banished House. Like Sedley, who became so stanch a revolutionist,
he had seen the Court of Charles II. and the character of that King's
brother too closely to feel much respect for either; but he thought it
indecorous to express opposition loudly against a party among whom were
many of his early friends; and the good old knight was too much attached
to private ties to be very much alive to public feeling. However, at
his well-filled board, conversation, generally, though displeasingly to
himself, turned upon politics, and I had there often listened, of
late, to dark hints of the danger to which we were exposed, and of the
restless machinations of the Jacobites. I did not, therefore, scruple to
suspect this Barnard of some plot against the existing state, and I did
it the more from observing that the Spaniard often spoke bitterly of the
English Court, which had rejected some claims he had imagined himself
entitled to make upon it; and that he was naturally of a temper
vehemently opposed to quiet and alive to enterprise. With this
impression, I deemed it fair to seize any opportunity of seeing, at
least, even if I could not question, the man whom the Spaniard himself
confessed to have state reasons for concealment; and my anxiety to
behold one whose very name could agitate Isora, and whose presence could
occasion the state in which I had found her, sharpened this desire into
the keenness of a passion.

While Alvarez descended to the beach, I kept the upper path, which wound
along the cliff. There was a spot where the rocks were rude and broken
into crags, and afforded me a place where, unseen, I could behold what
passed below. The first thing I beheld was a boat approaching rapidly
towards the shore; one man was seated in it; he reached the shore, and I
recognized Gerald. That was a dreadful moment. Alvarez now slowly joined
him; they remained together for nearly an hour. I saw Gerald give the
Spaniard a letter, which appeared to make the chief subject of their
conversation. At length they parted, with the signs rather of respect
than familiarity. Don Diego returned homeward, and Gerald re-entered the
boat. I watched its progress over the waves with feelings of a dark and
almost unutterable nature. "My enemy! my rival! ruiner of my hopes!--_my
brother_!--_my twin brother_!" I muttered bitterly between my ground
teeth.

The boat did not make to the open sea: it skulked along the shore, till
distance and shadow scarcely allowed me to trace the outline of Gerald's
figure. It then touched the beach, and I could just descry the dim shape
of another man enter; and Gerald, instead of returning homewards, pushed
out towards the islet. I spent the greater part of the night in the open
air. Wearied and exhausted by the furious indulgence of my passions,
I gained my room at length. There, however, as elsewhere, thought
succeeded to thought, and scheme to scheme. Should I speak to Gerald?
Should I confide in Alvarez? Should I renew my suit to Isora? If the
first, what could I hope to learn from my enemy? If the second, what
could I gain from the father, while the daughter remained averse to me?
If the third,--there my heart pointed, and the third scheme I resolved
to adopt.

But was I sure that Gerald was this Barnard? Might there not be some
hope that he was not? No, I could perceive none. Alvarez had never
spoken to me of acquaintance with any other Englishman than Barnard;
I had no reason to believe that he ever held converse with any other.
Would it not have been natural too, unless some powerful cause, such
as love to Isora, induced silence,--would it not have been natural that
Gerald should have mentioned his acquaintance with the Spaniard? Unless
some dark scheme, such as that which Barnard appeared to have in common
with Don Diego, commanded obscurity, would it have been likely that
Gerald should have met Alvarez alone,--at night,--on an unfrequented
spot? What that scheme _was_, I guessed not,--I cared not. All my
interest in the identity of Barnard with Gerald Devereux was that
derived from the power he seemed to possess over Isora. Here, too, at
once, was explained the pretended Barnard's desire of concealment, and
the vigilance with which it had been effected. It was so certain that
Gerald, if my rival, would seek to avoid me; it was so easy for him,
who could watch all my motions, to secure the power of doing so. Then
I remembered Gerald's character through the country as a gallant and a
general lover; and I closed my eyes as if to shut out the vision when
I recalled the beauty of his form contrasted with the comparative
plainness of my own.

"There is no hope," I repeated; and an insensibility, rather than sleep,
crept over me. Dreadful and fierce dreams peopled my slumbers; and, when
I started from them at a late hour the next day, I was unable to rise
from my bed: my agitation and my wanderings had terminated in a burning
fever. In four days, however, I recovered sufficiently to mount my
horse: I rode to the Spaniard's house; I found there only the woman who
had been Don Diego's solitary domestic. The morning before, Alvarez and
his daughter had departed, none knew for certain whither; but it was
supposed their destination was London. The woman gave me a note: it was
from Isora; it contained only these lines:


Forget me: we are now parted forever. As you value my peace of mind--of
happiness I do not speak--seek not to discover our next retreat. I
implore you to think no more of what has been; you are young, very
young. Life has a thousand paths for you; any one of them will lead you
from remembrance of me. Farewell, again and again!

        ISORA D'ALVAREZ.


With this note was another, in French, from Don Diego: it was colder and
more formal than I could have expected; it thanked me for my attentions
towards him; it regretted that he could not take leave of me in person,
and it enclosed the sum by the loan of which our acquaintance had
commenced.

"It is well!" said I, calmly, to myself, "it is well; I will forget
her:" and I rode instantly home. "But," I resumed in my soliloquy, "I
will yet strive to obtain confirmation to what perhaps needs it not.
I will yet strive to see if Gerald can deny the depth of his injuries
towards me; there will be at least some comfort in witnessing either his
defiance or his confusion."

Agreeably to this thought, I hastened to seek Gerald. I found him in
his apartment; I shut the door, and seating myself, with a smile thus
addressed him,--

"Dear Gerald, I have a favour to ask of you."

"What is it?"

"How long have you known a certain Mr. Barnard?" Gerald changed colour;
his voice faltered as he repeated the name "Barnard!"

"Yes," said I, with affected composure, "Barnard! a great friend of Don
Diego D'Alvarez."

"I perceive," said Gerald, collecting himself, "that you are in some
measure acquainted with my secret: how far it is known to you I cannot
guess; but I tell you, very fairly, that from me you will not increase
the sum of your knowledge."

When one is in a good sound rage, it is astonishing how calm one can be!
I was certainly somewhat amazed by Gerald's hardihood and assurance, but
I continued, with a smile,

"And Donna Isora, how long, if not very intrusive on your confidence,
have you known her?"

"I tell you," answered Gerald, doggedly, "that I will answer no
questions."

"You remember the old story," returned I, "of the two brothers, Eteocles
and Polynices, whose very ashes refused to mingle; faith, Gerald, our
love seems much of the same sort. I know not if our ashes will exhibit
so laudible an antipathy: but I think our hearts and hands will do so
while a spark of life animates them; yes, though our blood" (I added,
in a voice quivering with furious emotion) "prevents our contest by the
sword, it prevents not the hatred and the curses of the heart."

Gerald turned pale. "I do not understand you," he faltered out,--"I know
you abhor me; but why, why this excess of malice?"

I cast on him a look of bitter scorn, and turned from the room.

It is not pleasing to place before the reader these dark passages of
fraternal hatred: but in the record of all passions there is a moral;
and it is wise to see to how vast a sum the units of childish animosity
swell, when they are once brought into a heap, by some violent event,
and told over by the nice accuracy of Revenge.

But I long to pass from these scenes, and my history is about to glide
along others of more glittering and smiling aspect. Thank Heaven, I
write a tale, not only of love, but of a life; and that which I cannot
avoid I can at least condense.



CHAPTER X.

A VERY SHORT CHAPTER,--CONTAINING A VALET.

MY uncle for several weeks had flattered himself that I had quite
forgotten or foregone the desire of leaving Devereux Court for London.
Good easy man! he was not a little distressed when I renewed the subject
with redoubled firmness, and demanded an early period for that event.
He managed, however, still to protract the evil day. At one time it was
impossible to part with me, because the house was so full; at another
time it was cruel to leave him, when the house was so empty. Meanwhile,
a new change came over me. As the first shock of Isora's departure
passed away, I began to suspect the purity of her feelings towards
me. Might not Gerald--the beautiful, the stately, the glittering
Gerald--have been a successful wooer under the disguised name of
Barnard, and _hence_ Isora's confusion when that name was mentioned, and
hence the power which its possessor exercised over her?

This idea, once admitted, soon gained ground. It is true that Isora had
testified something of favourable feelings towards me; but this might
spring from coquetry or compassion. My love had been a boy's love,
founded upon beauty and coloured by romance. I had not investigated
the character of the object; and I had judged of the mind solely by the
face. I might easily have been deceived: I persuaded myself that I was.
Perhaps Gerald had provided their present retreat for sire and daughter;
perhaps they at this moment laughed over my rivalry and my folly.
Methought Gerald's lip wore a contemptuous curve when we met. "It shall
have no cause," I said, stung to the soul; "I will indeed forget this
woman, and yet, though in other ways, eclipse this rival. Pleasure,
ambition, the brilliancy of a court, the resources of wealth, invite me
to a thousand joys. I will not be deaf to the call. Meanwhile I will not
betray to Gerald, to any one, the scar of the wound I have received; and
I will mortify Gerald, by showing him that, handsome as he is, he shall
be forgotten in my presence!"

Agreeably to this exquisite resolution, I paid incessant court to the
numerous dames by whom my uncle's mansion was thronged; and I resolved
to prepare, among them, the reputation for gallantry and for wit which I
proposed to establish in town.

"You are greatly altered since your love," said Aubrey, one day to me,
"but not by your love. Own that I did right in dissuading you from its
indulgence!"

"Tell me!" said I, sinking my voice to a whisper, "do you think Gerald
was my rival?" and I recounted the causes of my suspicion.

Aubrey's countenance testified astonishment as he listened. "It is
strange, very strange," said he; "and the evidence of the boat is
almost conclusive; still I do not think it quite sufficient to leave no
loop-hole of doubt. But what matters it? you have conquered your love
now."

"Ay," I said, with a laugh, "I have conquered it, and I am now about
to find some other empress of the heart. What think you of the Lady
Hasselton?--a fair dame and a sprightly. I want nothing but her love to
be the most enviable of men, and a French _valet-de-chambre_ to be the
most irresistible."

"The former is easier to obtain than the latter, I fear," returned
Aubrey; "all places produce light dames, but the war makes a scarcity of
French valets."

"True," said I, "but I never thought of instituting a comparison between
their relative value. The Lady Hasselton, no disparagement to her
merits, is but one woman; but a French valet who knows his _metier_ arms
one for conquest over a thousand;" and I turned to the saloon.

Fate, which had destined to me the valuable affections of the Lady
Hasselton, granted me also, at a yet earlier period, the greater boon
of a French valet. About two or three weeks after this sapient
communication with Aubrey, the most charming person in the world
presented himself a candidate _pour le supreme bonheur de soigner
Monsieur le Comte_. Intelligence beamed in his eye; a modest assurance
reigned upon his brow; respect made his step vigilant as a zephyr's; and
his ruffles were the envy of the world!

I took him at a glance; and I presented to the admiring inmates of the
house a greater coxcomb than the Count Devereux in the ethereal person
of Jean Desmarais.



CHAPTER XI.

THE HERO ACQUITS HIMSELF HONOURABLY AS A COXCOMB.--A FINE LADY OF
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, AND A FASHIONABLE DIALOGUE; THE SUBSTANCE OF
FASHIONABLE DIALOGUE BEING IN ALL CENTURIES THE SAME.

"I AM thinking, Morton," said my uncle, "that if you are to go to town,
you should go in a style suitable to your rank. What say you to flying
along the road in my green and gold chariot? 'Sdeath! I'll make you
a present of it. Nay--no thanks; and you may have four of my black
Flanders mares to draw you."

"Now, my dear Sir William," cried Lady Hasselton, who, it may be
remembered, was the daughter of one of King Charles's Beauties, and who
alone shared the breakfast-room with my uncle and myself,--"now, my dear
Sir William, I think it would be a better plan to suffer the Count
to accompany us to town. We go next week. He shall have a seat in our
coach, help Lovell to pay our post-horses, protect us at inns, scold at
the drawers in the pretty oaths of the fashion, which are so innocent
that I will teach them to his Countship myself; and unless I am much
more frightful than my honoured mother, whose beauties you so gallantly
laud, I think you will own, Sir William, that this is better for your
nephew than doing solitary penance in your chariot of green and gold,
with a handkerchief tied over his head to keep away cold, and with no
more fanciful occupation than composing sonnets to the four Flanders
mares."

"'Sdeath, Madam, you inherit your mother's wit as well as beauty," cried
my uncle, with an impassioned air.

"And his Countship," said I, "will accept your invitation without asking
his uncle's leave."

"Come, that is bold for a gentleman of--let me see, thirteen--are you
not?"

"Really," answered I, "one learns to forget time so terribly in the
presence of Lady Hasselton that I do not remember even how long it has
existed for me."

"Bravo!" cried the knight, with a moistening eye; "you see, Madam, the
boy has not lived with his old uncle for nothing."

"I am lost in astonishment!" said the lady, glancing towards the
glass; "why, you will eclipse all our beaux at your first appearance;
but--but--Sir William--how green those glasses have become! Bless me,
there is something so contagious in the effects of the country that the
very mirrors grow verdant. But--Count--Count--where are you, Count? [I
was exactly opposite to the fair speaker.] Oh, there you are! Pray, do
you carry a little pocket-glass of the true quality about you? But, of
course you do; lend it me."

"I have not the glass you want, but I carry with me a mirror that
reflects your features much more faithfully."

"How! I protest I do not understand you!"

"The mirror is here!" said I, laying my hand to my heart.

"'Gad, I must kiss the boy!" cried my uncle, starting up.

"I have sworn," said I, fixing my eyes upon the lady,--"I have sworn
never to be kissed, even by women. You must pardon me, Uncle."

"I declare," cried the Lady Hasselton, flirting her fan, which was
somewhat smaller than the screen that one puts into a great hall, in
order to take off the discomfort of too large a room,--"I declare,
Count, there is a vast deal of originality about you. But tell me, Sir
William, where did your nephew acquire, at so early an age--eleven, you
say, he is--such a fund of agreeable assurance?"

"Nay, Madam, let the boy answer for himself."

"_Imprimis_, then," said I, playing with the ribbon of my
cane,--"_imprimis_, early study of the best authors,--Congreve and
Farquhar, Etherege and Rochester; secondly, the constant intercourse
of company which gives one the spleen so overpoweringly that despair
inspires one with boldness--to get rid of them; thirdly, the personal
example of Sir William Devereux; and, fourthly, the inspiration of
hope."

"Hope, sir?" said the Lady Hasselton, covering her face with her fan,
so as only to leave me a glimpse of the farthest patch upon her left
cheek,--"hope, sir?"

"Yes, the hope of being pleasing to you. Suffer me to add that the hope
has now become certainty."

"Upon my word, Count--"

"Nay, you cannot deny it; if one can once succeed in impudence, one is
irresistible."

"Sir William," cried Lady Hasselton, "you may give the Count your
chariot of green and gold, and your four Flanders mares, and send his
mother's maid with him. He shall not go with me."

"Cruel! and why?" said I.

"You are too"--the lady paused, and looked at me over her fan. She was
really very handsome--"you are too _old_, Count. You must be more than
nine."

"Pardon me," said I, "I _am_ nine,--a very mystical number nine is too,
and represents the Muses, who, you know, were always attendant upon
Venus--or you, which is the same thing; so you can no more dispense with
my company than you can with that of the Graces."

"Good morning, Sir William," cried the Lady Hasselton, rising.

I offered to hand her to the door; with great difficulty, for her
hoop was of the very newest enormity of circumference; I effected this
object. "Well, Count," said she, "I am glad to see you have brought so
much learning from school; make the best use of it while it lasts,
for your memory will not furnish you with a single simile out of the
mythology by the end of next winter."

"That would be a pity," said I, "for I intend having as many goddesses
as the heathens had, and I should like to worship them in a classical
fashion."

"Oh, the young reprobate!" said the beauty, tapping me with her fan.
"And pray, what other deities besides Venus do I resemble?"

"All!" said I,--"at least, all the celestial ones!"

Though half way through the door, the beauty extricated her hoop, and
drew back. "Bless me, the gods as well as the goddesses?"

"Certainly."

"You jest: tell me how."

"Nothing can be easier; you resemble Mercury because of your thefts."

"Thefts!"

"Ay; stolen hearts, and," added I, in a whisper, "glances; Jupiter,
partly because of your lightning, which you lock up in the said
glances,--principally because all things are subservient to you;
Neptune, because you are as changeable as the seas; Vulcan, because you
live among the flames you excite; and Mars, because--"

"You are so destructive," cried my uncle.

"Exactly so; and because," added I--as I shut the door upon the
beauty--"because, thanks to your hoop, you cover nine acres of ground."

"Ods fish, Morton," said my uncle, "you surprise me at times: one while
you are so reserved, at another so assured; to-day so brisk, to-morrow
so gloomy. Why now, Lady Hasselton (she is very comely, eh! faith, but
not comparable to her mother) told me, a week ago, that she, gave you up
in despair, that you were dull, past hoping for; and now, 'Gad, you had
a life in you that Sid himself could not have surpassed. How comes it,
Sir, eh?"

"Why, Uncle, you have explained the reason; it was exactly because she
said I was dull that I was resolved to convict her in an untruth."

"Well, now, there is some sense in that, boy; always contradict ill
report by personal merit. But what think you of her ladyship? 'Gad, you
know what old Bellair said of Emilia. 'Make much of her: she's one of
the best of your acquaintance. I like her countenance and behaviour.
Well, she has a modesty not i' this age, a-dad she has.' Applicable
enough; eh, boy?"

"'I know her value, Sir, and esteem her accordingly,'" answered I, out
of the same play, which by dint of long study I had got by heart. "But,
to confess the truth," added I, "I think you might have left out the
passage about her modesty."

"There, now; you young chaps are so censorious; why, 'sdeath, sir, you
don't think the worse of her virtue because of her wit?"

"Humph!"

"Ah, boy! when you are my age, you'll know that your demure cats are not
the best; and that reminds me of a little story; shall I tell it you,
child?"

"If it so please you, Sir."

"Zauns--where's my snuff-box?--oh, here it is. Well, Sir, you shall
have the whole thing, from beginning to end. Sedley and I were one day
conversing together about women. Sid was a very deep fellow in that
game: no passion you know; no love on his own side; nothing of the sort;
all done by rule and compass; knew women as well as dice, and calculated
the exact moment when his snares would catch them, according to the
principles of geometry. D----d clever fellow, faith; but a confounded
rascal: but let it go no further; mum's the word! must not slander the
dead; and 'tis only my suspicion, you know, after all. Poor fellow: I
don't think he was such a rascal; he gave a beggar an angel once,--well,
boy, have a pinch?--Well, so I said to Sir Charles, 'I think you will
lose the widow, after all,--'Gad I do.' 'Upon what principle of science,
Sir William?' said he. 'Why, faith, man, she is so modest, you see, and
has such a pretty way of blushing.' 'Hark ye, friend Devereux,' said Sir
Charles, smoothing his collar and mincing his words musically, as he
was wont to do,--'hark ye, friend Devereux, I will give you the whole
experience of my life in one maxim: I can answer for its being new, and
I think it is profound; and that maxim is--,' no, faith, Morton--no,
I can't tell it thee: it is villanous, and then it's so desperately
against all the sex."

"My dear uncle, don't tantalize me so: pray tell it me; it shall be a
secret."

"No, boy, no: it will corrupt thee; besides, it will do poor Sid's
memory no good. But, 'sdeath, it was a most wonderfully shrewd
saying,--i' faith, it was. But, zounds, Morton, I forgot to tell you
that I have had a letter from the Abbe to-day."

"Ha! and when does he return?"

"To-morrow, God willing!" said the knight, with a sigh.

"So soon, or rather after so long an absence! Well, I am glad of it. I
wish much to see him before I leave you."

"Indeed!" quoth my uncle; "you have an advantage over me, then! But, ods
fish, Morton, how is it that you grew so friendly with the priest before
his departure? He used to speak very suspiciously of thee formerly; and,
when I last saw him, he lauded thee to the skies."

"Why, the clergy of his faith have a habit of defending the strong and
crushing the weak, I believe; that's all. He once thought I was dull
enough to damn my fortune, and then he had some strange doubts for
my soul; now he thinks me wise enough to become prosperous, and it is
astonishing what a respect he has conceived for my principles."

"Ha! ha! ha!--you have a spice of your uncle's humour in you; and, 'Gad,
you have no small knowledge of the world, considering you have seen so
little of it."

A hit at the popish clergy was, in my good uncle's eyes, the exact acme
of wit and wisdom. We are always clever with those who imagine we think
as they do. To be shallow you must differ from people: to be profound
you must agree with them. "Why, Sir," answered the sage nephew, "you
forget that I have seen more of the world than many of twice my age.
Your house has been full of company ever since I have been in it, and
you set me to making observations on what I saw before I was thirteen.
And then, too, if one is reading books about real life, at the very time
one is mixing in it, it is astonishing how naturally one remarks and how
well one remembers."

"Especially if one has a genius for it,--eh, boy? And then too, you have
read my play; turned Horace's Satires into a lampoon upon the boys at
school; been regularly to assizes during the vacation; attended the
county balls, and been a most premature male coquette with the ladies.
Ods fish, boy! it is quite curious to see how the young sparks of the
present day get on with their lovemaking."

"Especially if one has a genius for it,--eh, sir?" said I.

"Besides, too," said my uncle, ironically, "you have had the Abbe's
instructions."

"Ay, and if the priests would communicate to their pupils their
experience in frailty, as well as in virtue, how wise they would make
us!"

"Ods fish! Morton, you are quite oracular. How got you that fancy of
priests?--by observation in life already?"

"No, Uncle: by observation in plays, which you tell me are the mirrors
of life; you remember what Lee says,--

        "''Tis thought
 That earth is more obliged to priests for bodies
 Than Heaven for souls.'"


And my uncle laughed, and called me a smart fellow.



CHAPTER XII.

THE ABBE'S RETURN.--A SWORD, AND A SOLILOQUY.

THE next evening, when I was sitting alone in my room, the Abbe
Montreuil suddenly entered. "Ah, is it you? welcome!" cried I. The
priest held out his arms, and embraced me in the most paternal manner.

"It is your friend," said he, "returned at last to bless and
congratulate you. Behold my success in your service," and the Abbe
produced a long leather case richly inlaid with gold.

"Faith, Abbe," said I, "am I to understand that this is a present for
your eldest pupil?"

"You are," said Montreuil, opening the case, and producing a sword. The
light fell upon the hilt, and I drew back, dazzled with its lustre; it
was covered with stones, apparently of the most costly value. Attached
to the hilt was a label of purple velvet, on which, in letters of gold,
was inscribed, "To the son of Marshal Devereux, the soldier of France,
and the friend of Louis XIV."

Before I recovered my surprise at this sight, the Abbe said: "It
was from the King's own hand that I received this sword, and I have
authority to inform you that if ever you wield it in the service of
France it will be accompanied by a post worthy of your name."

"The service of France!" I repeated; "why, at present that is the
service of an enemy."

"An enemy only to a _part_ of England!" said the Abbe, emphatically;
"perhaps I have overtures to you from other monarchs, and the friendship
