ponder well, and be assured that I will not decide from the rash
promptings of an ill-considered judgment."

Farther than this they could not then move the Earl; but Gurth was
pleased shortly afterwards to see him depart to Edith, whose fears,
from whatever source they sprang, would, he was certain, come in aid
of his own pleadings.

But as the Earl rode alone towards the once stately home of the
perished Roman, and entered at twilight the darkening forest-land, his
thoughts were less on Edith than on the Vala, with whom his ambition
had more and more connected his soul.  Perplexed by his doubts, and
left dim in the waning lights of human reason, never more
involuntarily did he fly to some guide to interpret the future, and
decide his path.

As if fate itself responded to the cry of his heart, he suddenly came
in sight of Hilda herself, gathering leaves from elm and ash amidst
the woodland.

He sprang from his horse and approached her.

"Hilda," said he, in a low but firm voice, "thou hast often told me
that the dead can advise the living.  Raise thou the Scin-laeca of the
hero of old--raise the Ghost, which mine eye, or my fancy, beheld
before, vast and dim by the silent bautastein, and I will stand by thy
side.  Fain would I know if thou hast deceived me and thyself; or if,
in truth, to man's guidance Heaven doth vouchsafe saga and rede from
those who have passed into the secret shores of Eternity."

"The dead," answered Hilda, "will not reveal themselves to eyes
uninitiate save at their own will, uncompelled by charm and rune.  To
me their forms can appear distinct through the airy flame; to me, duly
prepared by spells that purge the eye of the spirit, and loosen the
walls of the flesh.  I cannot say that what I see in the trance and
the travail of my soul, thou also wilt behold; or even when the vision
hath passed from my sight, and the voice from my ear, only memories,
confused and dim, of what I saw and heard, remain to guide the waking
and common life.  But thou shalt stand by my side while I invoke the
phantom, and hear and interpret the words which rush from my lips, and
the runes that take meaning from the sparks of the charmed fire.  I
knew ere thou camest, by the darkness and trouble of Edith's soul,
that some shade from the Ash-tree of Life had fallen upon thine."

Then Harold related what had passed, and placed before Hilda the
doubts that beset him.

The Prophetess listened with earnest attention; but her mind, when not
under its more mystic influences, being strongly biassed by its
natural courage and ambition, she saw at a glance all the advantages
towards securing the throne predestined to Harold, which might be
effected by his visit to the Norman court, and she held in too great
disdain both the worldly sense and the mystic reveries of the monkish
king (for the believer in Odin was naturally incredulous of the
visitation of the Christian saints) to attach much weight to his
dreary predictions.

The short reply she made was therefore not calculated to deter Harold
from the expedition in dispute.  But she deferred till the following
night, and to wisdom more dread than her own, the counsels that should
sway his decision.

With a strange satisfaction at the thought that he should, at least,
test personally the reality of those assumptions of preternatural
power which had of late coloured his resolves and oppressed his heart,
Harold then took leave of the Vala, who returned mechanically to her
employment; and, leading his horse by the reins, lowly continued his
musing way towards the green knoll and its heathen ruins.  But ere he
gained the hillock, and while his thoughtful eyes were bent on the
ground, he felt his arm seized tenderly--turned--and beheld Edith's
face full of unutterable and anxious love.

With that love, indeed, there was blended so much wistfulness, so much
fear, that Harold exclaimed:

"Soul of my soul, what hath chanced? what affects thee thus?"

"Hath no danger befallen thee?" asked Edith falteringly, and gazing on
his face with wistful, searching eyes.  "Danger! none, sweet
trembler," answered the Earl, evasively.

Edith dropped her eager looks, and clinging to his arm, drew him on
silently into the forest land.  She paused at last where the old
fantastic trees shut out the view of the ancient ruins; and when,
looking round, she saw not those grey gigantic shafts which mortal
hand seemed never to have piled together, she breathed more freely.

"Speak to me," then said Harold, bending his face to hers; "why this
silence?"

"Ah, Harold!" answered his betrothed, "thou knowest that ever since we
have loved one another, my existence hath been but a shadow of thine;
by some weird and strange mystery, which Hilda would explain by the
stars or the fates, that have made me a part of thee, I know by the
lightness or gloom of my own spirit when good or ill shall befall
thee.  How often, in thine absence, hath a joy suddenly broke upon me;
and I felt by that joy, as by the smile of a good angel, that thou
hast passed safe through some peril, or triumphed over some foe!  And
now thou askest me why I am so sad;--I can only answer thee by saying,
that the sadness is cast upon me by some thunder gloom on thine own
destiny."

Harold had sought Edith to speak of his meditated journey, but seeing
her dejection he did not dare; so he drew her to his breast, and chid
her soothingly for her vain apprehensions.  But Edith would not be
comforted; there seemed something weighing on her mind and struggling
to her lips, not accounted for merely by sympathetic forebodings; and
at length, as he pressed her to tell all, she gathered courage and
spoke:

"Do not mock me," she said, "but what secret, whether of vain folly or
of meaning fate, should I hold from thee?  All this day I struggled in
vain against the heaviness of my forebodings.  How I hailed the sight
of Gurth thy brother!  I besought him to seek thee--thou hast seen
him."

"I have!" said Harold.  "But thou wert about to tell me of something
more than this dejection."

"Well," resumed Edith, "after Gurth left me, my feet sought
involuntarily the hill on which we have met so often.  I sate down
near the old tomb, a strange weariness crept on my eyes, and a sleep
that seemed not wholly sleep fell over me.  I struggled against it, as
if conscious of some coming terror; and as I struggled, and ere I
slept, Harold,--yes, ere I slept,--I saw distinctly a pale and
glimmering figure rise from the Saxon's grave.  I saw--I see it still!
Oh, that livid front, those glassy eyes!"

"The figure of a warrior?" said Harold, startled.

"Of a warrior, armed as in the ancient days, armed like the warrior
that Hilda's maids are working for thy banner.  I saw it; and in one
hand it held a spear, and in the other a crown."

"A crown!--Say on, say on."

"I saw no more; sleep, in spite of myself, fell on me, a sleep full of
confused and painful--rapid and shapeless images, still at last this
dream rose clear.  I beheld a bright and starry shape, that seemed as
a spirit, yet wore thine aspect, standing on a rock; and an angry
torrent rolled between the rock and the dry safe land.  The waves
began to invade the rock, and the spirit unfurled its wings as to
flee.  And then foul things climbed up from the slime of the rock, and
descended from the mists of the troubled skies, and they coiled round
the wings and clogged them."

"Then a voice cried in my ear,--'Seest thou not on the perilous rock
the Soul of Harold the Brave?--seest thou not that the waters engulf
it, if the wings fail to flee?  Up, Truth, whose strength is in
purity, whose image is woman, and aid the soul of the brave!'  I
sought to spring to thy side; but I was powerless, and behold, close
beside me, through my sleep as through a veil, appeared the shafts of
