was so innately chaste and pure, that she knew not the nature of the
admiration she excited; but the admiration pleased her as it pleases
some young child; she was vain then, but it was an infant's vanity, not
a woman's. And thus, from innocence itself, there was a fearlessness, a
freedom, a something endearing and familiar in her manner, which might
have turned a wiser head than Marmaduke Nevile's. And this the more,
because, while liking her young guest, confiding in him, raised in her
own esteem by his gallantry, enjoying that intercourse of youth with
youth so unfamiliar to her, and surrendering herself the more to its
charm from the joy that animated her spirits, in seeing that her father
had forgotten his humiliation, and returned to his wonted labours,--she
yet knew not for the handsome Nevile one sentiment that approached to
love. Her mind was so superior to his own, that she felt almost as if
older in years, and in their talk her rosy lips preached to him in grave
advice.

On the landing, by Marmaduke's chamber, there was a large oriel casement
jutting from the wall. It was only glazed at the upper part, and that
most imperfectly, the lower part being closed at night or in inclement
weather with rude shutters. The recess formed by this comfortless
casement answered, therefore, the purpose of a balcony; it commanded
a full view of the vicinity without, and gave to those who might be
passing by the power also of indulging their own curiosity by a view of
the interior.

Whenever he lost sight of Sibyll, and had grown weary of the peacock,
this spot was Marmaduke's favourite haunt. It diverted him, poor youth,
to look out of the window upon the livelier world beyond. The place, it
is true, was ordinarily deserted, but still the spires and turrets of
London were always discernible,--and they were something.

Accordingly, in this embrasure stood Marmaduke, when one morning,
Sibyll, coming from her father's room, joined him.

"And what, Master Nevile," said Sibyll, with a malicious yet charming
smile, "what claimed thy meditations? Some misgiving as to the trimming
of thy tunic, or the length of thy shoon?"

"Nay," returned Marmaduke, gravely, "such thoughts, though not without
their importance in the mind of a gentleman, who would not that his
ignorance of court delicacies should commit him to the japes of his
equals, were not at that moment uppermost. I was thinking--"

"Of those mastiffs, quarrelling for a bone. Avow it."

"By our Lady, I saw them not, but now I look, they are brave dogs. Ha!
seest thou how gallantly each fronts the other, the hair bristling, the
eyes fixed, the tail on end, the fangs glistening? Now the lesser one
moves slowly round and round the bigger, who, mind you, Mistress
Sibyll, is no dullard, but moves, too, quick as thought, not to be
taken unawares. Ha! that is a brave spring! Heigh, dogs, Neigh! a good
sight!--it makes the blood warm! The little one hath him by the throat!"

"Alack," said Sibyll, turning away her eyes, "can you find pleasure in
seeing two poor brutes mangle each other for a bone?"

"By Saint Dunstan! doth it matter what may be the cause of quarrel, so
long as dog or man bears himself bravely, with a due sense of honour and
derring-do? See! the big one is up again. Ah, foul fall the butcher, who
drives them away! Those seely mechanics know not the joyaunce of fair
fighting to gentle and to hound. For a hound, mark you, hath nothing
mechanical in his nature. He is a gentleman all over,--brave against
equal and stranger, forbearing to the small and defenceless, true in
poverty and need where he loveth, stern and ruthless where he hateth,
and despising thieves, hildings, and the vulgar as much as e'er a gold
spur in King Edward's court! Oh, certes, your best gentleman is the best
hound!"

"You moralize to-day; and I know not how to gainsay you," returned
Sibyll, as the dogs, reluctantly beaten off, retired each from each,
snarling and reluctant, while a small black cur, that had hitherto sat
unobserved at the door of a small hostelrie, now coolly approached and
dragged off the bone of contention. "But what sayst thou now? See! see!
the patient mongrel carries off the bone from the gentleman-hounds. Is
that the way of the world?"

"Pardie! it is a naught world, if so, and much changed from the time of
our fathers, the Normans. But these Saxons are getting uppermost again,
and the yard measure, I fear me, is more potent in these holiday times
than the mace or the battle-axe." The Nevile paused, sighed, and changed
the subject: "This house of thine must have been a stately pile in its
day. I see but one side of the quadrangle is left, though it be easy to
trace where the other three have stood."

"And you may see their stones and their fittings in the butcher's and
baker's stalls over the way," replied Sibyll.

"Ay!" said the Nevile, "the parings of the gentry begin to be the wealth
of the varlets."

"Little ought we to pine at that," returned Sibyll, "if the varlets were
but gentle with our poverty; but they loathe the humbled fortunes on
which they rise, and while slaves to the rich, are tyrants to the poor."

This was said so sadly, that the Nevile felt his eyes overflow; and the
humble dress of the girl, the melancholy ridges which evinced the site
of a noble house, now shrunk into a dismal ruin, the remembrance of the
pastime-ground, the insults of the crowd, and the broken gittern, all
conspired to move his compassion, and to give force to yet more tender
emotions.

"Ah," he said suddenly, and with a quick faint blush over his handsome
and manly countenance,--"ah, fair maid--fair Sibyll--God grant that I
may win something of gold and fortune amidst yonder towers, on which the
sun shines so cheerly. God grant it, not for my sake,--not for mine; but
that I may have something besides a true heart and a stainless name to
lay at thy feet. Oh, Sibyll! By this hand, by my father's soul, I love
thee, Sibyll! Have I not said it before? Well, hear me now,--I love
thee!"

As he spoke, he clasped her hand in his own, and she suffered it for one
instant to rest in his. Then withdrawing it, and meeting his enamoured
eyes with a strange sadness in her own darker, deeper, and more
intelligent orbs, she said,--

"I thank thee,--thank thee for the honour of such kind thoughts; and
frankly I answer, as thou hast frankly spoken. It was sweet to me, who
have known little in life not hard and bitter,--sweet to wish I had a
brother like thee, and, as a brother, I can love and pray for thee.
But ask not more, Marmaduke. I have aims in life which forbid all other
love."

"Art thou too aspiring for one who has his spurs to win?"

"Not so; but listen. My mother's lessons and my own heart have made my
poor father the first end and object of all things on earth to me. I
live to protect him, work for him, honour him; and for the rest, I have
thoughts thou canst not know, an ambition thou canst not feel. Nay," she
added, with that delightful smile which chased away the graver thought
which had before saddened her aspect, "what would thy sober friend
Master Alwyn say to thee, if he heard thou hadst courted the wizard's
daughter?"

"By my faith," exclaimed Marmaduke, "thou art a very April,--smiles
and clouds in a breath! If what thou despisest in me be my want of
bookcraft, and such like, by my halidame I will turn scholar for thy
sake; and--"

Here, as he had again taken Sibyll's hand, with the passionate ardour of
his bold nature, not to be lightly daunted by a maiden's first "No," a
sudden shrill, wild burst of laughter, accompanied with a gusty fit
of unmelodious music from the street below, made both maiden and youth
start, and turn their eyes; there, weaving their immodest dance, tawdry
in their tinsel attire, their naked arms glancing above their heads, as
they waved on high their instruments, went the timbrel-girls.

"Ha, ha!" cried their leader, "see the gallant and the witch-leman! The
glamour has done its work! Foul is fair! foul is fair! and the devil
will have his own!"

But these creatures, whose bold license the ancient chronicler records,
were rarely seen alone. They haunted parties of pomp and pleasure;
they linked together the extremes of life,--the grotesque Chorus that
introduced the terrible truth of foul vice and abandoned wretchedness
in the midst of the world's holiday and pageant. So now, as they wheeled
into the silent, squalid street, they heralded a goodly company of dames
and cavaliers on horseback, who were passing through the neighbouring
plains into the park of Marybone to enjoy the sport of falconry. The
splendid dresses of this procession, and the grave and measured dignity
with which it swept along, contrasted forcibly with the wild movements
and disorderly mirth of the timbrel-players. These last darted round
and round the riders, holding out their instruments for largess, and
retorting, with laugh and gibe, the disdainful look or sharp rebuke with
which their salutations were mostly received.

Suddenly, as the company, two by two, paced up the street, Sibyll
uttered a faint exclamation, and strove to snatch her hand from the
Nevile's grasp. Her eye rested upon one of the horsemen, who rode last,
and who seemed in earnest conversation with a dame, who, though scarcely
in her first youth, excelled all her fair companions in beauty of face
and grace of horsemanship, as well as in the costly equipments of the
white barb that caracoled beneath her easy hand. At the same moment the
horseman looked up and gazed steadily at Sibyll, whose countenance
grew pale, and flushed, in a breath. His eye then glanced rapidly at
Marmaduke; a half-smile passed his pale, firm lips; he slightly raised
the plumed cap from his brow, inclined gravely to Sibyll, and, turning
once more to his companion, appeared to answer some question she
addressed to him as to the object of his salutation, for her look,
which was proud, keen, and lofty, was raised to Sibyll, and then dropped
somewhat disdainfully, as she listened to the words addressed her by the
cavalier.

The lynx eyes of the tymbesteres had seen the recognition; and their
leader, laying her bold hand on the embossed bridle of the horseman,
exclaimed, in a voice shrill and loud enough to be heard in the balcony
above, "Largess! noble lord, largess! for the sake of the lady thou
lovest best!"

The fair equestrian turned away her head at these words; the nobleman
watched her a moment, and dropped some coins into the timbrel.

"Ha, ha!" cried the tymbestere, pointing her long arm to Sibyll, and
springing towards the balcony,--

                "The cushat would mate
                 Above her state,
     And she flutters her wings round the falcon's beak;
                 But death to the dove
                 Is the falcon's love!
     Oh, sharp is the kiss of the falcon's beak!"

Before this rude song was ended, Sibyll had vanished from the place;
the cavalcade had disappeared. The timbrel-players, without deigning to
notice Marmaduke, darted elsewhere to ply their discordant trade, and
the Nevile, crossing himself devoutly, muttered, "Jesu defend us! Those
she Will-o'-the-wisps are eno' to scare all the blood out of one's body.
What--a murrain on them!--do they portend, flitting round and round, and
skirting off, as if the devil's broomstick was behind them! By the Mass!
they have frighted away the damozel, and I am not sorry for it. They
have left me small heart for the part of Sir Launval."

His meditations were broken off by the sudden sight of Nicholas Alwyn,
mounted on a small palfrey, and followed by a sturdy groom on horseback,
leading a steed handsomely caparisoned. In another moment, Marmaduke had
descended, opened the door, and drawn Alwyn into the hall.




CHAPTER IX. MASTER MARMADUKE NEVILE LEAVES THE WIZARD'S HOUSE FOR THE
GREAT WORLD.

"Right glad am I," said Nicholas, "to see you so stout and hearty, for
I am the bearer of good news. Though I have been away, I have not
forgotten you; and it so chanced that I went yesterday to attend my
Lord of Warwick with some nowches [buckles and other ornaments] and
knackeries, that he takes out as gifts and exemplars of English work.
They were indifferently well wrought, specially a chevesail, of which
the--"

"Spare me the fashion of thy mechanicals, and come to the point,"
interrupted Marmaduke, impatiently.

"Pardon me, Master Nevile. I interrupt thee not when thou talkest of
bassinets and hauberks,--every cobbler to his last. But, as thou sayest,
to the point: the stout earl, while scanning my workmanship, for in much
the chevesail was mine, was pleased to speak graciously of my skill with
the bow, of which he had heard; and he then turned to thyself, of whom
my Lord Montagu had already made disparaging mention. When I told the
earl somewhat more about thy qualities and disposings, and when I spoke
of thy desire to serve him, and the letter of which thou art the bearer,
his black brows smoothed mighty graciously, and he bade me tell thee to
come to him this afternoon, and he would judge of thee with his own eyes
and ears. Wherefore I have ordered the craftsman to have all thy gauds
and gear ready at thine hostelrie, and I have engaged thee henchmen and
horses for thy fitting appearance. Be quick: time and the great wait for
no man. So take whatever thou needest for present want from thy mails,
and I will send a porter for the rest ere sunset."

"But the gittern for the damozel?"

"I have provided that for thee, as is meet." And Nicholas, stepping
back, eased the groom of a case which contained a gittern, whose
workmanship and ornaments delighted the Nevile.

"It is of my lord the young Duke of Gloucester's own musical-vendor; and
the duke, though a lad yet, is a notable judge of all appertaining to
the gentle craft. [For Richard III.'s love of music, and patronage of
musicians and minstrels, see the discriminating character of that prince
in Sharon Turner's "History of England," vol. IV. p. 66.] So despatch,
and away!"

Marmaduke retired to his chamber, and Nicholas, after a moment spent in
silent thought, searched the room for the hand-bell, which then made the
mode of communication between the master and domestics. Not finding this
necessary luxury, he contrived at last to make Madge hear his voice
from her subterranean retreat; and on her arrival, sent her in quest of
Sibyll.

The answer he received was, that Mistress Sibyll was ill, and unable to
see him. Alwyn looked disconcerted at this intelligence, but, drawing
from his girdle a small gipsire, richly broidered, he prayed Madge to
deliver it to her young mistress, and inform her that it was the fruit
of the commission with which she had honoured him.

"It is passing strange," said he, pacing the hall alone,--"passing
strange, that the poor child should have taken such hold on me. After
all, she would be a bad wife for a plain man like me. Tush! that is the
trader's thought all over. Have I brought no fresher feeling out of my
fair village-green? Would it not be sweet to work for her, and rise in
life, with her by my side? And these girls of the city, so prim and so
brainless!--as well marry a painted puppet. Sibyll! Am I dement? Stark
wode? What have I to do with girls and marriage? Humph! I marvel what
Marmaduke still thinks of her,--and she of him."

While Alwyn thus soliloquized, the Nevile having hastily arranged his
dress, and laden himself with the moneys his mails contained, summoned
old Madge to receive his largess, and to conduct him to Warner's
chamber, in order to proffer his farewell.

With somewhat of a timid step he followed the old woman (who kept
muttering thanks and benedicites as she eyed the coin in her palm) up
the ragged stairs, and for the first time knocked at the door of the
student's sanctuary. No answer came. "Eh, sir! you must enter," said
Madge; "an' you fired a bombard under his ear he would not heed you."
So, suiting the action to the word, she threw open the door, and closed
it behind him, as Marmaduke entered.

The room was filled with smoke, through which mirky atmosphere the clear
red light of the burning charcoal peered out steadily like a Cyclop's
eye. A small, but heaving, regular, labouring, continuous sound, as of
a fairy hammer, smote the young man's ear. But as his gaze, accustoming
itself to the atmosphere, searched around, he could not perceive what
was its cause. Adam Warner was standing in the middle of the room, his
arms folded, and contemplating something at a little distance, which
Marmaduke could not accurately distinguish. The youth took courage, and
approached. "Honoured mine host," said he, "I thank thee for
hospitality and kindness, I crave pardon for disturbing thee in thy
incanta--ehem!--thy--thy studies, and I come to bid thee farewell."

Adam turned round with a puzzled, absent air, as if scarcely recognizing
his guest; at length, as his recollection slowly came back to him, he
smiled graciously, and said: "Good youth, thou art richly welcome to
what little it was in my power to do for thee. Peradventure a time may
come when they who seek the roof of Adam Warner may find less homely
cheer, a less rugged habitation,--for look you!" he exclaimed suddenly,
with a burst of irrepressible enthusiasm--and laying his hand on
Nevile's arm, as, through all the smoke and grime that obscured his
face, flashed the ardent soul of the triumphant Inventor,--"look you!
since you have been in this house, one of my great objects is well-nigh
matured,--achieved. Come hither," and he dragged the wondering Marmaduke
to his model, or Eureka, as Adam had fondly named his contrivance. The
Nevile then perceived that it was from the interior of this machine that
the sound which had startled him arose; to his eye the THING was uncouth
and hideous; from the jaws of an iron serpent, that, wreathing round it,
rose on high with erect crest, gushed a rapid volume of black smoke,
and a damp spray fell around. A column of iron in the centre kept in
perpetual and regular motion, rising and sinking successively, as the
whole mechanism within seemed alive with noise and action.

"The Syracusan asked an inch of earth, beyond the earth, to move the
earth," said Adam; "I stand in the world, and lo! with this engine the
world shall one day be moved."

"Holy Mother!" faltered Marmaduke; "I pray thee, dread sir, to ponder
well ere thou attemptest any such sports with the habitation in which
every woman's son is so concerned. Bethink thee, that if in moving the
world thou shouldst make any mistake, it would--"

"Now stand there and attend," interrupted Adam, who had not heard one
word of this judicious exhortation.

"Pardon me, terrible sir!" exclaimed Marmaduke, in great trepidation,
and retreating rapidly to the door; "but I have heard that the fiends
are mighty malignant to all lookers-on not initiated."

While he spoke, fast gushed the smoke, heavily heaved the fairy hammers,
up and down, down and up, sank or rose the column, with its sullen
sound. The young man's heart sank to the soles of his feet.

"Indeed and in truth," he stammered out, "I am but a dolt in these
matters; I wish thee all success compatible with the weal of a
Christian, and bid thee, in sad humility, good day:" and he added, in a
whisper--"the Lord's forgiveness! Amen!"

Marmaduke then fairly rushed through the open door, and hurried out of
the chamber as fast as possible.

He breathed more freely as he descended the stairs. "Before I would
call that gray carle my father, or his child my wife, may I feel all
the hammers of the elves and sprites he keeps tortured within that
ugly little prison-house playing a death's march on my body! Holy Saint
Dunstan, the timbrel-girls came in time! They say these wizards always
have fair daughters, and their love can be no blessing!"

As he thus muttered, the door of Sibyll's chamber opened, and she stood
before him at the threshold. Her countenance was very pale, and bore
evidence of weeping. There was a silence on both sides, which the girl
was the first to break.

"So, Madge tells me thou art about to leave us?"

"Yes, gentle maiden! I--I--that is, my Lord of Warwick has summoned me.
I wish and pray for all blessings on thee! and--and--if ever it be mine
to serve or aid thee, it will be--that is--verily, my tongue falters,
but my heart--that is--fare thee well, maiden! Would thou hadst a less
wise father; and so may the saints (Saint Anthony especially, whom the
Evil One was parlous afraid of) guard and keep thee!"

With this strange and incoherent address, Marmaduke left the maiden
standing by the threshold of her miserable chamber. Hurrying into the
hall, he summoned Alwyn from his meditations, and, giving the gittern
to Madge, with an injunction to render it to her mistress, with his
greeting and service, he vaulted lightly on his steed; the steady and
more sober Alwyn mounted his palfrey with slow care and due caution.
As the air of spring waved the fair locks of the young cavalier, as the
good horse caracoled under his lithesome weight, his natural temper of
mind, hardy, healthful, joyous, and world-awake, returned to him. The
image of Sibyll and her strange father fled from his thoughts like
sickly dreams.




BOOK II. THE KING'S COURT.




CHAPTER I. EARL WARWICK THE KING-MAKER.

The young men entered the Strand, which, thanks to the profits of a
toll-bar, was a passable road for equestrians, studded towards the
river, as we have before observed, with stately and half-fortified
mansions; while on the opposite side, here and there, were straggling
houses of a humbler kind,--the mediaeval villas of merchant and trader
(for, from the earliest period since the Conquest, the Londoners had
delight in such retreats), surrounded with blossoming orchards, [On
all sides, without the suburbs, are the citizens' gardens and orchards,
etc.--FITZSTEPHEN.] and adorned in front with the fleur-de-lis, emblem
of the vain victories of renowned Agincourt. But by far the greater
portion of the road northward stretched, unbuilt upon, towards a
fair chain of fields and meadows, refreshed by many brooks, "turning
water-mills with a pleasant noise." High rose, on the thoroughfare,
the famous Cross, at which "the Judges Itinerant whilome sate, without
London." [Stowe.] There, hallowed and solitary, stood the inn for the
penitent pilgrims, who sought "the murmuring runnels" of St. Clement's
healing well; for in this neighbourhood, even from the age of the Roman,
springs of crystal wave and salubrious virtue received the homage of
credulous disease. Through the gloomy arches of the Temple Gate and
Lud, our horsemen wound their way, and finally arrived in safety at
Marmaduke's hostelrie in the East Chepe. Here Marmaduke found the
decorators of his comely person already assembled. The simpler yet more
manly fashions he had taken from the provinces were now exchanged for an
attire worthy the kinsman of the great minister of a court unparalleled,
since the reign of William the Red King, for extravagant gorgeousness of
dress. His corset was of the finest cloth, sown with seed pearls; above
it the lawn shirt, worn without collar, partially appeared, fringed
with gold; over this was loosely hung a super-tunic of crimson sarcenet,
slashed and pounced with a profusion of fringes. His velvet cap,
turned up at the sides, extended in a point far over the forehead. His
hose--under which appellation is to be understood what serves us of the
modern day both for stockings and pantaloons--were of white cloth; and
his shoes, very narrow, were curiously carved into chequer work at the
instep, and tied with bobbins of gold thread, turning up like skates
at the extremity, three inches in length. His dagger was suspended by a
slight silver-gilt chain, and his girdle contained a large gipsire, or
pouch, of embossed leather, richly gilt.

And this dress, marvellous as it seemed to the Nevile, the tailor
gravely assured him was far under the mark of the highest fashion,
and that an' the noble youth had been a knight, the shoes would have
stretched at least three inches farther over the natural length of the
feet, the placard have shone with jewels, and the tunic luxuriated in
flowers of damacene. Even as it was, however, Marmaduke felt a natural
diffidence of his habiliments, which cost him a round third of his
whole capital; and no bride ever unveiled herself with more shamefaced
bashfulness than did Marmaduke Nevile experience when he remounted his
horse, and, taking leave of his foster-brother, bent his way to Warwick
Lane, where the earl lodged.

The narrow streets were, however, crowded with equestrians whose dress
eclipsed his own, some bending their way to the Tower, some to the
palaces of the Flete. Carriages there were none, and only twice he
encountered the huge litters, in which some aged prelate or some
high-born dame veiled greatness from the day. But the frequent vistas
to the river gave glimpses of the gay boats and barges that crowded the
Thames, which was then the principal thoroughfare for every class, but
more especially the noble. The ways were fortunately dry and clean for
London, though occasionally deep holes and furrows in the road menaced
perils to the unwary horseman. The streets themselves might well
disappoint in splendour the stranger's eye; for although, viewed at a
distance, ancient London was incalculably more picturesque and stately
than the modern, yet when fairly in its tortuous labyrinths, it seemed
to those who had improved the taste by travel the meanest and the
mirkiest capital of Christendom. The streets were marvellously narrow,
the upper stories, chiefly of wood, projecting far over the lower, which
were formed of mud and plaster. The shops were pitiful booths, and the
'prentices standing at the entrance bare-headed and cap in hand, and
lining the passages, as the old French writer avers, comme idoles,
[Perlin] kept up an eternal din with their clamorous invitations,
often varied by pert witticisms on some churlish passenger, or loud
vituperations of each other. The whole ancient family of the London
criers were in full bay. Scarcely had Marmaduke's ears recovered
the shock of "Hot peascods,--all hot!" than they were saluted with
"Mackerel!" "Sheep's feet! hot sheep's feet!" At the smaller taverns
stood the inviting vociferaters of "Cock-pie," "Ribs of beef,--hot
beef!" while, blended with these multi-toned discords, whined the
vielle, or primitive hurdy-gurdy, screamed the pipe, twanged the harp,
from every quarter where the thirsty paused to drink, or the idler stood
to gape. [See Lydgate: London Lyckpenny.]

Through this Babel Marmaduke at last slowly wound his way, and arrived
before the mighty mansion in which the chief baron of England held his
state.

As he dismounted and resigned his steed to the servitor hired for him by
Alwyn, Marmaduke paused a moment, struck by the disparity, common as
it was to eyes more accustomed to the metropolis, between the stately
edifice and the sordid neighbourhood. He had not noticed this so much
when he had repaired to the earl's house on his first arrival in London,
for his thoughts then had been too much bewildered by the general
bustle and novelty of the scene; but now it seemed to him that he better
comprehended the homage accorded to a great noble in surveying, at a
glance, the immeasurable eminence to which he was elevated above his
fellow-men by wealth and rank.

Far on either side of the wings of the earl's abode stretched, in
numerous deformity, sheds rather than houses, of broken plaster and
crazy timbers. But here and there were open places of public reception,
crowded with the lower followers of the puissant chief; and the eye
rested on many idle groups of sturdy swash-bucklers, some half-clad
in armour, some in rude jerkins of leather, before the doors of these
resorts,--as others, like bees about a hive, swarmed in and out with a
perpetual hum.

The exterior of Warwick House was of a gray but dingy stone, and
presented a half-fortified and formidable appearance. The windows, or
rather loop-holes, towards the street were few, and strongly barred.
The black and massive arch of the gateway yawned between two huge square
towers; and from a yet higher but slender tower on the inner side, the
flag gave the "White Bear and Ragged Staff" to the smoky air. Still,
under the portal as he entered, hung the grate of the portcullis, and
the square court which he saw before him swarmed with the more
immediate retainers of the earl, in scarlet jackets, wrought with
their chieftain's cognizance. A man of gigantic girth and stature,
who officiated as porter, leaning against the wall under the arch, now
emerged from the shadow, and with sufficient civility demanded the young
visitor's name and business. On hearing the former, he bowed low as he
doffed his hat, and conducted Marmaduke through the first quadrangle.
The two sides to the right and left were devoted to the offices and
rooms of retainers, of whom no less than six hundred, not to speak of
the domestic and more orderly retinue, attested the state of the Last of
the English Barons on his visits to the capital. Far from being then, as
now, the object of the great to thrust all that belongs to the service
of the house out of sight, it was their pride to strike awe into the
visitor by the extent of accommodation afforded to their followers: some
seated on benches of stone ranged along the walls; some grouped in the
centre of the court; some lying at length upon the two oblong patches of
what had been turf, till worn away by frequent feet,--this domestic
army filled the young Nevile with an admiration far greater than the
gay satins of the knights and nobles who had gathered round the lord of
Montagu and Northumberland at the pastime-ground.

This assemblage, however, were evidently under a rude discipline of
their own. They were neither noisy nor drunk. They made way with surly
obeisance as the cavalier passed, and closing on his track like some
horde of wild cattle, gazed after him with earnest silence, and then
turned once more to their indolent whispers with each other.

And now Nevile entered the last side of the quadrangle. The huge hall,
divided from the passage by a screen of stone fretwork, so fine as to
attest the hand of some architect in the reign of Henry III., stretched
to his right; and so vast, in truth, it was, that though more than fifty
persons were variously engaged therein, their number was lost in the
immense space. Of these, at one end of the longer and lower table
beneath the dais, some squires of good dress and mien were engaged at
chess or dice; others were conferring in the gloomy embrasures of
the casements; some walking to and fro, others gathered round the
shovel-board. At the entrance of this hall the porter left Marmaduke,
after exchanging a whisper with a gentleman whose dress eclipsed the
Nevile's in splendour; and this latter personage, who, though of high
birth, did not disdain to perform the office of chamberlain, or usher,
to the king-like earl, advanced to Marmaduke with a smile, and said,--

"My lord expects you, sir, and has appointed this time to receive you,
that you may not be held back from his presence by the crowds that crave
audience in the forenoon. Please to follow me!" This said, the gentleman
slowly preceded the visitor, now and then stopping to exchange a
friendly word with the various parties he passed in his progress; for
the urbanity which Warwick possessed himself, his policy inculcated as
a duty on all who served him. A small door at the other extremity of the
hall admitted into an anteroom, in which some half score pages, the sons
of knights and barons, were gathered round an old warrior, placed
at their head as a sort of tutor, to instruct them in all knightly
accomplishments; and beckoning forth one of these youths from the ring,
the earl's chamberlain said, with a profound reverence, "Will you be
pleased, my young lord, to conduct your cousin, Master Marmaduke Nevile,
to the earl's presence?" The young gentleman eyed Marmaduke with a
supercilious glance.

"Marry!" said he, pertly, "if a man born in the North were to feed all
his cousins, he would soon have a tail as long as my uncle, the stout
earl's. Come, sir cousin, this way." And without tarrying even to
give Nevile information of the name and quality of his new-found
relation,--who was no less than Lord Montagu's son, the sole male
heir to the honours of that mighty family, though now learning the
apprenticeship of chivalry amongst his uncle's pages,--the boy
passed before Marmaduke with a saunter, that, had they been in plain
Westmoreland, might have cost him a cuff from the stout hand of the
indignant elder cousin. He raised the tapestry at one end of the room,
and ascending a short flight of broad stairs, knocked gently on the
panels of an arched door sunk deep in the walls.

"Enter!" said a clear, loud voice, and the next moment Marmaduke was in
the presence of the King-maker.

He heard his guide pronounce his name, and saw him smile maliciously at
the momentary embarrassment the young man displayed, as the boy passed
by Marmaduke, and vanished. The Earl of Warwick was seated near a
door that opened upon an inner court, or rather garden, which gave
communication to the river. The chamber was painted in the style of
Henry III., with huge figures representing the battle of Hastings,
or rather, for there were many separate pieces, the conquest of Saxon
England. Over each head, to enlighten the ignorant, the artist had taken
the precaution to insert a label, which told the name and the subject.
The ceiling was groined, vaulted, and emblazoned with the richest
gilding and colours. The chimneypiece (a modern ornament) rose to the
roof, and represented in bold reliefs, gilt and decorated, the signing
of Magna Charta. The floor was strewed thick with dried rushes and
odorous herbs; the furniture was scanty, but rich. The low-backed
chairs, of which there were but four, carved in ebony, had cushions
of velvet with fringes of massive gold; a small cupboard, or beaufet,
covered with carpetz de cuir (carpets of gilt and painted leather),
of great price, held various quaint and curious ornaments of plate
inwrought with precious stones; and beside this--a singular contrast--on
a plain Gothic table lay the helmet, the gauntlets, and the battle-axe
of the master. Warwick himself, seated before a large, cumbrous desk,
was writing,--but slowly and with pain,--and he lifted his finger as
the Nevile approached, in token of his wish to conclude a task probably
little congenial to his tastes. But Marmaduke was grateful for the
moments afforded him to recover his self-possession, and to examine his
kinsman.

The earl was in the lusty vigour of his age. His hair, of the deepest
black, was worn short, as if in disdain of the effeminate fashions of
the day; and fretted bare from the temples by the constant and early
friction of his helmet, gave to a forehead naturally lofty yet more
majestic appearance of expanse and height. His complexion, though dark
and sunburned, glowed with rich health. The beard was closely shaven,
and left in all its remarkable beauty the contour of the oval face and
strong jaw,--strong as if clasped in iron. The features were marked and
aquiline, as was common to those of Norman blood. The form spare, but of
prodigious width and depth of chest, the more apparent from the fashion
of the short surcoat, which was thrown back, and left in broad expanse
a placard, not of holiday velvet and satins, but of steel polished as a
mirror, and inlaid with gold. And now as, concluding his task, the earl
rose and motioned Marmaduke to a stool by his side, his great stature,
which, from the length of his limbs, was not so observable when he sat,
actually startled his guest. Tall as Marmaduke was himself, the earl
towered [The faded portrait of Richard Nevile, Earl of Warwick, in the
Rous Roll, preserved at the Herald's College, does justice, at least, to
the height and majesty of his stature. The portrait of Edward IV. is the
only one in that long series which at all rivals the stately proportions
of the King-maker.] above him,--with his high, majestic, smooth,
unwrinkled forehead,--like some Paladin of the rhyme of poet or
romancer; and, perhaps, not only in this masculine advantage, but in
the rare and harmonious combination of colossal strength with graceful
lightness, a more splendid union of all the outward qualities we are
inclined to give to the heroes of old never dazzled the eye or impressed
the fancy. But even this effect of mere person was subordinate to that
which this eminent nobleman created--upon his inferiors, at least--by
a manner so void of all arrogance, yet of all condescension, so simple,
open, cordial, and hero-like, that Marmaduke Nevile, peculiarly alive
to external impressions, and subdued and fascinated by the earl's first
word, and that word was "Welcome!" dropped on his knee, and kissing the
hand extended to him, said, "Noble kinsman, in thy service and for
thy sake let me live and die!" Had the young man been prepared by the
subtlest master of courtcraft for this interview, so important to his
fortunes, he could not have advanced a hundredth part so far with the
great earl as he did by that sudden, frank burst of genuine emotion; for
Warwick was extremely sensitive to the admiration he excited,--vain or
proud of it, it matters not which; grateful as a child for love, and
inexorable as a woman for slight or insult: in rude ages, one sex has
often the qualities of the other.

"Thou hast thy father's warm heart and hasty thought, Marmaduke," said
Warwick, raising him; "and now he is gone where, we trust, brave men,
shrived of their sins, look down upon us, who should be thy friend but
Richard Nevile? So--so--yes, let me look at thee. Ha! stout Guy's honest
face, every line of it: but to the girls, perhaps, comelier, for wanting
a scar or two. Never blush,--thou shalt win the scars yet. So thou hast
a letter from thy father?"

"It is here, noble lord."

"And why," said the earl, cutting the silk with his dagger--"why hast
thou so long hung back from presenting it? But I need not ask thee.
These uncivil times have made kith and kin doubt worse of each other
than thy delay did of me. Sir Guy's mark, sure eno'! Brave old man! I
loved him the better for that, like me, the sword was more meet than the
pen for his bold hand." Here Warwick scanned, with some slowness, the
lines dictated by the dead to the priest; and when he had done, he
laid the letter respectfully on his desk, and bowing his head over it,
muttered to himself,--it might be an Ave for the deceased. "Well," he
said, reseating himself, and again motioning Marmaduke to follow his
example, "thy father was, in sooth, to blame for the side he took in the
Wars. What son of the Norman could bow knee or vail plume to that shadow
of a king, Henry of Windsor? And for his bloody wife--she knew no more
of an Englishman's pith and pride than I know of the rhymes and roundels
of old Rene, her father. Guy Nevile--good Guy--many a day in my boyhood
did he teach me how to bear my lance at the crest, and direct my sword
at the mail joints. He was cunning at fence--thy worshipful father--but
I was ever a bad scholar; and my dull arm, to this day, hopes more from
its strength than its craft."

"I have heard it said, noble earl, that the stoutest hand can scarcely
lift your battle-axe."

"Fables! romaunt!" answered the earl, smiling; "there it lies,--go and
lift it."

Marmaduke went to the table, and, though with some difficulty, raised
and swung this formidable weapon.

"By my halidame, well swung, cousin mine! Its use depends not on the
strength, but the practice. Why, look you now, there is the boy Richard
of Gloucester, who comes not up to thy shoulder, and by dint of custom
each day can wield mace or axe with as much ease as a jester doth his
lathesword. Ah, trust me, Marmaduke, the York House is a princely one;
and if we must have a king, we barons, by stout Saint George, let no
meaner race ever furnish our lieges. But to thyself, Marmaduke--what are
thy views and thy wishes?"

"To be one of thy following, noble Warwick."

"I thank and accept thee, young Nevile; but thou hast heard that I am
about to leave England, and in the mean time thy youth would run danger
without a guide." The earl paused a moment, and resumed: "My brother of
Montagu showed thee cold countenance; but a word from me will win
thee his grace and favour. What sayest thou, wilt thou be one of his
gentlemen? If so, I will tell thee the qualities a man must have,--a
discreet tongue, a quick eye, the last fashion in hood and shoe-bobbins,
a perfect seat on thy horse, a light touch for the gittern, a voice for
a love-song, and--"

"I have none of these save the horsemanship, gracious my lord; and if
thou wilt not receive me thyself, I will not burden my Lord of Montagu
and Northumberland."

"Hot and quick! No! John of Montagu would not suit thee, nor thou him.
But how to provide for thee till my return I know not."

"Dare I not hope, then, to make one of your embassage, noble earl?"

Warwick bent his brows, and looked at him in surprise. "Of our
embassage! Why, thou art haughty, indeed! Nay, and so a soldier's son
and a Nevile should be! I blame thee not; but I could not make thee
one of my train, without creating a hundred enemies--to me (but that's
nothing) and to thee, which were much. Knowest thou not that there is
scarce a gentleman of my train below the state of a peer's son, and that
I have made, by refusals, malcontents eno', as it is?--Yet, bold! there
is my learned brother, the Archbishop of York. Knowest thou Latin and
the schools?"

"'Fore Heaven, my lord," said the Nevile, bluntly, "I see already I had
best go back to green Westmoreland, for I am as unfit for his grace the
archbishop as I am for my Lord Montagu."

"Well, then," said the earl, dryly, "since thou hast not yet station
enough for my train, nor glosing for Northumberland, nor wit and lere
for the archbishop, I suppose, my poor youth, I must e'en make you only
a gentleman about the king! It is not a post so sure of quick rising and
full gipsires as one about myself or my brethren, but it will be less
envied, and is good for thy first essay. How goes the clock? Oh, here is
Nick Alwyn's new horologe. He tells me that the English will soon rival
the Dutch in these baubles. [Clockwork appears to have been introduced
into England in the reign of Edward III., when three Dutch horologers
were invited over from Delft. They must soon have passed into common
use, for Chaucer thus familiarly speaks of them:--

       "Full sickerer was his crowing in his loge
        Than is a clock or any abbey orloge."]

The more the pity!--our red-faced yeomen, alas, are fast sinking into
lank-jawed mechanics! We shall find the king in his garden within the
next half-hour. Thou shalt attend me."

Marmaduke expressed, with more feeling than eloquence, the thanks he
owed for an offer that, he was about to say, exceeded his hopes; but he
had already, since his departure from Westmoreland, acquired sufficient
wit to think twice of his words. And so eagerly, at that time, did the
youth of the nobility contend for the honour of posts about the person
of Warwick, and even of his brothers, and so strong was the belief that
the earl's power to make or to mar fortune was all-paramount in England,
that even a place in the king's household was considered an inferior
appointment to that which made Warwick the immediate patron and
protector. This was more especially the case amongst the more haughty
and ancient gentry since the favour shown by Edward to the relations
of his wife, and his own indifference to the rank and birth of his
associates. Warwick had therefore spoken with truth when he expressed
a comparative pity for the youth, whom he could not better provide for
than by a place about the court of his sovereign!

The earl then drew from Marmaduke some account of his early training,
his dependence on his brother, his adventures at the archery-ground, his
misadventure with the robbers, and even his sojourn with Warner,--though
Marmaduke was discreetly silent as to the very existence of Sibyll. The
earl, in the mean while, walked to and fro the chamber with a light,
careless stride, every moment pausing to laugh at the frank simplicity
of his kinsman, or to throw in some shrewd remark, which he cast
purposely in the rough Westmoreland dialect; for no man ever attains to
the popularity that rejoiced or accursed the Earl of Warwick, without a
tendency to broad and familiar humour, without a certain commonplace
of character in its shallower and more every-day properties. This
charm--always great in the great--Warwick possessed to perfection; and
in him--such was his native and unaffected majesty of bearing, and
such the splendour that surrounded his name--it never seemed coarse or
unfamiliar, but "everything he did became him best." Marmaduke had just
brought his narrative to a conclusion, when, after a slight tap at the
door, which Warwick did not hear, two fair young forms bounded joyously
in, and not seeing the stranger, threw themselves upon Warwick's breast
with the caressing familiarity of infancy.

"Ah, Father," said the elder of these two girls, as Warwick's hand
smoothed her hair fondly, "you promised you would take us in your barge
to see the sports on the river, and now it will be too late."

"Make your peace with your young cousins here," said the earl, turning
to Marmaduke; "you will cost them an hour's joyaunce. This is my eldest
daughter, Isabel; and this soft-eyed, pale-cheeked damozel--too loyal
for a leaf of the red rose--is the Lady Anne."

The two girls had started from their father's arms at the first address
to Marmaduke, and their countenances had relapsed from their caressing
and childlike expression into all the stately demureness with which
they had been brought up to regard a stranger. Howbeit, this reserve, to
which he was accustomed, awed Marmaduke less than the alternate gayety
and sadness of the wilder Sibyll, and he addressed them with all the
gallantry to the exercise of which he had been reared, concluding his
compliments with a declaration that he would rather forego the advantage
proffered him by the earl's favour with the king, than foster one
obnoxious and ungracious memory in damozels so fair and honoured.

A haughty smile flitted for a moment over the proud young face of Isabel
Nevile; but the softer Anne blushed, and drew bashfully behind her
sister.

As yet these girls, born for the highest and fated to the most wretched
fortunes, were in all the bloom of earliest youth; but the difference
between their characters might be already observable in their mien
and countenance. Isabel; of tall and commanding stature, had some
resemblance to her father, in her aquiline features, rich, dark hair,
and the lustrous brilliancy of her eyes; while Anne, less striking, yet
not less lovely, of smaller size and slighter proportions, bore in her
pale, clear face, her dove-like eyes, and her gentle brow an expression
of yielding meekness not unmixed with melancholy, which, conjoined with
an exquisite symmetry of features, could not fail of exciting interest
where her sister commanded admiration. Not a word, however, from either
did Marmaduke abstract in return for his courtesies, nor did either
he or the earl seem to expect it; for the latter, seating himself and
drawing Anne on his knee, while Isabella walked with stately grace
towards the table that bore her father's warlike accoutrements, and
played, as it were, unconsciously with the black plume on his black
burgonet, said to Nevile,

"Well, thou hast seen enough of the Lancastrian raptrils to make thee
true to the Yorkists. I would I could say as much for the king himself,
who is already crowding the court with that venomous faction, in honour
of Dame Elizabeth Gray, born Mistress Woodville, and now Queen of
England. Ha, my proud Isabel, thou wouldst have better filled the throne
that thy father built!"

And at these words a proud flash broke from the earl's dark eyes,
betraying even to Marmaduke the secret of perhaps his earliest
alienation from Edward IV. Isabella pouted her rich lip, but said
nothing. "As for thee, Anne," continued the earl, "it is a pity that
monks cannot marry,--thou wouldst have suited some sober priest better
than a mailed knight. 'Fore George, I would not ask thee to buckle my
baldrick when the war-steeds were snorting, but I would trust Isabel
with the links of my hauberk."

"Nay, Father," said the low, timid voice of Anne, "if thou wert going to
danger, I could be brave in all that could guard thee!"

"Why, that's my girl! kiss me! Thou hast a look of thy mother now,--so
thou hast! and I will not chide thee the next time I hear thee muttering
soft treason in pity of Henry of Windsor."

"Is he not to be pitied?--Crown, wife, son, and Earl Warwick's stout arm
lost--lost!"

"No!" said Isabel, suddenly; "no, sweet sister Anne, and fie on thee for
the words! He lost all, because he had neither the hand of a knight nor
the heart of a man! For the rest--Margaret of Anjou, or her butchers,
beheaded our father's father."

"And may God and Saint George forget me, when I forget those gray and
gory hairs!" exclaimed the earl; and putting away the Lady Anne somewhat
roughly, he made a stride across the room, and stood by his hearth. "And
yet Edward, the son of Richard of York, who fell by my father's side--he
forgets, he forgives! And the minions of Rivers the Lancastrian tread
the heels of Richard of Warwick."

At this unexpected turn in the conversation, peculiarly unwelcome, as
it may be supposed, to the son of one who had fought on the Lancastrian
side in the very battle referred to, Marmaduke felt somewhat uneasy; and
turning to the Lady Anne, he said, with the gravity of wounded pride, "I
owe more to my lord, your father, than I even wist of,--how much he must
have overlooked to--"

"Not so!" interrupted Warwick, who overheard him,--"not so; thou
wrongest me! Thy father was shocked at those butcheries; thy father
recoiled from that accursed standard; thy father was of a stock
ancient and noble as my own! But, these Woodvilles!--tush! my passion
overmasters me. We will go to the king,--it is time."

Warwick here rang the hand-bell on his table, and on the entrance of his
attendant gentleman, bade him see that the barge was in readiness; then
beckoning to his kinsman, and with a nod to his daughters, he caught up
his plumed cap, and passed at once into the garden.

"Anne," said Isabel, when the two girls were alone, "thou hast vexed my
father, and what marvel? If the Lancastrians can be pitied, the Earl of
Warwick must be condemned!"

"Unkind!" said Anne, shedding tears; "I can pity woe and mischance,
without blaming those whose hard duty it might be to achieve them."

"In good sooth cannot I! Thou wouldst pity and pardon till thou leftst
no distinction between foeman and friend, leife and loathing. Be it
mine, like my great father, to love and to hate!"

"Yet why art thou so attached to the White Rose?" said Anne, stung, if
not to malice, at least to archness. "Thou knowest my father's nearest
wish was that his eldest daughter might be betrothed to King Edward.
Dost thou not pay good for evil when thou seest no excellence out of the
House of York?"

"Saucy Anne," answered Isabel, with a half smile, "I am not raught by
thy shafts, for I was a child for the nurses when King Edward sought a
wife for his love. But were I chafed--as I may be vain enough to know
myself--whom should I blame?--Not the king, but the Lancastrian who
witched him!"

