had already won repute and the prospect of wealth by ingenuity,
application, and toil; and yet, to do justice, as much virtue went to
Marmaduke's loyalty to Warwick as to Alwyn's capacities for making a
fortune.  Mutual compliments over, Alwyn said hesitatingly,--

"And dost thou find Mistress Sibyll more gently disposed to thee than
when thou didst complain to me of her cruelty?"

"Marry, good Nicholas, I will be frank with thee.  When I left the
court to follow Lord Warwick, there were rumours of the gallantries of
Lord Hastings to the girl, which grieved me to the heart.  I spoke to
her thereof bluntly and honourably, and got but high looks and
scornful words in return.  Good fellow, I thank thee for that squeeze
of the hand and that doleful sigh.  In my absence at Middleham, I
strove hard to forget one who cared so little for me.  My dear Alwyn,
those Yorkshire lasses are parlously comely, and mighty douce and
debonaire.  So I stormed cruel Sibyll out of my heart perforce of
numbers."

"And thou lovest her no more?"

"Not I, by this goblet!  On coming back, it is true, I felt pleased to
clank my gold spurs in her presence, and curious to see if my new
fortunes would bring out a smile of approval; and verily, to speak
sooth, the donzell was kind and friendly, and spoke to me so cheerly
of the pleasure she felt in my advancement, that I adventured again a
few words of the old folly.  But my lassie drew up like a princess,
and I am a cured man."

"By your troth?"

"By my troth!"

Alwyn's head sank on his bosom in silent thought.  Sir Marmaduke
emptied his goblet; and really the young knight looked so fair and so
gallant, in his new surcoat of velvet, that it was no marvel if he
should find enough food for consolation in a court where men spent six
hours a day in making love,--nor in vain.

"And what say they still of the Lord Hastings?" asked Alwyn, breaking
silence.  "Nothing, I trow and trust, that arraigns the poor lady's
honour, though much that may scoff at her simple faith in a nature so
vain and fickle.  'The tongue's not steel, yet it cuts,' as the
proverb saith of the slanderer."

"No! scandal spares her virtue as woman, to run down her cunning as
witch!  They say that Hastings hath not prevailed, nor sought to
prevail,--that he is spell-bound.  By Saint Thomas, from a maid of
such character Marmaduke Nevile is happily rescued!"

"Sir Marmaduke," then said Alwyn, in a grave and earnest voice, "it
behooves me, as true friend, though humble, and as honest man, to give
thee my secret, in return for thine own.  I love this girl.  Ay, ay!
thou thinkest that love is a strange word on a craftsman's lips, but
'cold flint hides hot fire.'  I would not have been thy rival, Heaven
forefend! hadst thou still cherished a hope, or if thou now wilt
forbid my aspiring; but if thou wilt not say me nay, I will try my
chance in delivering a pure soul from a crafty wooer."

Marmaduke stared in great surprise at his foster-brother; and though,
no doubt, he spoke truth when he said he was cured of his love for
Sibyll, he yet felt a sort of jealousy at Alwyn's unexpected
confession, and his vanity was hurt at the notion that the plain-
visaged trader should attempt where the handsome gentleman had
failed.--However, his blunt, generous, manly nature after a brief
struggle got the better of these sore feelings; and holding out his
hand to Alwyn, he said, "My dear foster-brother, try the hazard and
cast thy dice, if thou wilt.  Heaven prosper thee, if success be for
thine own good!  But if she be given to witchcraft (plague on thee,
man, sneer not at the word), small comfort to bed and hearth can such
practices bring!"

"Alas!" said Alwyn, "the witchcraft is on the side of Hastings,--the
witchcraft of fame and rank, and a glozing tongue and experienced art.
But she shall not fall, if a true arm can save her; and 'though Hope
be a small child; she can carry a great anchor.'"

These words were said so earnestly, that they opened new light into
Marmaduke's mind; and his native generosity standing in lieu of
intellect, he comprehended sympathetically the noble motives which
actuated the son of commerce.

"My poor Alwyn," he said, "if thou canst save this young maid,--whom
by my troth I loved well, and who tells me yet that she loveth me as a
sister loves,--right glad shall I be.  But thou stakest thy peace of
mind against hers!  Fair luck to thee, say I again,--and if thou wilt
risk thy chance at once (for suspense is love's purgatory), seize the
moment.  I saw Sibyll, just ere we met, pass to the ramparts, alone;
at this sharp season the place is deserted; go."

"I will, this moment!" said Alwyn, rising and turning very pale; but
as he gained the door, he halted--"I had forgot, Master Nevile, that I
bring the king his signet-ring, new set, of the falcon and fetter-
lock."

"They will keep thee three hours in the anteroom.  The Duke of
Clarence is now with the king.  Trust the ring to me, I shall see his
highness ere he dines."

Even in his love, Alwyn had the Saxon's considerations of business; he
hesitated--"May I not endanger thereby the king's favour and loss of
custom?" said the trader.

"Tush, man! little thou knowest King Edward; he cares naught for the
ceremonies: moreover, the Neviles are now all-puissant in favour.  I
am here in attendance on sweet Lady Anne, whom the king loves as a
daughter, though too young for sire to so well-grown a donzell; and a
word from her lip, if need be, will set all as smooth as this gorget
of lawn!"

Thus assured, Alwyn gave the ring to his friend, and took his way at
once to the ramparts.  Marmaduke remained behind to finish the canary
and marvel how so sober a man should form so ardent a passion.  Nor
was he much less surprised to remark that his friend, though still
speaking with a strong provincial accent, and still sowing his
discourse with rustic saws and proverbs, had risen in language and in
manner with the rise of his fortunes.  "An he go on so, and become
lord mayor," muttered Marmaduke, "verily he will half look like a
gentleman!"

To these meditations the young knight was not long left in peace.  A
messenger from Warwick House sought and found him, with the news that
the earl was on his road to London, and wished to see Sir Marmaduke
the moment of his arrival, which was hourly expected.  The young
knight's hardy brain somewhat flustered by the canary, Alwyn's secret,
and this sudden tidings, he hastened to obey his chief's summons, and
forgot, till he gained the earl's mansion, the signet ring intrusted
to him by Alwyn.  "What matters it?" said he then, philosophically,--
"the king hath rings eno' on his fingers not to miss one for an hour
or so, and I dare not send any one else with it.  Marry, I must plunge
my head in cold water, to get rid of the fumes of the wine."




CHAPTER V.

THE LOVER AND THE GALLANT--WOMAN'S CHOICE.

Alwyn bent his way to the ramparts, a part of which then resembled the
boulevards of a French town, having rows of trees, green sward, a
winding walk, and seats placed at frequent intervals for the repose of
the loungers.  During the summer evenings, the place was a favourite
resort of the court idlers; but now, in winter, it was usually
deserted, save by the sentries, placed at distant intervals.  The
trader had not gone far in his quest when he perceived, a few paces
before him, the very man he had most cause to dread; and Lord
Hastings, hearing the sound of a footfall amongst the crisp, faded
leaves that strewed the path, turned abruptly as Alwyn approached his
side.

At the sight of his formidable rival, Alwyn had formed one of those
resolutions which occur only to men of his decided, plain-spoken,
energetic character.  His distinguishing shrewdness and penetration
had given him considerable insight into the nobler as well as the
weaker qualities of Hastings; and his hope in the former influenced
the determination to which he came.  The reflections of Hastings at
that moment were of a nature to augur favourably to the views of the
humbler lover; for, during the stirring scenes in which his late
absence from Sibyll had been passed, Hastings had somewhat recovered
from her influence; and feeling the difficulties of reconciling his
honour and his worldly prospects to further prosecution of the love,
rashly expressed but not deeply felt, he had determined frankly to cut
the Gordian knot he could not solve, and inform Sibyll that marriage
between them was impossible.  With that view he had appointed this
meeting, and his conference with the king but confirmed his intention.
It was in this state of mind that he was thus accosted by Alwyn:--

"My lord, may I make bold to ask for a few moments your charitable
indulgence to words you may deem presumptuous?"

"Be brief, then, Master Alwyn,--I am waited for."

"Alas, my lord!  I can guess by whom,--by the one whom I seek myself,
--by Sibyll Warner."

"How, Sir Goldsmith!" said Hastings, haughtily, "what knowest thou of
my movements, and what care I for thine?"

"Hearken, my Lord Hastings,--hearken!" said Alwyn, repressing his
resentment, and in a voice so earnest that it riveted the entire
attention of the listener--"hearken, and judge not as noble judges
craftsman, but as man should judge man.  As the saw saith, 'We all lie
alike in our graves.'  From the first moment I saw this Sibyll Warner
I loved her.  Yes; smile disdainfully, but listen still.  She was
obscure and in distress.  I loved her not for her fair looks alone; I
loved her for her good gifts, for her patient industry, for her filial
duty, for her struggles to give bread to her father's board.  I did
not say to myself, 'This girl will make a comely fere, a delicate
paramour!'  I said, 'This good daughter will make a wife whom an
honest man may take to his heart and cherish!'"  Poor Alwyn stopped,
with tears in his voice, struggled with his emotions, and pursued: "My
fortunes were more promising than hers; there was no cause why I might
not hope.  True, I had a rival then; young as myself, better born,
comelier; but she loved him not.  I foresaw that his love for her--if
love it were--would cease.  Methought that her mind would understand
mine; as mine--verily I say it--yearned for hers!  I could not look on
the maidens of mine own rank, and who had lived around me, but what--
oh, no, my lord, again I say, not the beauty, but the gifts, the mind,
the heart of Sibyll, threw them all into the shade.  You may think it
strange that I--a plain, steadfast, trading, working, careful man--
should have all these feelings; but I will tell you wherefore such as
I sometimes have them, nurse them, brood on them, more than you lords
and gentlemen, with all your graceful arts in pleasing.  We know no
light loves! no brief distractions to the one arch passion!  We sober
sons of the stall and the ware are no general gallants,--we love
plainly, we love but once, and we love heartily.  But who knows not
the proverb, 'What's a gentleman but his pleasure?'--and what's
pleasure but change?  When Sibyll came to the palace, I soon heard her
name linked with yours; I saw her cheek blush when you spoke.  Well,
well, well! after all, as the old wives tell us, 'Blushing is virtue's
livery.'  I said, 'She is a chaste and high-hearted girl.'  This will
pass, and the time will come when she can compare your love and mine.
Now, my lord, the time has come.  I know that you seek her.  Yea, at
this moment, I know that her heart beats for your footstep.  Say but
one word,--say that you love Sibyll Warner with the thought of wedding
her,--say that, on your honour, noble Hastings, as gentleman and peer,
and I will kneel at your feet, and beg your pardon for my vain
follies, and go back to my ware, and work, and not repine.  Say it!
You are silent?  Then I implore you, still as peer and gentleman, to
let the honest love save the maiden from the wooing that will blight
her peace and blast her name!  And now, Lord Hastings, I wait your
gracious answer."

The sensations experienced by Hastings, as Alwyn thus concluded, were
manifold and complicated; but, at the first, admiration and pity were
the strongest.

"My poor friend," said he, kindly, "if you thus love a demoiselle
deserving all my reverence, your words and your thoughts bespeak you
no unworthy pretender; but take my counsel, good Alwyn.  Come not--
thou from the Chepe--come not to the court for a wife.  Forget this
fantasy."

"My lord, it is impossible!  Forget I cannot, regret I may.

"Thou canst not succeed, man," resumed the nobleman, more coldly, "nor
couldst if William Hastings had never lived.  The eyes of women
accustomed to gaze on the gorgeous externals of the world are blinded
to plain worth like thine.  It might have been different had the
donzell never abided in a palace; but as it is, brave fellow, learn
how these wounds of the heart scar over, and the spot becomes hard and
callous evermore.  What art thou, Master Nicholas Alwyn," continued
Hastings, gloomily, and with a withering smile--"what art thou, to ask
