own apartment."

"Do so," said Hastings; and, grateful for the king's consideration, he
sought his rooms.  There, indeed, Alwyn soon joined him, and learned
from the nobleman what filled him at once with joy and terror.
Knowing that Warner and Sibyll had left the Tower, he had surmised
that the girl's virtue had at last succumbed; and it delighted him to
hear from Lord Hastings, whose word to men was never questionable, the
solemn assurance of her unstained chastity.  But he trembled at this
mysterious disappearance, and knew not to whom to impute the snare,
till the penetration of Hastings suddenly alighted near, at least, to
the clew.  "The Duchess of Bedford," said he, "ever increasing in
superstition as danger increases, may have desired to refind so great
a scholar and reputed an astrologer and magician; if so, all is safe.
On the other hand, her favourite, the friar, ever bore a jealous
grudge to poor Adam, and may have sought to abstract him from her
grace's search; here there may be molestation to Adam, but surely no
danger to Sibyll.  Hark ye, Alwyn, thou lovest the maid more worthily,
and--"  Hastings stopped short; for such is infirm human nature, that,
though he had mentally resigned Sibyll forever, he could not yet
calmly face the thought of resigning her to a rival.  "Thou lovest
her," he renewed, more coldly, "and to thee, therefore, I may safely
trust the search which time and circumstance and a soldier's duty
forbid to me.  And believe--oh, believe that I say not this from a
passion which may move thy jealousy, but rather with a brother's holy
love.  If thou canst but see her safe, and lodged where no danger nor
wrong can find her, thou hast no friend in the wide world whose
service through life thou mayst command like mine."

"My lord," said Alwyn, dryly, "I want no friends!  Young as I am, I
have lived long enough to see that friends follow fortune, but never
make it!  I will find this poor maid and her honoured father, if I
spend my last groat on the search.  Get me but such an order from the
king as may place the law at my control, and awe even her grace of
Bedford,--and I promise the rest!"

Hastings, much relieved, deigned to press the goldsmith's reluctant
hand; and, leaving him alone for a few minutes, returned with a
warrant from the king, which seemed to Alwyn sufficiently precise and
authoritative.  The goldsmith then departed, and first he sought the
friar, but found him not at home.  Bungey had taken with him, as was
his wont, the keys of his mysterious apartment.  Alwyn then hastened
elsewhere, to secure those experienced in such a search, and to head
it in person.  At the Tower, the evening was passed in bustle and
excitement,--the last preparations for departure.  The queen, who was
then far advanced towards her confinement, was, as we before said, to
remain at the Tower, which was now strongly manned.  Roused from her
wonted apathy by the imminent dangers that awaited Edward, the night
was passed by her in tears and prayers, by him in the sound sleep of
confident valour.  The next morning departed for the North the several
leaders,--Gloucester, Rivers, Hastings, and the king.




CHAPTER VII.

THE LANDING OF LORD WARWICK, AND THE EVENTS THAT ENSUE THEREON.

And Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, "prepared such a greate navie
as lightly hath not been seene before gathered in manner of all
nations, which armie laie at the mouth of the Seyne ready to fight
with the Earl of Warwick, when he should set out of his harborowe."
[Hall, p. 282, ed. 1809.]

But the winds fought for the Avenger.  In the night came "a terrible
tempest," which scattered the duke's ships "one from another, so that
two of them were not in compagnie together in one place;" and when the
tempest had done its work, it passed away; and the gales were fair,
and the heaven was clear, when, the next day, the earl "halsed up the
sayles," and came in sight of Dartmouth.

It was not with an army of foreign hirelings that Lord Warwick set
forth on his mighty enterprise.  Scanty indeed were the troops he
brought from France,--for he had learned from England that "men so
much daily and hourely desired and wished so sore his arrival and
return, that almost all men were in harness, looking for his landyng."
[The popular feeling in favour of the earl is described by Hall, with
somewhat more eloquence and vigour than are common with that homely
chronicler: "The absence of the Earle of Warwick made the common
people daily more and more to long and bee desirous to have the sight
of him, and presently to behold his personage.  For they judged that
the sunne was clerely taken from the world when hee was absent.  In
such high estimation amongst the people was his name, that neither no
one manne they had in so much honour, neither no one persone they so
much praised, or to the clouds so highly extolled.  What shall I say?
His only name sounded in every song, in the mouth of the common
people, and his persone [effigies] was represented with great
reverence when publique plaies or open triumphes should bee skewed or
set furthe abrode in the stretes," etc.  This lively passage, if not
too highly coloured, serves to show us the rude saturnalian kind of
liberty that existed, even under a king so vindictive as Edward IV.
Though an individual might be banged for the jest that he would make
his son heir to the crown (namely, the grocer's shop, which bore that
sign), yet no tyranny could deal with the sentiment of the masses.  In
our own day it would be less safe than in that to make public
exhibition "in plaies and triumphes" of sympathy with a man attainted
as a traitor, and in open rebellion to the crown.]  As his ships
neared the coast, and the banner of the Ragged Staff, worked in gold,
shone in the sun, the shores swarmed with armed crowds, not to resist
but to welcome.  From cliff to cliff, wide and far, blazed rejoicing
bonfires; and from cliff to cliff, wide and far, burst the shout,
when, first of all his men, bareheaded, but, save the burgonet, in
complete mail, the popular hero leaped to shore.

"When the earl had taken land, he made a proclamation, in the name of
King Henry VI., upon high paynes commanding and charging all men apt
or able to bear armour, to prepare themselves to fight against Edward,
Duke of York, who had untruly usurped the croune and dignity of this
realm."  [Hall, p. 82.]

And where was Edward?  Afar, following the forces of Fitzhugh and
Robin of Redesdale, who by artful retreat drew him farther and farther
northward, and left all the other quarters of the kingdom free to send
their thousands to the banners of Lancaster and Warwick.  And even as
the news of the earl's landing reached the king, it spread also
through all the towns of the North; and all the towns of the North
were in "a great rore, and made fires, and sang songs, crying, 'King
Henry! King Henry! a Warwicke! a Warwicke!'"  But his warlike and
presumptuous spirit forsook not the chief of that bloody and fatal
race,--the line of the English Pelops,--"bespattered with kindred
gore."  [Aeschylus: Agamemnon]  A messenger from Burgundy was in his
tent when the news reached him.  "Back to the duke!" cried Edward;
"tell him to recollect his navy, guard the sea, scour the streams,
that the earl shall not escape, nor return to France; for the doings
in England, let me alone!  I have ability and puissance to overcome
all enemies and rebels in mine own realm."  [Hall, p. 283.]

And therewith he raised his camp, abandoned the pursuit of Fitzhugh,
summoned Montagu to join him (it being now safer to hold the marquis
near him, and near the axe, if his loyalty became suspected), and
marched on to meet the earl.  Nor did the earl tarry from the
encounter.  His army, swelling as he passed, and as men read his
proclamations to reform all grievances and right all wrongs, he
pressed on to meet the king, while fast and fast upon Edward's rear
came the troops of Fitzhugh and Hilyard, no longer flying but
pursuing.  The king was the more anxious to come up to Warwick,
inasmuch as he relied greatly upon the treachery of Clarence, either
secretly to betray or openly to desert the earl.  And he knew that if
he did the latter on the eve of a battle, it could not fail morally to
weaken Warwick, and dishearten his army by fear that desertion should
prove, as it ever does, the most contagious disease that can afflict a
camp.  It is probable, however, that the enthusiasm which had
surrounded the earl with volunteers so numerous had far exceeded the
anticipations of the inexperienced Clarence, and would have forbid him
that opportunity of betraying the earl.  However this be, the rival
armies drew nearer and nearer.  The king halted in his rapid march at
a small village, and took up his quarters in a fortified house, to
which there was no access but by a single bridge.  [Sharon Turner,
Comines.]  Edward himself retired for a short time to his couch, for
he had need of all his strength in the battle he foresaw; but scarce
had he closed his eyes, when Alexander Carlile [Hearne: Fragment], the
serjeant of the royal minstrels, followed by Hastings and Rivers
(their jealousy laid at rest for a time in the sense of their king's
danger), rushed into his room.

"Arm, sire, arm!--Lord Montagu has thrown off the mask, and rides
through thy troops, shouting 'Long live King Henry!'"

"Ah, traitor!" cried the king, leaping from his bed.  "From Warwick
hate was my due, but not from Montagu!  Rivers, help to buckle on my
mail.  Hastings, post my body-guard at the bridge.  We will sell our
lives dear."

Hastings vanished.  Edward had scarcely hurried on his helm, cuirass,
and greaves, when Gloucester entered, calm in the midst of peril.

"Your enemies are marching to seize you, brother.  Hark! behind you
rings the cry, 'A Fitzhugh! a Robin! death to the tyrant!'  Hark! in
front, 'A Montagu! a Warwick!  Long live King Henry!'  I come to
redeem my word,--to share your exile or your death.  Choose either
while there is yet time.  Thy choice is mine!"

And while he spoke, behind, before, came the various cries nearer and
nearer.  The lion of March was in the toils.

"Now, my two-handed sword!" said Edward.  "Gloucester, in this weapon
learn my choice!"

But now all the principal barons and captains, still true to the king
whose crown was already lost, flocked in a body to the chamber.  They
fell on their knees, and with tears implored him to save himself for a
happier day.

"There is yet time to escape," said D'Eyncourt, "to pass the bridge,
to gain the seaport!  Think not that a soldier's death will be left
thee.  Numbers will suffice to encumber thine arm, to seize thy
person.  Live not to be Warwick's prisoner,--shown as a wild beast in
its cage to the hooting crowd!"

"If not on thyself," exclaimed Rivers, "have pity on these loyal
gentlemen, and for the sake of their lives preserve thine own.  What
is flight?  Warwick fled!"

"True,--and returned!" added Gloucester.  "You are right, my lords.
Come, sire, we must fly.  Our rights fly not with us, but shall fight
for us in absence!"

The calm WILL of this strange and terrible boy had its effect upon
Edward.  He suffered his brother to lead him from the chamber,
grinding his teeth in impotent rage.  He mounted his horse, while
Rivers held the stirrup, and with some six or seven knights and earls
rode to the bridge, already occupied by Hastings and a small but
determined guard.

"Come, Hastings," said the king, with a ghastly smile,--"they tell us
we must fly!"

"True, sire, haste, haste!  I stay but to deceive the enemy by
feigning to defend the pass, and to counsel, as I best may, the
faithful soldiers we leave behind."

"Brave Hastings!" said Gloucester, pressing his hand, "you do well,
and I envy you the glory of this post. Come, sire."

"Ay, ay," said the king, with a sudden and fierce cry, "we go,--but at
least slaughtering as we go.  See! yon rascal troop! ride we through
their midst!  Havock and revenge!"

He set spurs to his steed, galloped over the bridge, and before his
companions could join him, dashed alone into the very centre of the
advanced guard sent to invest the fortress, and while they were yet
shouting, "Where is the tyrant, where is Edward?"

"Here!" answered a voice of thunder,--"here, rebels and faytors, in
your ranks!"

This sudden and appalling reply, even more than the sweep of the
gigantic sword, before which were riven sallet and mail as the
woodman's axe rives the fagot, created amongst the enemy that singular
panic, which in those ages often scattered numbers before the arm and
the name of one.  They recoiled in confusion and dismay.  Many
actually threw down their arms and fled.  Through a path broad and
clear amidst the forest of pikes, Gloucester and the captains followed
the flashing track of the king, over the corpses, headless or
limbless, that he felled as he rode.

Meanwhile, with a truer chivalry, Hastings, taking advantage of the
sortie which confused and delayed the enemy, summoned such of the
loyal as were left in the fortress, advised them, as the only chance
of life, to affect submission to Warwick; but when the time came, to
remember their old allegiance, [Sharon Turner, vol. iii. 280.] and
promising that he would not desert them, save with life, till their
safety was pledged by the foe, reclosed his visor, and rode back to
the front of the bridge.

And now the king and his comrades had cut their way through all
barrier, but the enemy still wavered and lagged, till suddenly the cry
of "Robin of Redesdale!" was heard, and sword in hand, Hilyard,
followed by a troop of horse, dashed to the head of the besiegers,
and, learning the king's escape, rode off in pursuit.  His brief
presence and sharp rebuke reanimated the falterers, and in a few
minutes they gained the bridge.

"Halt, sirs," cried Hastings; "I would offer capitulation to your
leader!  Who is he?"

A knight on horseback advanced from the rest.  Hastings lowered the
point of his sword.

"Sir, we yield this fortress to your hands upon one condition,--our
men yonder are willing to submit, and shout with you for Henry VI.
Pledge me your word that you and your soldiers spare their lives and
do them no wrong, and we depart."

"And if I pledge it not?" said the knight.

"Then for every warrior who guards this bridge count ten dead men
amongst your ranks."

"Do your worst,--our bloods are up!  We want life for life! revenge
for the subjects butchered by your tyrant chief!  Charge! to the
attack! charge! pike and bill!"  The knight spurred on, the
Lancastrians followed, and the knight reeled from his horse into the
moat below, felled by the sword of Hastings.

For several minutes the pass was so gallantly defended that the strife
seemed uncertain, though fearfully unequal, when Lord Montagu himself,
hearing what had befallen, galloped to the spot, threw down his
truncheon, cried "Hold!" and the slaughter ceased.  To this nobleman
Hastings repeated the terms he had proposed.

"And," said Montagu, turning with anger to the Lancastrians, who
formed a detachment of Fitzhugh's force--"can Englishmen insist upon
butchering Englishmen?  Rather thank we Lord Hastings that he would
spare good King Henry so many subjects' lives!  The terms are granted,
my lord; and your own life also, and those of your friends around you,
vainly brave in a wrong cause.  Depart!"

"Ah, Montagu," said Hastings, touched, and in a whisper, "what pity
that so gallant a gentleman should leave a rebel's blot upon his
scutcheon!"

"When chiefs and suzerains are false and perjured, Lord Hastings,"
