had almost to force the doors of the staterooms to make the somnolent
appreciate their peril, and many of them, it is believed, were drowned
like rats in a trap.


ASTOR AND WIFE STROLLED ON DECK

Colonel and Mrs. Astor were in their room and saw the ice vision flash
by. They had not appreciably felt the gentle shock and supposed that
nothing out of the ordinary had happened. They were both dressed
and came on deck leisurely. William T. Stead, the London journalist,
wandered on deck for a few minutes, stopping to talk to Frank Millet.
"What do they say is the trouble?" he asked. "Icebergs," was the brief
reply. "Well," said Stead, "I guess it is nothing serious. I'm going
back to my cabin to read."

From end to end on the mighty boat officers were rushing about without
much noise or confusion, but giving orders sharply. Captain Smith told
the third officer to rush downstairs and see whether the water was
coming in very fast. "And," he added, "take some armed guards along to
see that the stokers and engineers stay at their posts."

In two minutes the officer returned. "It looks pretty bad, sir," he
said. "The water is rushing in and filling the bottom. The locks of the
water-tight compartments have been sprung by the shock."

"Give the command for all passengers to be on deck with life-belts on."

Through the length and breadth of the boat, upstairs and downstairs,
on all decks, the cry rang out: "All passengers on deck with
life-preservers."


A SUDDEN TREMOR OF FEAR

For the first time, there was a feeling of panic. Husbands sought for
wives and children. Families gathered together. Many who were asleep
hastily caught up their clothing and rushed on deck. A moment before the
men had been joking about the life-belts, according to the story told by
Mrs. Vera Dick, of Calgary, Canada. "Try this one," one man said to her,
"they are the very latest thing this season. Everybody's wearing them
now."

Another man suggested to a woman friend, who had a fox terrier in her
arms, that she should put a life-saver on the dog. "It won't fit," the
woman replied, laughing. "Make him carry it in his mouth," said the
friend.


CONFUSION AMONG THE IMMIGRANTS

Below, on the steerage deck, there was intense confusion. About the time
the officers on the first deck gave the order that all men should stand
to one side and all women should go below to deck B, taking the children
with them, a similar order was given to the steerage passengers. The
women were ordered to the front, the men to the rear. Half a dozen
healthy, husky immigrants pushed their way forward and tried to crowd
into the first boat.

"Stand back," shouted the officers who were manning the boat. "The women
come first."

Shouting curses in various foreign languages, the immigrant men
continued their pushing and tugging to climb into the boats. Shots
rang out. One big fellow fell over the railing into the water. Another
dropped to the deck, moaning. His jaw had been shot away. This was the
story told by the bystanders afterwards on the pier. One husky Italian
told the writer on the pier that the way in which the men were shot down
was horrible. His sympathy was with the men who were shot.

"They were only trying to save their lives," he said.


WIRELESS OPERATOR DIED AT HIS POST

On board the Titanic, the wireless operator, with a life-belt about
his waist, was hitting the instrument that was sending out C. Q. D.,
messages, "Struck on iceberg, C. Q. D."

"Shall I tell captain to turn back and help?" flashed a reply from the
Carpathia.

"Yes, old man," the Titanic wireless operator responded. "Guess we're
sinking."

An hour later, when the second wireless man came into the boxlike room
to tell his companion what the situation was, he found a negro stoker
creeping up behind the operator and saw him raise a knife over his head.
He said afterwards--he was among those rescued--that he realized at
once that the negro intended to kill the operator in order to take his
life-belt from him. The second operator pulled out his revolver and shot
the negro dead.

"What was the trouble?" asked the operator.

"That negro was going to kill you and steal your life-belt," the second
man replied.

"Thanks, old man," said the operator. The second man went on deck to get
some more information. He was just in time to jump overboard before the
Titanic went down. The wireless operator and the body of the negro who
tried to steal his belt went down together.

On the deck where the first class passengers were quartered, known as
deck A, there was none of the confusion that was taking place on the
lower decks. The Titanic was standing without much rocking. The captain
had given an order and the band was playing.


{illust. caption = WAITING FOR THE NEWS

A Bird's eye view of the great crowds...}

{illust. caption = WIRELESS STATION AT CAPE RACE

Where the first news of the Titanic disaster was received.}



CHAPTER VI. "WOMEN AND CHILDREN FIRST!"

COOL-HEADED OFFICERS AND CREW BRING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS--FILLING THE
LIFE-BOATS--HEARTRENDING SCENES AS FAMILIES ARE PARTED--FOUR LIFE-BOATS
LOST--INCIDENTS OF BRAVERY--"THE BOATS ARE ALL FILLED!"

ONCE on the deck, many hesitated to enter the swinging life-boats. Tho
glassy sea, the starlit sky, the absence, in the first few moments,
of intense excitement, gave them the feeling that there was only some
slight mishap; that those who got into the boats would have a chilly
half hour below and might, later, be laughed at.

It was such a feeling as this, from all accounts, which caused John
Jacob Astor and his wife to refuse the places offered them in the first
boat, and to retire to the gymnasium. In the same way H. J. Allison, a
Montreal banker, laughed at the warning, and his wife, reassured by
him, took her time dressing. They and their daughter did not reach
the Carpathia. Their son, less than two years old, was carried into a
life-boat by his nurse, and was taken in charge by Major Arthur Peuchen.

THE LIFE-BOATS LOWERED

The admiration felt by the passengers and crew for the matchlessly
appointed vessel was translated, in those first few moments, into a
confidence which for some proved deadly. The pulsing of the engines had
ceased, and the steamship lay just as though she were awaiting the order
to go on again after some trifling matter had been adjusted. But in a
few minutes the canvas covers were lifted from the life-boats and the
crews allotted to each standing by, ready to lower them to the water.

Nearly all the boats that were lowered on the port side of the ship
touched the water without capsizing. Four of the others lowered to
starboard, including one collapsible, were capsized. All, however, who
were in the collapsible boats that practically went to pieces, were
rescued by the other boats.

Presently the order was heard: "All men stand back and all women retire
to the deck below." That was the smoking-room deck, or the B deck. The
men stood away and remained in absolute silence, leaning against the
rail or pacing up and down the deck slowly. Many of them lighted cigars
or cigarettes and began to smoke.


LOADING THE BOATS

The boats were swung out and lowered from the A deck above. The women
were marshaled quietly in lines along the B deck, and when the boats
were lowered down to the level of the latter the women were assisted to
climb into them.

As each of the boats was filled with its quota of passengers the word
was given and it was carefully lowered down to the dark surface of the
water.

Nobody seemed to know how Mr. Ismay got into a boat, but it was assumed
that he wished to make a presentation of the case of the Titanic to his
company. He was among those who apparently realized that the splendid
ship was doomed. All hands in the life-boats, under instructions from
officers and men in charge, were rowed a considerable distance from the
ship herself in order to get far away from the possible suction that
would follow her foundering.


COOLEST MEN ON BOARD

Captain Smith and Major Archibald Butt, military aide to the President
of the United States, were among the coolest men on board. A number of
steerage passengers were yelling and screaming and fighting to get to
the boats. Officers drew guns and told them that if they moved towards
the boats they would be shot dead. Major Butt had a gun in his hand and
covered the men who tried to get to the boats.

The following story of his bravery was told by Mrs. Henry B. Harris,
wife of the theatrical manager:

"The world should rise in praise of Major Butt. That man's conduct will
remain in my memory forever. The American army is honored by him and
the way he taught some of the other men how to behave when women and
children were suffering that awful mental fear of death. Major Butt was
near me and I noticed everything that he did.

"When the order to man the boats came, the captain whispered something
to Major Butt. The two of them had become friends. The major immediately
became as one in supreme command. You would have thought he was at a
White House reception. A dozen or more women became hysterical all at
once, as something connected with a life-boat went wrong. Major Butt
stepped over to them and said:

"'Really, you must not act like that; we are all going to see you
through this thing.' He helped the sailors rearrange the rope or chain
that had gone wrong and lifted some of the women in with a touch of
gallantry. Not only was there a complete lack of any fear in his manner,
but there was the action of an aristocrat.

"When the time came he was a man to be feared. In one of the earlier
boats fifty women, it seemed, were about to be lowered, when a man,
suddenly panic-stricken, ran to the stern of it. Major Butt shot one arm
out, caught him by the back of the neck and jerked him backward like a
pillow. His head cracked against a rail and he was stunned.

"'Sorry,' said Major Butt, 'women will be attended to first or I'll
break every damned bone in your body.'


FORCED MEN USURPING PLACES TO VACATE

"The boats were lowered one by one, and as I stood by, my husband said
to me, 'Thank God, for Archie Butt.' Perhaps Major Butt heard it, for he
turned his face towards us for a second and smiled. Just at that moment,
a young man was arguing to get into a life-boat, and Major Butt had a
hold of the lad by the arm, like a big brother, and was telling him to
keep his head and be a man.

"Major Butt helped those poor frightened steerage people so wonderfully,
so tenderly and yet with such cool and manly firmness that he prevented
the loss of many lives from panic. He was a soldier to the last. He was
one of God's greatest noblemen, and I think I can say he was an example
of bravery even to men on the ship."


LAST WORDS OF MAJOR BUTT

Miss Marie Young, who was a music instructor to President Roosevelt's
children and had known Major Butt during the Roosevelt occupancy of the
White House, told this story of his heroism.

"Archie himself put me into the boat, wrapped blankets about me and
tucked me in as carefully as if we were starting on a motor ride. He,
himself, entered the boat with me, performing the little courtesies as
calmly and with as smiling a face as if death were far away, instead of
being but a few moments removed from him.

"When he had carefully wrapped me up he stepped upon the gunwale of the
boat, and lifting his hat, smiled down at me. 'Good-bye, Miss Young,'
he said. 'Good luck to you, and don't forget to remember me to the folks
back home.' Then he stepped back and waved his hand to me as the boat
was lowered. I think I was the last woman he had a chance to help, for
the boat went down shortly after we cleared the suction zone."

COLONEL ASTOR ANOTHER HERO

Colonel Astor was another of the heroes of the awful night. Effort was
made to persuade him to take a place in one of the life-boats, but he
emphatically refused to do so until every woman and child on board
had been provided for, not excepting the women members of the ship's
company.

One of the passengers describing the consummate courage of Colonel Astor
said:

"He led Mrs. Astor to the side of the ship and helped her to the
life-boat to which she had been assigned. I saw that she was prostrated
and said she would remain and take her chances with him, but Colonel
Astor quietly insisted and tried to reassure her in a few words. As she
took her place in the boat her eyes were fixed upon him. Colonel Astor
smiled, touched his cap, and when the boat moved safely away from the
ship's side he turned back to his place among the men."

Mrs. Ida S. Hippach and her daughter Jean, survivors of the Titanic,
said they were saved by Colonel John Jacob Astor, who forced the crew of
the last life-boat to wait for them.

"We saw Colonel Astor place Mrs. Astor in a boat and assure her that he
would follow later," said Mrs. Hippach.

"He turned to us with a smile and said, 'Ladies, you are next.' The
officer in charge of the boat protested that the craft was full, and the
seamen started to lower it.

"Colonel Astor exclaimed, 'Hold that boat,' in the voice of a man
accustomed to be obeyed, and they did as he ordered. The boat had been
lowered past the upper deck and the colonel took us to the deck below
and put us in the boat, one after the other, through a port-hole."


{illust. caption = LOADING THE LIFE-BOATS

Here occurred the heart-rending separation of husbands and wives, as the
women were given precedence in the boats.}


HEART-BREAKING SCENES

There were some terrible scenes. Fathers were parting from their
children and giving them an encouraging pat on the shoulders; men
were kissing their wives and telling them that they would be with them
shortly. One man said there was absolutely no danger, that the boat was
the finest ever built, with water-tight compartments, and that it could
not sink. That seemed to be the general impression.

A few of the men, however, were panic-stricken even when the first of
the fifty-six foot life-boats was being filled. Fully ten men threw
themselves into the boats already crowded with women and children. These
men were dragged back and hurled sprawling across the deck. Six of them,
screamed with fear, struggled to their feet and made a second attempt to
rush to the boats.

About ten shots sounded in quick succession. The six cowardly men were
stopped in their tracks, staggered and collapsed one after another. At
least two of them vainly attempted to creep toward the boats again. The
others lay quite still. This scene of bloodshed served its purpose.
In that particular section of the deck there was no further attempt to
violate the rule of "women and children first."

"I helped fill the boats with women," said Thomas Whiteley, who was a
waiter on the Titanic. "Collapsible boat No. 2 on the starboard jammed.
The second officer was hacking at the ropes with a knife and I was being
dragged around the deck by that rope when I looked up and saw the boat,
with all aboard, turn turtle. In some way I got overboard myself and
clung to an oak dresser. I wasn't more than sixty feet from the Titanic
when she went down. Her big stern rose up in the air and she went down
bow first. I saw all the machinery drop out of her."

