
"Nay, sir, you have ties which must render your life more than ever
valuable and dear to you, and duties to which, I know, you must be
anxious to betake yourself. In our present deplorable state of doubt and
distress, Castlewood can be a welcome place to no stranger, much less
to you, and so I know, sir, you will be for leaving us ere long. And you
will pardon me if the state of my own spirits obliges me for the most
part to keep my chamber. But my friends here will bear you company as
long as you favour us, whilst I nurse my poor Harry upstairs. Mountain,
you will have the cedar-room on the ground-floor ready for Mr.
Washington, and anything in the house is at his command. Farewell, sir.
Will you be pleased to present my compliments to your mother, who will
be thankful to have her son safe and sound out of the war,--as also
to my young friend Martha Custis, to whom and to whose children I
wish every happiness. Come, my son!" and with these words, and another
freezing curtsey, the pale little woman retreated, looking steadily at
the Colonel, who stood dumb on the floor.

Strong as Madam Esmond's belief appeared to be respecting her son's
safety, the house of Castlewood naturally remained sad and gloomy.
She might forbid mourning for herself and family; but her heart was
in black, whatever face the resolute little lady persisted in wearing
before the world. To look for her son, was hoping against hope. No
authentic account of his death had indeed arrived, and no one appeared
who had seen him fall; but hundreds more had been so stricken on that
fatal day, with no eyes to behold their last pangs, save those of the
lurking enemy and the comrades dying by their side. A fortnight after
the defeat, when Harry was absent on his quest, George's servant,
Sady, reappeared wounded and maimed at Castlewood. But he could give
no coherent account of the battle, only of his flight from the centre,
where he was with the baggage. He had no news of his master since the
morning of the action. For many days Sady lurked in the negro quarters
away from the sight of Madam Esmond, whose anger he did not dare to
face. That lady's few neighbours spoke of her as labouring under a
delusion. So strong was it, that there were times when Harry and the
other members of the little Castlewood family were almost brought to
share in it. It seemed nothing strange to her, that her father out of
another world should promise her her son's life. In this world or the
next, that family sure must be of consequence, she thought. Nothing
had ever yet happened to her sons, no accident, no fever, no important
illness, but she had a prevision of it. She could enumerate half a dozen
instances, which, indeed, her household was obliged more or less to
confirm, how, when anything had happened to the boys at ever so great a
distance, she had known of their mishap and its consequences. No, George
was not dead; George was a prisoner among the Indians; George would come
back and rule over Castlewood; as sure, as sure as his Majesty would
send a great force from home to recover the tarnished glory of the
British arms, and to drive the French out of the Americas.

As for Mr. Washington, she would never with her own goodwill behold him
again. He had promised to protect George with his life. Why was her son
gone and the Colonel alive? How dared he to face her after that promise,
and appear before a mother without her son? She trusted she knew her
duty. She bore illwill to no one: but as an Esmond, she had a sense of
honour, and Mr. Washington had forfeited hers in letting her son out of
his sight. He had to obey superior orders (some one perhaps objected)?
Psha! a promise was a promise. He had promised to guard George's life
with his own, and where was her boy? And was not the Colonel (a pretty
Colonel, indeed!) sound and safe? Do not tell me that his coat and hat
had shots through them! (This was her answer to another humble plea in
Mr. Washington's behalf.) Can't I go into the study this instant and
fire two shots with my papa's pistols through this paduasoy skirt,--and
should I be killed? She laughed at the notion of death resulting from
any such operation; nor was her laugh very pleasant to hear. The satire
of people who have little natural humour is seldom good sport for
bystanders. I think dull men's faceticae are mostly cruel.

So, if Harry wanted to meet his friend, he had to do so in secret, at
court-houses, taverns, or various places of resort; or in their little
towns, where the provincial gentry assembled. No man of spirit, she
vowed, could meet Mr. Washington after his base desertion of her family.
She was exceedingly excited when she heard that the Colonel and her son
absolutely had met. What a heart must Harry have to give his hand to one
whom she considered as little better than George's murderer! For shame
to say so! For shame upon you, ungrateful boy, forgetting the dearest,
noblest, most perfect of brothers, for that tall, gawky, fox-hunting
Colonel, with his horrid oaths! How can he be George's murderer, when
I say my boy is not dead? He is not dead, because my instinct never
deceived me: because, as sure as I see his picture now before me,--only
'tis not near so noble or so good as he used to look,--so surely two
nights running did my papa appear to me in my dreams. You doubt about
that, very likely? 'Tis because you never loved anybody sufficiently, my
poor Harry; else you might have leave to see them in dreams, as has been
vouchsafed to some."

"I think I loved George, mother," cried Harry. "I have often prayed that
I might dream about him, and I don't."

"How you can talk, sir, of loving George, and then--go and meet your Mr.
Washington at horse-races, I can't understand! Can you, Mountain?"

"We can't understand many things in our neighbours' characters. I can
understand that our boy is unhappy, and that he does not get strength,
and that he is doing no good here, in Castlewood, or moping at the
taverns and court-houses with horse-coupers and idle company," grumbled
Mountain in reply to her patroness; and, in truth, the dependant was
right.

There was not only grief in the Castlewood House, but there was
disunion. "I cannot tell how it came," said Harry, as he brought the
story to an end, which we have narrated in the last two numbers,
and which he confided to his new-found English relative, Madame de
Bernstein; "but since that fatal day of July, last year, and my return
home, my mother never has been the same woman. She seemed to love none
of us as she used. She was for ever praising George, and yet she did
not seem as if she liked him much when he was with us. She hath plunged,
more deeply than ever, into her books of devotion, out of which she
only manages to extract grief and sadness, as I think. Such a gloom has
fallen over our wretched Virginian house of Castlewood, that we all
grew ill, and pale as ghosts, who inhabited it. Mountain told me, madam,
that, for nights, my mother would not close her eyes. I have had her at
my bedside, looking so ghastly, that I have started from my own sleep,
fancying a ghost before me. By one means or other she has wrought
herself into a state of excitement which if not delirium, is akin to
it. I was again and again struck down by the fever, and all the Jesuits'
bark in America could not cure me. We have a tobacco-house and some land
about the new town of Richmond, in our province, and went thither, as
Williamsburg is no wholesomer than our own place; and there I mended a
little, but still did not get quite well, and the physicians strongly
counselled a sea-voyage. My mother, at one time, had thoughts of coming
with me, but--" (and here the lad blushed and hung his head down)
"--we did not agree very well, though I know we loved each other very
heartily, and 'twas determined that I should see the world for myself.
So I took passage in our ship from the James River, and was landed at
Bristol. And 'twas only on the 9th of July, this year, at sea, as had
been agreed between me and Madam Esmond, that I put mourning on for my
dear brother."

So that little Mistress of the Virginian Castlewood, for whom, I am
sure, we have all the greatest respect, had the knack of rendering the
people round about her uncomfortable; quarrelled with those she loved
best, and exercised over them her wayward jealousies and imperious
humours, until they were not sorry to leave her. Here was money enough,
friends enough, a good position, and the respect of the world; a house
stored with all manner of plenty, and good things, and poor Harry
Warrington was glad to leave them all behind him. Happy! Who is
happy? What good in a stalled ox for dinner every day, and no content
therewith? Is it best to be loved and plagued by those you love, or to
have an easy, comfortable indifference at home; to follow your fancies,
live there unmolested, and die without causing any painful regrets or
tears?

To be sure, when her boy was gone, Madam Esmond forgot all these little
tiffs and differences. To hear her speak of both her children, you would
fancy they were perfect characters, and had never caused her a moment's
worry or annoyance. These gone, Madam fell naturally upon Mrs. Mountain
and her little daughter, and worried and annoyed them. But women
bear with hard words more easily than men, are more ready to forgive
injuries, or, perhaps, to dissemble anger. Let us trust that Madam
Esmond's dependants found their life tolerable, that they gave her
ladyship sometimes as good as they got, that if they quarrelled in the
morning they were reconciled at night, and sate down to a tolerably
friendly game at cards and an amicable dish of tea.

But, without the boys, the great house of Castlewood was dreary to the
widow. She left an overseer there to manage her estates, and only paid
the place an occasional visit. She enlarged and beautified her house
in the pretty little city of Richmond, which began to grow daily in
importance. She had company there, and card-assemblies, and preachers in
plenty; and set up her little throne there, to which the gentlefolks of
the province were welcome to come and bow. All her domestic negroes,
who loved society as negroes will do, were delighted to exchange the
solitude of Castlewood for the gay and merry little town; where, for
a time, and while we pursue Harry Warrington's progress in Europe, we
leave the good lady.




CHAPTER XIV. Harry in England


When the famous Trojan wanderer narrated his escapes and adventures to
Queen Dido, her Majesty, as we read, took the very greatest interest
in the fascinating story-teller who told his perils so eloquently. A
history ensued, more pathetic than any of the previous occurrences in
the life of Pius Aeneas, and the poor princess had reason to rue the day
when she listened to that glib and dangerous orator. Harry Warrington
had not pious Aeneas's power of speech, and his elderly aunt, we may
presume, was by no means so soft-hearted as the sentimental Dido;
but yet the lad's narrative was touching, as he delivered it with his
artless eloquence and cordial voice; and more than once, in the course
of his story, Madam Bernstein found herself moved to a softness to which
she had very seldom before allowed herself to give way. There were not
many fountains in that desert of a life--not many sweet, refreshing
resting-places. It had been a long loneliness, for the most part, until
this friendly voice came and sounded in her ears and caused her heart to
beat with strange pangs of love and sympathy. She doted on this lad,
and on this sense of compassion and regard so new to her. Save once,
faintly, in very very early youth, she had felt no tender sentiment for
any human being. Such a woman would, no doubt, watch her own sensations
very keenly, and must have smiled after the appearance of this boy, to
mark how her pulses rose above their ordinary beat. She longed after
him. She felt her cheeks flush with happiness when he came near. Her
eyes greeted him with welcome, and followed him with fond pleasure. "Ah,
if she could have had a son like that, how she would have loved him!"
"Wait," says Conscience, the dark scoffer mocking within her, "wait,
Beatrix Esmond! You know you will weary of this inclination, as you have
of all. You know, when the passing fancy has subsided, that the boy may
perish, and you won't have a tear for him; or talk, and you weary of
his stories; and that your lot in life is to be lonely--lonely." Well?
suppose life be a desert? There are halting-places and shades, and
refreshing waters; let us profit by them for to-day. We know that we
must march when to-morrow comes, and tramp on our destiny onward.

She smiled inwardly, whilst following the lad's narrative, to recognise
in his simple tales about his mother, traits of family resemblance.
Madam Esmond was very jealous?--Yes, that Harry owned. She was fond of
Colonel Washington? She liked him, but only as a friend, Harry declared.
A hundred times he had heard his mother vow that she had no other
feeling towards him. He was ashamed to have to own that he himself had
been once absurdly jealous of the Colonel. "Well, you will see that my
half-sister will never forgive him," said Madam Beatrix. "And you need
not be surprised, sir, at women taking a fancy to men younger than
themselves; for don't I dote upon you; and don't all these Castlewood
people crevent with jealousy?"

However great might be their jealousy of Madame de Bernstein's new
favourite, the family of Castlewood allowed no feeling of illwill to
appear in their language or behaviour to their young guest and
kinsman. After a couple of days' stay in the ancestral house, Mr.
Harry Warrington had become Cousin Harry with young and middle-aged.
Especially in Madame Bernstein's presence, the Countess of Castlewood
was most gracious to her kinsman, and she took many amiable private
opportunities of informing the Baroness how charming the young Huron
was, of vaunting the elegance of his manners and appearance, and
wondering how, in his distant province, the child should ever have
learned to be so polite?

These notes of admiration or interrogation, the Baroness took with
equal complacency (speaking parenthetically, and, for his own part, the
present chronicler cannot help putting in a little respectful remark
here, and signifying his admiration of the conduct of ladies towards one
another, and of the things which they say, which they forbear to say,
and which they say behind each other's backs. With what smiles and
curtseys they stab each other! with what compliments they hate each
other! with what determination of long-suffering they won't be offended!
with what innocent dexterity they can drop the drop of poison into the
cup of conversation, hand round the goblet, smiling, to the whole family
to drink, and make the dear, domestic circle miserable!)--I burst out of
my parenthesis. I fancy my Baroness and Countess smiling at each other
a hundred years ago, and giving each other the hand or the cheek, and
calling each other, My dear, My dear creature, My dear Countess, My dear
Baroness, My dear sister--even, when they were most ready to fight.

"You wonder, my dear Maria, that the boy should be so polite?" cries
Madame de Bernstein. "His mother was bred up by two very perfect
gentlefolks. Colonel Esmond had a certain grave courteousness, and a
grand manner, which I do not see among the gentlemen nowadays."

"Eh, my dear, we all of us praise our own time! My grandmamma used to
declare there was nothing like Whitehall and Charles the Second."

"My mother saw King James the Second's court for a short while, and
though not a court-educated person, as you know,--her father was a
country clergyman--yet was exquisitely well-bred. The Colonel, her
second husband, was a person of great travel and experience, as well as
of learning, and had frequented the finest company of Europe. They could
not go into their retreat and leave their good manners behind them, and
our boy has had them as his natural inheritance."

"Nay, excuse me, my dear, for thinking you too partial about your
mother. She could not have been that perfection which your filial
fondness imagines. She left off liking her daughter--my dear creature,
you have owned that she did--and I cannot fancy a complete woman who has
a cold heart. No, no, my dear sister-in-law! Manners are very requisite,
no doubt, and, for a country parson's daughter, your mamma was very
well--I have seen many of the cloth who are very well. Mr. Sampson, our
chaplain, is very well. Dr. Young is very well. Mr. Dodd is very well;
but they have not the true air--as how should they? I protest, I beg
pardon! I forgot my lord bishop, your ladyship's first choice. But, as I
said before, to be a complete woman, one must have, what you have, what
I may say and bless Heaven for, I think I have--a good heart. Without
the affections, all the world is vanity, my love! I protest I only live,
exist, eat, drink, rest, for my sweet, sweet children!--for my wicked
Willy, for my self-willed Fanny, dear naughty loves!" (She
rapturously kisses a bracelet on each arm which contains the miniature
representations of those two young persons.) "Yes, Mimi! yes, Fanchon!
you know I do, you dear, dear little things! and if they were to die,
or you were to die, your poor mistress would die too!" Mimi and Fanchon,
two quivering Italian greyhounds, jump into their lady's arms, and kiss
her hands, but respect her cheeks, which are covered with rouge. "No,
my dear! For nothing do I bless Heaven so much (though it puts me
to excruciating torture very often) as for having endowed me with
sensibility and a feeling heart!"

"You are full of feeling, dear Anna," says the Baroness. "You are
celebrated for your sensibility. You must give a little of it to our
American nephew--cousin--I scarce know his relationship."

"Nay, I am here but as a guest in Castlewood now. The house is my Lord
Castlewood's, not mine, or his lordship's whenever he shall choose to
claim it. What can I do for the young Virginian that has not been done?
He is charming. Are we even jealous of him for being so, my dear? and
though we see what a fancy the Baroness de Bernstein has taken for him,
do your ladyship's nephews and nieces--your real nephews and nieces--cry
out? My poor children might be mortified, for indeed, in a few hours,
the charming young man has made as much way as my poor things have been
able to do in all their lives: but are they angry? Willy hath taken him
out to ride. This morning, was not Maria playing the harpsichord whilst
my Fanny taught him the minuet? 'Twas a charming young group, I assure
you, and it brought tears into my eyes to look at the young creatures.
Poor lad! we are as fond of him as you are, dear Baroness!"

Now, Madame de Bernstein had happened, through her own ears or her
maid's, to overhear what really took place in consequence of this
harmless little scene. Lady Castlewood had come into the room where the
young people were thus engaged in amusing and instructing themselves,
accompanied by her son William, who arrived in his boots from the
kennel.

"Bravi, bravi! Oh, charming!" said the Countess, clapping her hands,
nodding with one of her best smiles to Harry Warrington, and darting a
look at his partner, which my Lady Fanny perfectly understood; and
so, perhaps, did my Lady Maria at her harpsichord, for she played with
redoubled energy, and nodded her waving curls, over the chords.

"Infernal young Choctaw! Is he teaching Fanny the war-dance? and is Fan
going to try her tricks upon him now?" asked Mr. William, whose temper
was not of the best.

And that was what Lady Castlewood's look said to Fanny. "Are you going
to try your tricks upon him now?"

She made Harry a very low curtsey, and he blushed, and they both stopped
dancing, somewhat disconcerted. Lady Maria rose from the harpsichord and
walked away.

"Nay, go on dancing, young people! Don't let me spoil sport, and let me
play for you," said the Countess; and she sate down to the instrument
and played.

"I don't know how to dance," says Harry, hanging his head down, with a
blush that the Countess's finest carmine could not equal.

"And Fanny was teaching you? Go on teaching him, dearest Fanny!"

"Go on, do!" says William, with a sidelong growl.

"I--I had rather not show off my awkwardness in company," adds Harry,
recovering himself. "When I know how to dance a minuet, be sure I will
ask my cousin to walk one with me."

"That will be very soon, dear Cousin Warrington, I am certain," remarks
the Countess, with her most gracious air.

"What game is she hunting now?" thinks Mr. William to himself, who
cannot penetrate his mother's ways; and that lady, fondly calling her
daughter to her elbow, leaves the room.

They are no sooner in the tapestried passage leading away to their
own apartment, but Lady Castlewood's bland tone entirely changes. "You
booby!" she begins to her adored Fanny. "You double idiot! What are
you going to do with the Huron? You don't want to marry a creature like
that, and be a squaw in a wigwam?"

"Don't, mamma!" gasps Lady Fanny. Mamma was pinching her ladyship's arm
black-and-blue. "I am sure our cousin is very well," Fanny whimpers,
"and you said so yourself."

"Very well! Yes; and heir to a swamp, a negro, a log-cabin and a barrel
of tobacco! My Lady Frances Esmond, do you remember what your ladyship's
rank is, and what your name is, and who was your ladyship's mother,
when, at three days' acquaintance, you commence dancing--a pretty dance,
indeed--with this brat out of Virginia?"

"Mr. Warrington is our cousin," pleads Lady Fanny.

"A creature come from nobody knows where is not your cousin! How do we
know he is your cousin? He may be a valet who has taken his master's
portmanteau, and run away in his postchaise."

"But Madame de Bernstein says he is our cousin," interposes Fanny; "and
he is the image of the Esmonds."

"Madame de Bernstein has her likes and dislikes, takes up people and
forgets people; and she chooses to profess a mighty fancy for this young
man. Because she likes him to-day, is that any reason why she should
like him to-morrow? Before company, and in your aunt's presence,
your ladyship will please to be as civil to him as necessary; but, in
private, I forbid you to see him or encourage him."

"I don't care, madam, whether your ladyship forbids me or not!" cries
out Lady Fanny, wrought up to a pitch of revolt.

"Very good, Fanny! then I speak to my lord, and we return to Kensington.
If I can't bring you to reason, your brother will."

At this juncture the conversation between mother and daughter stopped,
or Madame de Bernstein's informer had no further means of hearing or
reporting it.

It was only in after days that she told Harry Warrington a part of what
she knew. At present he but saw that his kinsfolks received him not
unkindly. Lady Castlewood was perfectly civil to him; the young ladies
pleasant and pleased; my Lord Castlewood, a man of cold and haughty
demeanour, was not more reserved towards Harry than to any of the rest
of the family; Mr. William was ready to drink with him, to ride with
him, to go to races with him, and to play cards with him. When he
proposed to go away, they one and all pressed him to stay. Madame de
Bernstein did not tell him how it arose that he was the object of
such eager hospitality. He did not know what schemes he was serving or
disarranging, whose or what anger he was creating. He fancied he was
welcome because those around him were his kinsmen, and never thought
that those could be his enemies out of whose cup he was drinking, and
whose hand he was pressing every night and morning.




CHAPTER XV. A Sunday at Castlewood


The second day after Harry's arrival at Castlewood was a Sunday. The
chapel appertaining to the castle was the village church. A door from
the house communicated with a great state pew which the family occupied,
and here after due time they all took their places in order, whilst a
rather numerous congregation from the village filled the seats below. A
few ancient dusty banners hung from the church roof; and Harry pleased
himself in imagining that they had been borne by retainers of his family
in the Commonwealth wars, in which, as he knew well, his ancestors had
taken a loyal and distinguished part. Within the altar-rails was the
effigy of the Esmond of the time of King James the First, the common
forefather of all the group assembled in the family pew. Madame de
Bernstein, in her quality of Bishop's widow, never failed in attendance,
and conducted her devotions with a gravity almost as exemplary as that
of the ancestor yonder, in his square beard and red gown, for ever
kneeling on his stone hassock before his great marble desk and
book, under his emblazoned shield of arms. The clergyman, a tall,
high-coloured, handsome young man, read the service in a lively,
agreeable voice, giving almost a dramatic point to the chapters of
Scripture which he read. The music was good--one of the young ladies
of the family touching the organ--and would have been better but for an
interruption and something like a burst of laughter from the servants'
pew, which was occasioned by Mr. Warrington's lacquey Gumbo, who,
knowing the air given out for the psalm, began to sing it in a voice so
exceedingly loud and sweet, that the whole congregation turned towards
the African warbler; the parson himself put his handkerchief to his
mouth, and the liveried gentlemen from London were astonished out of all
propriety. Pleased, perhaps, with the sensation which he had created,
Mr. Gumbo continued his performance until it became almost a solo, and
the voice of the clerk himself was silenced. For the truth is, that
though Gumbo held on to the book, along with pretty Molly, the porter's
daughter, who had been the first to welcome the strangers to Castlewood,
he sang and recited by ear and not by note, and could not read a
syllable of the verses in the book before him.

This choral performance over, a brief sermon in due course followed,
which, indeed, Harry thought a deal too short. In a lively, familiar,
striking discourse the clergyman described a scene of which he had
been witness the previous week--the execution of a horse-stealer after
Assizes. He described the man and his previous good character, his
family, the love they bore one another, and his agony at parting from
them. He depicted the execution in a manner startling, terrible,
and picturesque. He did not introduce into his sermon the Scripture
phraseology, such as Harry had been accustomed to hear it from those
somewhat Calvinistic preachers whom his mother loved to frequent, but
rather spoke as one man of the world to other sinful people, who might
be likely to profit by good advice. The unhappy man just gone, had begun
as a farmer of good prospects; he had taken to drinking, card-playing,
horse-racing, cock-fighting, the vices of the age; against which the
young clergyman was generously indignant. Then he had got to poaching
and to horse-stealing, for which he suffered. The divine rapidly drew
striking and fearful pictures of these rustic crimes. He startled his
hearers by showing that the Eye of the Law was watching the poacher
at midnight, and setting traps to catch the criminal. He galloped the
stolen horse over highway and common, and from one county into another,
but showed Retribution ever galloping after, seizing the malefactor in
the country fair, carrying him before the justice, and never unlocking
his manacles till he dropped them at the gallows-foot. Heaven be pitiful
to the sinner! The clergyman acted the scene. He whispered in the
criminal's ear at the cart. He dropped his handkerchief on the clerk's
head. Harry started back as that handkerchief dropped. The clergyman had
been talking for more than twenty minutes. Harry could have heard
him for an hour more, and thought he had not been five minutes in the
pulpit. The gentlefolks in the great pew were very much enlivened by the
discourse. Once or twice, Harry, who could see the pew where the house
servants sate, remarked these very attentive; and especially Gumbo, his
own man, in an attitude of intense consternation. But the smockfrocks
did not seem to heed, and clamped out of church quite unconcerned.
Gaffer Brown and Gammer Jones took the matter as it came, and the
rosy-cheeked, red-cloaked village lasses sate under their broad
hats entirely unmoved. My lord, from his pew, nodded slightly to the
clergyman in the pulpit, when that divine's head and wig surged up from
the cushion.

"Sampson has been strong to-day," said his lordship. "He has assaulted
the Philistines in great force."

"Beautiful, beautiful!" says Harry.

"Bet five to four it was his Assize sermon. He has been over to Winton
to preach, and to see those dogs," cries William.

The organist had played the little congregation out into the sunshine.
Only Sir Francis Esmond, temp. Jac. I., still knelt on his marble
hassock, before his prayer-book of stone. Mr. Sampson came out of his
vestry in his cassock, and nodded to the gentlemen still lingering in
the great pew.

"Come up, and tell us about those dogs," says Mr. William, and the
divine nodded a laughing assent.

The gentlemen passed out of the church into the gallery of their house,
which connected them with that sacred building. Mr. Sampson made his
way through the court, and presently joined them. He was presented by my
lord to the Virginian cousin of the family, Mr. Warrington: the chaplain
bowed very profoundly, and hoped Mr. Warrington would benefit by the
virtuous example of his European kinsmen. Was he related to Sir Miles
Warrington of Norfolk? Sir Miles was Mr. Warrington's father's elder
brother. What a pity he had a son! 'Twas a pretty estate, and Mr.
Warrington looked as if he would become a baronetcy, and a fine estate
in Norfolk.

"Tell me about my uncle," cried Virginian Harry.

"Tell us about those dogs!" said English Will, in a breath.

"Two more jolly dogs, two more drunken dogs, saving your presence, Mr.
Warrington, than Sir Miles and his son, I never saw. Sir Miles was a
staunch friend and neighbour of Sir Robert's. He can drink down any man
in the county, except his son and a few more. The other dogs about which
Mr. William is anxious, for Heaven hath made him a prey to dogs and all
kinds of birds, like the Greeks in the Iliad----"

"I know that line in the Iliad," says Harry, blushing. "I only know five
more, but I know that one." And his head fell. He was thinking, "Ah, my
dear brother George knew all the Iliad and all the Odyssey, and almost
every book that was ever written besides!"

"What on earth" (only he mentioned a place under the earth) "are you
talking about now?" asked Will of his reverence.

The chaplain reverted to the dogs and their performance. He thought Mr.
William's dogs were more than a match for them. From dogs they went off
to horses. Mr. William was very eager about the Six Year Old Plate at
Huntingdon. "Have you brought any news of it, Parson?"

"The odds are five to four on Brilliant against the field," says the
parson, gravely, "but, mind you, Jason is a good horse."

"Whose horse?" asks my lord.

"Duke of Ancaster's. By Cartouche out of Miss Langley," says the divine.
"Have you horse-races in Virginia, Mr. Warrington?"

"Haven't we!" cries Harry; "but oh! I long to see a good English race!"

"Do you--do you--bet a little?" continues his reverence.

"I have done such a thing," replies Harry with a smile.

"I'll take Brilliant even against the field, for ponies with you,
cousin!" shouts out Mr. William.

"I'll give or take three to one against Jason!" says the clergyman.

"I don't bet on horses I don't know," said Harry, wondering to hear the
chaplain now, and remembering his sermon half an hour before.

"Hadn't you better write home, and ask your mother?" says Mr. William,
with a sneer.

"Will, Will!" calls out my lord, "our cousin Warrington is free to bet,
or not, as he likes. Have a care how you venture on either of them,
Harry Warrington. Will is an old file, in spite of his smooth face, and
as for Parson Sampson, I defy our ghostly enemy to get the better of
him."

"Him and all his works, my lord!" said Mr. Sampson, with a bow.

Harry was highly indignant at this allusion to his mother. "I'll tell
you what, cousin Will," he said, "I am in the habit of managing my own
affairs in my own way, without asking any lady to arrange them for me.
And I'm used to make my own bets upon my own judgment, and don't need
any relations to select them for me, thank you. But as I am your
guest, and, no doubt, you want to show me hospitality, I'll take your
bet--there. And so Done and Done."

"Done," says Will, looking askance.

"Of course it is the regular odds that's in the paper which you give me,
cousin?"

"Well, no, it isn't," growled Will. "The odds are five to four, that's
the fact, and you may have 'em, if you like."

"Nay, cousin, a bet is a bet; and I take you, too, Mr. Sampson."

"Three to one against Jason. I lay it. Very good," says Mr. Sampson.

"Is it to be ponies too, Mr. Chaplain?" asks Harry with a superb air, as
if he had Lombard Street in his pocket.

"No, no. Thirty to ten. It is enough for a poor priest to win."

"Here goes a great slice out of my quarter's hundred," thinks Harry.
"Well, I shan't let these Englishmen fancy that I am afraid of them. I
didn't begin, but for the honour of Old Virginia I won't go back."

These pecuniary transactions arranged, William Esmond went away scowling
towards the stables, where he loved to take his pipe with the grooms;
the brisk parson went off to pay his court to the ladies, and partake of
the Sunday dinner which would presently be served. Lord Castlewood and
Harry remained for a while together. Since the Virginian's arrival
my lord had scarcely spoken with him. In his manners he was perfectly
friendly, but so silent that he would often sit at the head of his
table, and leave it without uttering a word.

"I suppose yonder property of yours is a fine one by this time?" said my
lord to Harry.

"I reckon it's almost as big as an English county," answered Harry, "and
the land's as good, too, for many things." Harry would not have the Old
Dominion, nor his share in it, underrated.

"Indeed!" said my lord, with a look of surprise. "When it belonged to my
father it did not yield much."

"Pardon me, my lord. You know how it belonged to your father," cried the
youth, with some spirit. "It was because my grandfather did not choose
to claim his right." [This matter is discussed in the Author's previous
work, The Memoirs of Colonel Esmond.]

"Of course, of course," says my lord, hastily.

"I mean, cousin, that we of the Virginian house owe you nothing but
our own," continued Harry Warrington; "but our own, and the hospitality
which you are now showing me."

"You are heartily welcome to both. You were hurt by the betting just
now?"

"Well," replied the lad, "I am sort o' hurt. Your welcome, you see, is
different to our welcome, and that's the fact. At home we are glad to
see a man, hold out a hand to him, and give him of our best. Here you
take us in, give us beef and claret enough, to be sure, and don't seem
to care when we come, or when we go. That's the remark which I have been
making since I have been in your lordship's house; I can't help telling
it out, you see, now 'tis on my mind; and I think I am a little easier
now I have said it." And with this, the excited young fellow knocked
a billiard-ball across the table, and then laughed, and looked at his
elder kinsman.

"A la bonne heure! We are cold to the stranger within and without our
gates. We don't take Mr. Harry Warrington into our arms, and cry when we
see our cousin. We don't cry when he goes away--but do we pretend?"

"No, you don't. But you try to get the better of him in a bet," says
Harry, indignantly.

"Is there no such practice in Virginia, and don't sporting men there try
to overreach one another? What was that story I heard you telling our
aunt, of the British officers and Tom somebody of Spotsylvania!"

"That's fair!" cries Harry. "That is, it's usual practice, and a
stranger must look out. I don't mind the parson; if he wins, he may
have, and welcome. But a relation! To think that my own blood cousin
wants money out of me!"

"A Newmarket man would get the better of his father. My brother has
been on the turf since he rode over to it from Cambridge. If you play at
cards with him--and he will if you will let him--he will beat you if he
can."

"Well, I'm ready!" cries Harry. "I'll play any game with him that I
know, or I'll jump with him, or I'll ride with him, or I'll row with
him, or I'll wrestle with him, or I'll shoot with him--there--now."

The senior was greatly entertained, and held out his hand to the boy.
"Anything, but don't fight with him," said my lord.

"If I do, I'll whip him! hanged if I don't!" cried the lad. But a look
of surprise and displeasure on the nobleman's part recalled him to
better sentiments. "A hundred pardons, my lord!" he said, blushing very
red, and seizing his cousin's hand. "I talked of ill manners, being
angry and hurt just now; but 'tis doubly ill-mannered of me to show my
anger, and boast about my prowess to my own host and kinsman. It's not
the practice with us Americans to boast, believe me, it's not."

"You are the first I ever met," says my lord, with a smile, "and I take
you at your word. And I give you fair warning about the cards, and the
betting, that is all, my boy."

"Leave a Virginian alone! We are a match for most men, we are," resumed
the boy.

Lord Castlewood did not laugh. His eyebrows only arched for a moment,
and his grey eyes turned towards the ground. "So you can bet fifty
guineas, and afford to lose them? So much the better for you, cousin.
Those great Virginian estates yield a great revenue, do they?"

"More than sufficient for all of us--for ten times as many as we are
now," replied Harry. ("What, he is pumping me," thought the lad.)

"And your mother makes her son and heir a handsome allowance?"

"As much as ever I choose to draw, my lord!" cried Harry.

"Peste! I wish I had such a mother!" cried my lord. "But I have only the
advantage of a stepmother, and she draws me. There is the dinner-bell.
Shall we go into the eating-room?" And taking his young friend's arm, my
lord led him to the apartment where that meal was waiting.

Parson Sampson formed the delight of the entertainment, and amused the
ladies with a hundred agreeable stories. Besides being chaplain to his
lordship, he was a preacher in London, at the new chapel in Mayfair, for
which my Lady Whittlesea (so well known in the reign of George I.) had
left an endowment. He had the choicest stories of all the clubs and
coteries--the very latest news of who had run away with whom--the last
bon-mot of Mr. Selwyn--the last wild bet of March and Rockingham. He
knew how the old king had quarrelled with Madame Walmoden, and the Duke
was suspected of having a new love; who was in favour at Carlton House
with the Princess of Wales, and who was hung last Monday, and how
well he behaved in the cart. My lord's chaplain poured out all this
intelligence to the amused ladies and the delighted young provincial,
seasoning his conversation with such plain terms and lively jokes as
made Harry stare, who was newly arrived from the colonies, and unused to
the elegances of London life. The ladies, old and young, laughed quite
cheerfully at the lively jokes. Do not be frightened, ye fair readers
of the present day! We are not going to outrage your sweet modesties,
or call blushes on your maiden cheeks. But 'tis certain that their
ladyships at Castlewood never once thought of being shocked, but sate
listening to the parson's funny tales, until the chapel bell, clinking
for afternoon service, summoned his reverence away for half an hour.
There was no sermon. He would be back in the drinking of a bottle of
Burgundy. Mr. Will called a fresh one, and the chaplain tossed off a
glass ere he ran out.

Ere the half-hour was over, Mr. Chaplain was back again bawling for
another bottle. This discussed, they joined the ladies, and a couple
of card-tables were set out, as, indeed, they were for many hours every
day, at which the whole of the family party engaged. Madame de Bernstein
could beat any one of her kinsfolk at piquet, and there was only Mr.
Chaplain in the whole circle who was at all a match for her ladyship.

In this easy manner the Sabbath-day passed. The evening was beautiful,
and there was talk of adjourning to a cool tankard and a game of whist
in a summer-house; but the company voted to sit indoors, the ladies
declaring they thought the aspect of three honours in their hand,
and some good court-cards, more beautiful than the loveliest scene of
nature; and so the sun went behind the elms, and still they were at
their cards; and the rooks came home cawing their evensong, and they
never stirred except to change partners; and the chapel clock tolled
hour after hour unheeded, so delightfully were they spent over the
pasteboard; and the moon and stars came out; and it was nine o'clock,
and the groom of the chambers announced that supper was ready.

Whilst they sate at that meal, the postboy's twanging horn was heard,
as he trotted into the village with his letter-bag. My lord's bag was
brought in presently from the village, and his letters, which he put
aside, and his newspaper which he read. He smiled as he came to a
paragraph, looked at his Virginian cousin, and handed the paper over
to his brother Will, who by this time was very comfortable, having had
pretty good luck all the evening, and a great deal of liquor.

"Read that, Will," says my lord.

Mr. William took the paper, and, reading the sentence pointed out by his
brother, uttered an exclamation which caused all the ladies to cry out.

"Gracious heavens, William! What has happened?" cries one or the other
fond sister.

"Mercy, child, why do you swear so dreadfully?" asks the young man's
fond mamma.

"What's the matter?" inquires Madame de Bernstein, who has fallen into a
doze after her usual modicum of punch and beer.

"Read it, Parson!" says Mr. William, thrusting the paper over to the
chaplain, and looking as fierce as a Turk.

"Bit, by the Lord!" roars the chaplain, dashing down the paper.

"Cousin Harry, you are in luck," said my lord, taking up the sheet, and
reading from it. "The Six Year Old Plate at Huntingdon was won by Jason,
beating Brilliant, Pytho, and Ginger. The odds were five to four on
Brilliant against the field, three to one against Jason, seven to two
against Pytho, and twenty to one against Ginger."

"I owe you a half-year's income of my poor living, Mr. Warrington,"
groaned the parson. "I will pay when my noble patron settles with me."

"A curse upon the luck!" growls Mr. William; "that comes of betting on a
Sunday,"--and he sought consolation in another great bumper.

"Nay, cousin Will. It was but in jest," cried Harry. "I can't think of
taking my cousin's money."

"Curse me, sir, do you suppose, if I lose, I can't pay?" asks Mr.
William; "and that I want to be beholden to any man alive? That is a
good joke. Isn't it, Parson?"

"I think I have heard better," said the clergyman; to which William
replied, "Hang it, let us have another bowl."

Let us hope the ladies did not wait for this last replenishment of
liquor, for it is certain they had had plenty already during the
evening.




CHAPTER XVI. In which Gumbo shows Skill with the Old English Weapon


Our young Virginian having won these sums of money from his cousin and
the chaplain, was in duty bound to give them a chance of recovering
their money, and I am afraid his mamma and other sound moralists would
scarcely approve of his way of life. He plays at cards a great deal too
much. Besides the daily whist or quadrille with the ladies, which set in
soon after dinner at three o'clock, and lasted until supper-time, there
occurred games involving the gain or loss of very considerable sums of
money, in which all the gentlemen, my lord included, took part. Since
their Sunday's conversation, his lordship was more free and confidential
with his kinsman than he had previously been, betted with him quite
affably, and engaged him at backgammon and piquet. Mr. William and the
pious chaplain liked a little hazard; though this diversion was enjoyed
on the sly, and unknown to the ladies of the house, who had exacted
repeated promises from cousin Will that he would not lead the Virginian
into mischief, and that he would himself keep out of it. So Will
promised as much as his aunt or his mother chose to demand from him,
gave them his word that he would never play--no, never; and when the
family retired to rest, Mr. Will would walk over with a dice-box and
a rum-bottle to cousin Harry's quarters, where he, and Hal, and his
reverence would sit and play until daylight.

When Harry gave to Lord Castlewood those flourishing descriptions of the
maternal estate in America, he had not wished to mislead his kinsman,
or to boast, or to tell falsehoods, for the lad was of a very honest and
truth-telling nature; but, in his life at home, it must be owned
that the young fellow had had acquaintance with all sorts of queer
company,--horse-jockeys, tavern loungers, gambling and sporting men,
of whom a great number were found in his native colony. A landed
aristocracy, with a population of negroes to work their fields, and
cultivate their tobacco and corn, had little other way of amusement
than in the hunting-field, or over the cards and the punch-bowl. The
hospitality of the province was unbounded: every man's house was his
neighbour's; and the idle gentlefolks rode from one mansion to another,
finding in each pretty much the same sport, welcome, and rough plenty.
The Virginian squire had often a barefooted valet, and a cobbled saddle;
but there was plenty of corn for the horses, and abundance of drink and
venison for the master within the tumble-down fences, and behind the
cracked windows of the hall. Harry had slept on many a straw mattress,
and engaged in endless jolly night-bouts over claret and punch in
cracked bowls till morning came, and it was time to follow the hounds.
His poor brother was of a much more sober sort, as the lad owned with
contrition. So it is that Nature makes folks; and some love books and
tea, and some like Burgundy and a gallop across country. Our young
fellow's tastes were speedily made visible to his friends in England.
None of them were partial to the Puritan discipline; nor did they like
Harry the worse for not being the least of a milksop. Manners, you see,
were looser a hundred years ago; tongues were vastly more free-and-easy;
names were named, and things were done, which we should screech now to
hear mentioned. Yes, madam, we are not as our ancestors were. Ought we
not to thank the Fates that have improved our morals so prodigiously,
and made us so eminently virtuous?

So, keeping a shrewd keen eye upon people round about him, and fancying,
not incorrectly, that his cousins were disposed to pump him, Harry
Warrington had thought fit to keep his own counsel regarding his own
affairs, and in all games of chance or matters of sport was quite a
match for the three gentlemen into whose company he had fallen. Even in
the noble game of billiards he could hold his own after a few days' play
with his cousins and their revered pastor. His grandfather loved the
game, and had over from Europe one of the very few tables which existed
in his Majesty's province of Virginia. Nor, though Mr. Will could
beat him at the commencement, could he get undue odds out of the young
gamester. After their first bet, Harry was on his guard with Mr. Will,
and cousin William owned, not without respect, that the American was his
match in most things, and his better in many. But though Harry played so
well that he could beat the parson, and soon was the equal of Will, who
of course could beat both the girls, how came it, that in the contests
with these, especially with one of them, Mr. Warrington frequently
came off second? He was profoundly courteous to every being who wore a
petticoat; nor has that traditional politeness yet left his country. All
the women of the Castlewood establishment loved the young gentleman.
The grim housekeeper was mollified by him: the fat cook greeted him with
blowsy smiles; the ladies'-maids, whether of the French or the English
nation, smirked and giggled in his behalf; the pretty porter's daughter
at the lodge had always a kind word in reply to his. Madame de Bernstein
took note of all these things, and, though she said nothing, watched
carefully the boy's disposition and behaviour.

Who can say how old Lady Maria Esmond was? Books of the Peerage were
not so many in those days as they are in our blessed times, and I cannot
tell to a few years, or even a lustre or two. When Will used to say she
was five-and-thirty, he was abusive, and, besides, was always given
to exaggeration. Maria was Will's half-sister. She and my lord were
children of the late Lord Castlewood's first wife, a German lady, whom,
'tis known, my lord married in the time of Queen Anne's wars. Baron
Bernstein, who married Maria's Aunt Beatrix, Bishop Tusher's widow, was
also a German, a Hanoverian nobleman, and relative of the first Lady
Castlewood. If my Lady Maria was born under George I., and his Majesty
George II. had been thirty years on the throne, how could she be
seven-and-twenty, as she told Harry Warrington she was? "I am old,
child," she used to say. She used to call Harry "child" when they were
alone. "I am a hundred years old. I am seven-and-twenty. I might be your
mother almost." To which Harry would reply, "Your ladyship might be the
mother of all the cupids, I am sure. You don't look twenty, on my word
you do Dot!"

Lady Maria looked any age you liked. She was a fair beauty with a
dazzling white and red complexion, an abundance of fair hair which
flowed over her shoulders, and beautiful round arms which showed to
uncommon advantage when she played at billiards with cousin Harry. When
she had to stretch across the table to make a stroke, that youth caught
glimpses of a little ankle, a little clocked stocking, and a little
black satin slipper with a little red heel, which filled him with
unutterable rapture, and made him swear that there never was such a
foot, ankle, clocked stocking, satin slipper in the world. And yet, oh,
you foolish Harry! your mother's foot was ever so much more slender, and
half an inch shorter, than Lady Maria's. But, somehow, boys do not look
at their mammas' slippers and ankles with rapture.

No doubt Lady Maria was very kind to Harry when they were alone. Before
her sister, aunt, stepmother, she made light of him, calling him a
simpleton, a chit, and who knows what trivial names? Behind his back,
and even before his face, she mimicked his accent, which smacked
somewhat of his province. Harry blushed and corrected the faulty
intonation, under his English monitresses. His aunt pronounced that they
would soon make him a pretty fellow.

Lord Castlewood, we have said, became daily more familiar and friendly
with his guest and relative. Till the crops were off the ground there
was no sporting, except an occasional cock-match at Winchester, and a
bull-baiting at Hexton Fair. Harry and Will rode off to many jolly fairs
and races round about the young Virginian was presented to some of the
county families--the Henleys of the Grange, the Crawleys of Queen's
Crawley, the Redmaynes of Lionsden, and so forth. The neighbours came
in their great heavy coaches, and passed two or three days in country
fashion. More of them would have come, but for the fear all the
Castlewood family had of offending Madame de Bernstein. She did not like
country company; the rustical society and conversation annoyed her. "We
shall be merrier when my aunt leaves us," the young folks owned. "We
have cause, as you may imagine, for being very civil to her. You know
what a favourite she was with our papa? And with reason. She got him his
earldom, being very well indeed at Court at that time with the King and
Queen. She commands here naturally, perhaps a little too much. We are
all afraid of her: even my elder brother stands in awe of her, and my
stepmother is much more obedient to her than she ever was to my papa,
whom she ruled with a rod of iron. But Castlewood is merrier when our
aunt is not here. At least we have much more company. You will come to
us in our gay days, Harry, won't you? Of course you will: this is your
home, sir. I was so pleased--oh, so pleased--when my brother said he
considered it was your home!"

A soft hand is held out after this pretty speech, a pair of very well
preserved blue eyes look exceedingly friendly. Harry grasps his cousin's
hand with ardour. I do not know what privilege of cousinship he would
not like to claim, only he is so timid. They call the English selfish
and cold. He at first thought his relatives were so: but how mistaken he
was! How kind and affectionate they are, especially the Earl,--and
dear, dear Maria! How he wishes he could recall that letter which he
had written to Mrs. Mountain and his mother, in which he hinted that his
welcome had been a cold one! The Earl his cousin was everything that was
kind, had promised to introduce him to London society, and present him
at Court, and at White's. He was to consider Castlewood as his English
home. He had been most hasty in his judgment regarding his relatives
in Hampshire. All this, with many contrite expressions, he wrote in his
second despatch to Virginia. And he added, for it hath been hinted
that the young gentleman did not spell at this early time with especial
accuracy, "My cousin, the Lady Maria, is a perfect Angle."

"Ille praeter omnes angulus ridet," muttered little Mr. Dempster, at
home in Virginia.

"The child can't be falling in love with his angle, as he calls her!"
cries out Mountain.

"Pooh, pooh! my niece Maria is forty!" says Madam Esmond. "I perfectly
well recollect her when I was at home--a great, gawky, carroty creature,
with a foot like a pair of bellows." Where is truth, forsooth, and who
knoweth it? Is Beauty beautiful, or is it only our eyes that make it
so? Does Venus squint? Has she got a splay-foot, red hair, and a crooked
back? Anoint my eyes, good Fairy Puck, so that I may ever consider the
Beloved Object a paragon! Above all, keep on anointing my mistress's
dainty peepers with the very strongest ointment, so that my noddle may
ever appear lovely to her, and that she may continue to crown my honest
ears with fresh roses!

Now, not only was Harry Warrington a favourite with some in the
drawing-room, and all the ladies of the servants'-hall, but, like master
like man, his valet Gumbo was very much admired and respected by very
many of the domestic circle. Gumbo had a hundred accomplishments. He
was famous as a fisherman, huntsman, blacksmith. He could dress hair
beautifully, and improved himself in the art under my lord's own Swiss
gentleman. He was great at cooking many of his Virginian dishes, and
learned many new culinary secrets from my lord's French man. We have
heard how exquisitely and melodiously he sang at church; and he sang not
only sacred but secular music, often inventing airs and composing rude
words after the habit of his people. He played the fiddle so charmingly,
that he set all the girls dancing in Castlewood Hall, and was ever
welcome to a gratis mug of ale at the Three Castles in the village, if
he would but bring his fiddle with him. He was good-natured and loved
to play for the village children: so that Mr. Warrington's negro was a
universal favourite in all the Castlewood domain.

Now it was not difficult for the servants'-hall folks to perceive that
Mr. Gumbo was a liar, which fact was undoubted in spite of all his good
qualities. For instance, that day at church, when he pretended to read
out of Molly's psalm-book, he sang quite other words than those which
were down in the book, of which he could not decipher a syllable. And
he pretended to understand music, whereupon the Swiss valet brought him
some, and Master Gumbo turned the page upside down. These instances of
long-bow practice daily occurred, and were patent to all the Castlewood
household. They knew Gumbo was a liar, perhaps not thinking the worse
of him for this weakness; but they did not know how great a liar he
was, and believed him much more than they had any reason for doing, and
because, I suppose, they liked to believe him.

Whatever might be his feelings of wonder and envy on first viewing the
splendour and comforts of Castlewood, Mr. Gumbo kept his sentiments
to himself, and examined the place, park, appointments, stables, very
coolly. The horses, he said, were very well, what there were of them;
but at Castlewood in Virginia they had six times as many, and let
me see, fourteen eighteen grooms to look after them. Madam Esmond's
carriages were much finer than my lord's,--great deal more gold on the
panels. As for her gardens, they covered acres, and they grew every kind
of flower and fruit under the sun. Pineapples and peaches? Pineapples
and peaches were so common, they were given to pigs in his country. They
had twenty forty gardeners, not white gardeners, all black gentlemen,
like hisself. In the house were twenty forty gentlemen in
livery, besides women-servants--never could remember how
many women-servants,--dere were so many: tink dere were fifty
women-servants--all Madam Esmond's property, and worth ever so many
hundred pieces of eight apiece. How much was a piece of eight? Bigger
than a guinea, a piece of eight was. Tink, Madam Esmond have twenty
thirty thousand guineas a year,--have whole rooms full of gold and
plate. Came to England in one of her ships; have ever so many ships,
Gumbo can't count how many ships; and estates, covered all over with
tobacco and negroes, and reaching out for a week's journey. Was Master
Harry heir to all this property? Of course, now Master George was killed
and scalped by the Indians. Gumbo had killed ever so many Indians, and
tried to save Master George, but he was Master Harry's boy,--and Master
Harry was as rich,--oh, as rich as ever he like. He wore black now,
because Master George was dead; but you should see his chests full of
gold clothes, and lace, and jewels at Bristol. Of course, Master
Harry was the richest man in all Virginia, and might have twenty sixty
servants; only he liked travelling with one best, and that one, it need
scarcely be said, was Gumbo.

This story was not invented at once, but gradually elicited from Mr.
Gumbo, who might have uttered some trifling contradictions during the
progress of the narrative, but by the time he had told his tale twice or
thrice in the servants'-hall or the butler's private apartment, he
was pretty perfect and consistent in his part, and knew accurately the
number of slaves Madam Esmond kept, and the amount of income which she
enjoyed. The truth is, that as four or five blacks are required to do
the work of one white man, the domestics in American establishments
are much more numerous than in ours; and, like the houses of most other
Virginian landed proprietors, Madam Esmond's mansion and stables swarmed
with negroes.

Mr. Gumbo's account of his mistress's wealth and splendour was carried
to my lord by his lordship's man, and to Madame de Bernstein and my
ladies by their respective waiting-women, and, we may be sure, lost
nothing in the telling. A young gentleman in England is not the
less liked because he is reputed to be the heir to vast wealth and
possessions; when Lady Castlewood came to hear of Harry's prodigious
expectations, she repented of her first cool reception of him, and of
having pinched her daughter's arm till it was black-and-blue for having
been extended towards the youth in too friendly a manner. Was it too
late to have him back into those fair arms? Lady Fanny was welcome to
try, and resumed the dancing-lessons. The Countess would play the music
with all her heart. But, how provoking! that odious, sentimental Maria
would always insist upon being in the room; and, as sure as Fanny walked
in the gardens or the park, so sure would her sister come trailing after
her. As for Madame de Bernstein, she laughed, and was amused at the
stories of the prodigious fortune of her Virginian relatives. She knew
her half-sister's man of business in London, and very likely was aware
of the real state of Madame Esmond's money matters; but she did not
contradict the rumours which Gumbo and his fellow-servants had set
afloat; and was not a little diverted by the effect which these reports
had upon the behaviour of the Castlewood family towards their young
kinsman.

"Hang him! Is he so rich, Molly?" said my lord to his elder sister.
"Then good-bye to our chances with your aunt. The Baroness will be sure
to leave him all her money to spite us, and because he doesn't want
it. Nevertheless, the lad is a good lad enough, and it is not his fault
being rich, you know."

"He is very simple and modest in his habits for one so wealthy," remarks
Maria.

"Rich people often are so," says my lord. "If I were rich, I often think
I would be the greatest miser, and live in rags and on a crust. Depend
on it there is no pleasure so enduring as money-getting. It grows on
you, and increases with old age. But because I am as poor as Lazarus, I
dress in purple and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day."

Maria went to the book-room and got the History of Virginia, by R. B.
Gent--and read therein what an admirable climate it was, and how all
kinds of fruit and corn grew in that province, and what noble rivers
were those of Potomac and Rappahannoc, abounding in all sorts of fish.
And she wondered whether the climate would agree with her, and whether
her aunt would like her? And Harry was sure his mother would adore
her, so would Mountain. And when he was asked about the number of his
mother's servants, he said, they certainly had more servants than are
seen in England--he did not know how many. But the negroes did not do
near as much work as English servants did hence the necessity of keeping
so great a number. As for some others of Gumbo's details which were
brought to him, he laughed and said the boy was wonderful as a romancer,
and in telling such stories he supposed was trying to speak out for the
honour of the family.

So Harry was modest as well as rich! His denials only served to confirm
his relatives' opinion regarding his splendid expectations. More and
more the Countess and the ladies were friendly and affectionate with
him. More and more Mr. Will betted with him, and wanted to sell him
bargains. Harry's simple dress and equipage only served to confirm his
friends' idea of his wealth. To see a young man of his rank and means
with but one servant, and without horses or a carriage of his own--what
modesty! When he went to London he would cut a better figure? Of course
he would. Castlewood would introduce him to the best society in the
capital, and he would appear as he ought to appear at St. James's. No
man could be more pleasant, wicked, lively, obsequious than the worthy
chaplain, Mr. Sampson. How proud he would be if he could show his young
friend a little of London life!--if he could warn rogues off him, and
keep him out of the way of harm! Mr. Sampson was very kind: everybody
was very kind. Harry liked quite well the respect that was paid to him.
As Madam Esmond's son he thought perhaps it was his due: and took for
granted that he was the personage which his family imagined him to be.
How should he know better, who had never as yet seen any place but his
own province, and why should he not respect his own condition when other
people respected it so? So all the little knot of people at Castlewood
House, and from these the people in Castlewood village, and from thence
the people in the whole county, chose to imagine that Mr. Harry Esmond
Warrington was the heir of immense wealth, and a gentleman of very
great importance, because his negro valet told lies about him in the
servants'-hall.

Harry's aunt, Madame de Bernstein, after a week or two, began to tire of
Castlewood and the inhabitants of that mansion, and the neighbours who
came to visit them. This clever woman tired of most things and people
sooner or later. So she took to nodding and sleeping over the chaplain's
stories, and to doze at her whist and over her dinner, and to be very
snappish and sarcastic in her conversation with her Esmond nephews and
nieces, hitting out blows at my lord and his brother the jockey, and my
ladies, widowed and unmarried, who winced under her scornful remarks,
and bore them as they best might. The cook, whom she had so praised on
first coming, now gave her no satisfaction; the wine was corked; the
house was damp, dreary, and full of draughts; the doors would not shut,
and the chimneys were smoky. She began to think the Tunbridge waters
were very necessary for her, and ordered the doctor, who came to her
from the neighbouring town of Hexton, to order those waters for her
benefit.

"I wish to heaven she would go!" growled my lord, who was the most
independent member of his family. "She may go to Tunbridge, or she may
go to Bath, or she may go to Jericho, for me."

"Shall Fanny and I come with you to Tunbridge, dear Baroness?" asked
Lady Castlewood of her sister-in-law.

"Not for worlds, my dear! The doctor orders me absolute quiet, and if
you came I should have the knocker going all day, and Fanny's lovers
would never be out of the house," answered the Baroness, who was quite
weary of Lady Castlewood's company.

"I wish I could be of any service to my aunt!" said the sentimental Lady
Maria, demurely.

"My good child, what can you do for me? You cannot play piquet so well
as my maid, and I have heard all your songs till I am perfectly tired of
them! One of the gentlemen might go with me: at least make the journey,
and see me safe from highwaymen."

"I'm sure, ma'am, I shall be glad to ride with you," said Mr. Will.

"Oh, not you! I don't want you, William," cried the young man's
aunt. "Why do not you offer, and where are your American manners, you
ungracious Harry Warrington? Don't swear, Will, Harry is much better
company than you are, and much better ton too, sir."

"Tong, indeed! Confound his tong," growled envious Will to himself.

"I dare say I shall be tired of him, as I am of other folks," continued
the Baroness. "I have scarcely seen Harry at all in these last days. You
shall ride with me to Tunbridge, Harry!"

At this direct appeal, and to no one's wonder more than that of his
aunt, Mr. Harry Warrington blushed, and hemmed and ha'd and at length
said, "I have promised my cousin Castlewood to go over to Hexton Petty
