
CHORUS

  Ah but I shudder, father!--ah, even now,
  Even as I speak, the swift-winged ships draw nigh!

  I shudder, I shiver, I perish with fear:
      Overseas though I fled,
  Yet nought it avails; my pursuers are near!

DANAUS

  Children, take heart; they who decreed to aid
  Thy cause will arm for battle, well I ween.

CHORUS

  But desperate is Aegyptus' ravening race,
  With fight unsated; thou too know'st it well.

  In their wrath they o'ertake us; the prow is deep-dark
      In the which they have sped,
  And dark is the bench and the crew of the bark!

DANAUS

  Yea but a crew as stout they here shall find,
  And arms well steeled beneath a noon-day sun.

CHORUS

  Ah yet, O father, leave us not forlorn!
  Alone, a maid is nought, a strengthless arm.
  With guile they Pursue me, with counsel malign,
      And unholy their soul;
  And as ravens they seize me, unheeding the shrine!

DANAUS

  Fair will befall us, children, in this chance,
  If thus in wrath they wrong the gods and you.

CHORUS

  Alas, nor tridents nor the sanctity
  Of shrines will drive them, O my sire, from us!

  Unholy and daring and cursed is their ire,
      Nor own they control
  Of the gods, but like jackals they glut their desire!

DANAUS

  Ay, but _Come wolf, flee jackal_, saith the saw;
  Nor can the flax-plant overbear the corn.

CHORUS

  Lustful, accursed, monstrous is their will
  As of beasts ravening--'ware we of their power!

DANAUS

  Look you, not swiftly puts a fleet to sea,
  Nor swiftly to its moorings; long it is
  Or e'er the saving cables to the shore
  Are borne, and long or e'er the steersmen cry,
  _The good ship swings at anchor--all is well_.
  Longest of all, the task to come aland
  Where haven there is none, when sunset fades
  In night. _To pilot wise_, the adage saith,
  _Night is a day of wakefulness and pain_.
  Therefore no force of weaponed men, as yet
  Scatheless can come ashore, before the bank
  Lie at her anchorage securely moored.
  Bethink thee therefore, nor in panic leave
  The shrine of gods whose succour thou hast won
  I go for aid--men shall not blame me long,
  Old, but with youth at heart and on my tongue
                                             [_Exit_ DANAUS.

CHORUS

  O land of hill and dale, O holy land,
  What shall befall us? whither shall we flee,
  From Apian land to some dark lair of earth?

  O would that in vapour of smoke I might rise to the
      clouds of the sky,
  That as dust which flits up without wings I might pass
      and evanish and die!
  I dare not, I dare not abide: my heart yearns, eager
      to fly;
  And  dark is the cast of my thought;  I shudder and
      tremble for fear.
  My father looked forth and beheld:  I die of the sight
      that draws near.
  And for me be the strangling cord, the halter made
      ready by Fate,
  Before to my body draws nigh the man of my horror
      and hate.
  Nay,  ere  I will own him as lord, as handmaid to
      Hades I go!
  And oh, that aloft in the sky, where the dark clouds
      are frozen to snow,
  A refuge for me might be found, or a mountain-top
      smooth and too high

  For the foot of the goat, where the vulture sits lonely,
     and none may descry
  The  pinnacle veiled in the cloud,
      the highest and sheerest of all,
  Ere to wedlock that rendeth my heart,
      and love that is loveless, I fall!
  Yea, a prey to the dogs and the birds of the mount
       will I give me to be,--
  From wailing and curse and pollution it is death,
      only death, sets me free:
  Let death come upon me before
      to the ravisher's bed I am thrust;
  What champion, what saviour but death can I find,
      or what refuge from lust?
  I will utter my shriek of entreaty,
      a prayer that shrills up to the sky,
  That calleth  the gods  to  compassion,
      a tuneful, a pitiful cry,
  That is loud to invoke the releaser.
      O father, look down on the fight;
  Look down in thy wrath on the wronger,
      with eyes that are eager for right.
  Zeus, thou that art lord of the world,
      whose kingdom is strong over all,
  Have mercy on us! At thine altar for refuge
      and safety we call.
  For the race of Aegyptus is fierce,
      with greed and with malice afire;
  They cry as the questing hounds,
      they sweep with the speed of desire.
  But thine is the balance of fate,
      thou rulest the wavering scale,
  And without thee no mortal emprise
      shall have strength to achieve or prevail.

    Alack, alack! the ravisher--
  He leaps from boat to beach, he draweth near!
    Away, thou plunderer accurst!
      Death seize thee first,
  Or e'er thou touch me--off! God, hear our cry,
      Our maiden agony!
  Ah, ah, the touch, the prelude of my shame.
      Alas, my maiden fame!
    O sister, sister, to the altar cling,
      For he that seizeth me,
  Grim is his wrath and stern, by land as on the sea.
      Guard us, O king!
                              [_Enter the_ HERALD OF AEGYPTUS]

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Hence to my barge--step swiftly, tarry not.

CHORUS

  Alack, he rends--he rends my hair! O wound on
      wound!
  Help! my lopped head will fall, my blood gush o'er
      the ground!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Aboard, ye cursed--with a new curse, go!

CHORUS

    Would God that on the wand'ring brine
    Thou and this braggart tongue of thine
      Had sunk beneath the main--
    Thy mast and planks, made fast in vain!
    Thee would I drive aboard once more,
  A slayer and a dastard, from the shore!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

    Be still, thou vain demented soul;
    My force thy craving shall control.
  Away, aboard!  What, clingest to the shrine?
  Away! this city's gods I hold not for divine.

CHORUS

      Aid me, ye gods, that never, never
        I may again behold
      The mighty, the life-giving river,
    Nilus, the quickener of field and fold!
    Alack, O sire, unto the shrine I cling--
  Shrine of this land from which mine ancient line did spring!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Shrines,  shrines, forsooth!--the ship, the ship be shrine!
  Aboard, perforce and will-ye nill-ye, go!
      Or e'er from hands of mine
  Ye suffer torments worse and blow on blow.

CHORUS

      Alack, God grant those hands may strive in vain
        With the salt-streaming wave,
      When 'gainst  the wide-blown  blasts thy bark shall strain
  To round Sarpedon's cape, the sandbank's treach'rous grave.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Shrill ye and shriek unto what gods ye may,
  Ye shall not leap from out Aegyptus' bark,
  How bitterly soe'er ye wail your woe.

CHORUS

  Alack, alack my wrong!
  Stern is thy voice, thy vaunting loud and strong.
  Thy sire, the mighty Nilus, drive thee hence
  Turning to death and doom thy greedy violence!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Swift to the vessel of the double prow,
  Go quickly! let none linger, else this hand
  Ruthless will hale you by your tresses hence.

CHORUS

  Alack, O father! from the shrine
  Not aid but agony is mine.
  As a spider he creeps and he clutches his prey,
  And he hales me away.
  A spectre of darkness, of darkness. Alas and alas! well-a-day!
  O Earth, O my mother! O Zeus, thou king of the earth, and her child!
  Turn back, we pray thee, from us his clamour and threatenings wild!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Peace! I fear not this country's deities.
  They fostered not my childhood nor mine age.

CHORUS

  Like a snake that is human he comes,
      he shudders and crawls to my side;
  As an adder that biteth the foot,
      his clutch on my flesh doth abide.
  O Earth, O my mother! O Zeus, thou king of the earth,
      and her child!
  Turn back, we pray thee, from us his clamour
      and threatenings wild!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Swift each unto the ship; repine no more,
  Or my hand shall not spare to rend your robe.

CHORUS

  O chiefs, O leaders, aid me, or I yield!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Peace! if ye have not ears to hear my words,
  Lo, by these tresses must I hale you hence.

CHORUS

  Undone we are, O king! all hope is gone.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Ay, kings enow ye shall behold anon,
  Aegyptus' sons--Ye shall not want for kings.
                                   [_Enter the_ KING OF ARGOS.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Sirrah, what dost thou? in what arrogance
  Darest thou thus insult Pelasgia's realm?
  Deemest thou this a woman-hearted town?
  Thou art too full of thy barbarian scorn
  For us of Grecian blood, and, erring thus,
  Thou dost bewray thyself a fool in all!


HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Say thou wherein my deeds transgress my right.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  First, that thou play'st a stranger's part amiss.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Wherein?  I do but search and claim mine own.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  To whom of our guest-champions hast appealed?

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  To Hermes, herald's champion, lord of search.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Yea, to a god--yet dost thou wrong the gods!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  The gods that rule by Nilus I revere.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Hear I aright? our Argive gods are nought?

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  The prey is mine, unless force rend it from me.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  At thine own peril touch them--'ware, and soon!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  I hear thy speech, no hospitable word.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  I am no host for sacrilegious hands.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  I will go tell this to Aegyptus' sons.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Tell it! my pride will ponder not thy word.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Yet, that I have my message clear to say
  (For it behooves that heralds' words be clear,
  Be they or ill or good), how art thou named?
  By whom despoiled of this sister-band
  Of maidens pass I homeward?--speak and say!
  For lo, henceforth in Ares' court we stand,
  Who judges not by witness but by war:
  No pledge of silver now can bring the cause
  To issue: ere this thing end, there must be
  Corpse piled on corpse and many lives gasped forth.

THE KING OF ARGOS

  What skills it that I tell my name to thee?
  Thou and thy mates shall learn it ere the end.
  Know that if words unstained by violence
  Can change these maidens' choice, then mayest thou,
  With full consent of theirs, conduct them hence.
  But thus the city with one voice ordained--

    _No force shall bear away the maiden band_.

  Firmly this word upon the temple wall
  Is by a rivet clenched, and shall abide:
  Not upon wax inscribed and delible,
  Nor upon parchment sealed and stored away.--
  Lo, thou hast heard our free mouths speak their will:
  Out from our presence--tarry not, but go!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS

  Methinks we stand on some new edge of war:
  Be strength and triumph on the young men's side!

THE KING OF ARGOS

  Nay but here also shall ye find young men,
  Unsodden with the juices oozed from grain.[6]
                                      [_Exit_ HERALD OF AEGYPTUS
  But ye, O maids, with your attendants true,
  Pass hence with trust into the fenced town,
  Ringed with a wide confine of guarding towers.
  Therein are many dwellings for such guests
  As the State honours; there myself am housed
