by bands of flayers, skinners, Brabacons, tardvenus, and the rest of
them. When every man's grip is on his neighbor's throat, and every
five-sous-piece of a baron is marching with tuck of drum to fight whom
he will, it would be a strange thing if five hundred brave English boys
could not pick up a living. Now that Sir John Hawkwood hath gone with
the East Anglian lads and the Nottingham woodmen into the service of the
Marquis of Montferrat to fight against the Lord of Milan, there are but
ten score of us left, yet I trust that I may be able to bring some back
with me to fill the ranks of the White Company. By the tooth of Peter!
it would be a bad thing if I could not muster many a Hamptonshire man
who would be ready to strike in under the red flag of St. George, and
the more so if Sir Nigel Loring, of Christchurch, should don hauberk
once more and take the lead of us."

"Ah, you would indeed be in luck then," quoth a woodman; "for it is said
that, setting aside the prince, and mayhap good old Sir John Chandos,
there was not in the whole army a man of such tried courage."

"It is sooth, every word of it," the archer answered. "I have seen him
with these two eyes in a stricken field, and never did man carry himself
better. Mon Dieu! yes, ye would not credit it to look at him, or to
hearken to his soft voice, but from the sailing from Orwell down to
the foray to Paris, and that is clear twenty years, there was not a
skirmish, onfall, sally, bushment, escalado or battle, but Sir Nigel was
in the heart of it. I go now to Christchurch with a letter to him from
Sir Claude Latour to ask him if he will take the place of Sir John
Hawkwood; and there is the more chance that he will if I bring one or
two likely men at my heels. What say you, woodman: wilt leave the bucks
to loose a shaft at a nobler mark?"

The forester shook his head. "I have wife and child at Emery Down,"
quoth he; "I would not leave them for such a venture."

"You, then, young sir?" asked the archer.

"Nay, I am a man of peace," said Alleyne Edricson. "Besides, I have
other work to do."

"Peste!" growled the soldier, striking his flagon on the board until the
dishes danced again. "What, in the name of the devil, hath come over
the folk? Why sit ye all moping by the fireside, like crows round a dead
horse, when there is man's work to be done within a few short leagues of
ye? Out upon you all, as a set of laggards and hang-backs! By my hilt I
believe that the men of England are all in France already, and that what
is left behind are in sooth the women dressed up in their paltocks and
hosen."

"Archer," quoth Hordle John, "you have lied more than once and more than
twice; for which, and also because I see much in you to dislike, I am
sorely tempted to lay you upon your back."

"By my hilt! then, I have found a man at last!" shouted the bowman.
"And, 'fore God, you are a better man than I take you for if you can lay
me on my back, mon garcon. I have won the ram more times than there are
toes to my feet, and for seven long years I have found no man in the
Company who could make my jerkin dusty."

"We have had enough bobance and boasting," said Hordle John, rising and
throwing off his doublet. "I will show you that there are better men
left in England than ever went thieving to France."

"Pasques Dieu!" cried the archer, loosening his jerkin, and eyeing his
foeman over with the keen glance of one who is a judge of manhood.
"I have only once before seen such a body of a man. By your leave, my
red-headed friend, I should be right sorry to exchange buffets with
you; and I will allow that there is no man in the Company who would
pull against you on a rope; so let that be a salve to your pride. On
the other hand I should judge that you have led a life of ease for some
months back, and that my muscle is harder than your own. I am ready to
wager upon myself against you if you are not afeard."

"Afeard, thou lurden!" growled big John. "I never saw the face yet of
the man that I was afeard of. Come out, and we shall see who is the
better man."

"But the wager?"

"I have nought to wager. Come out for the love and the lust of the
thing."

"Nought to wager!" cried the soldier. "Why, you have that which I covet
above all things. It is that big body of thine that I am after. See,
now, mon garcon. I have a French feather-bed there, which I have been at
pains to keep these years back. I had it at the sacking of Issodun, and
the King himself hath not such a bed. If you throw me, it is thine; but,
if I throw you, then you are under a vow to take bow and bill and hie
with me to France, there to serve in the White Company as long as we be
enrolled."

"A fair wager!" cried all the travellers, moving back their benches and
trestles, so as to give fair field for the wrestlers.

"Then you may bid farewell to your bed, soldier," said Hordle John.

"Nay; I shall keep the bed, and I shall have you to France in spite
of your teeth, and you shall live to thank me for it. How shall it be,
then, mon enfant? Collar and elbow, or close-lock, or catch how you
can?"

"To the devil with your tricks," said John, opening and shutting his
great red hands. "Stand forth, and let me clip thee."

"Shalt clip me as best you can then," quoth the archer, moving out into
the open space, and keeping a most wary eye upon his opponent. He had
thrown off his green jerkin, and his chest was covered only by a pink
silk jupon, or undershirt, cut low in the neck and sleeveless. Hordle
John was stripped from his waist upwards, and his huge body, with his
great muscles swelling out like the gnarled roots of an oak, towered
high above the soldier. The other, however, though near a foot shorter,
was a man of great strength; and there was a gloss upon his white skin
which was wanting in the heavier limbs of the renegade monk. He was
quick on his feet, too, and skilled at the game; so that it was clear,
from the poise of head and shine of eye, that he counted the chances to
be in his favor. It would have been hard that night, through the whole
length of England, to set up a finer pair in face of each other.

Big John stood waiting in the centre with a sullen, menacing eye, and
his red hair in a bristle, while the archer paced lightly and swiftly to
the right and the left with crooked knee and hands advanced. Then with a
sudden dash, so swift and fierce that the eye could scarce follow it, he
flew in upon his man and locked his leg round him. It was a grip that,
between men of equal strength, would mean a fall; but Hordle John tore
him off from him as he might a rat, and hurled him across the room, so
that his head cracked up against the wooden wall.

"Ma foi!" cried the bowman, passing his fingers through his curls, "you
were not far from the feather-bed then, mon gar. A little more and this
good hostel would have a new window."

Nothing daunted, he approached his man once more, but this time with
more caution than before. With a quick feint he threw the other off his
guard, and then, bounding upon him, threw his legs round his waist and
his arms round his bull-neck, in the hope of bearing him to the ground
with the sudden shock. With a bellow of rage, Hordle John squeezed him
limp in his huge arms; and then, picking him up, cast him down upon the
floor with a force which might well have splintered a bone or two,
had not the archer with the most perfect coolness clung to the other's
forearms to break his fall. As it was, he dropped upon his feet and
kept his balance, though it sent a jar through his frame which set every
joint a-creaking. He bounded back from his perilous foeman; but the
other, heated by the bout, rushed madly after him, and so gave the
practised wrestler the very vantage for which he had planned. As big
John flung himself upon him, the archer ducked under the great red hands
that clutched for him, and, catching his man round the thighs, hurled
him over his shoulder--helped as much by his own mad rush as by the
trained strength of the heave. To Alleyne's eye, it was as if John had
taken unto himself wings and flown. As he hurtled through the air, with
giant limbs revolving, the lad's heart was in his mouth; for surely no
man ever yet had such a fall and came scathless out of it. In truth,
hardy as the man was, his neck had been assuredly broken had he not
pitched head first on the very midriff of the drunken artist, who was
slumbering so peacefully in the corner, all unaware of these stirring
doings. The luckless limner, thus suddenly brought out from his dreams,
sat up with a piercing yell, while Hordle John bounded back into the
circle almost as rapidly as he had left it.

"One more fall, by all the saints!" he cried, throwing out his arms.

"Not I," quoth the archer, pulling on his clothes, "I have come well out
of the business. I would sooner wrestle with the great bear of Navarre."

"It was a trick," cried John.

"Aye was it. By my ten finger-bones! it is a trick that will add a
proper man to the ranks of the Company."

"Oh, for that," said the other, "I count it not a fly; for I had
promised myself a good hour ago that I should go with thee, since the
life seems to be a goodly and proper one. Yet I would fain have had the
feather-bed."

"I doubt it not, mon ami," quoth the archer, going back to his tankard.
"Here is to thee, lad, and may we be good comrades to each other! But,
hola! what is it that ails our friend of the wrathful face?"

The unfortunate limner had been sitting up rubbing himself ruefully
and staring about with a vacant gaze, which showed that he knew neither
where he was nor what had occurred to him. Suddenly, however, a flash
of intelligence had come over his sodden features, and he rose and
staggered for the door. "'Ware the ale!" he said in a hoarse whisper,
shaking a warning finger at the company. "Oh, holy Virgin, 'ware the
ale!" and slapping his hands to his injury, he flitted off into the
darkness, amid a shout of laughter, in which the vanquished joined as
merrily as the victor. The remaining forester and the two laborers
were also ready for the road, and the rest of the company turned to the
blankets which Dame Eliza and the maid had laid out for them upon the
floor. Alleyne, weary with the unwonted excitements of the day, was soon
in a deep slumber broken only by fleeting visions of twittering legs,
cursing beggars, black robbers, and the many strange folk whom he had
met at the "Pied Merlin."



CHAPTER VII. HOW THE THREE COMRADES JOURNEYED THROUGH THE WOODLANDS.


At early dawn the country inn was all alive, for it was rare indeed
that an hour of daylight would be wasted at a time when lighting was so
scarce and dear. Indeed, early as it was when Dame Eliza began to stir,
it seemed that others could be earlier still, for the door was ajar,
and the learned student of Cambridge had taken himself off, with a
mind which was too intent upon the high things of antiquity to stoop
to consider the four-pence which he owed for bed and board. It was the
shrill out-cry of the landlady when she found her loss, and the clucking
of the hens, which had streamed in through the open door, that first
broke in upon the slumbers of the tired wayfarers.

Once afoot, it was not long before the company began to disperse. A
sleek mule with red trappings was brought round from some neighboring
shed for the physician, and he ambled away with much dignity upon his
road to Southampton. The tooth-drawer and the gleeman called for a cup
of small ale apiece, and started off together for Ringwood fair, the old
jongleur looking very yellow in the eye and swollen in the face after
his overnight potations. The archer, however, who had drunk more than
any man in the room, was as merry as a grig, and having kissed the
matron and chased the maid up the ladder once more, he went out to the
brook, and came back with the water dripping from his face and hair.

"Hola! my man of peace," he cried to Alleyne, "whither are you bent this
morning?"

"To Minstead," quoth he. "My brother Simon Edricson is socman there, and
I go to bide with him for a while. I prythee, let me have my score, good
dame."

"Score, indeed!" cried she, standing with upraised hands in front of the
panel on which Alleyne had worked the night before. "Say, rather what
it is that I owe to thee, good youth. Aye, this is indeed a pied merlin,
and with a leveret under its claws, as I am a living woman. By the rood
of Waltham! but thy touch is deft and dainty."

"And see the red eye of it!" cried the maid.

"Aye, and the open beak."

"And the ruffled wing," added Hordle John.

"By my hilt!" cried the archer, "it is the very bird itself."

The young clerk flushed with pleasure at this chorus of praise, rude and
indiscriminate indeed, and yet so much heartier and less grudging than
any which he had ever heard from the critical brother Jerome, or the
short-spoken Abbot. There was, it would seem, great kindness as well as
great wickedness in this world, of which he had heard so little that was
good. His hostess would hear nothing of his paying either for bed or
for board, while the archer and Hordle John placed a hand upon either
shoulder and led him off to the board, where some smoking fish, a dish
of spinach, and a jug of milk were laid out for their breakfast.

"I should not be surprised to learn, mon camarade," said the soldier, as
he heaped a slice of fish upon Alleyne's tranchoir of bread, "that you
could read written things, since you are so ready with your brushes and
pigments."

"It would be shame to the good brothers of Beaulieu if I could not," he
answered, "seeing that I have been their clerk this ten years back."

The bowman looked at him with great respect. "Think of that!" said he.
"And you with not a hair to your face, and a skin like a girl. I can
shoot three hundred and fifty paces with my little popper there, and
four hundred and twenty with the great war-bow; yet I can make nothing
of this, nor read my own name if you were to set 'Sam Aylward' up
against me. In the whole Company there was only one man who could read,
and he fell down a well at the taking of Ventadour, which proves that
the thing is not suited to a soldier, though most needful to a clerk."

"I can make some show at it," said big John; "though I was scarce long
enough among the monks to catch the whole trick of it.

"Here, then, is something to try upon," quoth the archer, pulling a
square of parchment from the inside of his tunic. It was tied securely
with a broad band of purple silk, and firmly sealed at either end with a
large red seal. John pored long and earnestly over the inscription upon
the back, with his brows bent as one who bears up against great mental
strain.

"Not having read much of late," he said, "I am loth to say too much
about what this may be. Some might say one thing and some another, just
as one bowman loves the yew, and a second will not shoot save with the
ash. To me, by the length and the look of it, I should judge this to be
a verse from one of the Psalms."

The bowman shook his head. "It is scarce likely," he said, "that Sir
Claude Latour should send me all the way across seas with nought more
weighty than a psalm-verse. You have clean overshot the butts this time,
mon camarade. Give it to the little one. I will wager my feather-bed
that he makes more sense of it."

"Why, it is written in the French tongue," said Alleyne, "and in a
right clerkly hand. This is how it runs: 'A le moult puissant et moult
honorable chevalier, Sir Nigel Loring de Christchurch, de son tres
fidele ami Sir Claude Latour, capitaine de la Compagnie blanche,
chatelain de Biscar, grand seigneur de Montchateau, vavaseur de le
renomme Gaston, Comte de Foix, tenant les droits de la haute justice, de
la milieu, et de la basse.' Which signifies in our speech: 'To the very
powerful and very honorable knight, Sir Nigel Loring of Christchurch,
from his very faithful friend Sir Claude Latour, captain of the White
Company, chatelain of Biscar, grand lord of Montchateau and vassal to
the renowned Gaston, Count of Foix, who holds the rights of the high
justice, the middle and the low.'"

"Look at that now!" cried the bowman in triumph. "That is just what he
would have said."

"I can see now that it is even so," said John, examining the parchment
again. "Though I scarce understand this high, middle and low."

"By my hilt! you would understand it if you were Jacques Bonhomme. The
low justice means that you may fleece him, and the middle that you may
torture him, and the high that you may slay him. That is about the truth
of it. But this is the letter which I am to take; and since the platter
is clean it is time that we trussed up and were afoot. You come with
me, mon gros Jean; and as to you, little one, where did you say that you
journeyed?"

"To Minstead."

"Ah, yes. I know this forest country well, though I was born myself
in the Hundred of Easebourne, in the Rape of Chichester, hard by the
village of Midhurst. Yet I have not a word to say against the Hampton
men, for there are no better comrades or truer archers in the whole
Company than some who learned to loose the string in these very parts.
We shall travel round with you to Minstead lad, seeing that it is little
out of our way."

"I am ready," said Alleyne, right pleased at the thought of such company
upon the road.

"So am not I. I must store my plunder at this inn, since the hostess is
an honest woman. Hola! ma cherie, I wish to leave with you my gold-work,
my velvet, my silk, my feather bed, my incense-boat, my ewer, my naping
linen, and all the rest of it. I take only the money in a linen bag,
and the box of rose colored sugar which is a gift from my captain to the
Lady Loring. Wilt guard my treasure for me?"

"It shall be put in the safest loft, good archer. Come when you may, you
shall find it ready for you."

"Now, there is a true friend!" cried the bowman, taking her hand. "There
is a bonne amie! English land and English women, say I, and French wine
and French plunder. I shall be back anon, mon ange. I am a lonely man,
my sweeting, and I must settle some day when the wars are over and done.
Mayhap you and I----Ah, mechante, mechante! There is la petite peeping
from behind the door. Now, John, the sun is over the trees; you must be
brisker than this when the bugleman blows 'Bows and Bills.'"

"I have been waiting this time back," said Hordle John gruffly.

"Then we must be off. Adieu, ma vie! The two livres shall settle the
score and buy some ribbons against the next kermesse. Do not forget Sam
Aylward, for his heart shall ever be thine alone--and thine, ma petite!
So, marchons, and may St. Julian grant us as good quarters elsewhere!"

The sun had risen over Ashurst and Denny woods, and was shining
brightly, though the eastern wind had a sharp flavor to it, and the
leaves were flickering thickly from the trees. In the High Street of
Lyndhurst the wayfarers had to pick their way, for the little town
was crowded with the guardsmen, grooms, and yeomen prickers who were
attached to the King's hunt. The King himself was staying at Castle
Malwood, but several of his suite had been compelled to seek such
quarters as they might find in the wooden or wattle-and-daub cottages of
the village. Here and there a small escutcheon, peeping from a
glassless window, marked the night's lodging of knight or baron. These
coats-of-arms could be read, where a scroll would be meaningless, and
the bowman, like most men of his age, was well versed in the common
symbols of heraldry.

"There is the Saracen's head of Sir Bernard Brocas," quoth he. "I saw
him last at the ruffle at Poictiers some ten years back, when he bore
himself like a man. He is the master of the King's horse, and can sing
a right jovial stave, though in that he cannot come nigh to Sir John
Chandos, who is first at the board or in the saddle. Three martlets on a
field azure, that must be one of the Luttrells. By the crescent upon it,
it should be the second son of old Sir Hugh, who had a bolt through his
ankle at the intaking of Romorantin, he having rushed into the fray ere
his squire had time to clasp his solleret to his greave. There too is
the hackle which is the old device of the De Brays. I have served under
Sir Thomas de Bray, who was as jolly as a pie, and a lusty swordsman
until he got too fat for his harness."

So the archer gossiped as the three wayfarers threaded their way among
the stamping horses, the busy grooms, and the knots of pages and squires
who disputed over the merits of their masters' horses and deer-hounds.
As they passed the old church, which stood upon a mound at the left-hand
side of the village street the door was flung open, and a stream of
worshippers wound down the sloping path, coming from the morning mass,
all chattering like a cloud of jays. Alleyne bent knee and doffed hat at
the sight of the open door; but ere he had finished an ave his comrades
were out of sight round the curve of the path, and he had to run to
overtake them.

"What!" he said, "not one word of prayer before God's own open house?
How can ye hope for His blessing upon the day?"

"My friend," said Hordle John, "I have prayed so much during the last
two months, not only during the day, but at matins, lauds, and the like,
when I could scarce keep my head upon my shoulders for nodding, that I
feel that I have somewhat over-prayed myself."

"How can a man have too much religion?" cried Alleyne earnestly. "It is
the one thing that availeth. A man is but a beast as he lives from day
to day, eating and drinking, breathing and sleeping. It is only when
he raises himself, and concerns himself with the immortal spirit within
him, that he becomes in very truth a man. Bethink ye how sad a thing
it would be that the blood of the Redeemer should be spilled to no
purpose."

"Bless the lad, if he doth not blush like any girl, and yet preach like
the whole College of Cardinals," cried the archer.

"In truth I blush that any one so weak and so unworthy as I should
try to teach another that which he finds it so passing hard to follow
himself."

"Prettily said, mon garcon. Touching that same slaying of the Redeemer,
it was a bad business. A good padre in France read to us from a scroll
the whole truth of the matter. The soldiers came upon him in the garden.
In truth, these Apostles of His may have been holy men, but they were of
no great account as men-at-arms. There was one, indeed, Sir Peter, who
smote out like a true man; but, unless he is belied, he did but clip
a varlet's ear, which was no very knightly deed. By these ten
finger-bones! had I been there with Black Simon of Norwich, and but one
score picked men of the Company, we had held them in play. Could we do
no more, we had at least filled the false knight, Sir Judas, so full of
English arrows that he would curse the day that ever he came on such an
errand."

The young clerk smiled at his companion's earnestness. "Had He wished
help," he said, "He could have summoned legions of archangels from
heaven, so what need had He of your poor bow and arrow? Besides, bethink
you of His own words--that those who live by the sword shall perish by
the sword."

"And how could man die better?" asked the archer. "If I had my wish, it
would be to fall so--not, mark you, in any mere skirmish of the Company,
but in a stricken field, with the great lion banner waving over us and
the red oriflamme in front, amid the shouting of my fellows and the
twanging of the strings. But let it be sword, lance, or bolt that
strikes me down: for I should think it shame to die from an iron ball
from the fire-crake or bombard or any such unsoldierly weapon, which is
only fitted to scare babes with its foolish noise and smoke."

"I have heard much even in the quiet cloisters of these new and dreadful
engines," quoth Alleyne. "It is said, though I can scarce bring myself
to believe it, that they will send a ball twice as far as a bowman
can shoot his shaft, and with such force as to break through armor of
proof."

"True enough, my lad. But while the armorer is thrusting in his
devil's-dust, and dropping his ball, and lighting his flambeau, I
can very easily loose six shafts, or eight maybe, so he hath no great
vantage after all. Yet I will not deny that at the intaking of a town
it is well to have good store of bombards. I am told that at Calais they
made dints in the wall that a man might put his head into. But surely,
comrades, some one who is grievously hurt hath passed along this road
before us."

All along the woodland track there did indeed run a scattered straggling
trail of blood-marks, sometimes in single drops, and in other places in
broad, ruddy gouts, smudged over the dead leaves or crimsoning the white
flint stones.

"It must be a stricken deer," said John.

"Nay, I am woodman enough to see that no deer hath passed this way this
morning; and yet the blood is fresh. But hark to the sound!"

They stood listening all three with sidelong heads. Through the silence
of the great forest there came a swishing, whistling sound, mingled
with the most dolorous groans, and the voice of a man raised in a
high quavering kind of song. The comrades hurried onwards eagerly, and
topping the brow of a small rising they saw upon the other side the
source from which these strange noises arose.

A tall man, much stooped in the shoulders, was walking slowly with
bended head and clasped hands in the centre of the path. He was dressed
from head to foot in a long white linen cloth, and a high white cap
with a red cross printed upon it. His gown was turned back from his
shoulders, and the flesh there was a sight to make a man wince, for it
was all beaten to a pulp, and the blood was soaking into his gown and
trickling down upon the ground. Behind him walked a smaller man with his
hair touched with gray, who was clad in the same white garb. He intoned
a long whining rhyme in the French tongue, and at the end of every line
he raised a thick cord, all jagged with pellets of lead, and smote his
companion across the shoulders until the blood spurted again. Even as
the three wayfarers stared, however, there was a sudden change, for the
smaller man, having finished his song, loosened his own gown and handed
the scourge to the other, who took up the stave once more and lashed
his companion with all the strength of his bare and sinewy arm. So,
alternately beating and beaten, they made their dolorous way through the
beautiful woods and under the amber arches of the fading beech-trees,
where the calm strength and majesty of Nature might serve to rebuke the
foolish energies and misspent strivings of mankind.

Such a spectacle was new to Hordle John or to Alleyne Edricson; but the
archer treated it lightly, as a common matter enough.

"These are the Beating Friars, otherwise called the Flagellants," quoth
he. "I marvel that ye should have come upon none of them before, for
across the water they are as common as gallybaggers. I have heard that
there are no English among them, but that they are from France, Italy
and Bohemia. En avant, camarades! that we may have speech with them."

As they came up to them, Alleyne could hear the doleful dirge which the
beater was chanting, bringing down his heavy whip at the end of each
line, while the groans of the sufferer formed a sort of dismal chorus.
It was in old French, and ran somewhat in this way:

        Or avant, entre nous tous freres
        Battons nos charognes bien fort
        En remembrant la grant misere
        De Dieu et sa piteuse mort
        Qui fut pris en la gent amere
        Et vendus et trais a tort
        Et bastu sa chair, vierge et dere
        Au nom de ce battons plus fort.

Then at the end of the verse the scourge changed hands and the chanting
began anew.

"Truly, holy fathers," said the archer in French as they came abreast of
them, "you have beaten enough for to-day. The road is all spotted like a
shambles at Martinmas. Why should ye mishandle yourselves thus?"

