intent on revenge, that he raised himself from his bed to attend
the execution of William Gamwell. He rode to the august structure of
retributive Themis, as the French call a gallows, in all the pride and
pomp of shrievalty, and with a splendid retinue of well-equipped knaves
and varlets, as our ancestors called honest serving-men.

Young Gamwell was brought forth with his arms pinioned behind him; his
sister Alice and his father, Sir Guy, attending him in disconsolate
mood. He had rejected the confessor provided by the sheriff, and had
insisted on the privilege of choosing his own, whom Little John had
promised to bring. Little John, however, had not made his appearance
when the fatal procession began its march; but when they reached the
place of execution, Little John appeared, accompanied by a ghostly
friar.

"Sheriff," said young Gamwell, "let me not die with my hands pinioned:
give me a sword, and set any odds of your men against me, and let me
die the death of a man, like the descendant of a noble house, which has
never yet been stained with ignominy."

"No, no," said the sheriff; "I have had enough of setting odds against
you. I have sworn you shall be hanged, and hanged you shall be."

"Then God have mercy on me," said young Gamwell; "and now, holy friar,
shrive my sinful soul."

The friar approached.

"Let me see this friar," said the sheriff: "if he be the friar of the
bridge, I had as lief have the devil in Nottingham; but he shall find me
too much for him here."

"The friar of the bridge," said Little John, "as you very well know,
sheriff, was father Michael of Rubygill Abbey, and you may easily see
that this is not the man."

"I see it," said the sheriff; "and God be thanked for his absence."

Young Gamwell stood at the foot of the ladder. The friar approached him,
opened his book, groaned, turned up the whites of his eyes, tossed up
his arms in the air, and said "Dominus vobiscum." He then crossed both
his hands on his breast under the folds of his holy robes, and stood a
few moments as if in inward prayer. A deep silence among the attendant
crowd accompanied this action of the friar; interrupted only by the
hollow tone of the death-bell, at long and dreary intervals. Suddenly
the friar threw off his holy robes, and appeared a forester clothed in
green, with a sword in his right hand and a horn in his left. With the
sword he cut the bonds of William Gamwell, who instantly snatched a
sword from one of the sheriff's men; and with the horn he blew a loud
blast, which was answered at once by four bugles from the quarters
of the four winds, and from each quarter came five-and-twenty bowmen
running all on a row.

"Treason! treason!" cried the sheriff. Old Sir Guy sprang to his son's
side, and so did Little John; and the four setting back to back, kept
the sheriff and his men at bay till the bowmen came within shot and let
fly their arrows among the sheriff's men, who, after a brief resistance,
fled in all directions. The forester, who had personated the friar, sent
an arrow after the flying sheriff, calling with a strong voice, "To the
sheriff's left arm, as a keepsake from Robin Hood." The arrow reached
its destiny; the sheriff redoubled his speed, and, with the one arrow in
his arm, did not stop to breathe till he was out of reach of another.

The foresters did not waste time in Nottingham, but were soon at a
distance from its walls. Sir Guy returned with Alice to Gamwell-Hall;
but thinking he should not be safe there, from the share he had had in
his son's rescue, they only remained long enough to supply themselves
with clothes and money, and departed, under the escort of Little John,
to another seat of the Gamwells in Yorkshire. Young Gamwell, taking it
for granted that his offence was past remission, determined on joining
Robin Hood, and accompanied him to the forest, where it was deemed
expedient that he should change his name; and he was rechristened
without a priest, and with wine instead of water, by the immortal name
of Scarlet.




CHAPTER IX

          Who set my man i' the stocks?----
      I set him there, Sir but his own disorders
      Deserved much less advancement.--Lear.


The baron was inflexible in his resolution not to let Matilda leave the
castle. The letter, which announced to her the approaching fate of
young Gamwell, filled her with grief, and increased the irksomeness of a
privation which already preyed sufficiently on her spirits, and began to
undermine her health. She had no longer the consolation of the society
of her old friend father Michael: the little fat friar of Rubygill was
substituted as the castle confessor, not without some misgivings in his
ghostly bosom; but he was more allured by the sweet savour of the good
things of this world at Arlingford Castle, than deterred by his awe
of the lady Matilda, which nevertheless was so excessive, from his
recollection of the twang of the bow-string, that he never ventured to
find her in the wrong, much less to enjoin any thing in the shape of
penance, as was the occasional practice of holy confessors, with or
without cause, for the sake of pious discipline, and what was in those
days called social order, namely, the preservation of the privileges
of the few who happened to have any, at the expense of the swinish
multitude who happened to have none, except that of working and being
shot at for the benefit of their betters, which is obviously not the
meaning of social order in our more enlightened times: let us therefore
be grateful to Providence, and sing Te Deum laudamus in chorus with the
Holy Alliance.

The little friar, however, though he found the lady spotless, found the
butler a great sinner: at least so it was conjectured, from the length
of time he always took to confess him in the buttery.

Matilda became every day more pale and dejected: her spirit, which could
have contended against any strenuous affliction, pined in the monotonous
inaction to which she was condemned. While she could freely range the
forest with her lover in the morning, she had been content to return
to her father's castle in the evening, thus preserving underanged the
balance of her duties, habits, and affections; not without a hope that
the repeal of her lover's outlawry might be eventually obtained, by
a judicious distribution of some of his forest spoils among the
holy fathers and saints that-were-to-be,--pious proficients in the
ecclesiastic art equestrian, who rode the conscience of King Henry with
double-curb bridles, and kept it well in hand when it showed mettle
and seemed inclined to rear and plunge. But the affair at Gamwell feast
threw many additional difficulties in the way of the accomplishment of
this hope; and very shortly afterwards King Henry the Second went to
make up in the next world his quarrel with Thomas-a-Becket; and Richard
Coeur de Lion made all England resound with preparations for the
crusade, to the great delight of many zealous adventurers, who eagerly
flocked under his banner in the hope of enriching themselves with
Saracen spoil, which they called fighting the battles of God. Richard,
who was not remarkably scrupulous in his financial operations, was
not likely to overlook the lands and castle of Locksley, which he
appropriated immediately to his own purposes, and sold to the highest
bidder. Now, as the repeal of the outlawry would involve the restitution
of the estates to the rightful owner, it was obvious that it could never
be expected from that most legitimate and most Christian king,
Richard the First of England, the arch-crusader and anti-jacobin by
excellence,--the very type, flower, cream, pink, symbol, and mirror of
all the Holy Alliances that have ever existed on earth, excepting
that he seasoned his superstition and love of conquest with a certain
condiment of romantic generosity and chivalrous self-devotion, with
which his imitators in all other points have found it convenient to
dispense. To give freely to one man what he had taken forcibly from
another, was generosity of which he was very capable; but to restore
what he had taken to the man from whom he had taken it, was something
that wore too much of the cool physiognomy of justice to be easily
reconcileable to his kingly feelings. He had, besides, not only sent
all King Henry's saints about their business, or rather about their
no-business--their faineantise--but he had laid them under rigorous
contribution for the purposes of his holy war; and having made them
refund to the piety of the successor what they had extracted from the
piety of the precursor, he compelled them, in addition, to give
him their blessing for nothing. Matilda, therefore, from all these
circumstances, felt little hope that her lover would be any thing but an
outlaw for life.

The departure of King Richard from England was succeeded by the
episcopal regency of the bishops of Ely and Durham. Longchamp, bishop
of Ely, proceeded to show his sense of Christian fellowship by arresting
his brother bishop, and despoiling him of his share in the government;
and to set forth his humility and loving-kindness in a retinue of nobles
and knights who consumed in one night's entertainment some five years'
revenue of their entertainer, and in a guard of fifteen hundred foreign
soldiers, whom he considered indispensable to the exercise of a vigour
beyond the law in maintaining wholesome discipline over the refractory
English. The ignorant impatience of the swinish multitude with these
fruits of good living, brought forth by one of the meek who had
inherited the earth, displayed itself in a general ferment, of which
Prince John took advantage to make the experiment of getting possession
of his brother's crown in his absence. He began by calling at Reading
a council of barons, whose aspect induced the holy bishop to disguise
himself (some say as an old woman, which, in the twelfth century,
perhaps might have been a disguise for a bishop), and make his
escape beyond sea. Prince John followed up his advantage by obtaining
possession of several strong posts, and among others of the castle of
Nottingham.

While John was conducting his operations at Nottingham, he rode at times
past the castle of Arlingford. He stopped on one occasion to claim Lord
Fitzwater's hospitality, and made most princely havoc among his venison
and brawn. Now it is a matter of record among divers great historians
and learned clerks, that he was then and there grievously smitten by the
charms of the lovely Matilda, and that a few days after he despatched
his travelling minstrel, or laureate, Harpiton, [3] (whom he retained at
moderate wages, to keep a journal of his proceedings, and prove them all
just and legitimate), to the castle of Arlingford, to make proposals to
the lady. This Harpiton was a very useful person. He was always ready,
not only to maintain the cause of his master with his pen, and to sing
his eulogies to his harp, but to undertake at a moment's notice any
kind of courtly employment, called dirty work by the profane, which the
blessings of civil government, namely, his master's pleasure, and the
interests of social order, namely, his own emolument, might require. In
short,

 Il eut l'emploi qui certes n'est pas mince,
 Et qu'a la cour, ou tout se peint en beau,
 On appelloit etre l'ami du prince;
 Mais qu'a la ville, et surtout en province,
 Les gens grossiers ont nomme maquereau.


Prince John was of opinion that the love of a prince actual and king
expectant, was in itself a sufficient honour to the daughter of a simple
baron, and that the right divine or royalty would make it sufficiently
holy without the rite divine of the church. He was, therefore,
graciously pleased to fall into an exceeding passion, when his
confidential messenger returned from his embassy in piteous plight,
having been, by the baron's order, first tossed in a blanket and set in
the stocks to cool, and afterwards ducked in the moat and set again in
the stocks to dry. John swore to revenge horribly this flagrant outrage
on royal prerogative, and to obtain possession of the lady by force
of arms; and accordingly collected a body of troops, and marched upon
Arlingford castle. A letter, conveyed as before on the point of a blunt
arrow, announced his approach to Matilda: and lord Fitzwater had just
time to assemble his retainers, collect a hasty supply of provision,
raise the draw-bridge, and drop the portcullis, when the castle was
surrounded by the enemy. The little fat friar, who during the confusion
was asleep in the buttery, found himself, on awaking, inclosed in the
besieged castle, and dolefully bewailed his evil chance.




CHAPTER X


     A noble girl, i' faith.  Heart!  I think I fight with a
     familiar, or the ghost of a fencer.  Call you this an
     amorous visage? Here's blood that would have served me these
     seven years, in broken heads and cut fingers, and now it
     runs out all together.--MIDDLETON.  Roaring Girl.


Prince John sat down impatiently before Arlingford castle in the hope
of starving out the besieged; but finding the duration of their supplies
extend itself in an equal ratio with the prolongation of his hope,
he made vigorous preparations for carrying the place by storm. He
constructed an immense machine on wheels, which, being advanced to the
edge of the moat, would lower a temporary bridge, of which one end would
rest on the bank, and the other on the battlements, and which, being
well furnished with stepping boards, would enable his men to ascend the
inclined plane with speed and facility. Matilda received intimation of
this design by the usual friendly channel of a blunt arrow, which must
either have been sent from some secret friend in the prince's camp,
or from some vigorous archer beyond it: the latter will not appear
improbable, when we consider that Robin Hood and Little John could shoot
two English miles and an inch point-blank,

Come scrive Turpino, che non erra.


The machine was completed, and the ensuing morning fixed for the
assault. Six men, relieved at intervals, kept watch over it during
the night. Prince John retired to sleep, congratulating himself in
the expectation that another day would place the fair culprit at his
princely mercy. His anticipations mingled with the visions of his
slumber, and he dreamed of wounds and drums, and sacking and firing
the castle, and bearing off in his arms the beautiful prize through the
midst of fire and smoke. In the height of this imaginary turmoil, he
awoke, and conceived for a few moments that certain sounds which rang in
his ears, were the continuation of those of his dream, in that sort
of half-consciousness between sleeping and waking, when reality and
phantasy meet and mingle in dim and confused resemblance. He was,
however, very soon fully awake to the fact of his guards calling on him
to arm, which he did in haste, and beheld the machine in flames, and
a furious conflict raging around it. He hurried to the spot, and found
that his camp had been suddenly assailed from one side by a party of
foresters, and that the baron's people had made a sortie on the other,
and that they had killed the guards, and set fire to the machine, before
the rest of the camp could come to the assistance of their fellows.

The night was in itself intensely dark, and the fire-light shed around
it a vivid and unnatural radiance. On one side, the crimson light
quivered by its own agitation on the waveless moat, and on the bastions
and buttresses of the castle, and their shadows lay in massy blackness
on the illuminated walls: on the other, it shone upon the woods,
streaming far within among the open trunks, or resting on the closer
foliage. The circumference of darkness bounded the scene on all sides:
and in the centre raged the war; shields, helmets, and bucklers gleaming
and glittering as they rang and clashed against each other; plumes
confusedly tossing in the crimson light, and the messy light and shade
that fell on the faces of the combatants, giving additional energy to
their ferocious expression.

John, drawing nearer to the scene of action, observed two young warriors
fighting side by side, one of whom wore the habit of a forester, the
other that of a retainer of Arlingford. He looked intently on them both:
their position towards the fire favoured the scrutiny; and the hawk's
eye of love very speedily discovered that the latter was the fair
Matilda. The forester he did not know: but he had sufficient tact to
discern that his success would be very much facilitated by separating
her from this companion, above all others. He therefore formed a party
of men into a wedge, only taking especial care not to be the point of
it himself, and drove it between them with so much precision, that they
were in a moment far asunder.

"Lady Matilda," said John, "yield yourself my prisoner."

"If you would wear me, prince," said Matilda, "you must win me:" and
without giving him time to deliberate on the courtesy of fighting with
the lady of his love, she raised her sword in the air, and lowered it on
his head with an impetus that would have gone nigh to fathom even that
extraordinary depth of brain which always by divine grace furnishes the
interior of a head-royal, if he had not very dexterously parried the
blow. Prince John wished to disarm and take captive, not in any way to
wound or injure, least of all to kill, his fair opponent. Matilda was
only intent to get rid of her antagonist at any rate: the edge of her
weapon painted his complexion with streaks of very unloverlike crimson,
and she would probably have marred John's hand for ever signing Magna
Charta, but that he was backed by the advantage of numbers, and that her
sword broke short on the boss of his buckler. John was following up his
advantage to make a captive of the lady, when he was suddenly felled to
the earth by an unseen antagonist. Some of his men picked him carefully
up, and conveyed him to his tent, stunned and stupified.

When he recovered, he found Harpiton diligently assisting in his
recovery, more in the fear of losing his place than in that of losing
his master: the prince's first inquiry was for the prisoner he had
been on the point of taking at the moment when his habeas corpus was
so unseasonably suspended. He was told that his people had been on the
point of securing the said prisoner, when the devil suddenly appeared
among them in the likeness of a tall friar, having his grey frock
cinctured with a sword-belt, and his crown, which whether it were shaven
or no they could not see, surmounted with a helmet, and flourishing an
eight-foot staff, with which he laid about him to the right and to the
left, knocking down the prince and his men as if they had been so
many nine-pins: in fine, he had rescued the prisoner, and made a clear
passage through friend and foe, and in conjunction with a chosen
party of archers, had covered the retreat of the baron's men and the
foresters, who had all gone off in a body towards Sherwood forest.

Harpiton suggested that it would be desirable to sack the castle, and
volunteered to lead the van on the occasion, as the defenders were
withdrawn, and the exploit seemed to promise much profit and little
danger: John considered that the castle would in itself be a great
acquisition to him, as a stronghold in furtherance of his design on his
brother's throne; and was determining to take possession with the first
light of morning, when he had the mortification to see the castle burst
into flames in several places at once. A piteous cry was heard from
within, and while the prince was proclaiming a reward to any one who
would enter into the burning pile, and elucidate the mystery of the
doleful voice, forth waddled the little fat friar in an agony of fear,
out of the fire into the frying-pan; for he was instantly taken into
custody and carried before Prince John, wringing his hands and tearing
his hair.

"Are you the friar," said Prince John, in a terrible voice, "that
laid me prostrate in battle, mowed down my men like grass, rescued my
captive, and covered the retreat of my enemies? And, not content with
this, have you now set fire to the castle in which I intended to take up
my royal quarters?"

The little friar quaked like a jelly: he fell on his knees, and
attempted to speak; but in his eagerness to vindicate himself from this
accumulation of alarming charges, he knew not where to begin; his ideas
rolled round upon each other like the radii of a wheel; the words he
desired to utter, instead of issuing, as it were, in a right line from
his lips, seemed to conglobate themselves into a sphere turning on its
own axis in his throat: after several ineffectual efforts, his utterance
totally failed him, and he remained gasping, with his mouth open, his
lips quivering, his hands clasped together, and the whites of his eyes
turned up towards the prince with an expression most ruefully imploring.

"Are you that friar?" repeated the prince.

Several of the by-standers declared that he was not that friar. The
little friar, encouraged by this patronage, found his voice, and pleaded
for mercy. The prince questioned him closely concerning the burning of
the castle. The little friar declared, that he had been in too great
fear during the siege to know much of what was going forward, except
that he had been conscious during the last few days of a lamentable
deficiency of provisions, and had been present that very morning at the
broaching of the last butt of sack. Harpiton groaned in sympathy. The
little friar added, that he knew nothing of what had passed since till
he heard the flames roaring at his elbow.

"Take him away, Harpiton," said the prince, "fill him with sack, and
turn him out."

"Never mind the sack," said the little friar, "turn me out at once."

"A sad chance," said Harpiton, "to be turned out without sack."

But what Harpiton thought a sad chance the little friar thought a merry
one, and went bounding like a fat buck towards the abbey of Rubygill.

An arrow, with a letter attached to it, was shot into the camp, and
carried to the prince. The contents were these:--

"Prince John,--I do not consider myself to have resisted lawful
authority in defending my castle against you, seeing that you are at
present in a state of active rebellion against your liege sovereign
Richard: and if my provisions had not failed me, I would have maintained
it till doomsday. As it is, I have so well disposed my combustibles that
it shall not serve you as a strong hold in your rebellion. If you hunt
in the chases of Nottinghamshire, you may catch other game than my
daughter. Both she and I are content to be houseless for a time, in
the reflection that we have deserved your enmity, and the friendship of
Coeur-de-Lion.

"FITZWATER."




CHAPTER XI

     --Tuck, the merry friar, who many a sermon made In praise of
     Robin Hood, his outlaws, and their trade.--DRAYTON.


The baron, with some of his retainers and all the foresters, halted at
daybreak in Sherwood forest. The foresters quickly erected tents, and
prepared an abundant breakfast of venison and ale.

"Now, Lord Fitzwater," said the chief forester, "recognise your
son-in-law that was to have been, in the outlaw Robin Hood."

"Ay, ay," said the baron, "I have recognised you long ago."

"And recognise your young friend Gamwell," said the second, "in the
outlaw Scarlet."

"And Little John, the page," said the third, "in Little John the
outlaw."

"And Father Michael, of Rubygill Abbey," said the friar, "in Friar Tuck,
of Sherwood forest. Truly, I have a chapel here hard by, in the shape of
a hollow tree, where I put up my prayers for travellers, and Little John
holds the plate at the door, for good praying deserves good paying."

"I am in fine company," said the baron.

"In the very best of company," said the friar, "in the high court of
Nature, and in the midst of her own nobility. Is it not so? This goodly
grove is our palace: the oak and the beech are its colonnade and its
canopy: the sun and the moon and the stars are its everlasting lamps:
the grass, and the daisy, and the primrose, and the violet, are its
many-coloured floor of green, white, yellow, and blue; the may-flower,
and the woodbine, and the eglantine, and the ivy, are its decorations,
its curtains, and its tapestry: the lark, and the thrush, and the
linnet, and the nightingale, are its unhired minstrels and musicians.
Robin Hood is king of the forest both by dignity of birth and by virtue
of his standing army: to say nothing of the free choice of his people,
which he has indeed, but I pass it by as an illegitimate basis of power.
He holds his dominion over the forest, and its horned multitude of
citizen-deer, and its swinish multitude or peasantry of wild boars, by
right of conquest and force of arms. He levies contributions among them
by the free consent of his archers, their virtual representatives. If
they should find a voice to complain that we are 'tyrants and usurpers
to kill and cook them up in their assigned and native dwelling-place,'
we should most convincingly admonish them, with point of arrow, that
they have nothing to do with our laws but to obey them. Is it not
written that the fat ribs of the herd shall be fed upon by the mighty in
