               But on my heart thy name
               The words on each alike adored;
               The truth of each the same,
               The same!--alas! too well I feel
               The heart is truer than the steel!
               Light of my soul! upon me shine;
               Night wakes her stars to envy mine.
                         Those eyes of thine,
                         Wild eyes of thine,
               What stars are like those eyes of thine?

As he concluded, the lattice softly opened; and a female form appeared on
the balcony.

"Ah, Leila!" said the  Moor, "I see thee, and I am blessed!"

"Hush!" answered Leila; "speak low, nor tarry long I fear that our
interviews are suspected; and this," she added in a trembling voice,
"may perhaps be the last time we shall meet."

"Holy Prophet!" exclaimed Muza, passionately, "what do I hear?  Why this
mystery? why cannot I learn thine origin, thy rank, thy parents?  Think
you, beautiful Leila, that Granada holds a rouse lofty enough to disdain
the alliance with Muza Ben Abil Gazan? and oh!" he added (sinking the
haughty tones of his voice into accents of the softest tenderness),
"if not too high to scorn me, what should war against our loves and our
bridals?  For worn equally on my heart were the flower of thy sweet self,
whether the mountain top or the valley gave birth to the odour and the
bloom."

"Alas!" answered Leila, weeping, "the mystery thou complainest of is as
dark to myself as thee.  How often have I told thee that I know nothing
of my birth or childish fortunes, save a dim memory of a more distant and
burning clime; where, amidst sands and wastes, springs the everlasting
cedar, and the camel grazes on stunted herbage withering in the fiery
air?  Then, it seemed to me that I had a mother: fond eyes looked on me,
and soft songs hushed me into sleep."

"Thy mother's soul has passed into mine," said the Moor, tenderly.

Leila continued:--"Borne hither, I passed from childhood into youth
within these walls.  Slaves ministered to my slightest wish; and those
who have seen both state and poverty, which I have not, tell me that
treasures and splendour, that might glad a monarch, are prodigalised
around me: but of ties and kindred know I little: my father, a stern and
silent man, visits me but rarely--sometimes months pass, and I see him
not; but I feel he loves me; and, till I knew thee, Muza, my brightest
hours were in listening to the footsteps and flying to the arms of that
solitary friend."

"Know you not his name?"

"Nor, I nor any one of the household; save perhaps Ximen, the chief of
the slaves, an old and withered man, whose very eye chills me into fear
and silence."

"Strange!" said the Moor, musingly; "yet why think you our love is
discovered, or can be thwarted?"

"Hush!  Ximen sought me this day: 'Maiden,' said he, 'men's footsteps
have been tracked within the gardens; if your sire know this, you will
have looked your last on Granada.  Learn,' he added, in a softer voice,
as he saw me tremble, 'that permission were easier given to thee to wed
the wild tiger than to mate with the loftiest noble of Morisca!  Beware!'
He spoke, and left me.  O Muza!" she continued, passionately wringing her
hands, "my heart sinks within me, and omen and doom rise dark before my
sight!"

"By my father's head, these obstacles but fire my love, and I would scale
to thy possession, though every step in the ladder were the corpses of a
hundred foes!"

Scarcely had the fiery and high-souled Moor uttered his boast, than, from
some unseen hand amidst the groves, a javelin whirred past him, and as
the air it raised came sharp upon his cheek, half buried its quivering
shaft in the trunk of a tree behind him.

"Fly, fly, and save thyself!  O God, protect him!" cried Leila; and she
vanished within the chamber.

The Moor did not wait the result of a deadlier aim; he turned; yet, in
the instinct of his fierce nature, not from, but against, the foe; his
drawn scimitar in his hand, the half-suppressed cry of wrath trembling on
his lips, he sprang forward in the direction the javelin had sped.  With
eyes accustomed to the ambuscades of Moorish warfare, he searched
eagerly, yet warily through the dark and sighing foliage.  No sign of
life met his gaze; and at length, grimly and reluctantly, he retraced his
steps, and quitted the demesnes; but just as he had cleared the wall, a
voice--low, but sharp and shrill--came from the gardens.

"Thou art spared," it said, "but, haply, for a more miserable doom!"




CHAPTER IV.

THE FATHER AND DAUGHTER.

The chamber into which Leila retreated bore out the character she had
given of the interior of her home.  The fashion of its ornament and
decoration was foreign to that adopted by the Moors of Granada.  It had a
more massive and, if we may use the term, Egyptian gorgeousness.  The
walls were covered with the stuffs of the East, stiff with gold,
embroidered upon ground of the deepest purple; strange characters,
apparently in some foreign tongue, were wrought in the tesselated
cornices and on the heavy ceiling, which was supported by square pillars,
round which were twisted serpents of gold and enamel, with eyes to which
enormous emeralds gave a green and lifelike glare: various scrolls and
musical instruments lay scattered upon marble tables: and a solitary lamp
of burnished silver cast a dim and subdued light around the chamber.  The
effect of the whole, though splendid, was gloomy, strange, and
oppressive, and rather suited to the thick and cave-like architecture
which of old protected the inhabitants of Thebes and Memphis from the
rays of the African sun, than to the transparent heaven and light
pavilions of the graceful orientals of Granada.

Leila stood within this chamber, pale and breathless, with her lips
apart, her hands clasped, her very soul in her ears; nor was it possible
to conceive a more perfect ideal of some delicate and brilliant Peri,
captured in the palace of a hostile and gloomy Genius.  Her form was of
the lightest shape consistent with the roundness of womanly beauty; and
there was something in it of that elastic and fawnlike grace which a
sculptor seeks to embody in his dreams of a being more aerial than those
of earth.  Her luxuriant hair was dark indeed, but a purple and glossy
hue redeemed it from that heaviness of shade too common in the tresses of
the Asiatics; and her complexion, naturally pale but clear and lustrous,
would have been deemed fair even in the north.  Her features, slightly
aquiline, were formed in the rarest mould of symmetry, and her full rich
lips disclosed teeth that might have shamed the pearl.  But the chief
charm of that exquisite countenance was in an expression of softness and
purity, and intellectual sentiment, that seldom accompanies that cast of
loveliness, and was wholly foreign to the voluptuous and dreamy languor
of Moorish maidens; Leila had been educated, and the statue had received
a soul.

After a few minutes of intense suspense, she again stole to the lattice,
gently unclosed it, and looked forth.  Far, through an opening amidst the
trees, she descried for a single moment the erect and stately figure of
her lover, darkening the moonshine on the sward, as now, quitting his
fruitless search, he turned his lingering gaze towards the lattice of his
beloved: the thick and interlacing foliage quickly hid him from her eyes;
but Leila had seen enough--she turned within, and said, as grateful tears
trickled clown her cheeks, and she sank on her knees upon the piled
cushions of the chamber: "God of my fathers!  I bless Thee--he is safe!"

"And yet (she added, as a painful thought crossed her), how may I pray
for him? we kneel not to the same Divinity; and I have been taught to
