"Are ye sure, Master Carew," he ventured timidly--

At that the master-player took on so offended an air that Nick was sorry
he had spoken.

"Why, now," said Carew, haughtily, "if thou dost know the roads of
England better than I, who have trudged and ridden them all these years,
I'll sit me down and learn of thee how to follow mine own nose. I tell
thee I know the road thou art to ride this day better than thou dost
thyself; and I'll see to it that thou dost come without fail to the very
place that thou art going. I will, upon my word, and on the remnant of
mine honour!"

But in spite of this assurance, and in spite of the master-player's
ceaseless stream of gaiety and marvels, Nick became more and more
uneasy. The road was certainly growing stranger and stranger as they
passed. The company, too, instead of ambling leisurely along, as they
had done at first, were now spurring ahead at a good round gallop, in
answer to a shrill whistle from the master-player; and the horses were
wet with sweat.

They passed a country village, too, that was quite unknown to Nick, and
a great highway running to the north that he had never seen before; and
when they had ridden for about two hours, the road swerved southward to
a shining ford, and on a little tableland beyond he saw the gables of a
town he did not know.

"Why, Master Carew!" he cried out, half indignant, half perplexed, and
thoroughly frightened, "this is na the Stratford road at all. I'm going
back. I will na ride another mile!"

As he spoke he wheeled the roan sharply out of the clattering file with
a slash of the rein across the withers, and started back along the hill
past the rest of the company, who came thumping down behind.

"Stop him! Stop him there!" he heard the master-player shout, and there
was something in the fierce, high voice that turned his whole heart
sick. What right had they to stop him? This was not the Stratford road;
he was certain of that now. But "Stop him--stop him there!" he heard the
master-player call, and a wild, unreasoning fright came over him. He dug
his heels into the palfrey's heaving sides and urged him up the hill
through the cloud of dust that came rolling down behind the horsemen.
The hindmost riders had plunged into those before, and the whole array
was struggling, shouting, and wrangling in wild disorder; but out of the
flurry Carew and the bandy-legged man with the ribbon in his ear spurred
furiously and came galloping after him at the top of their speed.

Nick cried out, and beat the palfrey with the rein; but the chase was
short. They overtook him as he topped the hill, one on each side, and,
leaning over, Carew snatched the bridle from his hand. "Thou little
imp!" he panted, as he turned the roan around and started down the hill.
"Don't try this on again!"

"Oh, Master Carew," gasped Nick, "what are ye going to do wi' me?"

"Do with thee?" cried the master-player, savagely clapping his hand upon
his poniard,--"why, I am going to do with thee just whatever I please.
Dost hear? And, hark 'e, this sort of caper doth not please me at all;
and by the whistle of the Lord High Admiral, if thou triest it on again,
thy life is not worth a rotten peascod!"

Unbuckling the rein, he tossed one end to the bandy-legged man, and
holding the other in his own hand, with Nick riding helplessly between
them, they trotted down the hill again, took their old places in the
ranks, and spattered through the shallow ford.

The bandy-legged man had pulled a dagger from beneath his coat, and held
it under his bridle-rein, shining through the horse's mane as they
dashed through the still half-sleeping town. Nick was speechless
with terror.

Beyond the town's end they turned sharply to the northeast, galloping
steadily onward for what was perhaps half an hour, though to Nick it
seemed a forever, until they came out into a great highway running
southward. "Watling street!" he heard the man behind him say, and knew
that they were in the old Roman road that stretched from London to the
north. Still they were galloping, though long strings dribbled from the
horses' mouths, and the saddle-leathers dripped with foam. One or two
looked back at him and bit their lips; but Carew's eyes were hot and
fierce, and his hand was on his poniard. The rest, after a curious
glance or two, shrugged their shoulders carelessly and galloped on: this
affair was Master Gaston Carew's business, not theirs.

Until high noon they hurried on with neither stop nor stay. Then they
came to a place where a little brook sang through the grass by the
roadside in a shady nook beneath some mighty oaks, and there the
master-player whistled for a halt, to give the horses breath and rest,
and to water them at the brook-pools. Some of the players sauntered up
and down to stretch their tired legs, munching meat and bread; and some
lay down upon the grass and slept a little. Two of them came, offering
Nick some cakes and cheese; but he was crying hard and would neither
eat nor drink, though Carew urged him earnestly. Then Master Tom
Heywood, with an ugly look at Carew, and without so much as an
if-ye-please or a by-your-leave, led Nick up the brook to a spot where
it had not been muddied by the horses, and made him wash his dusty face
and hands in the cool water and dampen his hair, though he complied as
if in a daze. And indeed Nick rode on through the long afternoon,
clinging helplessly to the pommel of his saddle, sobbing bitterly until
for very weariness he could no longer sob.

It was after nine o'clock that night when they rode into Towcester, and
all that was to be seen was a butcher's boy carting garbage out of the
town and whistling to keep his courage up. The watch had long since gone
to sleep about the silent streets, but a dim light burned in the
tap-room of the Old Brown Cow; and there the players rested for
the night.




CHAPTER XIII


A DASH FOR FREEDOM

Nick awoke from a heavy, burning sleep, aching from head to foot. The
master-player, up and dressed, stood by the window, scowling grimly out
into the ashy dawn. Nick made haste to rise, but could not stifle a
sharp cry of pain as he staggered to his feet, he was so racked and sore
with riding.

At the boy's smothered cry Carew turned, and his dark face softened with
a sudden look of pity and concern. "Why, Nick, my lad," he cried, and
hurried to his side, "this is too bad, indeed!" and without more words
took him gently in his arms and carried him down to the courtyard well,
where he bathed him softly from neck to heel in the cold, refreshing
water, and wiped him with a soft, clean towel as tenderly as if he had
been the lad's own mother. And having dried him thoroughly, he rubbed
him with a waxy ointment that smelled of henbane and poppies, until the
aching was almost gone. So soft and so kind was he withal that Nick took
heart after a little and asked timidly, "And ye will let me go home
to-day, sir, will ye not?"

The master-player frowned.

"Please, Master Carew, let me go."

"Come, come," said Carew, impatiently, "enough of this!" and stamped his
foot.

"But, oh, Master Carew," pleaded Nick, with a sob in his throat, "my
mother's heart will surely break if I do na come home!"

Carew started, and his mouth twitched queerly. "Enough, I say--enough!"
he cried. "I will not hear; I'll have no more. I tell thee hold thy
tongue--be dumb! I'll not have ears--thou shalt not speak! Dost hear?"
He dashed the towel to the ground. "I bid thee hold thy tongue."

Nick hid his face between his hands, and leaned against the rough stone
wall, a naked, shivering, wretched little chap indeed. "Oh, mother,
mother, mother!" he sobbed pitifully.

A singular expression came over the master-player's face. "I will not
hear--I tell thee I will not hear!" he choked, and, turning suddenly
away, he fell upon the sleepy hostler, who was drawing water at the
well, and rated him outrageously, to that astounded worthy's
great amazement.

Nick crept into his clothes, and stole away to the kitchen door. There
was a red-faced woman there who bade him not to cry--'t would soon be
breakfast-time. Nick thought he could not eat at all; but when the
savory smell crept out and filled the chilly air, his poor little empty
stomach would not be denied, and he ate heartily. Master Heywood sat
beside him and gave him the choicest bits from his own trencher; and
Carew himself, seeing that he ate, looked strangely pleased, and ordered
him a tiny mutton-pie, well spiced. Nick pushed it back indignantly; but
Heywood took the pie and cut it open, saying quietly: "Come, lad, the
good God made the sheep that is in this pie, not Gaston Carew. Eat
it--come, 'twill do thee good!" and saw him finish the last crumb.

From Towcester south through Northamptonshire is a pretty country of
rolling hills and undulating hollows, ribboned with pebbly rivers, and
dotted with fair parks and tofts of ash and elm and oak. Straggling
villages now and then were threaded on the road like beads upon a
string, and here and there the air was damp and misty from the grassy
fens along some winding stream.

It was against nature that a healthy, growing lad should be so much cast
down as not to see and be interested in the strange, new, passing world
of things about him; and little by little Nick roused from his
wretchedness and began to look about him. And a wonder grew within his
brain: why had they stolen him?--where were they taking him?--what would
they do with him there?--or would they soon let him go again?

Every yellow cloud of dust arising far ahead along the road wrought up
his hopes to a Bluebeard pitch, as regularly to fall. First came a
cast-off soldier from the war in the Netherlands, rakishly forlorn, his
breastplate full of rusty dents, his wild hair worn by his steel cap,
swaggering along on a sorry hack with an old belt full of pistolets, and
his long sword thumping Rosinante's ribs. Then a peddling chapman, with
a dust-white pack and a cunning Hebrew look, limped by, sulkily doffing
his greasy hat. Two sturdy Midland journeymen, in search of southern
handicraft, trudged down with tool-bags over their shoulders and stout
oak staves in hand. Of wretched beggars and tattered rogues there was an
endless string. But of any help no sign.

Here and there, like a moving dot, a ploughman turned a belated furrow;
or a sweating ditcher leaned upon his reluctant spade and longed for
night; or a shepherd, quite as silly as his sheep, gawked up the morning
hills. But not a sign of help for Nick.

Once, passing through a little town, he raised a sudden cry of "Help!
Help--they be stealing me away!" But at that the master-player and the
bandy-legged man waved their hands and set up such a shout that his
shrill outcry was not even heard. And the simple country bumpkins,
standing in a grinning row like so many Old Aunt Sallys at a fair,
pulled off their caps and bowed, thinking it some company of great
lords, and fetched a clownish cheer as the players galloped by.

Then the hot dust got into Nick's throat, and he began to cough. Carew
started with a look of alarm. "Come, come, Nicholas, this will never
do--never do in the world; thou'lt spoil thy voice."

"I do na care," said Nick.

"But I do," said Carew, sharply. "So we'll have no more of it!" and he
clapped his hand upon his poniard. "But, nay--nay, lad, I did not mean
to threaten thee--'tis but a jest. Come, smooth thy throat, and do not
shriek no more. We play in old St. Albans town to-night, and thou art to
sing thy song for us again."

Nick pressed his lips tight shut and shook his head. He would not sing
for them again.

"Come, Nick, I've promised Tom Heywood that thou shouldst sing his song;
and, lad, there's no one left in all the land to sing it if thou'lt not.
Tom doth dearly love thee, lad--why, sure, thou hast seen that! And,
Nick, I've promised all the company that thou wouldst sing Tom's song
with us to-night. 'Twill break their hearts if thou wilt not. Come,
Nick, thou'lt sing it for us all, and set old Albans town afire!" said
Carew, pleadingly.

Nick shook his head.

"Come, Nick," said Carew, coaxingly, "we must hear that sweet voice of
thine in Albans town to-night. Come, there's a dear, good lad, and give
us just one little song! Come, act the man and sing, as thou alone in
all the world canst sing, in Albans town this night; and on my word, and
on the remnant of mine honour, I'll leave thee go back to Stratford town
to-morrow morning!"

"To Stratford--to-morrow?" stammered Nick, with a glad, incredulous cry,
while his heart leaped up within him.

"Ay, verily; upon my faith as the fine fag-end of a very proper
gentleman--thou shalt go back to Stratford town to-morrow if thou wilt
but do thy turn with us to-night."

Nick caught the master-player's arm as they rode along, almost crying
for very joy: "Oh, that I will, sir--and do my very best. And, oh,
Master Carew, I ha' thought so ill o' thee! Forgive me, sir; I did na
know thee well."

Carew winced. Hastily throwing the rein to Nick, he left him to master
his own array.

As for Nick, as happy as a lark he learned his new lines as he rode
along, Master Carew saying them over to him from the manuscript and over
again until he made not a single mistake; and was at great pains to
teach him the latest fashionable London way of pronouncing all the
words, and of emphasizing his set phrases. "Nay, nay," he would cry
laughingly, "not that way, lad; but this: 'Good my lord, I bring a
letter from the duke'--as if thou hadst indeed a letter, see, and not an
empty fist. And when thou dost hand it to him, do it thus--and not as if
thou wert about to stab him in the paunch with a cheese-knife!" And at
the end he clapped him upon the back and said again and again that he
loved him, that he was a dear, sweet figure of a lad, and that his voice
among the rest of England's singers, was like clear honey dropping into
a pot of grease.

But it is a long ride from Towcester to St. Albans town in Herts, though
the road runs through a pleasant, billowy land of oak-walled lanes, wide
pastures, and quiet parks; and the steady jog, jog of the little roan
began to rack Nick's tired bones before the day was done.

Yet when they marched into the quaint old town to the blare of trumpets
and the crash of the kettledrums, all the long line gaudy with the
coat-armour of the Lord High Admiral beneath their flaunting banners,
and the horses pricked up their ears and arched their necks and pranced
along the crowded streets, Nick, stared at by all the good townsfolk,
could not help feeling a thrill of pride that he was one of the great
company of players, and sat up very straight and held his head up
haughtily as Master Carew did, and bore himself with as lordly an air as
he knew how.

       *       *       *       *       *

But when morning came, and he danced blithely back from washing himself
at the horse-trough, all ready to start for home, he found the little
roan cross-bridled as before between the master-player's gray and the
bandy-legged fellow's sorrel mare.

"What, there! cast him loose," said he to the horse-boy who held the
three. "I am not going on with the players--I'm to go back to
Stratford."

"Then ye go afoot," coolly rejoined the other, grinning, "for the hoss
goeth on wi' the rest."

"What is this, Master Carew?" cried Nick, indignantly, bursting into the
tap-room, where the players were at ale. "They will na let me have the
horse, sir. Am I to walk the whole way back to Stratford town?"

"To Stratford?" asked Master Carew, staring with an expression of most
innocent surprise, as he set his ale-can down and turned around. "Why,
thou art not going to Stratford."

"Not going to Stratford!" gasped Nick, catching at the table with a
sinking heart. "Why, sir, ye promised that I should to-day."

"Nay, now, that I did not, Nicholas. I promised thee that thou shouldst
go back to-morrow--were not those my very words!"

"Ay, that they were," cried Nick; "and why will ye na leave me go?"

"Why, this is not to-morrow, Nick. Why, see, I cannot leave thee go
to-day. Thou knowest that I said to-morrow; and this is not
to-morrow--on thine honour, is it now?"

"How can I tell?" cried Nick, despairingly. "Yesterday ye said it would
be, and now ye say that it is na. Ye've twisted it all up so that a body
can na tell at all. But there is a falsehood--a wicked, black
falsehood--somewhere betwixt you and me, sir; and ye know that I have na
lied to you, Master Carew!"

Through the tap-room door he saw the open street and the hills beyond
the town. Catching his breath, he sprang across the sill, and ran for
the free fields at the top of his speed.




CHAPTER XIV


AT BAY

"After him!--stop him!--catch the rogue!" cried Carew, running out on
the cobbles with his ale-can in his hand. "A shilling to the man that
brings him back unharmed! No blows, nor clubs, nor stabbing, hark 'e,
but catch me the knave straightway; he hath snatched a fortune from
my hands!"

At that the hostler, whip in hand, and the tapster with his bit, were
off as fast as their legs could carry them, bawling "Stop, thief, stop!"
at the top of their lungs; and at their backs every idle varlet about
the inn--grooms, stable-boys, and hangers-on--ran whooping, howling, and
hallooing like wild huntsmen.

Nick's frightened heart was in his mouth, and his breath came quick and
sharp. Tap-a-tap, tap-a-tap went his feet on the cobblestones as down
the long street he flew, running as he had never run before.

It seemed as if the whole town bellowed at his back; for windows creaked
above his head, and doors banged wildly after him; curs from every
alley-way came yelping at his heels; apprentices let go the
shutter-bars, and joined in the chase; and near and nearer came the cry
of "Stop, thief, stop!" and the kloppety-klop of hob-nailed shoes in
wild pursuit.

The rabble filled the dark old street from wall to wall, as if a cloud
of good-for-naughts had burst above the town; and far in front sped one
small, curly-headed lad, running like a frightened fawn. He had lost his
cap, and his breath came short, half sobbing in his throat as the sound
of footfalls gained upon his ear; but even yet he might have beaten them
all and reached the open fields but for the dirt and garbage in the
street. Three times he slipped upon a rancid bacon-rind and almost fell;
and the third time, as he plunged across the oozing drain, a dog dashed
right between his feet.

He staggered, nearly fell, threw out his hand against the house and
saved himself; but as he started on again he saw the town-watch, wakened
by the uproar, standing with their long staves at the end of the street,
barring the way.

The door of a smithy stood open just ahead, with forge-fires glowing and
the hammer ringing on the anvil. Nick darted in, past the horses,
hostlers, and blacksmith's boys, and caught at the leather apron of the
sturdy smith himself.

"Hoo, man, what a dickens!" snorted he, dropping the red-hot shoe on
which he was at work, and staring like a startled ox at the panting
little fugitive.

"Do na leave them take me!" panted Nick. "They ha' stolen me away from
Stratford town and will na leave me go!"

At that Will Hostler bolted in, red-faced and scant of wind, "Thou
young rascal," quoth he, "I have thee now! Come out o' that!" and he
tried to take Nick by the collar.

"So-oftly, so-oftly!" rumbled the smith, tweaking up the glowing shoe in
his great pincers, and sweeping a sputtering half-circle in front of the
cowering lad. "Droive slow through the cro-owd! What hath youngster here
did no-ow?"

"He hath stolen a fortune from his master at the Three Lions--and the
shilling for him's mine!"

"Hath stealed a fortune? Whoy, huttlety-tut!" roared the burly smith,
turning ponderously upon Nick, who was dodging around him like a boy at
tag around a tree. "Whoy, lad," said he, scratching his puzzled head
with his great, grimy fingers, "where hast putten it?"

All the rout and the riot now came plunging into the smithy, breathless
with the chase. Master Carew himself, his ale-can still clutched in his
hand, and bearing himself with a high air of dignity, followed after
them, frowning.

"What?" said he, angrily, "have ye earthed the cub and cannot dig him
out? Hast caught him there, fellow?"

"Ay, master, that I have!" shouted Will Hostler. "Shilling's mine, sir."

"Then fetch him out of this hole!" cried Carew, sniffing disdainfully at
the low, smoky door.

"But he will na be fetched," stammered the doughty Will, keeping a most
respectful distance from the long black pincers and the sputtering shoe
with which the farrier stolidly mowed the air round about Nick Attwood
and himself.

At that the crowd set up a shout.

Carew thrust fiercely into the press, the louts and loafers giving way.
"What, here! Nicholas Attwood," said he, harshly, "come hither."

"Do na leave him take me," begged Nick. "He is not my master; I am not
bound out apprentice--they are stealing me away from my own home, and it
will break my mother's heart."

"Nobody breaks nobody's hearts in old Jo-ohn Smithses sho-op," drawled
the smith, in his deep voice; "nor steals nobody, nother. We be
honest-dealing folk in Albans town, an' makes as good horse-shoes as be
forged in all England"--and he went placidly on mowing the air with the
glimmering shoe.

"Here, fellow, stand aside," commanded Master Carew, haughtily. "Stand
aside and let me pass!" As he spoke he clapped his hand upon his poniard
with a fierce snarl, showing his white teeth like a wolf-hound.

The men about him fell back with unanimous alacrity, making out each to
put himself behind the other. But the huge smith only puffed out his
sooty cheeks as if to blow a fly off the next bite of cheese. "So-oftly,
so-oftly, muster," drawled he; "do na go to ruffling it here. This shop
be mine, and I be free-born Englishman. I'll stand aside for no
swash-buckling rogue on my own ground. Come, now, what wilt thou o' the
