abounded in the family they were visiting, and that they had expended it
freely for the gratification of Edwy.

Ethelgiva, the lady of the house, was of noble presence, which almost
seemed to justify the claim of royal blood which was made for her. Tall
and commanding, age had not bent her form, although her locks were
already white. Her beauty, which must have been marvellous in her
younger days, had attracted the attention of a younger son of the
reigning house, and they were married at an early age, secretly, without
the sanction of the king.

The fruit of their union was Elgiva, a name destined to fill a place in
a sad and painful tragedy; but we are anticipating, and must crave the
reader's pardon.

Bright and cheerful indeed was the fair Elgiva at this moment. Her
beauty was remarkable even in a land so famed for the beauty of its
daughters; and the ill-advised Edwy may be pitied, if not altogether
pardoned, for his infatuation, for infatuation it was in a day when the
near tie of blood between them precluded the possibility of lawful
matrimony, save at the expense of a dispensation never likely to be
conceded, since the temperament of men like Odo, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and of Dunstan, was opposed to any relaxation of the law in
the case of the great when such relaxation was unattainable by the poor
and lowly.

To return to our subject:

The feast proceeded with great animation. At first Elfric hesitated when
the meat was placed before him, but he withered, in his weakness, before
the mocking smile of Edwy, and the sarcasm which played upon the lips of
the rest of the company, who perceived his hesitation. So he yielded,
and, shaking off all restraint, ate heartily.

Dish followed dish, and the wine cup circulated with great freedom.
Excited as he was, Elfric could but remark the loose tone of the
conversation. Subjects were freely discussed which had never found
admittance either in the palace of King Edred or at Aescendune, and
which, indeed, caused him to look up with surprise, remembering in whose
presence he sat.

But, as is often the case in an age where opinion is severely repressed
in its outward expression, and amongst those compelled against their
will to observe silence on such subjects on ordinary occasions, all
restraint seemed abandoned at the table of Ethelgiva. It was not that
the language was coarse, but whether the conversation turned upon the
restraints of the clergy, or the court, or upon the fashionable
frivolities of the day--for there were frivolities and fashions even
in that primitive age--there was a freedom of expression bordering
upon profanity or licentiousness.

Edred was mocked as an old babbler; Dunstan was sometimes a fool,
sometimes a hypocrite, sometimes even a sorcerer, although this was said
sneeringly; the clergy were divided into fools and knaves; the claims of
the Church--that is of Christianity--derided, and the principle
freely avowed--"Enjoy life while you can, for you know not what may
come after."

Excited by the wine he had drunk, Elfric became as wild in his talk as
the other young men, and as the intoxicating drink mounted to his brain,
seemed to think that he had just learnt how to enjoy life.

The ladies retired at last, and Edwy followed them. Elfric was on the
point of rising too, but a hint from his companions restrained him. The
wine cup still circulated, the conversation, now unrestrained, initiated
the boy into many an evil secret he had never known earlier; and so the
hours passed on, till Edwy, himself much flushed, came in and said that
it was time to depart, for midnight had long been tolled from the
distant towers of London.

He smiled as he saw by Elfric's bloodshot eyes and unsteady gait, as he
rose, upsetting his seat, that his companion was something less master
of himself than usual; he felt, it need hardly be said, no remorse, but
rather regarded the whole thing as what might now be termed "a jolly lark."

"Shall you require bearers, or can you walk to the boat? I do not wonder
you are ill, you have eaten too much fish today; it is a shame to make
the knees weak through fasting in this style."

"I--I--am all right now."

"You will be better in the air."

So, bidding a farewell of somewhat doubtful character to his
entertainers, Elfric was assisted to the boat. The air did not revive
him, he felt wretchedly feverish and giddy, and could hardly tell how he
reached the river.

Reach it, however, he did, and the strong arms of the watermen impelled the
boat rapidly down the tide, until it reached the stairs near the palace.

Here Redwald was in waiting, and assisted them to land.

"You are very late, or rather early," he said.

"Yes," said Edwy, "but it has been a jolly evening, only poor Elfric has
been ill, having of course weakened himself by fasting."

Redwald smiled such a scornful smile, and muttered some words to
himself. Yet it did not seem as if he were altogether displeased at the
state in which he saw Elfric. It may be added that Edwy was but little
better.

"You must keep silent," said Redwald; "I believe the king and Dunstan
are hearing matins in the chapel: it is the festival of some saint or
other, who went to the gridiron in olden days."

The outer gate of the palace was cautiously opened, and, taking off
their shoes, the youths ascended the stairs which led to their
apartments as lightly as possible.

"Send the leech Sigebert to us in the morning--he must report Elfric
unwell--for he will hardly get up to hear Dunstan mumble mass."

"Perhaps your royal highness had better rest also."

"And bring suspicion upon us both? No," said Edwy, "one will be enough
to report ill at once; Dunstan is an old fox."

Poor Elfric could hardly get to bed, and, almost for the first time
since infancy, he laid himself down without one prayer. Edwy left him in
the dark, and there he lay, his head throbbing, and a burning thirst
seeming to consume him.

Long before morning he was very sick, and when the bell was sounded for
the early mass it need hardly be said that he was unable to rise.

Sigebert the physician, who, like Redwald, was in the confidence of the
future king, Edwy, came in to see him, and asked what was the matter.

"I am very sick and ill," gasped Elfric.

"I suppose you have taken something that disagreed with you--too much
fish perhaps." (with a smile).

"No--no--I do not--"

"I understand," said the leech; "you will soon be better; meanwhile, I
will account for your absence at chapel. Here, take this medicine; you
will find it relieve you."

And he gave Elfric a mixture which assuaged his burning thirst, and
bathed his forehead with some powerful essence which refreshed him
greatly, whereupon the leech departed.

Only an hour later, and Edred, hearing from the physician of Elfric's
sudden illness, came in to see the boy, whose bright cheerful face and
merry disposition had greatly attracted him. This was hardest of all for
Elfric to bear; he had to evade the kind questions of the king, and to
hear expressions of sympathy which he felt he did not deserve.

More than once he felt inclined to tell all, but the fear of the prince
restrained him, and also a sense of what he thought honour, for he would
not betray his companion, and he could not confess his own guilt without
implicating Edwy.

Poor boy! it would have been far better for him had he done so: he had
taken his first step downward.


    CHAPTER VI. LOWER AND LOWER.

It becomes our painful duty to record that from the date of the feast,
described in our last chapter, the character of poor Elfric underwent
rapid deterioration. In the first place, the fact of his having yielded
to the forbidden indulgence, and--as he felt--disgraced himself,
gave Edwy, as the master of the secret, great power over him, and he
never failed to use this power whenever he saw any inclination on the
part of his vassal to throw off the servitude. It was not that he
deliberately intended to injure Elfric, but he had come to regard virtue
as either weakness or hypocrisy, at least such virtues as temperance,
purity, or self restraint.

The great change which was creeping over Elfric became visible to
others: he seemed to lose his bright smile; the look of boyish innocence
faded from his countenance, and gave place to an expression of sullen
reserve; he showed less ardour in all his sports and pastimes, became
subject to fits of melancholy, and often seemed lost in thought, anxious
thought, in the midst of his studies.

He seldom had the power, even if the will, to communicate with home.
Mercia was in many respects an independent state, subject to the same
king, but governed by a code of laws differing from those of Wessex; and
it was only when a royal messenger or some chance traveller left court
for the banks of the Midland Avon, that Elfric could use the art of
writing, a knowledge he was singular in possessing, thanks to the wisdom
of his sire.

So the home authorities knew little of the absent one, for whom they
offered up many a fervent prayer, and of whom they constantly spoke and
thought. And yet, so mysterious are the ways of Providence, it seemed as
if these prayers were unanswered--seemed indeed, yet they were not
forgotten before God.

Seemed forgotten; for Elfric was rapidly becoming reckless. Many
subsequent scenes of indulgence had followed the first one, and other
haunts, residences of licentious young nobles, or taverns, had been
sought out by the youths, and always by Redwald's connivance.

He was Edwy's evil genius, and always seemed at hand whensoever the
prince sought occasion to sin. Still, he was not at all suspected by
Edred, before whom he kept up an appearance of the strictest morality--
always punctual in his attendance at mass, matins, and evensong, and
with a various stock of phrases of pious import ready at tongue in case
of need or opportunity of using them to advantage.

To Elfric, his behaviour was always reserved, yet he seemed even more
ready to lend him a helping hand downward than did the prince.

So time passed on; weeks became months; and Christmas with all its
hallowed associations had passed; it had been Elfric's first Christmas
away from home, and he was sad at heart, in spite of the boisterous
merriment of his companions. The spring of the year 955 came on, and
Lent drew near, a season to which Edwy looked forward with great dread,
for, as he said, there would be nothing in the whole palace to eat until
Easter, and he could not even hope to bribe the cook.

The canons of the church required all persons to make confession, and so
enter upon the fast tide, having "thus purified their minds;" [x]
it may, alas! be easily guessed how the guilty lads performed this duty,
how enforced confession only led to their adding the sin of further
deceit, and that of a deadly kind.

Thus they entered upon Lent: their abstinence was entirely compulsory,
not voluntary; and although they made up for it in some degree when they
could get away from the palace, yet even this was difficult, for it was
positively unlawful for butchers to sell or for people to buy meat at
the prohibited seasons, and the law was not easily evaded. But it was a
prayerless Lent also to Elfric, for he had, alas! even discontinued his
habit of daily prayer, a habit he had hitherto maintained from
childhood, a habit first learned at his mother's knee.

Holy Week came, and was spent with great strictness; the king seemed to
divide his whole time between the business of state and the duties of
religion.

Dunstan was absent at Glastonbury, but other ecclesiastics thronged the
palace, and there were few, save the guilty boys and Redwald, who seemed
uninfluenced by the solemn commemoration.

But it must not be supposed that Elfric was wholly uninfluenced: after
the preaching of the Passion by a poor simple monk on Good Friday, he
retired to his own little room, where he wept as if his heart would
break. Had Dunstan been then in town, the whole story would have been
told, and much misery saved, for Elfric felt he could trust him if he
could trust anybody; but unhappily Dunstan was, as we have seen, keeping
Passiontide at his abbey.

Still, Elfric felt he must tell all, and submit to the advice and
penance which might be imposed; and as he sat weeping over his sin that
Good Friday night, with the thought that he might find pardon and peace
through the Great Sacrifice so touchingly pleaded that day, he felt that
the first step to amendment must lie in a full and frank confession of
all; he knew he should grievously offend Edwy, and that he should lose
the favour of his future king, but he could not help it.

"Why, oh why did I leave Aescendune, dear Aescendune?--fool that I was
--I will go back."

And a sweet desire of home and kindred rose up before him--of his
father's loving welcome, his fond mother's chaste kiss, and of the dear
old woods and waters--the hallowed associations of his home life. He
rose up to seek Father Benedict, determined to enter upon the path of
peace at any cost, when Edwy entered.

He did not see in the gathering darkness the traces of emotion visible
on poor Elfric's countenance, and he began in his usual careless way--
"How are you, Elfric, my boy; glad Lent is nearly over? What a dismal
time that wretched monk preached this morning!"

"Edwy, I am utterly miserable: I must tell all; I cannot live like this
any longer."

"What a burst of penitence! go to confession; to be sure it looks well,
and if one can only manage to get out a few tears they account him a
saint; tell me the receipt."

"But, Edwy, I must tell all!"

"Not if you are wise."

"Why not? It is all in secrecy."

"No it is not; you will be required as a penance to go and tell the king
all that we have done; you may do so, and I will manage to represent
matters so as to throw the whole blame on you; you will be sent home in
disgrace."

Poor Elfric hung down his head; the thought of his disgrace reaching
home had not occurred to him.

"Come," said Edwy, "I don't want to be hard upon you. Cheer up, my man.
What have you done amiss? Only enjoyed yourself as nature has guided
you. Why should you think God meant us to pass through life like those
miserable shavelings Edred delights to honour? Cheer up, Elfric; your
bright face was never meant for that of a hypocrite. If you are so
dreadfully bad, you are in a pretty numerous company; and I don't think
the shavelings believe their own tales about fire and torment hereafter.
They are merry enough, considering."

In short, poor Elfric's short-lived penitence was given to the winds.
Edwy went alone to be shriven on the morrow.

On Easter Day they both received the Holy Communion in the royal chapel.

From that time remorse ceased to visit the heir of Aescendune, as if he
had at last quenched the Spirit, and he became so utterly wild and
reckless, that at last Dunstan thought it necessary to speak to him
privately on the subject. It was nearly six months after Easter.

The boy entered the study set apart for the use of the great monk and
statesman with a palpitating heart, but he managed to repress its
beatings, and put on a perfectly unconcerned expression of countenance.
He had gained in self control if in nothing else.

"I wished to speak with you, Elfric," said the abbot, "upon a very
serious matter. When you first came here, I was delighted to have you as
a companion to the prince. You were evidently well brought up, and bore
