delighting his soul, as in a dream. And there, when they had taken their
fill of food and drink, they kept awake all night waiting for the sons
of Boreas. And the aged sire himself sat in the midst, near the hearth,
telling of the end of their voyage and the completion of their journey:

"Listen then. Not everything is it lawful for you to know clearly; but
whatever is heaven's will, I will not hide. I was infatuated aforetime,
when in my folly I declared the will of Zeus in order and to the end.
For he himself wishes to deliver to men the utterances of the prophetic
art incomplete, in order that they may still have some need to know the
will of heaven.

"First of all, after leaving me, ye will see the twin Cyanean rocks
where the two seas meet. No one, I ween, has won his escape between
them. For they are not firmly fixed with roots beneath, but constantly
clash against one another to one point, and above a huge mass of salt
water rises in a crest, boiling up, and loudly dashes upon the hard
beach. Wherefore now obey my counsel, if indeed with prudent mind and
reverencing the blessed gods ye pursue your way; and perish not
foolishly by a self-sought death, or rush on following the guidance of
youth. First entrust the attempt to a dove when ye have sent her forth
from the ship. And if she escapes safe with her wings between the rocks
to the open sea, then no more do ye refrain from the path, but grip your
oars well in your hands and cleave the sea's narrow strait, for the
light of safety will be not so much in prayer as in strength of hands.
Wherefore let all else go and labour boldly with might and main, but ere
then implore the gods as ye will, I forbid you not. But if she flies
onward and perishes midway, then do ye turn back; for it is better to
yield to the immortals. For ye could not escape an evil doom from the
rocks, not even if Argo were of iron.

"O hapless ones, dare not to transgress my divine warning, even though
ye think that I am thrice as much hated by the sons of heaven as I am,
and even more than thrice; dare not to sail further with your ship in
despite of the omen. And as these things will fall, so shall they fall.
But if ye shun the clashing rocks and come scatheless inside Pontus,
straightway keep the land of the Bithynians on your right and sail on,
and beware of the breakers, until ye round the swift river Rhebas and
the black beach, and reach the harbour of the Isle of Thynias. Thence ye
must turn back a little space through the sea and beach your ship on the
land of the Mariandyni lying opposite. Here is a downward path to the
abode of Hades, and the headland of Acherusia stretches aloft, and
eddying Acheron cleaves its way at the bottom, even through the
headland, and sends its waters forth from a huge ravine. And near it ye
will sail past many hills of the Paphlagonians, over whom at the first
Eneteian Pelops reigned, and of his blood they boast themselves to be.

"Now there is a headland opposite Helice the Bear, steep on all sides,
and they call it Carambis, about whose crests the blasts of the north
wind are sundered. So high in the air does it rise turned towards the
sea. And when ye have rounded it broad Aegialus stretches before you;
and at the end of broad Aegialus, at a jutting point of coast, the
waters of the river Halys pour forth with a terrible roar; and after it
Iris flowing near, but smaller in stream, rolls into the sea with white
eddies. Onward from thence the bend of a huge and towering cape reaches
out from the land, next Thermodon at its mouth flows into a quiet bay at
the Themiscyreian headland, after wandering through a broad continent.
And here is the plain of Doeas, and near are the three cities of the
Amazons, and after them the Chalybes, most wretched of men, possess a
soil rugged and unyielding--sons of toil, they busy themselves with
working iron. And near them dwell the Tibareni, rich in sheep, beyond
the Genetaean headland of Zeus, lord of hospitality. And bordering on it
the Mossynoeci next in order inhabit the well-wooded mainland and the
parts beneath the mountains, who have built in towers made from trees
their wooden homes and well-fitted chambers, which they call Mossynes,
and the people themselves take their name from them. After passing them
ye must beach your ship upon a smooth island, when ye have driven away
with all manner of skill the ravening birds, which in countless numbers
haunt the desert island. In it the Queens of the Amazons, Otrere and
Antiope, built a stone temple of Ares what time they went forth to war.
Now here an unspeakable help will come to you from the bitter sea;
wherefore with kindly intent I bid you stay. But what need is there that
I should sin yet again declaring everything to the end by my prophetic
art? And beyond the island and opposite mainland dwell the Philyres: and
above the Philyres are the Macrones, and after them the vast tribes of
the Becheiri. And next in order to them dwell the Sapeires, and the
Byzeres have the lands adjoining to them, and beyond them at last live
the warlike Colchians themselves. But speed on in your ship, till ye
touch the inmost bourne of the sea. And here at the Cytaean mainland and
from the Amarantine mountains far away and the Circaean plain eddying
Phasis rolls his broad stream to the sea. Guide your ship to the mouth
of that river and ye shall behold the towers of Cytaean Aeetes and the
shady grove of Ares, where a dragon, a monster terrible to behold, ever
glares around, keeping watch over the fleece that is spread upon the top
of an oak; neither by day nor by night does sweet sleep subdue his
restless eyes."

Thus he spake, and straightway fear seized them as they heard. And for a
long while they were struck with silence; till at last the hero, son of
Aeson, spake, sore dismayed at their evil plight:

"O aged sire, now hast thou come to the end of the toils of our
sea-journeying and hast told us the token, trusting to which we shall
make our way to Pontus through the hateful rocks; but whether, when we
have escaped them, we shall have a return back again to Hellas, this too
would we gladly learn from thee. What shall I do, how shall I go over
again such a long path through the sea, unskilled as I am, with
unskilled comrades? And Colchian Aea lies at the edge of Pontus and of
the world."

Thus he spake, and him the aged sire addressed in reply: "O son, when
once thou hast escaped through the deadly rocks, fear not; for a deity
will be the guide from Aea by another track; and to Aea there will be
guides enough. But, my friends, take thought of the artful aid of the
Cyprian goddess. For on her depends the glorious issue of your venture.
And further than this ask me not."

Thus spake Agenor's son, and close at hand the twin sons of Thracian
Boreas came darting from the sky and set their swift feet upon the
threshold; and the heroes rose up from their seats when they saw them
present. And Zetes, still drawing hard breath after his toil, spake
among the eager listeners, telling them how far they had driven the
Harpies and how Iris prevented their slaying them, and how the goddess
of her grace gave them pledges, and how those others in fear plunged
into the vast cave of the Dictaean cliff. Then in the mansion all their
comrades were joyful at the tidings and so was Phineus himself. And
quickly Aeson's son, with good will exceeding, addressed him:

"Assuredly there was then, Phineus, some god who cared for thy bitter
woe, and brought us hither from afar, that the sons of Boreas might aid
thee; and if too he should bring sight to thine eyes, verily I should
rejoice, methinks, as much as if I were on my homeward way."

Thus he spake, but Phineus replied to him with downcast look: "Son of
Aeson, that is past recall, nor is there any remedy hereafter, for
blasted are my sightless eyes. But instead of that, may the god grant me
death at once, and after death I shall take my share in perfect bliss."

Then they two returned answering speech, each to other, and soon in the
midst of their converse early dawn appeared; and round Phineus were
gathered the neighbours who used to come thither aforetime day by day
and constantly bring a portion of their food. To all alike, however poor
he was that came, the aged man gave his oracles with good will, and
freed many from their woes by his prophetic art; wherefore they visited
and tended him. And with them came Paraebius, who was dearest to him,
and gladly did he perceive these strangers in the house. For long ere
now the seer himself had said that a band of chieftains, faring from
Hellas to the city of Aeetes, would make fast their hawsers to the
Thynian land, and by Zeus' will would check the approach of the Harpies.
The rest the old man pleased with words of wisdom and let them go;
Paraebius only he bade remain there with the chiefs; and straightway he
sent him and bade him bring back the choicest of his sheep. And when he
had left the hall Phineus spake gently amid the throng of oarsmen:

"O my friends, not all men are arrogant, it seems, nor unmindful of
benefits. Even as this man, loyal as he is, came hither to learn his
fate. For when he laboured the most and toiled the most, then the needs
of life, ever growing more and more, would waste him, and day after day
ever dawned more wretched, nor was there any respite to his toil. But he
was paying the sad penalty of his father's sin. For he when alone on the
mountains, felling trees, once slighted the prayers of a Hamadryad, who
wept and sought to soften him with plaintive words, not to cut down the
stump of an oak tree coeval with herself, wherein for a long time she
had lived continually; but he in the arrogance of youth recklessly cut
it down. So to him the nymph thereafter made her death a curse, to him
and to his children. I indeed knew of the sin when he came; and I bid
him build an altar to the Thynian nymph, and offer on it an atoning
sacrifice, with prayer to escape his father's fate. Here, ever since he
escaped the god-sent doom, never has he forgotten or neglected me; but
sorely and against his will do I send him from my doors, so eager is he
to remain with me in my affliction."

Thus spake Agenor's son; and his friend straightway came near leading
two sheep from the flock. And up rose Jason and up rose the sons of
Boreas at the bidding of the aged sire. And quickly they called upon
Apollo, lord of prophecy, and offered sacrifice upon the hearth as the
day was just sinking. And the younger comrades made ready a feast to
their hearts' desire. Thereupon having well feasted they turned
themselves to rest, some near the ship's hawsers, others in groups
throughout the mansion. And at dawn the Etesian winds blew strongly,
which by the command of Zeus blow over every land equally.

Cyrene, the tale goes, once tended sheep along the marsh-meadow of
Peneus among men of old time; for dear to her were maidenhood and a
couch unstained. But, as she guarded her flock by the river, Apollo
carried her off far from Haemonia and placed her among the nymphs of the
land, who dwelt in Libya near the Myrtosian height. And here to Phoebus
she bore Aristaeus whom the Haemonians, rich in corn-land, call "Hunter"
and "Shepherd." Her, of his love, the god made a nymph there, of long
life and a huntress, and his son he brought while still an infant to be
nurtured in the cave of Cheiron. And to him when he grew to manhood the
Muses gave a bride, and taught him the arts of healing and of prophecy;
and they made him the keeper of their sheep, of all that grazed on the
Athamantian plain of Phthia and round steep Othrys and the sacred stream
of the river Apidanus. But when from heaven Sirius scorched the Minoan
Isles, and for long there was no respite for the inhabitants, then by
the injunction of the Far-Darter they summoned Aristaeus to ward off the
pestilence. And by his father's command he left Phthia and made his home
in Ceos, and gathered together the Parrhasian people who are of the
lineage of Lycaon, and he built a great altar to Zeus Icmaeus, and duly
offered sacrifices upon the mountains to that star Sirius, and to Zeus
son of Cronos himself. And on this account it is that Etesian winds from
Zeus cool the land for forty days, and in Ceos even now the priests
offer sacrifices before the rising of the Dog-star.

So the tale is told, but the chieftains stayed there by constraint, and
every day the Thynians, doing pleasure to Phineus, sent them gifts
beyond measure. And afterwards they raised an altar to the blessed
twelve on the sea-beach opposite and laid offerings thereon and then
entered their swift ship to row, nor did they forget to bear with them a
trembling dove; but Euphemus seized her and brought her all quivering
with fear, and they loosed the twin hawsers from the land.

Nor did they start unmarked by Athena, but straightway swiftly she set
her feet on a light cloud, which would waft her on, mighty though she
was, and she swept on to the sea with friendly thoughts to the oarsmen.
And as when one roveth far from his native land, as we men often wander
with enduring heart, nor is any land too distant but all ways are clear
to his view, and he sees in mind his own home, and at once the way over
sea and land seems plain, and swiftly thinking, now this way, now that,
he strains with eager eyes; so swiftly the daughter of Zeus darted down
and set her foot on the cheerless shore of Thynia.

Now when they reached the narrow strait of the winding passage, hemmed
in on both sides by rugged cliffs, while an eddying current from below
was washing against the ship as she moved on, they went forward sorely
in dread; and now the thud of the crashing rocks ceaselessly struck
their ears, and the sea-washed shores resounded, and then Euphemus
grasped the dove in his hand and started to mount the prow; and they, at
the bidding of Tiphys, son of Hagnias, rowed with good will to drive
Argo between the rocks, trusting to their strength. And as they rounded
a bend they saw the rocks opening for the last time of all. Their spirit
melted within them; and Euphemus sent forth the dove to dart forward in
flight; and they all together raised their heads to look; but she flew
between them, and the rocks again rushed together and crashed as they
met face to face. And the foam leapt up in a mass like a cloud; awful
was the thunder of the sea; and all round them the mighty welkin roared.

The hollow caves beneath the rugged cliffs rumbled as the sea came
surging in; and the white foam of the dashing wave spurted high above
the cliff. Next the current whirled the ship round. And the rocks shore
away the end of the dove's tail-feathers; but away she flew unscathed.
And the rowers gave a loud cry; and Tiphys himself called to them to row
with might and main. For the rocks were again parting asunder. But as
they rowed they trembled, until the tide returning drove them back
within the rocks. Then most awful fear seized upon all; for over their
head was destruction without escape. And now to right and left broad
Pontus was seen, when suddenly a huge wave rose up before them, arched,
like a steep rock; and at the sight they bowed with bended heads. For it
seemed about to leap down upon the ship's whole length and to overwhelm
them. But Tiphys was quick to ease the ship as she laboured with the
oars; and in all its mass the wave rolled away beneath the keel, and at
the stern it raised Argo herself and drew her far away from the rocks;
and high in air was she borne. But Euphemus strode among all his
comrades and cried to them to bend to their oars with all their might;
and they with a shout smote the water. And as far as the ship yielded to
the rowers, twice as far did she leap back, and the oars were bent like
curved bows as the heroes used their strength.

Then a vaulted billow rushed upon them, and the ship like a cylinder ran
on the furious wave plunging through the hollow sea. And the eddying
current held her between the clashing rocks; and on each side they shook
and thundered; and the ship's timbers were held fast. Then Athena with
her left hand thrust back one mighty rock and with her right pushed the
ship through; and she, like a winged arrow, sped through the air.
Nevertheless the rocks, ceaselessly clashing, shore off as she passed
the extreme end of the stern-ornament. But Athena soared up to Olympus,
when they had escaped unscathed. And the rocks in one spot at that
moment were rooted fast for ever to each other, which thing had been
destined by the blessed gods, when a man in his ship should have passed
between them alive. And the heroes breathed again after their chilling
fear, beholding at the same time the sky and the expanse of sea
spreading far and wide. For they deemed that they were saved from Hades;
and Tiphys first of all began to speak:

"It is my hope that we have safely escaped this peril--we, and the ship;
and none other is the cause so much as Athena, who breathed into Argo
divine strength when Argus knitted her together with bolts; and she may
not be caught. Son of Aeson, no longer fear thou so much the best of thy
king, since a god hath granted us escape between the rocks; for Phineus,
Agenor's son, said that our toils hereafter would be lightly
accomplished."

He spake, and at once he sped the ship onward through the midst of the
sea past the Bithynian coast. But Jason with gentle words addressed him
in reply: "Tiphys, why dost thou comfort thus my grieving heart? I have
erred and am distraught in wretched and helpless ruin. For I ought, when
Pelias gave the command, to have straightway refused this quest to his
face, yea, though I were doomed to die pitilessly, torn limb from limb,
but now I am wrapped in excessive fear and cares unbearable, dreading to
sail through the chilling paths of the sea, and dreading when we shall
set foot on the mainland. For on every side are unkindly men. And ever
when day is done I pass a night of groans from the time when ye first
gathered together for my sake, while I take thought for all things; but
thou talkest at thine ease, caring only for thine own life; while for
myself I am dismayed not a whit; but I fear for this man and for that
equally, and for thee, and for my other comrades, if I shall not bring
you back safe to the land of Hellas."

Thus he spake, making trial of the chiefs; but they shouted loud with
cheerful words. And his heart was warmed within him at their cry and
again he spake outright among them: "My friends, in your valour my
courage is quickened. Wherefore now, even though I should take my way
through the gulfs of Hades, no more shall I let fear seize upon me,
since ye are steadfast amid cruel terrors. But now that we have sailed
out from the striking rocks, I trow that never hereafter will there be
another such fearful thing, if indeed we go on our way following the
counsel of Phineus."

Thus he spake, and straightway they ceased from such words and gave
unwearying labour to the oar; and quickly they passed by the swiftly
flowing river Rhebas and the peak of Colone, and soon thereafter the
black headland, and near it the mouth of the river Phyllis, where
aforetime Dipsacus received in his home the son of Athamas, when with
his ram he was flying from the city of Orchomenus; and Dipsacus was the
son of a meadow-nymph, nor was insolence his delight, but contented by
his father's stream he dwelt with his mother, pasturing his flocks by
the shore. And quickly they sighted and sailed past his shrine and the
broad banks of the river and the plain, and deep-flowing Calpe, and all
the windless night and the day they bent to their tireless oars. And
even as ploughing oxen toil as they cleave the moist earth, and sweat
streams in abundance from flank and neck; and from beneath the yoke
their eyes roll askance, while the breath ever rushes from their mouths
in hot gasps; and all day long they toil, planting their hoofs deep in
the ground; like them the heroes kept dragging their oars through the
sea.

Now when divine light has not yet come nor is it utter darkness, but a
faint glimmer has spread over the night, the time when men wake and call
it twilight, at that hour they ran into the harbour of the desert island
Thynias and, spent by weary toil, mounted the shore. And to them the son
of Leto, as he passed from Lycia far away to the countless folk of the
Hyperboreans, appeared; and about his cheeks on both sides his golden
locks flowed in clusters as he moved; in his left hand he held a silver
bow, and on his back was slung a quiver hanging from his shoulders; and
beneath his feet all the island quaked, and the waves surged high on the
beach. Helpless amazement seized them as they looked; and no one dared
to gaze face to face into the fair eyes of the god. And they stood with
heads bowed to the ground; but he, far off, passed on to the sea through
the air; and at length Orpheus spake as follows, addressing the chiefs:

"Come, let us call this island the sacred isle of Apollo of the Dawn
since he has appeared to all, passing by at dawn; and we will offer such
sacrifices as we can, building an altar on the shore; and if hereafter
he shall grant us a safe return to the Haemonian land, then will we lay
on his altar the thighs of horned goats. And now I bid you propitiate
him with the steam of sacrifice and libations. Be gracious, O king, be
gracious in thy appearing."

Thus he spake, and they straightway built up an altar with shingle; and
over the island they wandered, seeking if haply they could get a glimpse
of a fawn or a wild goat, that often seek their pasture in the deep
wood. And for them Leto's son provided a quarry; and with pious rites
they wrapped in fat the thigh bones of them all and burnt them on the
sacred altar, celebrating Apollo, Lord of Dawn. And round the burning
sacrifice they set up a broad dancing-ring, singing, "All hail, fair god
of healing, Phoebus, all hail," and with them Oeagrus' goodly son began
a clear lay on his Bistonian lyre; how once beneath the rocky ridge of
Parnassus he slew with his bow the monster Delphyne, he, still young and
beardless, still rejoicing in his long tresses. Mayst thou be gracious!
Ever, O king, be thy locks unshorn, ever unravaged; for so is it right.
And none but Leto, daughter of Coeus, strokes them with her dear hands.
And often the Corycian nymphs, daughters of Pleistus, took up the
cheering strain crying "Healer"; hence arose this lovely refrain of the
hymn to Phoebus.

Now when they had celebrated him with dance and song they took an oath
with holy libations, that they would ever help each other with concord
of heart, touching the sacrifice as they swore; and even now there
stands there a temple to gracious Concord, which the heroes themselves
reared, paying honour at that time to the glorious goddess.

Now when the third morning came, with a fresh west wind they left the
lofty island. Next, on the opposite side they saw and passed the mouth
of the river Sangarius and the fertile land of the Mariandyni, and the
stream of Lycus and the Anthemoeisian lake; and beneath the breeze the
ropes and all the tackling quivered as they sped onward. During the
night the wind ceased and at dawn they gladly reached the haven of the
Acherusian headland. It rises aloft with steep cliffs, looking towards
the Bithynian sea; and beneath it smooth rocks, ever washed by the sea,
stand rooted firm; and round them the wave rolls and thunders loud, but
above, wide-spreading plane trees grow on the topmost point. And from it
towards the land a hollow glen slopes gradually away, where there is a
cave of Hades overarched by wood and rocks. From here an icy breath,
unceasingly issuing from the chill recess, ever forms a glistening rime
which melts again beneath the midday sun. And never does silence hold
that grim headland, but there is a continual murmur from the sounding
sea and the leaves that quiver in the winds from the cave. And here is
the outfall of the river Acheron which bursts its way through the
headland and falls into the Eastern sea, and a hollow ravine brings it
down from above. In after times the Nisaean Megarians named it
Sooenautes[1] when they were about to settle in the land of the
Mariandyni. For indeed the river saved them with their ships when they
were caught in a violent tempest. By this way the heroes took the ship
