SECOND ELDER.

How? Will she prophesy about her own
Sorrows? That power abides when all is gone!

CASSANDRA.

Apollo, Apollo! Light of all that is!
  Mine enemy!
Where hast thou led me? ... Ha! What house is this?

LEADER.

The Atreidae's castle. If thou knowest not, I
Am here to help thee, and help faithfully.

CASSANDRA (_whispering_).

Nay, nay. This is the house that God hateth.
There be many things that know its secret; sore
And evil things; murders and strangling death.
'Tis here they slaughter men...A splashing floor.

SECOND ELDER.

Keen-sensed the strange maid seemeth, like a hound
For blood.--And what she seeks can sure be found!

CASSANDRA.

The witnesses ... I follow where they lead.
The crying ... of little children ... near the gate:
Crying for wounds that bleed:
And the smell of the baked meats their father ate.

SECOND ELDER (_recognizing her vision, and repelled_).

Word of thy mystic power had reached our ear
Long since. Howbeit we need no prophets here.

CASSANDRA.

Ah, ah! What would they? A new dreadful thing.
A great great sin plots in the house this day;
Too strong for the faithful, beyond medicining ...
And help stands far away.

LEADER.

This warning I can read not, though I knew
That other tale. It rings the city through.

CASSANDRA.

O Woman, thou! The lord who lay with thee!
  Wilt lave with water, and then ... How speak the end?
It comes so quick. A hand ... another hand ...
  That reach, reach gropingly....

LEADER.

I see not yet. These riddles, pierced with blind
Gleams of foreboding, but bemuse my mind.

CASSANDRA.

Ah, ah! What is it? There; it is coming clear.
  A net ... some net of Hell.
Nay, she that lies with him ... is she the snare?
  And half of his blood upon it. It holds well....
O Crowd of ravening Voices, be glad, yea, shout
And cry for the stoning, cry for the casting out!

SECOND ELDER.

What Fury Voices call'st thou to be hot
Against this castle? Such words like me not.

  And deep within my breast I felt that sick
    And saffron drop, which creepeth to the heart
    To die as the last rays of life depart.
      Misfortune comes so quick.

CASSANDRA.

Ah, look! Look! Keep his mate from the Wild Bull!
  A tangle of raiment, see;
A black horn, and a blow, and he falleth, full
  In the marble amid the water. I counsel ye.
  I speak plain ... Blood in the bath and treachery!

LEADER.

No great interpreter of oracles
Am I; but this, I think, some mischief spells.

  What spring of good hath seercraft ever made
    Up from the dark to flow?
  'Tis but a weaving of words, a craft of woe,
    To make mankind afraid.

CASSANDRA.

Poor woman! Poor dead woman! ... Yea, it is I,
  Poured out like water among them. Weep for me....
  Ah! What is this place? Why must I come with thee....
    To die, only to die?

LEADER.

Thou art borne on the breath of God, thou spirit wild,
  For thine own weird to wail,
Like to that winged voice, that heart so sore
Which, crying alway, hungereth to cry more,
"Itylus, Itylus," till it sing her child
  Back to the nightingale.

CASSANDRA.

Oh, happy Singing Bird, so sweet, so clear!
  Soft wings for her God made,
And an easy passing, without pain or tear ...
For me 'twill be torn flesh and rending blade.

SECOND ELDER.

Whence is it sprung, whence wafted on God's breath,
  This anguish reasonless?
This throbbing of terror shaped to melody,
Moaning of evil blent with music high?
Who hath marked out for thee that mystic path
  Through thy woe's wilderness?

CASSANDRA.

Alas for the kiss, the kiss of Paris, his people's bane!
Alas for Scamander Water, the water my fathers drank!
Long, long ago, I played about thy bank,
  And was cherished and grew strong;
Now by a River of Wailing, by shores of Pain,
  Soon shall I make my song.

LEADER.

  How sayst thou? All too clear,
This ill word thou hast laid upon thy mouth!
    A babe could read thee plain.
It stabs within me like a serpent's tooth,
The bitter thrilling music of her pain:
    I marvel as I hear.

CASSANDRA.

Alas for the toil, the toil of a City, worn unto death!
Alas for my father's worship before the citadel,
The flocks that bled and the tumult of their breath!
  But no help from them came
To save Troy Towers from falling as they fell!...
And I on the earth shall writhe, my heart aflame.

SECOND ELDER.

Dark upon dark, new ominous words of ill!
  Sure there hath swept on thee some Evil Thing,
    Crushing, which makes thee bleed
  And in the torment of thy vision sing
These plaining death-fraught oracles ... Yet still, still,
    Their end I cannot read!

CASSANDRA.
  [_By an effort she regains mastery of herself, and speaks directly to
the Leader_.

'Fore God, mine oracle shall no more hide
With veils his visage, like a new-wed bride!
A shining wind out of this dark shall blow,
Piercing the dawn, growing as great waves grow,
To burst in the heart of sunrise ... stronger far
Than this poor pain of mine. I will not mar
With mists my wisdom.
                      Be near me as I go,
Tracking the evil things of long ago,
And bear me witness. For this roof, there clings
Music about it, like a choir which sings
One-voiced, but not well-sounding, for not good
The words are.  Drunken, drunken, and with blood,
To make them dare the more, a revelling rout
Is in the rooms, which no man shall cast out,
Of sister Furies. And they weave to song,
Haunting the House, its first blind deed of wrong,
Spurning in turn that King's bed desecrate,
Defiled, which paid a brother's sin with hate....
  Hath it missed or struck, mine arrow? Am I a poor
Dreamer, that begs and babbles at the door?
Give first thine oath in witness, that I know
Of this great dome the sins wrought long ago.

ELDER.

And how should oath of mine, though bravely sworn,
Appease thee? Yet I marvel that one born
Far over seas, of alien speech, should fall
So apt, as though she had lived here and seen all.

CASSANDRA.

The Seer Apollo made me too to see.

ELDER (_in a low voice_).

Was the God's heart pierced with desire for thee?

CASSANDRA.

Time was, I held it shame hereof to speak.

ELDER.

Ah, shame is for the mighty, not the weak.

CASSANDRA.

We wrestled, and his breath to me was sweet.

ELDER.

Ye came to the getting of children, as is meet?

CASSANDRA.

I swore to Loxias, and I swore a lie.

ELDER.

Already thine the gift of prophecy?

CASSANDRA.

Already I showed my people all their path.

ELDER.

And Loxias did not smite thee in his wrath?

CASSANDRA.

After that sin ... no man believed me more.

ELDER.

Nay, then, to us thy wisdom seemeth sure.

CASSANDRA.

Oh, oh! Agony, agony!
Again the awful pains of prophecy
Are on me, maddening as they fall....
Ye see them there ... beating against the wall?
So young ... like shapes that gather in a dream ...
Slain by a hand they loved. Children they seem,
Murdered ... and in their hands they bear baked meat:
I think it is themselves. Yea, flesh; I see it;
And inward parts.... Oh, what a horrible load
To carry! And their father drank their blood.

From these, I warn ye, vengeance broodeth still,
A lion's rage, which goes not forth to kill
But lurketh in his lair, watching the high
Hall of my war-gone master ... Master? Aye;
Mine, mine! The yoke is nailed about my neck....
Oh, lord of ships and trampler on the wreck
Of Ilion, knows he not this she-wolf's tongue,
Which licks and fawns, and laughs with ear up-sprung,
To bite in the end like secret death?--And can
The woman?  Slay a strong and armed man? ...
  What fanged reptile like to her doth creep?
Some serpent amphisbene, some Skylla, deep
Housed in the rock, where sailors shriek and die,
Mother of Hell blood-raging, which doth cry
On her own flesh war, war without alloy ...
God! And she shouted in his face her joy,
Like men in battle when the foe doth break.
And feigns thanksgiving for his safety's sake!
  What if no man believe me? 'Tis all one.
The thing which must be shall be; aye, and soon
Thou too shalt sorrow for these things, and here
Standing confess me all too true a seer.

LEADER.

The Thyestean feast of children slain
I understood, and tremble. Aye, my brain
Reels at these visions, beyond guesswork true.
But after, though I heard, I had lost the clue.

CASSANDRA.

Man, thou shalt look on Agamemnon dead.

LEADER.

Peace, Mouth of Evil! Be those words unsaid!

CASSANDRA.

No god of peace hath watch upon that hour.

LEADER.

If it must come. Forefend it, Heavenly Power!

CASSANDRA.

They do not think of prayer; they think of death.

LEADER.

They? Say, what man this foul deed compasseth?

CASSANDRA.

Alas, thou art indeed fallen far astray!

LEADER.

How could such deed be done? I see no way.

CASSANDRA.

Yet know I not the Greek tongue all too well?

LEADER.

Greek are the Delphic dooms, but hard to spell.

CASSANDRA.

Ah! Ah! There!
What a strange fire! It moves ... It comes at me.
O Wolf Apollo, mercy! O agony! ...
Why lies she with a wolf, this lioness lone,
Two-handed, when the royal lion is gone?
God, she will kill me! Like to them that brew
Poison, I see her mingle for me too
A separate vial in her wrath, and swear,
Whetting her blade for him, that I must share
His death ... because, because he hath dragged me here!
  Oh, why these mockers at my throat? This gear
Of wreathed bands, this staff of prophecy?
I mean to kill you first, before I die.
Begone!

  [_She tears off her prophetic habiliments; and presently throws them on
the ground, and stamps on them._

  Down to perdition! ... Lie ye so?
So I requite you! Now make rich in woe
Some other Bird of Evil, me no more!            [_Coming to herself._
Ah, see! It is Apollo's self, hath tore
His crown from me! Who watched me long ago
In this same prophet's robe, by friend, by foe,
All with one voice, all blinded, mocked to scorn:
"A thing of dreams," "a beggar-maid outworn,"
Poor, starving and reviled, I endured all;
And now the Seer, who called me till my call
Was perfect, leads me to this last dismay....
'Tis not the altar-stone where men did slay
My father; 'tis a block, a block with gore
Yet hot, that waits me, of one slain before.
  Yet not of God unheeded shall we lie.
There cometh after, one who lifteth high
The downfallen; a branch where blossometh
A sire's avenging and a mother's death.
Exiled and wandering, from this land outcast,
One day He shall return, and set the last
Crown on these sins that have his house downtrod.
For, lo, there is a great oath sworn of God,
His father's upturned face shall guide him home.
  Why should I grieve? Why pity these men's doom?
