habit cunningly to lead Mistress Margery to talking about him and
relating long histories of his conquests and his grace.  Mistress Wimpole
knew many of them, having, for a staid and prudent matron, a lively
interest in his ways.  It seemed, truly--if one must believe her long-
winded stories--that no duchess under seventy had escaped weeping for him
and losing rest, and that ladies of all ranks had committed follies for
his sake.

Mistress Anne, having led her to this fruitful subject, would sit and
listen, bending over her embroidery frame with strange emotions, causing
her virgin breast to ache with their swelling.  She would lie awake at
night thinking in the dark, with her heart beating.  Surely, surely there
was no other man on earth who was so fitted to Clorinda, and to whom it
was so suited that this empress should give her charms.  Surely no woman,
however beautiful or proud, could dismiss his suit when he pressed it.
And then, poor woman, her imagination strove to paint the splendour of
their mutual love, though of such love she knew so little.  But it must,
in sooth, be bliss and rapture; and perchance, was her humble thought,
she might see it from afar, and hear of it.  And when they went to court,
and Clorinda had a great mansion in town, and many servants who needed a
housewife's eye upon their doings to restrain them from wastefulness and
riot, might it not chance to be that if she served well now, and had the
courage to plead with her then, she might be permitted to serve her
there, living quite apart in some quiet corner of the house.  And then
her wild thoughts would go so far that she would dream--reddening at her
own boldness--of a child who might be born to them, a lordly infant son
and heir, whose eyes might be blue and winning, and his hair in great
fair locks, and whom she might nurse and tend and be a slave to--and
love--and love--and love, and who might end by knowing she was his tender
servant, always to be counted on, and might look at her with that wooing,
laughing glance, and even love her too.

The night Clorinda laid her commands upon Mistress Wimpole concerning the
coming of Sir John Oxon, that matron, after receiving them, hurried to
her other charges, flurried and full of talk, and poured forth her wonder
and admiration at length.

"She is a wondrous lady!" she said--"she is indeed!  It is not alone her
beauty, but her spirit and her wit.  Mark you how she sees all things and
lets none pass, and can lay a plan as prudent as any lady old enough to
be twice her mother.  She knows all the ways of the world of fashion, and
will guard herself against gossip in such a way that none can gainsay her
high virtue.  Her spirit is too great to allow that she may even _seem_
to be as the town ladies.  She will not have it!  Sir John will not find
his court easy to pay.  She will not allow that he shall be able to say
to any one that he has seen her alone a moment.  Thus, she says, he
cannot boast.  If all ladies were as wise and cunning, there would be no
tales to tell."  She talked long and garrulously, and set forth to them
how Mistress Clorinda had looked straight at her with her black eyes,
until she had almost shaken as she sat, because it seemed as though she
dared her to disobey her will; and how she had sat with her hair trailing
upon the floor over the chair's back, and at first it had seemed that she
was flushed with anger, but next as if she had smiled.

"Betimes," said Mistress Wimpole, "I am afraid when she smiles, but to-
night some thought had crossed her mind that pleased her.  I think it was
that she liked to think that he who has conquered so many ladies will
find that he is to be outwitted and made a mock of.  She likes that
others shall be beaten if she thinks them impudent.  She liked it as a
child, and would flog the stable-boys with her little whip until they
knelt to beg her pardon for their freedoms."

That night Mistress Anne went to her bed-chamber with her head full of
wandering thoughts, and she had not the power to bid them disperse
themselves and leave her--indeed, she scarce wished for it.  She was
thinking of Clorinda, and wondering sadly that she was of so high a pride
that she could bear herself as though there were no human weakness in her
breast, not even the womanly weakness of a heart.  How could it be
possible that she could treat with disdain this gallant gentleman, if he
loved her, as he surely must?  Herself she had been sure that she had
seen an ardent flame in his blue eyes, even that first day when he had
bowed to her with that air of grace as he spoke of the fragrance of the
rose leaves he had thought wafted from her robe.  How could a woman whom
he loved resist him?  How could she cause him to suffer by forcing him to
stand at arm's length when he sighed to draw near and breathe his passion
at her feet?

In the silence of her chamber as she disrobed, she sighed with restless
pain, but did not know that her sighing was for grief that love--of which
there seemed so little in some lives--could be wasted and flung away.  She
could not fall into slumber when she lay down upon her pillow, but tossed
from side to side with a burdened heart.

"She is so young and beautiful and proud," she thought.  "It is because I
am so much older that I can see these things--that I see that this is
surely the one man who should be her husband.  There may be many others,
but they are none of them her equals, and she would scorn and hate them
when she was once bound to them for life.  This one is as beautiful as
she--and full of grace, and wit, and spirit.  She could not look down
upon him, however wrath she was at any time.  Ah me!  She should not
spurn him, surely she should not!"

She was so restless and ill at ease that she could not lie upon her bed,
but rose therefrom, as she often did in her wakeful hours, and went to
her lattice, gently opening it to look out upon the night, and calm
herself by sitting with her face uplifted to the stars, which from her
childhood she had fancied looked down upon her kindly and as if they
would give her comfort.

To-night there were no stars.  There should have been a moon
three-quarters full, but, in the evening, clouds had drifted across the
sky and closed over all heavily, so that no moonlight was to be seen,
save when a rare sudden gust made a ragged rent, for a moment, in the
blackness.

She did not sit this time, but knelt, clad in her night-rail as she was.
All was sunk into the profoundest silence of the night.  By this time the
entire household had been long enough abed to be plunged in sleep.  She
alone was waking, and being of that simple mind which, like a child's,
must ever bear its trouble to a protecting strength, she looked up at the
darkness of the cloudy sky and prayed for the better fortune of the man
who had indeed not remembered her existence after the moment he had made
her his obeisance.  She was too plain and sober a creature to be
remembered.

"Perchance," she murmured, "he is at this moment also looking at the
clouds from his window, because he cannot sleep for thinking that in two
days he will be beneath her father's roof and will see her loveliness,
and he must needs be contriving within his mind what he will say, if she
do but look as if she might regard him with favour, which I pray she
will."

From the path below, that moment there rose a slight sound, so slight a
one that for a moment she thought she must have been deceived in
believing it had fallen upon her ear.  All was still after it for full
two minutes, and had she heard no more she would have surely forgotten
she had heard aught, or would have believed herself but the victim of
fancy.  But after the long pause the same sound came again, though this
time it was slighter; yet, despite its slightness, it seemed to her to be
the crushing of the earth and stone beneath a cautious foot.  It was a
foot so cautious that it was surely stealthy and scarce dared to advance
at all.  And then all was still again.  She was for a moment overcome
with fears, not being of a courageous temper, and having heard, but of
late, of a bold gipsy vagabond who, with a companion, had broken into the
lower rooms of a house of the neighbourhood, and being surprised by its
owner, had only been overcome and captured after a desperate fight, in
which shots were exchanged, and one of the hurriedly-awakened servants
killed.  So she leaned forward to hearken further, wondering what she
should do to best alarm the house, and, as she bent so, she heard the
sound again and a smothered oath, and with her straining eyes saw that
surely upon the path there stood a dark-draped figure.  She rose with
great care to her feet, and stood a moment shaking and clinging to the
window-ledge, while she bethought her of what servants she could wake
first, and how she could reach her father's room.  Her poor heart beat in
her side, and her breath came quickly.  The soundlessness of the night
was broken by one of the strange sudden gusts of wind which tossed the
trees, and tore at the clouds as they hurried.  She heard the footsteps
again, as if it feared its own sound the less when the wind might cover
it.  A faint pale gleam showed between two dark clouds behind which the
moon had been hidden; it grew brighter, and a jagged rent was torn, so
that the moon herself for a second or so shone out dazzling bright before
the clouds rushed over her again and shut her in.

It was at this very instant Mistress Anne heard the footsteps once more,
and saw full well a figure in dark cloak and hat which stepped quickly
into the shade of a great tree.  But more she saw--and clapped her hand
upon her mouth to stifle the cry that would have otherwise risen in spite
of her--that notwithstanding his fair locks were thrust out of sight
beneath his hat, and he looked strange and almost uncomely, it was the
face of Sir John Oxon, the moon, bursting through the jagged clouds, had
shone upon.




CHAPTER VIII--Two meet in the deserted rose garden, and the old Earl of
Dunstanwolde is made a happy man


It was not until three days later, instead of two, that Sir John Oxon
rode into the courtyard with his servant behind him.  He had been
detained on his journey, but looked as if his impatience had not caused
him to suffer, for he wore his finest air of spirit and beauty, and when
he was alone with Sir Jeoffry, made his compliments to the absent ladies,
and inquired of their health with his best town grace.

Mistress Clorinda did not appear until the dining hour, when she swept
into the room like a queen, followed by her sister, Anne, and Mistress
Wimpole, this being the first occasion of Mistress Anne's dining, as it
were, in state with her family.

The honour had so alarmed her, that she looked pale, and so ugly that Sir
Jeoffry scowled at sight of her, and swore under his breath to Clorinda
that she should have been allowed to come.

"I know my own affairs the best, by your leave, sir," answered Clorinda,
as low and with a grand flash of her eye.  "She hath been drilled well."

This she had indeed, and so had Mistress Wimpole, and throughout Sir John
Oxon's stay they were called upon to see that they played well their
parts.  Two weeks he stayed and then rode gaily back to town, and when
Clorinda made her sweeping curtsey to the ground to him upon the
threshold of the flowered room in which he bade her farewell, both Anne
and Mistress Wimpole curtseyed a step behind her.

"Now that he has gone and you have shown me that you can attend me as I
wish," she said, turning to them as the sound of his horse's hoofs died
away, "it will not trouble me should he choose some day to come again.  He
has not carried with him much that he can boast of."

In truth, it seemed to the outer world that she had held him well in
hand.  If he had come as a sighing lover, the whole county knew she had
shown him but small favour.  She had invited companies to the house on
several occasions, and all could see how she bore herself towards him.
She carried herself with a certain proud courtesy as becoming the
daughter of his host, but her wit did not spare him, and sometimes when
it was more than in common cutting he was seen to wince though he held
himself gallantly.  There were one or two who thought they now and then
had seen his blue eyes fall upon her when he believed none were looking,
and rest there burningly for a moment, but 'twas never for more than an
instant, when he would rouse himself with a start and turn away.

She had been for a month or two less given to passionate outbreaks,
having indeed decided that it was to her interest as a young lady and a
future great one to curb herself.  Her tirewoman, Rebecca, had begun to
dare to breathe more freely when she was engaged about her person, and
had, in truth, spoken of her pleasanter fortune among her fellows in the
servants' hall.

But a night or two after the visitor took his departure, she gave way to
such an outburst as even Rebecca had scarce ever beheld, being roused to
it by a small thing in one sense, though in yet another perhaps great
enough, since it touched upon the despoiling of one of her beauties.

She was at her toilet-table being prepared for the night, and her long
hair brushed and dressed before retiring.  Mistress Wimpole had come in
to the chamber to do something at her bidding, and chancing to stand
gazing at her great and heavy fall of locks as she was waiting, she
observed a thing which caused her, foolish woman that she was, to give a
start and utter an unwise exclamation.

"Madam!" she gasped--"madam!"

"What then!" quoth Mistress Clorinda angrily.  "You bring my heart to my
throat!"

"Your hair!" stammered Wimpole, losing all her small wit--"your beauteous
hair!  A lock is gone, madam!"

Clorinda started to her feet, and flung the great black mass over her
white shoulder, that she might see it in the glass.

"Gone!" she cried.  "Where?  How?  What mean you?  Ah-h!"

Her voice rose to a sound that was well-nigh a scream.  She saw the
rifled spot--a place where a great lock had been severed jaggedly--and it
must have been five feet long.

She turned and sprang upon her woman, her beautiful face distorted with
fury, and her eyes like flames of fire.  She seized her by each shoulder
and boxed her ears until her head spun round and bells rang within it.

"'Twas you!" she shrieked.  "'Twas you--she-devil-beast--slut that you
are!  'Twas when you used your scissors to the new head you made for me.
You set it on my hair that you might set a loop--and in your sluttish way
you snipped a lock by accident and hid it from me."

She beat her till her own black hair flew about her like the mane of a
fury; and having used her hands till they were tired, she took her brush
from the table and beat her with that till the room echoed with the blows
on the stout shoulders.

"Mistress, 'twas not so!" cried the poor thing, sobbing and struggling.
"'Twas not so, madam!"

"Madam, you will kill the woman," wept Mistress Wimpole.  "I beseech
you--!  'Tis not seemly, I beseech--"

Mistress Clorinda flung her woman from her and threw the brush at
Mistress Wimpole, crying at her with the lordly rage she had been wont to
shriek with when she wore breeches.

"Damnation to thy seemliness!" she cried, "and to thee too!  Get thee
gone--from me, both--get thee gone from my sight!"

And both women fled weeping, and sobbing, and gasping from the room
incontinently.

She was shrewish and sullen with her woman for days after, and it was the
poor creature's labour to keep from her sight, when she dressed her head,
the place from whence the lock had been taken.  In the servants' hall the
woman vowed that it was not she who had cut it, that she had had no
accident, though it was true she had used the scissors about her head,
yet it was but in snipping a ribbon, and she had not touched a hair.

"If she were another lady," she said, "I should swear some gallant had
robbed her of it; but, forsooth, she does not allow them to come near
enough for such sport, and with five feet of hair wound up in coronals,
how could a man unwind a lock, even if 'twas permitted him to stand at
her very side."

Two years passed, and the beauty had no greater fields to conquer than
those she found in the country, since her father, Sir Jeoffry, had not
the money to take her to town, he becoming more and more involved and so
fallen into debt that it was even whispered that at times it went hard
with him to keep even the poor household he had.

Mistress Clorinda's fortunes the gentry of the neighbourhood discussed
with growing interest and curiosity.  What was like to become of her
great gifts and powers in the end, if she could never show them to the
great world, and have the chance to carry her splendid wares to the
fashionable market where there were men of quality and wealth who would
be like to bid for them.  She had not chosen to accept any of those who
had offered themselves so far, and it was believed that for some reason
she had held off my lord of Dunstanwolde in his suit.  'Twas evident that
he admired her greatly, and why he had not already made her his countess
was a sort of mystery which was productive of many discussions and bore
much talking over.  Some said that, with all her beauty and his
admiration, he was wary and waited, and some were pleased to say that the
reason he waited was because the young lady herself contrived that he
should, it being her desire to make an open conquest of Sir John Oxon,
and show him to the world as her slave, before she made up her mind to
make even a much greater match.  Some hinted that for all her
disdainfulness and haughty pride she would marry Sir John if he asked
her, but that he being as brilliant a beau as she a beauty, he was too
fond of his pleasures and his gay town life to give them up even to a
goddess who had no fortune.  His own had not been a great one, and he had
squandered it magnificently, his extravagances being renowned in the
world of fashion, and having indeed founded for him his reputation.

It was, however, still his way to accept frequent hospitalities from his
kinsman Eldershawe, and Sir Jeoffry was always rejoiced enough to secure
him as his companion for a few days when he could lure him from the
dissipation of the town.  At such times it never failed that Mistress
Wimpole and poor Anne kept their guard.  Clorinda never allowed them to
relax their vigilance, and Mistress Wimpole ceased to feel afraid, and
became accustomed to her duties, but Anne never did so.  She looked
always her palest and ugliest when Sir John was in the house, and she
would glance with sad wonder and timid adoration from him to Clorinda;
but sometimes when she looked at Sir John her plain face would grow
crimson, and once or twice he caught her at the folly, and when she
dropped her eyes overwhelmed with shame, he faintly smiled to himself,
seeing in her a new though humble conquest.

There came a day when in the hunting-field there passed from mouth to
mouth a rumour, and Sir Jeoffry, hearing it, came pounding over on his
big black horse to his daughter and told it to her in great spirits.

"He is a sly dog, John Oxon," he said, a broad grin on his rubicund face.
"This very week he comes to us, and he and I are cronies, yet he has
blabbed nothing of what is being buzzed about by all the world."

"He has learned how to keep a closed mouth," said Mistress Clorinda,
without asking a question.

"But 'tis marriage he is so mum about, bless ye!" said Sir Jeoffry.  "And
that is not a thing to be hid long.  He is to be shortly married, they
say.  My lady, his mother, has found him a great fortune in a new beauty
but just come to town.  She hath great estates in the West Indies, as
well as a fine fortune in England--and all the world is besieging her;
but Jack hath come and bowed sighing before her, and writ some verses,
and borne her off from them all."

"'Tis time," said Clorinda, "that he should marry some woman who can pay
his debts and keep him out of the spunging house, for to that he will
come if he does not play his cards with skill."

Sir Jeoffry looked at her askance and rubbed his red chin.

"I wish thou hadst liked him, Clo," he said, "and ye had both had
fortunes to match.  I love the fellow, and ye would have made a handsome
pair."

Mistress Clorinda laughed, sitting straight in her saddle, her fine eyes
unblenching, though the sun struck them.

"We had fortunes to match," she said--"I was a beggar and he was a
spendthrift.  Here comes Lord Dunstanwolde."

And as the gentleman rode near, it seemed to his dazzled eyes that the
sun so shone down upon her because she was a goddess and drew it from the
heavens.

In the west wing of the Hall 'twas talked of between Mistress Wimpole and
her charges, that a rumour of Sir John Oxon's marriage was afloat.

"Yet can I not believe it," said Mistress Margery; "for if ever a
gentleman was deep in love, though he bitterly strove to hide it, 'twas
Sir John, and with Mistress Clorinda."

"But she," faltered Anne, looking pale and even agitated--"she was always
disdainful to him and held him at arm's length.  I--I wished she would
have treated him more kindly."

"'Tis not her way to treat men kindly," said Mistress Wimpole.

But whether the rumour was true or false--and there were those who
bestowed no credit upon it, and said it was mere town talk, and that the
same things had been bruited abroad before--it so chanced that Sir John
paid no visit to his relative or to Sir Jeoffry for several months.  'Twas
heard once that he had gone to France, and at the French Court was making
as great a figure as he had made at the English one, but of this even his
kinsman Lord Eldershawe could speak no more certainly than he could of
the first matter.

The suit of my Lord of Dunstanwolde--if suit it was--during these months
appeared to advance somewhat.  All orders of surmises were made
concerning it--that Mistress Clorinda had privately quarrelled with Sir
John and sent him packing; that he had tired of his love-making, as 'twas
well known he had done many times before, and having squandered his
possessions and finding himself in open straits, must needs patch up his
fortunes in a hurry with the first heiress whose estate suited him.  But
'twas the women who said these things; the men swore that no man could
tire of or desert such spirit and beauty, and that if Sir John Oxon
stayed away 'twas because he had been commanded to do so, it never having
been Mistress Clorinda's intention to do more than play with him awhile,
she having been witty against him always for a fop, and meaning herself
to accept no man as a husband who could not give her both rank and
wealth.

"We know her," said the old boon companions of her childhood, as they
talked of her over their bottles.  "She knew her price and would bargain
for it when she was not eight years old, and would give us songs and
kisses but when she was paid for them with sweet things and knickknacks
from the toy-shops.  She will marry no man who cannot make her at least a
countess, and she would take him but because there was not a duke at
hand.  We know her, and her beauty's ways."

But they did not know her; none knew her, save herself.

In the west wing, which grew more bare and ill-furnished as things wore
out and time went by, Mistress Anne waxed thinner and paler.  She was so
thin in two months' time, that her soft, dull eyes looked twice their
natural size, and seemed to stare piteously at people.  One day, indeed,
as she sat at work in her sister's room, Clorinda being there at the
time, the beauty, turning and beholding her face suddenly, uttered a
violent exclamation.

"Why look you at me so?" she said.  "Your eyes stand out of your head
like a new-hatched, unfeathered bird's.  They irk me with their strange
asking look.  Why do you stare at me?"

"I do not know," Anne faltered.  "I could not tell you, sister.  My eyes
seem to stare so because of my thinness.  I have seen them in my mirror."

"Why do you grow thin?" quoth Clorinda harshly.  "You are not ill."

"I--I do not know," again Anne faltered.  "Naught ails me.  I do not
know.  For--forgive me!"

Clorinda laughed.

"Soft little fool," she said, "why should you ask me to forgive you?  I
might as fairly ask you to forgive _me_, that I keep my shape and show no
wasting."

Anne rose from her chair and hurried to her sister's side, sinking upon
