gods really dwell?  Am I to believe with this man, that none whom for so
many centuries my fathers worshipped have a being or a name?  Am I to
break down, as something blasphemous and profane, the very altars which
I have deemed most sacred? or am I to think with Arbaces--what?' He
paused, and strode rapidly away in the impatience of a man who strives
to get rid of himself.  But the Nazarene was one of those hardy,
vigorous, and enthusiastic men, by whom God in all times has worked the
revolutions of earth, and those, above all, in the establishment and in
the reformation of His own religion--men who were formed to convert,
because formed to endure.  It is men of this mould whom nothing
discourages, nothing dismays; in the fervor of belief they are inspired
and they inspire.  Their reason first kindles their passion, but the
passion is the instrument they use; they force themselves into men's
hearts, while they appear only to appeal to their judgment.  Nothing is
so contagious as enthusiasm; it is the real allegory of the tale of
Orpheus--it moves stones, it charms brutes.  Enthusiasm is the genius of
sincerity, and truth accomplishes no victories without it.

Olinthus did not then suffer Apaecides thus easily to escape him.  He
overtook and addressed him thus:

'I do not wonder, Apaecides, that I distress you; that I shake all the
elements of your mind: that you are lost in doubt; that you drift here
and there in the vast ocean of uncertain and benighted thought.  I
wonder not at this, but bear with me a little; watch and pray--the
darkness shall vanish, the storm sleep, and God Himself, as He came of
yore on the seas of Samaria, shall walk over the lulled billows, to the
delivery of your soul.  Ours is a religion jealous in its demands, but
how infinitely prodigal in its gifts! It troubles you for an hour, it
repays you by immortality.'

'Such promises,' said Apaecides, sullenly, 'are the tricks by which man
is ever gulled.  Oh, glorious were the promises which led me to the
shrine of Isis!'

'But,' answered the Nazarene, 'ask thy reason, can that religion be
sound which outrages all morality?  You are told to worship your gods.
What are those gods, even according to yourselves?  What their actions,
what their attributes?  Are they not all represented to you as the
blackest of criminals? yet you are asked to serve them as the holiest of
divinities. Jupiter himself is a parricide and an adulterer.  What are
the meaner deities but imitators of his vices?  You are told not to
murder, but you worship murderers; you are told not to commit adultery,
and you make your prayers to an adulterer!  Oh!  what is this but a
mockery of the holiest part of man's nature, which is faith?  Turn now
to the God, the one, the true God, to whose shrine I would lead you.  If
He seem to you too sublime, two shadowy, for those human associations,
those touching connections between Creator and creature, to which the
weak heart clings--contemplate Him in His Son, who put on mortality like
ourselves.  His mortality is not indeed declared, like that of your
fabled gods, by the vices of our nature, but by the practice of all its
virtues.  In Him are united the austerest morals with the tenderest
affections.  If He were but a mere man, He had been worthy to become a
god.  You honour Socrates--he has his sect, his disciples, his schools.
But what are the doubtful virtues of the Athenian, to the bright, the
undisputed, the active, the unceasing, the devoted holiness of Christ?
I speak to you now only of His human character.  He came in that as the
pattern of future ages, to show us the form of virtue which Plato
thirsted to see embodied. This was the true sacrifice that He made for
man; but the halo that encircled His dying hour not only brightened
earth, but opened to us the sight of heaven!  You are touched--you are
moved.  God works in your heart.  His Spirit is with you.  Come, resist
not the holy impulse; come at once--unhesitatingly.  A few of us are now
assembled to expound the word of God.  Come, let me guide you to them.
You are sad, you are weary.  Listen, then, to the words of God: "Come to
me", saith He, "all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest!"'

'I cannot now,' said Apaecides; 'another time.'

'Now--now!' exclaimed Olinthus, earnestly, and clasping him by the arm.

But Apaecides, yet unprepared for the renunciation of that faith--that
life, for which he had sacrificed so much, and still haunted by the
promises of the Egyptian, extricated himself forcibly from the grasp;
and feeling an effort necessary to conquer the irresolution which the
eloquence of the Christian had begun to effect in his heated and
feverish mind, he gathered up his robes and fled away with a speed that
defied pursuit.

Breathless and exhausted, he arrived at last in a remote and sequestered
part of the city, and the lone house of the Egyptian stood before him.
As he paused to recover himself, the moon emerged from a silver cloud,
and shone full upon the walls of that mysterious habitation.

No other house was near--the darksome vines clustered far and wide in
front of the building and behind it rose a copse of lofty forest trees,
sleeping in the melancholy moonlight; beyond stretched the dim outline
of the distant hills, and amongst them the quiet crest of Vesuvius, not
then so lofty as the traveler beholds it now.

Apaecides passed through the arching vines, and arrived at the broad and
spacious portico.  Before it, on either side of the steps, reposed the
image of the Egyptian sphinx, and the moonlight gave an additional and
yet more solemn calm to those large, and harmonious, and passionless
features, in which the sculptors of that type of wisdom united so much
of loveliness with awe; half way up the extremities of the steps
darkened the green and massive foliage of the aloe, and the shadow of
the eastern palm cast its long and unwaving boughs partially over the
marble surface of the stairs.

Something there was in the stillness of the place, and the strange
aspect of the sculptured sphinxes, which thrilled the blood of the
priest with a nameless and ghostly fear, and he longed even for an echo
to his noiseless steps as he ascended to the threshold.

He knocked at the door, over which was wrought an inscription in
characters unfamiliar to his eyes; it opened without a sound, and a tall
Ethiopian slave, without question or salutation, motioned to him to
proceed.

The wide hall was lighted by lofty candelabra of elaborate bronze, and
round the walls were wrought vast hieroglyphics, in dark and solemn
colors, which contrasted strangely with the bright hues and graceful
shapes with which the inhabitants of Italy decorated their abodes.  At
the extremity of the hall, a slave, whose countenance, though not
African, was darker by many shades than the usual color of the south,
advanced to meet him.

'I seek Arbaces,' said the priest; but his voice trembled even in his
own ear.  The slave bowed his head in silence, and leading Apaecides to
a wing without the hall, conducted him up a narrow staircase, and then
traversing several rooms, in which the stern and thoughtful beauty of
the sphinx still made the chief and most impressive object of the
priest's notice, Apaecides found himself in a dim and half-lighted
chamber, in the presence of the Egyptian.

Arbaces was seated before a small table, on which lay unfolded several
scrolls of papyrus, impressed with the same character as that on the
threshold of the mansion.  A small tripod stood at a little distance,
from the incense in which the smoke slowly rose.  Near this was a vast
globe, depicting the signs of heaven; and upon another table lay several
instruments, of curious and quaint shape, whose uses were unknown to
Apaecides.  The farther extremity of the room was concealed by a
curtain, and the oblong window in the roof admitted the rays of the
moon, mingling sadly with the single lamp which burned in the apartment.

'Seat yourself, Apaecides,' said the Egyptian, without rising.

The young man obeyed.

'You ask me,' resumed Arbaces, after a short pause, in which he seemed
absorbed in thought--'You ask me, or would do so, the mightiest secrets
which the soul of man is fitted to receive; it is the enigma of life
itself that you desire me to solve.  Placed like children in the dark,
and but for a little while, in this dim and confined existence, we shape
our spectres in the obscurity; our thoughts now sink back into ourselves
in terror, now wildly plunge themselves into the guideless gloom,
guessing what it may contain; stretching our helpless hands here and
there, lest, blindly, we stumble upon some hidden danger; not knowing
the limits of our boundary, now feeling them suffocate us with
compression, now seeing them extend far away till they vanish into
eternity.  In this state all wisdom consists necessarily in the solution
of two questions: "What are we to believe? and What are we to reject?"
These questions you desire me to decide.'

Apaecides bowed his head in assent.

'Man must have some belief,' continued the Egyptian, in a tone of
sadness. 'He must fasten his hope to something: is our common nature
that you inherit when, aghast and terrified to see that in which you
have been taught to place your faith swept away, you float over a dreary
and shoreless sea of incertitude, you cry for help, you ask for some
plank to cling to, some land, however dim and distant, to attain.  Well,
then, have not forgotten our conversation of to-day?'

'Forgotten!'

'I confessed to you that those deities for whom smoke so many altars
were but inventions.  I confessed to you that our rites and ceremonies
were but mummeries, to delude and lure the herd to their proper good.  I
explained to you that from those delusions came the bonds of society,
the harmony of the world, the power of the wise; that power is in the
obedience of the vulgar. Continue we then these salutary delusions--if
man must have some belief, continue to him that which his fathers have
made dear to him, and which custom sanctifies and strengthens.  In
seeking a subtler faith for us, whose senses are too spiritual for the
gross one, let us leave others that support which crumbles from
ourselves.  This is wise--it is benevolent.'

'Proceed.'

'This being settled,' resumed the Egyptian, 'the old landmarks being
left uninjured for those whom we are about to desert, we gird up our
loins and depart to new climes of faith.  Dismiss at once from your
recollection, from your thought, all that you have believed before.
Suppose the mind a blank, an unwritten scroll, fit to receive
impressions for the first time.  Look round the world--observe its
order--its regularity--its design.  Something must have created it--the
design speaks a designer: in that certainty we first touch land.  But
what is that something?--A god, you cry.  Stay--no confused
and confusing names.  Of that which created the world, we know,
we can know, nothing, save these attributes--power and unvarying
regularity--stern, crushing, relentless regularity--heeding no
individual cases--rolling--sweeping--burning on; no matter what
scattered hearts, severed from the general mass, fall ground and
scorched beneath its wheels. The mixture of evil with good--the
existence of suffering and of crime--in all times have perplexed the
wise.  They created a god--they supposed him benevolent.  How then came
this evil? why did he permit it--nay, why invent, why perpetuate it?  To
account for this, the Persian creates a second spirit, whose nature is
evil, and supposes a continual war between that and the god of good.  In
our own shadowy and tremendous Typhon, the Egyptians image a similar
demon.  Perplexing blunder that yet more bewilders us!--folly that arose
from the vain delusion that makes a palpable, a corporeal, a human
being, of this unknown power--that clothes the Invisible with attributes
and a nature similar to the Seen.  No: to this designer let us give a
name that does not command our bewildering associations, and the mystery
becomes more clear--that name is NECESSITY.  Necessity, say the Greeks,
compels the gods.  Then why the gods?--their agency becomes
unnecessary--dismiss them at once. Necessity is the ruler of all we
see--power, regularity--these two qualities make its nature.  Would you
ask more?--you can learn nothing: whether it be eternal--whether it
compel us, its creatures, to new careers after that darkness which we
call death--we cannot tell.  There leave we this ancient, unseen,
unfathomable power, and come to that which, to our eyes, is the great
minister of its functions. This we can task more, from this we can learn
more: its evidence is around us--its name is NATURE.  The error of the
sages has been to direct their researches to the attributes of
necessity, where all is gloom and blindness. Had they confined their
researches to Nature--what of knowledge might we not already have
achieved?  Here patience, examination, are never directed in vain.  We
see what we explore; our minds ascend a palpable ladder of causes and
effects. Nature is the great agent of the external universe, and
Necessity imposes upon it the laws by which it acts, and imparts to us
the powers by which we examine; those powers are curiosity and
memory--their union is reason, their perfection is wisdom.  Well, then,
I examine by the help of these powers this inexhaustible Nature.  I
examine the earth, the air, the ocean, the heaven: I find that all have
a mystic sympathy with each other--that the moon sways the tides--that
the air maintains the earth, and is the medium of the life and sense of
things--that by the knowledge of the stars we measure the limits of the
earth--that we portion out the epochs of time--that by their pale light
we are guided into the abyss of the past--that in their solemn lore we
discern the destinies of the future. And thus, while we know not that
which Necessity is, we learn, at least, her decrees.  And now, what
morality do we glean from this religion?--for religion it is.  I believe
in two deities--Nature and Necessity; I worship the last by reverence,
the first by investigation.  What is the morality my religion teaches?
This--all things are subject but to general rules; the sun shines for
the joy of the many--it may bring sorrow to the few; the night sheds
sleep on the multitude--but it harbors murder as well as rest; the
forests adorn the earth--but shelter the serpent and the lion; the ocean
supports a thousand barks--but it engulfs the one. It is only thus for
the general, and not for the universal benefit, that Nature acts, and
Necessity speeds on her awful course.  This is the morality of the dread
agents of the world--it is mine, who am their creature.  I would
preserve the delusions of priestcraft, for they are serviceable to the
multitude; I would impart to man the arts I discover, the sciences I
perfect; I would speed the vast career of civilizing lore: in this I
serve the mass, I fulfill the general law, I execute the great moral
that Nature preaches.  For myself I claim the individual exception; I
claim it for the wise--satisfied that my individual actions are nothing
in the great balance of good and evil; satisfied that the product of my
knowledge can give greater blessings to the mass than my desires can
operate evil on the few (for the first can extend to remotest regions
and humanize nations yet unborn), I give to the world wisdom, to myself
freedom. I enlighten the lives of others, and I enjoy my own.  Yes; our
wisdom is eternal, but our life is short: make the most of it while it
lasts. Surrender thy youth to pleasure, and thy senses to delight.  Soon
comes the hour when the wine-cup is shattered, and the garlands shall
cease to bloom.  Enjoy while you may.  Be still, O Apaecides, my pupil
and my follower!  I will teach thee the mechanism of Nature, her darkest
and her wildest secrets--the lore which fools call magic--and the mighty
mysteries of the stars. By this shalt thou discharge thy duty to the
mass; by this shalt thou enlighten thy race.  But I will lead thee also
to pleasures of which the vulgar do not dream; and the day which thou
givest to men shall be followed by the sweet night which thou
surrenderest to thyself.'

As the Egyptian ceased there rose about, around, beneath, the softest
music that Lydia ever taught, or Iona ever perfected.  It came like a
stream of sound, bathing the senses unawares; enervating, subduing with
delight.  It seemed the melodies of invisible spirits, such as the
shepherd might have heard in the golden age, floating through the vales
of Thessaly, or in the noontide glades of Paphos.  The words which had
rushed to the lip of Apaecides, in answer to the sophistries of the
Egyptian, died tremblingly away.  He felt it as a profanation to break
upon that enchanted strain--the susceptibility of his excited nature,
the Greek softness and ardour of his secret soul, were swayed and
captured by surprise.  He sank on the seat with parted lips and
thirsting ear; while in a chorus of voices, bland and melting as those
which waked Psyche in the halls of love, rose the following song:

                THE HYMN OF EROS

       By the cool banks where soft Cephisus flows,
         A voice sail'd trembling down the waves of air;
        The leaves blushed brighter in the Teian's rose,
         The doves couch'd breathless in their summer lair;

       While from their hands the purple flowerets fell,
         The laughing Hours stood listening in the sky;--
       From Pan's green cave to AEgle's haunted cell,
         Heaved the charm'd earth in one delicious sigh.

       Love, sons of earth!  I am the Power of Love!
         Eldest of all the gods, with Chaos born;
        My smile sheds light along the courts above,
         My kisses wake the eyelids of the Morn.

       Mine are the stars--there, ever as ye gaze,
         Ye meet the deep spell of my haunting eyes;
        Mine is the moon--and, mournful if her rays,
         'Tis that she lingers where her Carian lies.

       The flowers are mine--the blushes of the rose,
         The violet--charming Zephyr to the shade;
        Mine the quick light that in the Maybeam glows,
         And mine the day-dream in the lonely glade.

       Love, sons of earth--for love is earth's soft lore,
         Look where ye will--earth overflows with ME;
        Learn from the waves that ever kiss the shore,
         And the winds nestling on the heaving sea.

       'All teaches love!'--The sweet voice, like a dream,
         Melted in light; yet still the airs above,
        The waving sedges, and the whispering stream,
         And the green forest rustling, murmur'd 'LOVE!'
As the voices died away, the Egyptian seized the hand of Apaecides, and
led him, wandering, intoxicated, yet half-reluctant, across the chamber
towards the curtain at the far end; and now, from behind that curtain,
there seemed to burst a thousand sparkling stars; the veil itself,
hitherto dark, was now lighted by these fires behind into the tenderest
blue of heaven.  It represented heaven itself--such a heaven, as in the
nights of June might have shone down over the streams of Castaly.  Here
and there were painted rosy and aerial clouds, from which smiled, by the
limner's art, faces of divinest beauty, and on which reposed the shapes
of which Phidias and Apelles dreamed.  And the stars which studded the
transparent azure rolled rapidly as they shone, while the music, that
again woke with a livelier and lighter sound, seemed to imitate the
melody of the joyous spheres.

'Oh! what miracle is this, Arbaces,' said Apaecides in faltering
accents. 'After having denied the gods, art thou about to reveal to
me...'

'Their pleasures!' interrupted Arbaces, in a tone so different from its
usual cold and tranquil harmony that Apaecides started, and thought the
Egyptian himself transformed; and now, as they neared the curtain, a
wild--a loud--an exulting melody burst from behind its concealment.
With that sound the veil was rent in twain--it parted--it seemed to
vanish into air: and a scene, which no Sybarite ever more than rivalled,
broke upon the dazzled gaze of the youthful priest.  A vast banquet-room
stretched beyond, blazing with countless lights, which filled the warm
air with the scents of frankincense, of jasmine, of violets, of myrrh;
all that the most odorous flowers, all that the most costly spices could
distil, seemed gathered into one ineffable and ambrosial essence: from
the light columns that sprang upwards to the airy roof, hung draperies
of white, studded with golden stars.  At the extremities of the room two
fountains cast up a spray, which, catching the rays of the roseate
light, glittered like countless diamonds. In the centre of the room as
they entered there rose slowly from the floor, to the sound of unseen
minstrelsy, a table spread with all the viands which sense ever devoted
to fancy, and vases of that lost Myrrhine fabric, so glowing in its
colors, so transparent in its material, were crowned with the exotics of
the East.  The couches, to which this table was the centre, were covered
with tapestries of azure and gold; and from invisible tubes the vaulted
roof descended showers of fragrant waters, that cooled the delicious
air, and contended with the lamps, as if the spirits of wave and fire
disputed which element could furnish forth the most delicious odorous.
And now, from behind the snowy draperies, trooped such forms as Adonis
beheld when he lay on the lap of Venus.  They came, some with garlands,
others with lyres; they surrounded the youth, they led his steps to the
banquet.  They flung the chaplets round him in rosy chains.  The
earth--the thought of earth, vanished from his soul.  He imagined
himself in a dream, and suppressed his breath lest he should wake too
soon; the senses, to which he had never yielded as yet, beat in his
burning pulse, and confused his dizzy and reeling sight.  And while thus
amazed and lost, once again, but in brisk and Bacchic measures, rose the
magic strain:

                ANACREONTIC

       In the veins of the calix foams and glows
          The blood of the mantling vine,
        But oh! in the bowl of Youth there glows
          A Lesbian, more divine!
              Bright, bright,
             As the liquid light,
         Its waves through thine eyelids shine!

       Fill up, fill up, to the sparkling brim,
          The juice of the young Lyaeus;
        The grape is the key that we owe to him
          From the gaol of the world to free us.
              Drink, drink!
             What need to shrink,
         When the lambs alone can see us?

       Drink, drink, as I quaff from thine eyes
          The wine of a softer tree;
        Give the smiles to the god of the grape--thy sighs,
          Beloved one, give to me.
              Turn, turn,
             My glances burn,
         And thirst for a look from thee!
As the song ended, a group of three maidens, entwined with a chain of
starred flowers, and who, while they imitated, might have shamed the
Graces, advanced towards him in the gliding measures of the Ionian
dance: such as the Nereids wreathed in moonlight on the yellow sands of
the AEgean wave--such as Cytherea taught her handmaids in the
marriage-feast of Psyche and her son.

Now approaching, they wreathed their chaplet round his head; now
kneeling, the youngest of the three proffered him the bowl, from which
the wine of Lesbos foamed and sparkled.  The youth resisted no more, he
grasped the intoxicating cup, the blood mantled fiercely through his
veins.  He sank upon the breast of the nymph who sat beside him, and
turning with swimming eyes to seek for Arbaces, whom he had lost in the
whirl of his emotions, he beheld him seated beneath a canopy at the
upper end of the table, and gazing upon him with a smile that encouraged
him to pleasure.  He beheld him, but not as he had hitherto seen, with
dark and sable garments, with a brooding and solemn brow: a robe that
dazzled the sight, so studded was its whitest surface with gold and
gems, blazed upon his majestic form; white roses, alternated with the
emerald and the ruby, and shaped tiara-like, crowned his raven locks.
He appeared, like Ulysses, to have gained the glory of a second
youth--his features seemed to have exchanged thought for beauty, and he
towered amidst the loveliness that surrounded him, in all the beaming
and relaxing benignity of the Olympian god.

'Drink, feast, love, my pupil!' said he, 'blush not that thou art
passionate and young.  That which thou art, thou feelest in thy veins:
that which thou shalt be, survey!'

With this he pointed to a recess, and the eyes of Apaecides, following
the gesture, beheld on a pedestal, placed between the statues of Bacchus
and Idalia, the form of a skeleton.

'Start not,' resumed the Egyptian; 'that friendly guest admonishes us
but of the shortness of life.  From its jaws I hear a voice that summons
us to ENJOY.'

As he spoke, a group of nymphs surrounded the statue; they laid chaplets
on its pedestal, and, while the cups were emptied and refilled at that
glowing board, they sang the following strain:

         BACCHIC HYMNS TO THE IMAGE OF DEATH

                    I

        Thou art in the land of the shadowy Host,
           Thou that didst drink and love:
         By the Solemn River, a gliding ghost,
           But thy thought is ours above!
                If memory yet can fly,
                Back to the golden sky,
           And mourn the pleasures lost!
         By the ruin'd hall these flowers we lay,
           Where thy soul once held its palace;
         When the rose to thy scent and sight was gay,
           And the smile was in the chalice,
                And the cithara's voice
                Could bid thy heart rejoice
           When night eclipsed the day.

Here a new group advancing, turned the tide of the music into a quicker
and more joyous strain.


                    II

        Death, death is the gloomy shore
           Where we all sail--
        Soft, soft, thou gliding oar;
           Blow soft, sweet gale!
         Chain with bright wreaths the Hours;
           Victims if all
         Ever, 'mid song and flowers,
           Victims should fall!

Pausing for a moment, yet quicker and quicker danced the silver-footed
music:


        Since Life's so short, we'll live to laugh,
           Ah! wherefore waste a minute!
         If youth's the cup we yet can quaff,
           Be love the pearl within it!

A third band now approached with brimming cups, which they poured in
libation upon that strange altar; and once more, slow and solemn, rose
the changeful melody:

                  III

        Thou art welcome, Guest of gloom,
           From the far and fearful sea!
         When the last rose sheds its bloom,
           Our board shall be spread with thee!
              All hail, dark Guest!
           Who hath so fair a plea
           Our welcome Guest to be,
           As thou, whose solemn hall
           At last shall feast us all
           In the dim and dismal coast?
           Long yet be we the Host!
           And thou, Dead Shadow, thou,
           All joyless though thy brow,
               Thou--but our passing GUEST!


At this moment, she who sat beside Apaecides suddenly took up the song:


                    IV

        Happy is yet our doom,
           The earth and the sun are ours!
         And far from the dreary tomb
           Speed the wings of the rosy Hours--
          Sweet is for thee the bowl,
              Sweet are thy looks, my love;
           I fly to thy tender soul,
              As bird to its mated dove!
                Take me, ah, take!
           Clasp'd to thy guardian breast,
           Soft let me sink to rest:
                But wake me--ah, wake!
           And tell me with words and sighs,
           But more with thy melting eyes,
                That my sun is not set--
         That the Torch is not quench'd at the Urn
           That we love, and we breathe, and burn,
                Tell me--thou lov'st me yet!





BOOK THE SECOND



Chapter I

A FLASH HOUSE IN POMPEII, AND THE GENTLEMEN OF THE CLASSIC RING.

TO one of those parts of Pompeii, which were tenanted not by the lords
of pleasure, but by its minions and its victims; the haunt of gladiators
and prize-fighters; of the vicious and the penniless; of the savage and
the obscene; the Alsatia of an ancient city--we are now transported.

It was a large room, that opened at once on the confined and crowded
lane. Before the threshold was a group of men, whose iron and
well-strung muscles, whose short and Herculean necks, whose hardy and
reckless countenances, indicated the champions of the arena. On a shelf,
without the shop, were ranged jars of wine and oil; and right over this
was inserted in the wall a coarse painting, which exhibited gladiators
drinking--so ancient and so venerable is the custom of signs!  Within
the room were placed several small tables, arranged somewhat in the
modern fashion of 'boxes', and round these were seated several knots of
men, some drinking, some playing at dice, some at that more skilful game
called 'duodecim scriptae', which certain of the blundering learned have
mistaken for chess, though it rather, perhaps, resembled backgammon of
the two, and was usually, though not always, played by the assistance of
dice.  The hour was in the early forenoon, and nothing better, perhaps,
than that unseasonable time itself denoted the habitual indolence of
these tavern loungers.

Yet, despite the situation of the house and the character of its
inmates, it indicated none of that sordid squalor which would have
characterized a similar haunt in a modern city.  The gay disposition of
all the Pompeians, who sought, at least, to gratify the sense even where
they neglected the mind, was typified by the gaudy colors which
decorated the walls, and the shapes, fantastic but not inelegant, in
which the lamps, the drinking-cups, the commonest household utensils,
were wrought.

'By Pollux!' said one of the gladiators, as he leaned against the wall
of the threshold, 'the wine thou sellest us, old Silenus'--and as he
spoke he slapped a portly personage on the back--'is enough to thin the
best blood in one's veins.'

The man thus caressingly saluted, and whose bared arms, white apron, and
keys and napkin tucked carelessly within his girdle, indicated him to be
the host of the tavern, was already passed into the autumn of his years;
but his form was still so robust and athletic, that he might have shamed
even the sinewy shapes beside him, save that the muscles had seeded, as
it were, into flesh, that the cheeks were swelled and bloated, and the
increasing stomach threw into shade the vast and massive chest which
rose above it.

'None of thy scurrilous blusterings with me,' growled the gigantic
