lineage.

Suddenly she said, without turning round, for she was standing by a table
gazing at the pictures in a Book of Hours--

"I have seen her!"

"The Pucelle?--do you speak of her, gentle maid?"

"I saw her and spoke to her, and heard her voice"; and here her own
broke, and I guessed that she was near to weeping.  "I went up within the
castle precinct, to the tower Coudraye," she said, "for I knew that she
lodged hard by, with a good woman who dwells there.  I passed into the
chapel of St. Martin on the cliff, and there heard the voice of one
praying before the image of Our Lady.  The voice was even as you said
that day--the sweetest of voices.  I knelt beside her, and prayed aloud
for her and for France.  She rested her hand on my hair--her hair is
black, and cut 'en ronde' like a man's.  It is true that they say, she
dresses in man's garb.  We came forth together, and I put my hand into
hers, and said, 'I believe in you; if none other believes, yet do I
believe.'  Then she wept, and she kissed me; she is to visit me here to-
morrow, la fille de Dieu--"

She drew a long sob, and struck her hand hard on the table; then, keeping
her back ever towards me, she fled swiftly from the room.  I was
amazed--so light of heart as she commonly seemed, and of late
disdainful--to find her in this passion.  Yet it was to me that she had
spoken--to me that she had opened her heart.  Now I guessed that, if I
was ever to win her, it must be through this Pucelle, on whom her mind
was so strangely bent.  So I prayed that, if it might be God's will, He
would prosper the Maid, and let me be her loyal servitor, and at last
bring me to my desire.

Something also I dreamed, as young men will who have read many romances,
of myself made a knight for great feats of arms, and wearing in my salade
my lady's favour, and breaking a spear on Talbot, or Fastolf, or
Glasdale, in some last great victory for France.

Then shone on my eyesight, as it were, the picture of these two children,
for they were little more, Elliot and the Maid, kneeling together in the
chapel of St. Martin, the gold hair and the black blended; and what were
they two alone against this world and the prince of this world?  Alas,
how much, and again how little, doth prayer avail us!  These thoughts
were in my mind all day, while serving and answering customers, and
carrying my master's wares about the town, and up to the castle on the
cliff, where the soldiers and sentries now knew me well enough, and the
Scots archers treated me kindly.  But as for Elliot, she was like her
first self again, and merrier than common with her father, to whom, as
far as my knowledge went, she said not a word about the meeting in the
crypt of St. Martin's chapel, though to me she had spoken so freely.  This
gave me some hope; but when I would have tried to ask her a question, she
only gazed at me in a manner that abashed me, and turned off to toy with
her jackanapes.  Whereby I went to my bed perplexed, and with a heavy
heart, as one that was not yet conversant with the ways of women--nay,
nor ever, in my secular life, have I understood what they would be at.
Happier had it been for my temporal life if I had been wiser in woman's
ways.  But commonly, when we have learned a lesson, the lore comes too
late.

Next day my master had business at the castle with a certain lord, and
took me thither to help in carrying his wares.  This castle was a place
that I loved well, it is so old, having first been builded when the
Romans were lords of the land; and is so great and strong that our
bishop's castle of St. Andrews seems but a cottage compared to it.  From
the hill-top there is a wide prospect over the tower and the valley of
the Vienne, which I liked to gaze upon.  My master, then, went in by the
drawbridge, high above the moat, which is so deep that, I trow, no foeman
could fill it up and cross it to assail the walls.  My master, in limping
up the hill, had wearied himself, but soon passed into the castle through
the gateway of the bell-tower, as they call it, while I waited for him on
the further end of the bridge, idly dropping morsels of bread to the
swans that swam in the moat below.

On the drawbridge, standing sentinel, was a French man-at-arms, a young
man of my own age, armed with a long fauchard, which we call a bill or
halberd, a weapon not unlike the Lochaber axes of the Highlandmen.  Other
soldiers, French, Scottish, Spaniards, Germans, a mixed company, were
idling and dicing just within the gate.

I was throwing my last piece of crust to a swan, my mind empty of
thought, when I started out of my dream, hearing that rare woman's voice
which once I had heard before.  Then turning quickly, I saw, walking
between two gentlemen, even those who had ridden with her from
Vaucouleurs, one whom no man could deem to be other than that much-talked-
of Maid of Lorraine.  She was clad very simply, like the varlet of some
lord of no great estate, in a black cap with a little silver brooch, a
grey doublet, and black and grey hose, trussed up with many points; a
sword of small price hung by her side. {10} In stature she was something
above the common height of women, her face brown with sun and wind, her
eyes great, grey, and beautiful, beneath black brows, her lips red and
smiling.  In figure she seemed strong and shapely, but so slim--she being
but seventeen years of age--that, were it not for her sweet girl's voice,
and for the beauty of her grey eyes, she might well have passed for a
page, her black hair being cut "en ronde," as was and is the fashion
among men-at-arms.  Thus much have I written concerning her bodily
aspect, because many have asked me what manner of woman was the blessed
Maid, and whether she was beautiful.  I gazed at her like one
moon-struck, then, remembering my courtesy, I doffed my cap, and louted
low; and she bowed, smiling graciously like a great lady, but with such
an air as if her mind was far away.

She passed, with her two gentlemen, but the French sentinel barred the
way, holding his fauchard thwartwise.

"On what business come you, and by what right?" he cried, in a rude
voice.

"By the Dauphin's gracious command, to see the Dauphin," said one of the
gentlemen right courteously.  "Here is his own letter, and you may know
the seal, bidding La Pucelle to come before him at this hour."

The fellow looked at the seal, and could not but acknowledge the arms of
France thereon.  He dropped his fauchard over his shoulder, and stood
aside, staring impudently at the Maiden, and muttering foul words.

"So this is the renowned Pucelle," he cried; "by God's name" . . . and
here he spoke words such as I may not set down in writing, blaspheming
God and the Maid.

She turned and looked at him, but as if she saw him not; and then, a
light of joy and love transfiguring her face, she knelt down on the
drawbridge, folding her hands, her face bowed, and so abode while one
might count twenty, we that beheld her being amazed.  Then she rose and
bent as if in salutation to one we saw not; next, addressing herself to
the sentinel, she said, very gently--

"Sir, how canst thou take in vain the name of God, thou that art in this
very hour to die?"

So speaking, she with her gentlemen went within the gate, while the
soldier stood gazing after her like a man turned to stone.

The Maid passed from our sight, and then the sentinel, coming to himself,
turned in great wrath on me, who stood hard by.

"What make you gaping here, you lousy wine-sack of Scotland?" he cried;
and at the word, my prayer which I had made to St. Andrew in my bonds
came into my mind, namely, that I should not endure to hear my country
defamed.

I stopped not to think of words, wherein I never had a ready wit, but his
were still in his mouth when I had leaped within his guard, so that he
might not swing out his long halberd.

"Blasphemer and liar!" I cried, gripping his neck with my left hand,
while with two up-cuts of my right I sent his lies down his throat in
company, as I deem, with certain of his teeth.

He dropped his halberd against the wooden fence of the bridge, and felt
for his dagger.  I caught at his right hand with mine; cries were in my
ears--St. Denis for France!  St. Andrew for Scotland!--as the other men
on guard came running forth to see the sport.

We gripped and swayed for a moment, then the staff of his fauchard coming
between his legs, he tripped and fell, I above him; our weight soused
against the low pales of the bridge side, that were crazy and old; there
was a crash, and I felt myself in mid-air, failing to the moat far below
us.  Down and down I whirled, and then the deep water closed over me.




CHAPTER VI--HOW NORMAN LESLIE ESCAPED OUT OF CHINON CASTLE


Down and down I sank, the water surging up into my nostrils and sounding
in my ears; but, being in water, I was safe if it were but deep enough.
Presently I struck out, and, with a stroke or two, came to the surface.
But no sooner did my head show above, and I draw a deep breath or twain,
looking for my enemy, than an arbalest bolt cleft the water with a
clipping sound, missing me but narrowly.  I had but time to see that
there was a tumult on the bridge, and swords out (the Scots, as I
afterwards heard, knocking up the arbalests that the French soldiers
levelled at me).  Then I dived again, and swam under water, making
towards the right and the castle rock, which ran sheer down to the moat.
This course I chose because I had often noted, from the drawbridge, a
jutting buttress of rock, behind which, at least, I should be out of
arrow-shot.  My craft was to give myself all the semblance of a drowning
man, throwing up my arms, when I rose to see whereabout I was and to take
breath, as men toss their limbs who cannot swim.  On the second time of
rising thus, I saw myself close to the jut of rock.  My next dive took me
behind it, and I let down my feet, close under the side of this natural
buttress, to look around, being myself now concealed from the sight of
those who were on the bridge.

To my surprise I touched bottom, for I had deemed that the water was very
deep thereby.  Next I found that I was standing on a step of hewn stone,
and that a concealed staircase, cut in the rock, goes down, in that
place, to the very bottom of the moat; for what purpose I know not, but
so it is. {11}  I climbed up the steps, shook myself, and wrung the water
out of my hair, looking about the while for any sign of my enemy, who had
blasphemed against my country and the Maiden.  But there was nothing to
see on the water save my own cloth cap floating.  On the other side of
the fosse, howbeit, men were launching a pleasure-boat, which lay by a
stair at the foot of the further wall of the fosse.  The sight of them
made me glad to creep further up the steps that rounded a sharp corner,
till I came as far as an iron wicket-gate, which seemed to cut off my
retreat.  There I stopped, deeming that the wicket must be locked.  The
men were now rowing the boat into the middle of the water, so, without
expecting to find the gate open, I tried the handle.  It turned, to my no
little amazement; the gate swang lightly aside, as if its hinges had been
newly oiled, and I followed the staircase, creeping up the slimy steps in
the half-dark.  Up and round I went, till I was wellnigh giddy, and then
I tripped and reeled so that my body struck against a heavy ironed door.
Under my weight it yielded gently, and I stumbled across the threshold of
a room that smelled strangely sweet and was very warm, being full of the
sun, and the heat of a great fire.

"Is that you, Robin of my heart?" said a girl's voice in French; and,
before I could move, a pair of arms were round my neck.  Back she leaped,
finding me all wet, and not the man she looked for; and there we both
stood, in a surprise that prevented either of us from speaking.

She was a pretty lass, with brown hair and bright red cheeks, and was
dressed all in white, being, indeed, one of the laundresses of the
castle; and this warm room, fragrant with lavender, whereinto I had
stumbled, was part of the castle laundry.  A mighty fire was burning, and
all the tables were covered with piles and flat baskets of white linen,
sweet with scented herbs.

Back the maid stepped towards the door, keeping her eyes on mine; and, as
she did not scream, I deemed that none were within hearing: wherein I was
wrong, and she had another reason for holding her peace.

"Save me, gentle maid, if you may," I cried at last, falling on my knees,
just where I stood: "I am a luckless man, and stand in much peril of my
life."

"In sooth you do," she said, "if Robert Lindsay of the Scottish Archers
finds you here.  He loves not that another should take his place at a
tryst."

"Maiden," I said, beginning to understand why the gate was unlocked, and
wherefore it went so smooth on its hinges, "I fear I have slain a man,
one of the King's archers.  We wrestled together on the drawbridge, and
the palisade breaking, we fell into the moat, whence I clomb by the
hidden stairs."

"One of the archers!" cried she, as pale as a lily, and catching at her
side with her hand.  "Was he a Scot?"

"No, maid, but I am; and I pray you hide me, or show me how to escape
from this castle with my life, and that speedily."

"Come hither!" she said, drawing me through a door into a small, square,
empty room that jutted out above the moat.  "The other maids are at their
dinner," she went on, "and I all alone--the season being Lent, and I
under penance, and thinking of no danger."

For which reason, I doubt not, namely that the others had gone forth, she
had made her tryst at this hour with Robin Lindsay.  But he, if he was,
as she said, one of the Scottish archers that guarded the gate, was busy
enough belike with the tumult on the bridge, or in seeking for the body
of mine enemy.

"How to get you forth I know not," she said, "seeing that from yonder
room you pass into the kitchen and thence into the guard-room, and thence
again by a passage in the wall behind the great hall, and so forth to the
court, and through the gate, and thereby there is no escape: for see you
the soldiers must, and will avenge their comrade."

Hearing this speech, I seemed to behold myself swinging by a tow from a
tree branch, a death not beseeming one of gentle blood.  Up and down I
looked, in vain, and then I turned to the window, thinking that, as
better was not to be, I might dive thence into the moat, and take my
chance of escape by the stairs on the further side.  But the window was
heavily barred.  Yet again, if I went forth by the door, and lurked on
the postern stair, there was Robin Lindsay's dirk to reckon with, when he
came, a laggard, to his love-tryst.

"Stop!  I have it," said the girl; and flying into the laundry, she
returned with a great bundle of white women's gear and a gown of linen,
and a woman's white coif, such as she herself wore.

In less time than a man would deem possible, she had my wet hair, that I
wore about my shoulders, as our student's manner was, tucked up under the
cap, and the clean white smock over my wet clothes, and belted neatly
about my middle.

"A pretty wench you make, I swear by St. Valentine," cried she, falling
back to look at me, and then coming forward to pin up something about my
coif, with her white fingers.

I reckoned it no harm to offer her a sisterly kiss.

"'Tis lucky Robin Lindsay is late," cried she, laughing, "though even
were he here, he could scarce find fault that one maid should kiss
another.  Now," she said, snatching up a flat crate full of linen, "carry
these, the King's shirts, and sorely patched they are, on your head;
march straight through the kitchen, then through the guard-room, and then
by the door on the left into the long passage, and so into the court, and
begone; they will but take you for a newly come blanchisseuse.  Only
speak as little as may be, for your speech may betray you."  She kissed
me very kindly on both cheeks, for she was as frank a lass as ever I met,
and a merry.  Then, leading me to the door of the inner room, she pushed
it open, the savoury reek of the kitchen pouring in.

"Make good speed, Margot!" she cried aloud after me, so that all could
hear; and I walked straight up the King's kitchen, full as it was of men
and boys, breaking salads, spitting fowls, basting meat (though it was
Lent, but doubtless the King had a dispensation for his health's sake),
watching pots, tasting dishes, and all in a great bustle and clamour.  The
basket of linen shading my face, I felt the more emboldened, though my
legs, verily, trembled under me as I walked.  Through the room I went,
none regarding me, and so into the guard-room, but truly this was another
matter.  Some soldiers were dicing at a table, some drinking, some
brawling over the matter of the late tumult, but all stopped and looked
at me.

"A new face, and, by St. Andrew, a fair one!" said a voice in the accent
of my own country.

"But she has mighty big feet; belike she is a countrywoman of thine,"
quoth a French archer; and my heart sank within me as the other cast a
tankard at his head.

"Come, my lass," cried another, a Scot, with a dice-box in his hand,
catching at my robe as I passed, "kiss me and give me luck," and,
striking up my basket of linen, so that the wares were all scattered on
the floor, he drew me on to his knee, and gave me a smack that reeked
sorely of garlic.  Never came man nearer getting a sore buffet, yet I
held my hand.  Then, making his cast with the dice, he swore roundly,
when he saw that he had thrown deuces.

"Lucky in love, unlucky in gaming.  Lug out your losings," said his
adversary with a laugh; and the man left hold of my waist and began
fumbling in his pouch.  Straightway, being free, I cast myself on the
floor to pick up the linen, and hide my face, which so burned that it
must have seemed as red as the most modest maid might have deemed seemly.

"Leave the wench alone; she is new come, I warrant, and has no liking for
your wantonness," said a kind voice; and, glancing up, I saw that he who
spoke was one of the gentlemen who had ridden with the Maiden from
Vaucouleurs.  Bertrand de Poulengy was his name; belike he was waiting
while the King and the nobles devised with the Maiden privately in the
great hall.

He stooped and helped me to pick up my linen, as courteously as if I had
been a princess of the blood; and, because he was a gentleman, I suppose,
and a stranger, the archers did not meddle with him, save to break
certain soldiers' jests, making me glad that I was other than I appeared.

"Come," he said, "my lass, I will be your escort; it seems that Fortune
has chosen me for a champion of dames."

With these words he led the way forth, and through a long passage lit
from above, which came out into the court at the stairs of the great
hall.

Down these stairs the Maiden herself was going, her face held high and a
glad look in her eyes, her conference with the King being ended.  Poulengy
joined her; they said some words which I did not hear, for I deemed that
it became me to walk forward after thanking him by a look, and bending my
