  And in fierce battle, like a tower, he fell.
  Him fallen by both feet Calchodon's son                        550
  Seized, royal Elephenor, leader brave
  Of the Abantes, and in haste to strip
  His armor, drew him from the fight aside.
  But short was that attempt. Him so employ'd
  Dauntless Agenor mark'd, and as he stoop'd,                    555
  In his unshielded flank a pointed spear
  Implanted deep; he languid sunk and died.
  So Elephenor fell, for whom arose
  Sharp conflict; Greeks and Trojans mutual flew
  Like wolves to battle, and man grappled man.                   560
  Then Telamonian Ajax, in his prime
  Of youthful vigor Simoeisius slew,[17]
  Son of Anthemion. Him on Simois' banks
  His mother bore, when with her parents once
  She came from Ida down to view the flocks,                     565
  And thence they named him; but his parents'
  He lived not to requite, in early youth
  Slain by the spear of Ajax famed in arms.
  For him advancing Ajax at the pap
  Wounded; right through his shoulder driven the point           570
  Stood forth behind; he fell, and press'd the dust.
  So in some spacious marsh the poplar falls
  Smooth-skinn'd, with boughs unladen save aloft;
  Some chariot-builder with his axe the trunk
  Severs, that he may warp it to a wheel                         575
  Of shapely form; meantime exposed it lies
  To parching airs beside the running stream;
  Such Simoeisius seemed, Anthemion's son,
  Whom noble Ajax slew. But soon at him
  Antiphus, son of Priam, bright in arms,                        580
  Hurl'd through the multitude his pointed spear.
  He erred from Ajax, but he pierced the groin
  Of Leucus, valiant warrior of the band
  Led by Ulysses. He the body dragg'd
  Apart, but fell beside it, and let fall,                       585
  Breathless himself, the burthen from his hand.
  Then burn'd Ulysses' wrath for Leucus slain,
  And through the foremost combatants, array'd
  In dazzling arms, he rush'd. Full near he stood,
  And, looking keen around him, hurl'd a lance.                  590
  Back fell the Trojans from before the face
  Dispersed of great Ulysses. Not in vain
  His weapon flew, but on the field outstretch'd
  A spurious son of Priam, from the shores
  Call'd of Abydus famed for fleetest mares,                     595
  Democoon; him, for Leucus' sake enraged,
  Ulysses through both temples with his spear
  Transpierced. The night of death hung on his eyes,
  And sounding on his batter'd arms he fell.
  Then Hector and the van of Troy retired;                       600
  Loud shout the Grecians; these draw off the dead,
  Those onward march amain, and from the heights
  Of Pergamus Apollo looking down
  In anger, to the Trojans called aloud.
    Turn, turn, ye Trojans! face your Grecian foes.              605
  They, like yourselves, are vulnerable flesh,
  Not adamant or steel. Your direst dread
  Achilles, son of Thetis radiant-hair'd,
  Fights not, but sullen in his fleet abides.[18]
    Such from the citadel was heard the voice                    610
  Of dread Apollo. But Minerva ranged
  Meantime, Tritonian progeny of Jove,
  The Grecians, rousing whom she saw remiss.
  Then Amarynceus' son, Diores, felt
  The force of fate, bruised by a rugged rock                    615
  At his right heel, which Pirus, Thracian Chief,
  The son of Imbrasus of AEnos, threw.
  Bones and both tendons in its fall the mass
  Enormous crush'd. He, stretch'd in dust supine,
  With palms outspread toward his warrior friends                620
  Lay gasping life away. But he who gave
  The fatal blow, Pirus, advancing, urged
  Into his navel a keen lance, and shed
  His bowels forth; then, darkness veil'd his eyes.
    Nor Pirus long survived; him through the breast              625
  Above the pap, AEtolian Thoas pierced,
  And in his lungs set fast the quivering spear.
  Then Thoas swift approach'd, pluck'd from the wound
  His stormy spear, and with his falchion bright
  Gashing his middle belly, stretch'd him dead.                  630
  Yet stripp'd he not the slain, whom with long spears
  His Thracians hairy-scalp'd[19] so round about
  Encompassed, that though bold and large of limb
  Were Thoas, from before them him they thrust
  Staggering and reeling in his forced retreat.                  635
    They therefore in the dust, the Epean Chief
  Diores, and the Thracian, Pirus lay
  Stretch'd side by side, with numerous slain around.
    Then had Minerva led through all that field
  Some warrior yet unhurt, him sheltering safe                   640
  From all annoyance dread of dart or spear,
  No cause of blame in either had he found
  That day, so many Greeks and Trojans press'd,
  Extended side by side, the dusty plain.




                              THE ILIAD.

                               BOOK V.




                     ARGUMENT OF THE FIFTH BOOK.


Diomede is extraordinarily distinguished. He kills Pandarus, who had
violated the truce, and wounds first Venus and then Mars.




                               BOOK V.


  Then Athenaean Pallas on the son
  Of Tydeus,[1] Diomede, new force conferr'd
  And daring courage, that the Argives all
  He might surpass, and deathless fame achieve.
  Fires on his helmet and his shield around                        5
  She kindled, bright and steady as the star
  Autumnal,[2] which in Ocean newly bathed
  Assumes fresh beauty; with such glorious beams
  His head encircling and his shoulders broad,
  She urged him forth into the thickest fight.                    10
    There lived a man in Troy, Dares his name,
  The priest of Vulcan; rich he was and good,
  The father of two sons, Idaeus this,
  That, Phegeus call'd; accomplish'd warriors both.
  These, issuing from their phalanx, push'd direct                15
  Their steeds at Diomede, who fought on foot.
  When now small interval was left between,
  First Phegeus his long-shadow'd spear dismiss'd;
  But over Diomede's left shoulder pass'd
  The point, innocuous. Then his splendid lance                   20
  Tydides hurl'd; nor ineffectual flew
  The weapon from his hand, but Phegeus pierced
  His paps between, and forced him to the ground.
  At once, his sumptuous chariot left, down leap'd
  Idaesus, wanting courage to defend                               25
  His brother slain; nor had he scaped himself
  His louring fate, but Vulcan, to preserve
  His ancient priest from unmixt sorrow, snatch'd
  The fugitive in darkness wrapt, away.
  Then brave Tydides, driving off the steeds,                     30
  Consign'd them to his fellow-warriors' care,
  That they might lead them down into the fleet.
    The valiant Trojans, when they saw the sons
  Of Dares, one beside his chariot slain,
  And one by flight preserved, through all their host             35
  Felt consternation. Then Minerva seized
  The hand of fiery Mars, and thus she spake.
    Gore-tainted homicide, town-battering Mars!
  Leave we the Trojans and the Greeks to wage
  Fierce fight alone, Jove prospering whom he will,               40
  So shall we not provoke our father's ire.
    She said, and from the fight conducted forth
  The impetuous Deity, whom on the side
  She seated of Scamander deep-embank'd.[3]
    And now the host of Troy to flight inclined                   45
  Before the Grecians, and the Chiefs of Greece
  Each slew a warrior. Agamemnon first
  Gigantic Odius from his chariot hurl'd.
  Chief of the Halizonians. He to flight
  Turn'd foremost, when the monarch in his spine                  50
  Between the shoulder-bones his spear infixt,
  And urged it through his breast. Sounding he fell,
  And loud his batter'd armor rang around.
    By brave Idomeneus a Lydian died,
  Phaestus, from fruitful Tarne sent to Troy,                      55
  Son of Maeonian Borus; him his steeds
  Mounting, Idomeneus the spear-renown'd
  Through his right shoulder pierced; unwelcome night
  Involved him; from his chariot down he fell,[4]
  And the attendant Cretans stripp'd his arms.                    60
    But Menelaus, son of Atreus slew
  With his bright spear Scamandrius, Stropius' son,
  A skilful hunter; for Diana him,
  Herself, the slaughter of all savage kinds
  Had taught, on mountain or in forest bred.                      65
  But she, shaft-aiming Goddess, in that hour
  Avail'd him not, nor his own matchless skill;
  For Menelaus, Atreus son spear-famed,
  Him flying wounded in the spine between
  His shoulders, and the spear urged through his breast.          70
  Prone on his loud-resounding arms he fell.
    Next, by Meriones, Phereclus died,
  Son of Harmonides. All arts that ask
  A well-instructed hand his sire had learn'd,
  For Pallas dearly loved him. He the fleet,                      75
  Prime source of harm to Troy and to himself,
  For Paris built, unskill'd to spell aright
  The oracles predictive of the wo.
  Phereclus fled; Meriones his flight
  Outstripping, deep in his posterior flesh                       80
  A spear infix'd; sliding beneath the bone
  It grazed his bladder as it pass'd, and stood
  Protruded far before. Low on his knees
  Phereclus sank, and with a shriek expired.
  Pedaeus, whom, although his spurious son,                        85
  Antenor's wife, to gratify her lord,
  Had cherish'd as her own--him Meges slew.
  Warlike Phylides[5] following close his flight,
  His keen lance drove into his poll, cut sheer
  His tongue within, and through his mouth enforced               90
  The glittering point. He, prostrate in the dust,
  The cold steel press'd between his teeth and died.
    Eurypylus, Evemon's son, the brave
  Hypsenor slew; Dolopion was his sire,
  Priest of Scamander, reverenced as a God.                       95
  In vain before Eurypylus he fled;
  He, running, with his falchion lopp'd his arm
  Fast by the shoulder; on the field his hand
  Fell blood-distained, and destiny severe
  With shades of death for ever veil'd his eyes.                 100
    Thus strenuous they the toilsome battle waged.
  But where Tydides fought, whether in aid
  Of Ilium's host, or on the part of Greece,
  Might none discern. For as a winter-flood
  Impetuous, mounds and bridges sweeps away;[6]                  105
  The buttress'd bridge checks not its sudden force,
  The firm inclosure of vine-planted fields
  Luxuriant, falls before it; finish'd works
  Of youthful hinds, once pleasant to the eye,
  Now levell'd, after ceaseless rain from Jove;                  110
  So drove Tydides into sudden flight
  The Trojans; phalanx after phalanx fled
  Before the terror of his single arm.
    When him Lycaon's son illustrious saw
  Scouring the field, and from before his face                   115
  The ranks dispersing wide, at once he bent
  Against Tydides his elastic bow.
  The arrow met him in his swift career
  Sure-aim'd; it struck direct the hollow mail
  Of his right shoulder, with resistless force                   120
  Transfix'd it, and his hauberk stain'd with blood.
  Loud shouted then Lycaon's son renown'd.
    Rush on, ye Trojans, spur your coursers hard.
  Our fiercest foe is wounded, and I deem
  His death not distant far, if me the King[7]                   125
  Jove's son, indeed, from Lycia sent to Troy.
    So boasted Pandarus. Yet him the dart
  Quell'd not. Retreating, at his coursers' heads
  He stood, and to the son of Capaneus
  His charioteer and faithful friend he said.                    130
    Arise, sweet son of Capaneus, dismount,
  And from my shoulder draw this bitter shaft.
    He spake; at once the son of Capaneus
  Descending, by its barb the bitter shaft
  Drew forth; blood spouted through his twisted mail             135
  Incontinent, and thus the Hero pray'd.
    Unconquer'd daughter of Jove AEgis-arm'd!
  If ever me, propitious, or my sire
  Thou hast in furious fight help'd heretofore,
  Now aid me also. Bring within the reach                        140
  Of my swift spear, Oh grant me to strike through
  The warrior who hath check'd my course, and boasts
  The sun's bright beams for ever quench'd to me![8]
    He prayed, and Pallas heard; she braced his limbs,
  She wing'd him with alacrity divine,                           145
  And, standing at his side, him thus bespake.
    Now Diomede, be bold! Fight now with Troy.
  To thee, thy father's spirit I impart
  Fearless; shield-shaking Tydeus felt the same.
  I also from thine eye the darkness purge                       150
  Which dimm'd thy sight[9] before, that thou may'st know
  Both Gods and men; should, therefore, other God
  Approach to try thee, fight not with the powers
  Immortal; but if foam-born Venus come,
  Her spare not. Wound her with thy glittering spear.            155
    So spake the blue-eyed Deity, and went,
  Then with the champions in the van again
  Tydides mingled; hot before, he fights
  With threefold fury now, nor less enraged
  Than some gaunt lion whom o'erleaping light                    160
  The fold, a shepherd hath but gall'd, not kill'd,
  Him irritating more; thenceforth the swain
  Lurks unresisting; flies the abandon'd flock;
  Heaps slain on heaps he leaves, and with a bound
  Surmounting all impediment, escapes;                           165
  Such seem'd the valiant Diomede incensed
  To fury, mingling with the host of Troy.
    Astynoues and Hypenor first he slew;
  One with his brazen lance above the pap
  He pierced, and one with his huge falchion smote               170
  Fast by the key-bone,[10] from the neck and spine
  His parted shoulder driving at a blow.
    Them leaving, Polyides next he sought
  And Abas, sons of a dream-dealing seer,
  Eurydamas; their hoary father's dreams                         175
  Or not interpreted, or kept concealed,
  Them saved not, for by Diomede they died.
  Xanthus and Thoeon he encounter'd next,
  Both sons of Phaenops, sons of his old age,
  Who other heir had none of all his wealth,                     180
  Nor hoped another, worn with many years.
  Tydides slew them both; nor aught remain'd
  To the old man but sorrow for his sons
  For ever lost, and strangers were his heirs.
  Two sons of Priam in one chariot borne                         185
  Echemon next, and Chromius felt his hand
  Resistless. As a lion on the herd
  Leaping, while they the shrubs and bushes browse,
  Breaks short the neck of heifer or of steer,
  So them, though clinging fast and loth to fall,                190
  Tydides hurl'd together to the ground,
  Then stripp'd their splendid armor, and the steeds
  Consigned and chariot to his soldiers' care.
    AEneas him discern'd scattering the ranks,
  And through the battle and the clash of spears                 195
  Went seeking godlike Pandarus; ere long
  Finding Lycaon's martial son renown'd,
  He stood before him, and him thus address'd.
    Thy bow, thy feather'd shafts, and glorious name
  Where are they, Pandarus? whom none of Troy                    200
  Could equal, whom of Lycia, none excel.
  Come. Lift thine hands to Jove, and at yon Chief
  Dispatch an arrow, who afflicts the host
  Of Ilium thus, conquering where'er he flies,
  And who hath slaughter'd numerous brave in arms,               205
  But him some Deity I rather deem
  Avenging on us his neglected rites,
  And who can stand before an angry God?
    Him answer'd then Lycaon's son renown'd.
  Brave leader of the Trojans brazen-mail'd,                     210
  AEneas! By his buckler which I know,
  And by his helmet's height, considering, too
  His steeds, I deem him Diomede the bold;
  Yet such pronounce him not, who seems a God.
  But if bold Diomede indeed he be                               215
  Of whom I speak, not without aid from heaven
  His fury thus prevails, but at his side
  Some God, in clouds enveloped, turns away
  From him the arrow to a devious course.
  Already, at his shoulder's hollow mail                         220
  My shaft hath pierced him through, and him I deem'd
  Dismiss'd full sure to Pluto ere his time
  But he survives; whom therefore I at last
  Perforce conclude some angry Deity.
  Steeds have I none or chariot to ascend,                       225
  Who have eleven chariots in the stands
  Left of Lycaon, with fair hangings all
  O'ermantled, strong, new finish'd, with their steeds
  In pairs beside them, eating winnow'd grain.
  Me much Lycaon my old valiant sire                             230
  At my departure from his palace gates
  Persuaded, that my chariot and my steeds
  Ascending, I should so conduct my bands
  To battle; counsel wise, and ill-refused!
  But anxious, lest (the host in Troy so long                    235
  Immew'd) my steeds, fed plenteously at home,
  Should here want food, I left them, and on foot
  To Ilium came, confiding in my bow
  Ordain'd at last to yield me little good.
  Twice have I shot, and twice I struck the mark,                240
  First Menelaus, and Tydides next;
  From each I drew the blood, true, genuine blood,
  Yet have but more incensed them. In an hour
  Unfortunate, I therefore took my bow
  Down from the wall that day, when for the sake                 245
  Of noble Hector, to these pleasant plains
  I came, a leader on the part of Troy.
  But should I once return, and with these eyes
  Again behold my native land, my sire,
  My wife, my stately mansion, may the hand,                     250
  That moment, of some adversary there
  Shorten me by the head, if I not snap
  This bow with which I charged myself in vain,
  And burn the unprofitable tool to dust.
    To whom AEneas, Trojan Chief, replied.                        255
  Nay, speak not so. For ere that hour arrive
  We will, with chariot and with horse, in arms
  Encounter him, and put his strength to proof.
  Delay not, mount my chariot. Thou shalt see
  With what rapidity the steeds of Troy                          260
  Pursuing or retreating, scour the field.
  If after all, Jove purpose still to exalt
  The son of Tydeus, these shall bear us safe
  Back to the city. Come then. Let us on.
  The lash take thou, and the resplendent reins,                 265
  While I alight for battle, or thyself
  Receive them, and the steeds shall be my care.
    Him answer'd then Lycaon's son renown'd.
  AEneas! manage thou the reins, and guide
  Thy proper steeds. If fly at last we must                      270
  The son of Tydeus, they will readier draw
  Directed by their wonted charioteer.
  Else, terrified, and missing thy control,
  They may refuse to bear us from the fight,
  And Tydeus' son assailing us, with ease                        275
  Shall slay us both, and drive thy steeds away.
  Rule therefore thou the chariot, and myself
  With my sharp spear will his assault receive.
    So saying, they mounted both, and furious drove
  Against Tydides. Them the noble son                            280
  Of Capaneus observed, and turning quick
  His speech to Diomede, him thus address'd.
    Tydides, Diomede, my heart's delight!
  Two warriors of immeasurable force
  In battle, ardent to contend with thee,                        285
  Come rattling on. Lycaon's offspring one,
  Bow-practised Pandarus; with whom appears
  AEneas; he who calls the mighty Chief
  Anchises father, and whom Venus bore.
  Mount--drive we swift away--lest borne so far                  290
  Beyond the foremost battle, thou be slain.
    To whom, dark-frowning, Diomede replied
  Speak not of flight to me, who am disposed
  To no such course. I am ashamed to fly
  Or tremble, and my strength is still entire;                   295
  I cannot mount. No. Rather thus, on foot,
  I will advance against them. Fear and dread
  Are not for me; Pallas forbids the thought.
  One falls, be sure; swift as they are, the steeds
  That whirl them on, shall never rescue both.                   300
  But hear my bidding, and hold fast the word.
  Should all-wise Pallas grant me my desire
  To slay them both, drive not my coursers hence,
  But hook the reins, and seizing quick the pair
  That draw AEneas, urge them from the powers                     305
  Of Troy away into the host of Greece.
  For they are sprung from those which Jove to Tros
  In compensation gave for Ganymede;
  The Sun himself sees not their like below.
  Anchises, King of men, clandestine them                        310
  Obtain'd, his mares submitting to the steeds
  Of King Laomedon. Six brought him foals;
  Four to himself reserving, in his stalls
  He fed them sleek, and two he gave his son:
  These, might we win them, were a noble prize.                  315
    Thus mutual they conferr'd; those Chiefs, the while,
  With swiftest pace approach'd, and first his speech
  To Diomede Lycaon's son address'd.
    Heroic offspring of a noble sire,
  Brave son of Tydeus! false to my intent                        320
  My shaft hath harm'd thee little. I will now
  Make trial with my spear, if that may speed.
    He said, and shaking his long-shadow'd spear,
  Dismiss'd it. Forceful on the shield it struck
  Of Diomede, transpierced it, and approach'd                    325
  With threatening point the hauberk on his breast.
  Loud shouted Pandarus--Ah nobly thrown!
  Home to thy bowels. Die, for die thou must,
  And all the glory of thy death is mine.
    Then answer thus brave Diomede return'd                      330
  Undaunted. I am whole. Thy cast was short.
  But ye desist not, as I plain perceive,
  Till one at least extended on the plain
  Shall sate the God of battles with his blood.
    He said and threw. Pallas the spear herself                  335
  Directed; at his eye fast by the nose
  Deep-entering, through his ivory teeth it pass'd,
  At its extremity divided sheer
  His tongue, and started through his chin below.
  He headlong fell, and with his dazzling arms                   340
  Smote full the plain. Back flew the fiery steeds
  With swift recoil, and where he fell he died.
  Then sprang AEneas forth with spear and shield,
  That none might drag the body;[11] lion-like
  He stalk'd around it, oval shield and spear                    345
  Advancing firm, and with incessant cries
  Terrific, death denouncing on his foes.
  But Diomede with hollow grasp a stone
  Enormous seized, a weight to overtask
  Two strongest men of such as now are strong,                   350
  Yet he, alone, wielded the rock with ease.
  Full on the hip he smote him, where the thigh
  Rolls in its cavity, the socket named.
  He crushed the socket, lacerated wide
  Both tendons, and with that rough-angled mass                  355
  Flay'd all his flesh, The Hero on his knees
  Sank, on his ample palm his weight upbore
  Laboring, and darkness overspread his eyes.
    There had AEneas perish'd, King of men,
  Had not Jove's daughter Venus quick perceived                  360
  His peril imminent, whom she had borne
  Herself to Anchises pasturing his herds.
  Her snowy arras her darling son around
  She threw maternal, and behind a fold
  Of her bright mantle screening close his breast                365
  From mortal harm by some brave Grecian's spear,
  Stole him with eager swiftness from the fight.
    Nor then forgat brave Sthenelus his charge
  Received from Diomede, but his own steeds
  Detaining distant from the boisterous war,                     370
  Stretch'd tight the reins, and hook'd them fast behind.
  The coursers of AEneas next he seized
  Ardent, and them into the host of Greece
  Driving remote, consign'd them to his care,
  Whom far above all others his compeers                         375
  He loved, Deipylus, his bosom friend
  Congenial. Him he charged to drive them thence
  Into the fleet, then, mounting swift his own,
  Lash'd after Diomede; he, fierce in arms,
  Pursued the Cyprian Goddess, conscious whom,                   380
  Not Pallas, not Enyo, waster dread
  Of cities close-beleaguer'd, none of all
  Who o'er the battle's bloody course preside,
  But one of softer kind and prone to fear.
  When, therefore, her at length, after long chase               385
  Through all the warring multitude he reach'd,
  With his protruded spear her gentle hand
  He wounded, piercing through her thin attire
  Ambrosial, by themselves the graces wrought,
  Her inside wrist, fast by the rosy palm.                       390
  Blood follow'd, but immortal; ichor pure,
  Such as the blest inhabitants of heaven
  May bleed, nectareous; for the Gods eat not
  Man's food, nor slake as he with sable wine
  Their thirst, thence bloodless and from death exempt.          395
  She, shrieking, from her arms cast down her son,
  And Phoebus, in impenetrable clouds
  Him hiding, lest the spear of some brave Greek
  Should pierce his bosom, caught him swift away.
  Then shouted brave Tydides after her--                         400
    Depart, Jove's daughter! fly the bloody field.
  Is't not enough that thou beguilest the hearts
  Of feeble women? If thou dare intrude
  Again into the war, war's very name
  Shall make thee shudder, wheresoever heard.                    405
    He said, and Venus with excess of pain
  Bewilder'd went; but Iris tempest-wing'd
  Forth led her through the multitude, oppress'd
  With anguish, her white wrist to livid changed.
  They came where Mars far on the left retired                   410
  Of battle sat, his horses and his spear
  In darkness veil'd. Before her brother's knees
  She fell, and with entreaties urgent sought
  The succor of his coursers golden-rein'd.
    Save me, my brother! Pity me! Thy steeds                     415
  Give me, that they may bear me to the heights
  Olympian, seat of the immortal Gods!
  Oh! I am wounded deep; a mortal man
  Hath done it, Diomede; nor would he fear
  This day in fight the Sire himself of all.                     420
    Then Mars his coursers gold-caparison'd
  Resign'd to Venus; she, with countenance sad,
  The chariot climb'd, and Iris at her side
  The bright reins seizing lash'd the ready steeds.
  Soon as the Olympian heights, seat of the Gods,                425
  They reach'd, wing-footed Iris loosing quick
  The coursers, gave them large whereon to browse
  Ambrosial food; but Venus on the knees
  Sank of Dione, who with folded arms
  Maternal, to her bosom straining close                         430
  Her daughter, stroked her cheek, and thus inquired.
    My darling child! who? which of all the Gods
  Hath rashly done such violence to thee
  As if convicted of some open wrong?
    Her then the Goddess of love-kindling smiles                 435
  Venus thus answer'd; Diomede the proud,
  Audacious Diomede; he gave the wound,
  For that I stole AEneas from the fight
  My son of all mankind my most beloved;
  Nor is it now the war of Greece with Troy,                     440
  But of the Grecians with the Gods themselves.
    Then thus Dione, Goddess all divine.
  My child! how hard soe'er thy sufferings seem
  Endure them patiently. Full many a wrong
  From human hands profane the Gods endure,                      445
  And many a painful stroke, mankind from ours.
  Mars once endured much wrong, when on a time
  Him Otus bound and Ephialtes fast,
  Sons of Aloeeus, and full thirteen moons
  In brazen thraldom held him. There, at length,                 450
  The fierce blood-nourished Mars had pined away,
  But that Eeriboea, loveliest nymph,
  His step-mother, in happy hour disclosed
  To Mercury the story of his wrongs;
  He stole the prisoner forth, but with his woes                 455
  Already worn, languid and fetter-gall'd.
  Nor Juno less endured, when erst the bold
  Son of Amphytrion with tridental shaft
  Her bosom pierced; she then the misery felt
  Of irremediable pain severe.                                   460
  Nor suffer'd Pluto less, of all the Gods
  Gigantic most, by the same son of Jove
  Alcides, at the portals of the dead
  Transfix'd and fill'd with anguish; he the house
  Of Jove and the Olympian summit sought                         465
  Dejected, torture-stung, for sore the shaft
  Oppress'd him, into his huge shoulder driven.
  But Paeon[12] him not liable to death
  With unction smooth of salutiferous balms
  Heal'd soon. Presumptuous, sacrilegious man!                   470
  Careless what dire enormities he wrought,
  Who bent his bow against the powers of heaven!
  But blue-eyed Pallas instigated him
  By whom thou bleed'st. Infatuate! he forgets
  That whoso turns against the Gods his arm                      475
  Lives never long; he never, safe escaped
  From furious fight, the lisp'd caresses hears
  Of his own infants prattling at his knees.
  Let therefore Diomede beware, lest strong
  And valiant as he is, he chance to meet                        490
  Some mightier foe than thou, and lest his wife,
  Daughter of King Adrastus, the discrete
  AEgialea, from portentous dreams
  Upstarting, call her family to wail
  Her first-espoused, Achaia's proudest boast,                   485
  Diomede, whom she must behold no more.
    She said, and from her wrist with both hands wiped
  The trickling ichor; the effectual touch
  Divine chased all her pains, and she was heal'd.
  Them Juno mark'd and Pallas, and with speech                   490
  Sarcastic pointed at Saturnian Jove
  To vex him, blue-eyed Pallas thus began.
    Eternal father! may I speak my thought,
  And not incense thee, Jove? I can but judge
  That Venus, while she coax'd some Grecian fair                 495
  To accompany the Trojans whom she loves
  With such extravagance, hath heedless stroked
  Her golden clasps, and scratch'd her lily hand.
    So she; then smiled the sire of Gods and men,
  And calling golden Venus, her bespake.                         500
    War and the tented field, my beauteous child,
  Are not for thee. Thou rather shouldst be found
  In scenes of matrimonial bliss. The toils
  Of war to Pallas and to Mars belong.
    Thus they in heaven. But Diomede the while                   505
  Sprang on AEneas, conscious of the God
  Whose hand o'ershadow'd him, yet even him
  Regarding lightly; for he burn'd to slay
  AEneas, and to seize his glorious arms.
  Thrice then he sprang impetuous to the deed,                   510
  And thrice Apollo with his radiant shield
  Repulsed him. But when ardent as a God
  The fourth time he advanced, with thundering-voice
  Him thus the Archer of the skies rebuked.
    Think, and retire, Tydides! nor affect                       515
  Equality with Gods; for not the same
  Our nature is and theirs who tread the ground.
    He spake, and Diomede a step retired,
  Not more; the anger of the Archer-God
  Declining slow, and with a sullen awe.                         520
  Then Phoebus, far from all the warrior throng
  To his own shrine the sacred dome beneath
  Of Pergamus, AEneas bore; there him
  Latona and shaft-arm'd Diana heal'd
  And glorified within their spacious fane.                      525
  Meantime the Archer of the silver bow
  A visionary form prepared; it seem'd
  Himself AEneas, and was arm'd as he.
  At once, in contest for that airy form,
  Grecians and Trojans on each other's breasts                   530
  The bull-hide buckler batter'd and light targe.
    Then thus Apollo to the warrior God.
  Gore-tainted homicide, town-batterer Mars!
  Wilt thou not meet and from the fight withdraw
  This man Tydides, now so fiery grown                           535
  That he would even cope with Jove himself?
  First Venus' hand he wounded, and assail'd
  Impetuous as a God, next, even me.
  He ceased, and on the topmost turret sat
  Of Pergamus. Then all-destroyer Mars                           540
  Ranging the Trojan host, rank after rank
  Exhorted loud, and in the form assumed
  Of Acamas the Thracian leader bold,
  The godlike sons of Priam thus harangued.
    Ye sons of Priam, monarch Jove-beloved!                      545
  How long permit ye your Achaian foes
  To slay the people?--till the battle rage
  (Push'd home to Ilium) at her solid gates?
  Behold--a Chief disabled lies, than whom
  We reverence not even Hector more,                             550
  AEneas; fly, save from the roaring storm
  The noble Anchisiades your friend.
    He said; then every heart for battle glow'd;
  And thus Sarpedon with rebuke severe
  Upbraiding generous Hector, stern began.                       555
    Where is thy courage, Hector? for thou once
  Hadst courage. Is it fled? In other days
  Thy boast hath been that without native troops
  Or foreign aids, thy kindred and thyself
  Alone, were guard sufficient for the town.                     560
  But none of all thy kindred now appears;
  I can discover none; they stand aloof
  Quaking, as dogs that hear the lion's roar.
  We bear the stress, who are but Troy's allies;
  Myself am such, and from afar I came;                          565
  For Lycia lies far distant on the banks
  Of the deep-eddied Xanthus. There a wife
  I left and infant son, both dear to me,
  With plenteous wealth, the wish of all who want.
  Yet urge I still my Lycians, and am prompt                     570
  Myself to fight, although possessing here
  Nought that the Greeks can carry or drive hence.
  But there stand'st thou, neither employed thyself,
  Nor moving others to an active part
  For all their dearest pledges. Oh beware!                      575
  Lest, as with meshes of an ample net,
  At one huge draught the Grecians sweep you all,
  And desolate at once your populous Troy!
  By day, by night, thoughts such as these should still
  Thy conduct influence, and from Chief to Chief                 580
  Of the allies should send thee, praying each
  To make firm stand, all bickerings put away.
    So spake Sarpedon, and his reprimand
  Stung Hector; instant to the ground he leap'd
  All arm'd, and shaking his bright spears his host              585
  Ranged in all quarters animating loud
  His legions, and rekindling horrid war.
  Then, rolling back, the powers of Troy opposed
  Once more the Grecians, whom the Grecians dense
  Expected, unretreating, void of fear.                          590
    As flies the chaff wide scatter'd by the wind
  O'er all the consecrated floor, what time
  Ripe Ceres[13] with brisk airs her golden grain
  Ventilates, whitening with its husk the ground;
  So grew the Achaians white, a dusty cloud                      595
  Descending on their arms, which steeds with steeds
  Again to battle mingling, with their hoofs
  Up-stamp'd into the brazen vault of heaven;
  For now the charioteers turn'd all to fight.
  Host toward host with full collected force                     600
  They moved direct. Then Mars through all the field
  Took wide his range, and overhung the war
  With night, in aid of Troy, at the command
  Of Phoebus of the golden sword; for he
  Perceiving Pallas from the field withdrawn,                    605
  Patroness of the Greeks, had Mars enjoin'd
  To rouse the spirit of the Trojan host.
  Meantime Apollo from his unctuous shrine
  Sent forth restored and with new force inspired
  AEneas. He amidst his warriors stood,                           610
  Who him with joy beheld still living, heal'd,
  And all his strength possessing unimpair'd.
  Yet no man ask'd him aught. No leisure now
  For question was; far other thoughts had they;
  Such toils the archer of the silver bow,                       615
  Wide-slaughtering Mars, and Discord as at first
  Raging implacable, for them prepared.
    Ulysses, either Ajax, Diomede--
  These roused the Greeks to battle, who themselves
  The force fear'd nothing, or the shouts of Troy,               620
  But steadfast stood, like clouds by Jove amass'd
  On lofty mountains, while the fury sleeps
  Of Boreas, and of all the stormy winds
  Shrill-voiced, that chase the vapors when they blow,
  So stood the Greeks, expecting firm the approach               625
  Of Ilium's powers, and neither fled nor fear'd.
    Then Agamemnon the embattled host
  On all sides ranging, cheer'd them. Now, he cried,
  Be steadfast, fellow warriors, now be men!
  Hold fast a sense of honor. More escape                        630
  Of men who fear disgrace, than fall in fight,
  While dastards forfeit life and glory both.
    He said, and hurl'd his spear. He pierced a friend
  Of brave AEneas, warring in the van,
  Deicoeon son of Pergasus, in Troy                               635
  Not less esteem'd than Priam's sons themselves,
  Such was his fame in foremost fight acquired.
  Him Agamemnon on his buckler smote,
  Nor stayed the weapon there, but through his belt
  His bowels enter'd, and with hideous clang                     640
  And outcry[14] of his batter'd arms he fell.
    AEneas next two mightiest warriors slew,
  Sons of Diocles, of a wealthy sire,
  Whose house magnificent in Phaerae stood,
  Orsilochus and Crethon. Their descent                          645
  From broad-stream'd Alpheus, Pylian flood, they drew.
  Alpheus begat Orsilochus, a prince
  Of numerous powers. Orsilochus begat
  Warlike Diodes. From Diodes sprang
  Twins, Crethon and Orsilochus, alike                           650
  Valiant, and skilful in all forms of war.
  Their boyish prime scarce past, they, with the Greeks
  Embarking, in their sable ships had sail'd
  To steed-fam'd Ilium; just revenge they sought
  For Atreus' sons, but perished first themselves.               655
    As two young lions, in the deep recess
  Of some dark forest on the mountain's brow
  Late nourished by their dam, forth-issuing, seize
  The fatted flocks and kine, both folds and stalls
  Wasting rapacious, till, at length, themselves                 660
  Deep-wounded perish by the hand of man,
  So they, both vanquish'd by AEneas, fell,
  And like two lofty pines uprooted, lay.
  Them fallen in battle Menelaus saw
  With pity moved; radiant in arms he shook                      665
  His brazen spear, and strode into the van.
