
PENN, WILLIAM. Born at London, October 14, 1644; became preacher of
Friends, 1668; part proprietor of West Jersey, 1675; received grant of
Pennsylvania, 1681; founded Philadelphia, 1682; returned to England,
1684; deprived of government of colony on charge of treason, 1692, but
restored to it in 1694; visited Pennsylvania, 1699-1701; died at
Ruscombe, Berks, England, July 30, 1718.

OGLETHORPE, JAMES EDWARD. Born at London, December 21, 1696; projected
colony of Georgia for insolvent debtors and persecuted Protestants, and
conducted expedition for its settlement, 1733; returned to England,
1743; died at Cranham Hall, Essex, England, 1785.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER III

WASHINGTON TO LINCOLN


Near the left bank of the Potomac river, in the northwestern
part of Westmoreland county, Virginia, there stood, in the year 1732, a
little cabin, where lived a planter by the name of Augustine Washington.
It was a lonely spot, for the nearest neighbor was miles away, but the
little family, consisting of father, mother, and two boys, Lawrence and
Augustine, were kept busy enough wresting a living from the soil. Here,
on the twenty-second day of February, a third son was born, and in due
time christened George.

Just a century had elapsed since John Smith had died in London, but in
that time the colony which he had founded and which had been more than
once so near extinction, had grown to be the greatest in America. Half a
million people were settled along her bays and rivers, engaged, for the
most part, in the culture of tobacco, for which the colony had long been
famous and which was the basis of her wealth. Her boundaries were still
indefinite, for though, by, the king's charter, the colony was supposed
to stretch clear across the continent to the Pacific, the country beyond
the Blue Ridge mountains was still a wilderness where the Indian and the
wild beast held undisputed sway. Even in Virginia proper, there were few
towns and no cities, Williamsburg, the capital, having less than two
hundred houses; but each planter lived on his own estate, very much
after the fashion of the feudal lords of the Middle Ages, generous,
hospitable, and kind-hearted, fond of the creature-comforts, proud of
his women and of his horses, and satisfied with himself.

It was into this world that George Washington was born. While he was
still a baby, his father moved to a place he purchased on the banks of
the Rappahannock, opposite Fredericksburg, and here the boy's childhood
was spent. His father died when he was only eleven years old, but his
mother was a vigorous and capable woman, from whom her son inherited not
a little of his sturdy character. He developed into a tall, strong,
athletic youth, and many stories are told of his prowess. He could jump
twenty feet; on one occasion he threw a stone across the Rappahannock,
and on another, standing beneath the famous Natural Bridge, threw a
stone against its great arch, two hundred feet above his head. He grew
to be over six feet in height and finely proportioned--altogether a
handsome and capable fellow, who soon commanded respect.

At that time, surveying was a very important occupation, since so much
of the colony remained to be laid out, and George began to study to be a
surveyor, an occupation which appealed to him especially because it was
of the open air. He was soon to get a very important commission.

When Augustine Washington died, he bequeathed to his elder son,
Lawrence, an estate on the Potomac called Hunting Creek. Near by lay the
magnificent estate of Belvoir, owned by the wealthy William Fairfax, and
Lawrence Washington had the good fortune to win the heart and hand of
Fairfax's daughter. With the money his bride brought him, he was able to
build for himself a very handsome dwelling on his estate, whose name he
changed to Mount Vernon, in honor of the English admiral with whom he
had seen some service. George, of course, was a frequent visitor at
Belvoir, meeting other members of the Fairfax family, among them Thomas,
sixth Lord Fairfax, who finally engaged him to survey a great estate
which had been granted him by the king on the slope of the Blue Ridge
mountains.

George Washington was only sixteen years of age when he started out on
this errand into what was then the wilderness. It was a tremendous task
which he had undertaken, for the estate comprised nearly a fifth of the
present state, but he did it so well that, on Lord Fairfax's
recommendation, he was at once appointed a public surveyor, and may
fairly be said to have commenced his public career. His brother soon
afterwards secured for him the appointment as adjutant-general for the
district in which he lived, so that it became his duty to attend to the
organization and equipment of the district militia. This was the
beginning of his military service and of his study of military
science. He was at that time eighteen years of age.

That was the end of his boyhood. You will notice that I have said
nothing about his being a marvel of goodness or of wisdom--nothing, for
instance, about a cherry tree. That fable, and a hundred others like it,
were the invention of a man who wrote a life of Washington half a
century after his death, and who managed so to enwrap him with
disguises, that it is only recently we have been able to strip them all
away and see the man as he really was. Washington's boyhood was much
like any other. He was a strong, vigorous, manly fellow; he got into
scrapes, just as any healthy boy does; he grew up straight and handsome,
ready to play his part in the world, and he was called upon to play it
much earlier than most boys are. We shall see what account he gave of
himself.

When George was twenty years old, his brother Lawrence died and made him
his executor. From that time forward, Mount Vernon was his home, and in
the end passed into his possession. But he was not long to enjoy the
pleasant life there, for a year later, he was called upon to perform an
important and hazardous mission.

We have seen how La Salle dreamed of a great French empire, stretching
from the Great Lakes to the mouth of the Mississippi. This was already
becoming a reality, for the governor of Canada had sent troops to occupy
the Ohio valley, and to build such forts as might be needed to hold it.
This was bringing the French altogether too close for comfort.
As long as they were content to remain in the Illinois country, nothing
much was thought of it, for that was far away; but here they were now
right at Virginia's back door, and there was no telling when they would
try to force it open and enter. So Governor Dinwiddie, of Virginia,
determined to dispatch a commissioner to the officer-in-command of the
French, to summon him to leave English territory. The commissioner was
also to try to kill two birds with one stone and form an alliance with
the Indians, so that, if it came to fighting, the Indians would be with
the English. No more delicate and dangerous mission could well be
conceived, and after careful consideration, the governor selected George
Washington to undertake it.

On October 30, 1753, Washington left Williamsburg, with a journey of
more than a thousand miles before him. How that journey was
accomplished, what perils he faced, what difficulties he overcame, how,
on more than one occasion his life hung by a thread--all this he has
told, briefly and modestly, in the journal which he kept of the
expedition. Three months from the time he started, he was back again in
Williamsburg, having faced his first great responsibility, and done his
work absolutely well. He had shown a cool courage that nothing could
shake, a fine patience, and a penetration and perception which nothing
could escape. He was the hero of the hour in the little Virginia
capital; the whole colony perceived that here was a man to be depended
upon.

He had found the French very active along the Ohio, preparing
to build forts and hold the country, and laughing at Dinwiddie's summons
to vacate it. This news caused Virginia to put a military force in the
field at once, and dispatch it to the west, with Washington in virtual
command. It was hoped to build a strong fort at the junction of the
Allegheny and Monongahela rivers, which would prevent the French getting
to the Ohio, since all travel in that wilderness must be by water. On
May 28, 1754, while hastening forward to secure this position,
Washington's little force encountered a party of French, and the first
shots were exchanged of the great contest which, twelve years later, was
to result in the expulsion of the French from the continent. It was
Washington who gave the word to fire, little foreseeing what history he
was making.

"I heard the bullets whistle," he wrote home to his mother, "and believe
me, there is something charming in the sound"--a bit of bravado which
shows that Washington had not yet quite outgrown his boyhood. No doubt
the bullets sounded much less charmingly five weeks later when he and
his men, brought to bay in a rude fortification which he named Fort
Necessity, were surrounded by a superior force of French and Indians,
and, after an all-day fight, compelled to surrender. It is worth
remarking that this bitter defeat--the first reverse which Washington
suffered--occurred on the third day of July, 1754. Twenty-one years from
that day, he was to draw his sword at the head of an American army.

Washington made his way back to Virginia with the news of his
failure. The French had occupied the vantage ground he was aiming at and
at once proceeded to erect a fort there, which they named Duquesne. Aid
was asked from England to repel these invaders, and early in 1755, a
great force under Major-General Edward Braddock advanced against the
enemy. Washington served as aide-de-camp to the general, whose ideas of
warfare had been gained on the battlefields of Europe, and who could not
understand that these ideas did not apply to warfare in a wilderness. In
consequence, when only a few miles from the fort, he was attacked by a
force of French and Indians, his army all but annihilated and he himself
wounded so severely that he died a few days later. During that fierce
battle, Washington seemed to bear a charmed life. Four bullets tore
through his coat and two horses were shot under him, but he received not
a scratch, and did effective work in rallying the Virginia militia to
cover the retreat. Three years later, he had the satisfaction of
marching into Fort Duquesne with an English force, which banished the
French for all time from the valley of the Ohio.

That victory ended the war for a time, and Washington returned to
Virginia to marry a charming and wealthy widow, Mrs. Martha Custis, and
to take the seat in the House of Burgesses to which he had just been
elected. He served there for fifteen years, living the life of the
typical Virginia planter on his estate of Mount Vernon, which had passed
into his possession through the death of his brother's only
child. He had become one of the most important men of the colony, whose
opinion was respected and whose influence was very great.

During all this period, the feeling against England was growing more and
more bitter. Let us be candid about it. The expulsion of the French from
the continent had freed the colonies from the danger of French
aggression and from the feeling that they needed the aid of the mother
country. That they should have been taxed to help defray the great
expense of this war against the French seems reasonable enough, but
there happened to be in power in England, at the time, a few obstinate
and bull-headed statesmen, serving under an obstinate and ignorant king,
and they handled the question of taxation with so little tact and
delicacy that, among them, they managed to rouse the anger of the
colonies to the boiling point.

For the colonists, let us remember, were of the same obstinate and
bull-headed stock, and it was soon evident that the only way to settle
the difference was to fight it out. But the impartial historian must
write it down that the colonies had much more to thank England for than
to complain about, and that at first, the idea of a war for independence
was not a popular one. As it went on, and the Tories were run out of the
country or won over, as battle and bloodshed aroused men's passions,
then it gradually gained ground; but throughout, the members of the
Continental Congress, led by John and Samuel Adams, were ahead
of public opinion.

As we have said, it soon became apparent that there was going to be a
fight, and independent companies were formed all over Virginia, and
started industriously to drilling. Washington, by this time the most
conspicuous man in the colony, was chosen commander-in-chief; and when,
at the gathering of the second Continental Congress at Philadelphia,
came news of the fight at Lexington and Concord, the army before Boston
was formally adopted by the Congress as an American army, and Washington
was unanimously chosen to command it. I wonder if any one foresaw that
day, even in the dimmest fashion, what immortality of fame was to come
to that tall, quiet, dignified man?

That was on the 15th day of June, 1775, and Washington left immediately
for Boston to take command of the American forces. All along the route,
the people turned out to welcome him and bid him Godspeed. Delegations
escorted him from one town to the next, and at last, on the afternoon of
July 2d, he rode into Cambridge, where, the next day, in the shadow of a
great elm on Cambridge Common, he took command of his army, and began
the six years' struggle which resulted in the establishment of the
independence of the United States of America.

His first task was to drive the British from Boston, and he had
accomplished it by the following March. Then came a long period of
reverses and disappointments, during which his little army,
outnumbered, but not outgeneraled, was driven from Long
Island, from New York, and finally across New Jersey, taking refuge on
the south bank of the Delaware. There he gathered it together, and on
Christmas night, 1776, while the enemy were feasting and celebrating in
their quarters at Trenton, he ferried his army back across the
ice-blocked river, fell upon the British, administered a stinging
defeat, and never paused until he had driven them from New Jersey. That
brilliant campaign effectually stifled the opposition which he had had
to fight in the Congress, and resulted in his being given full power
over the army, and over all parts of the country which the army
occupied.

One more terrible ordeal awaited him--the winter of 1777-1778 spent at
Valley Forge, where the army, without the merest necessities of life,
melted away from desertion and disease, until, at one time, it consisted
of less than two thousand effective men. The next spring saw the
turning-point, for France allied herself with the United States; the
British were forced to evacuate Philadelphia and were driven back across
New Jersey to New York; and, finally, by one of the most brilliant
marches in history, Washington transferred his whole army from the
Hudson to the Potomac, and trapped Cornwallis and his army of seven
thousand men at Yorktown. Cornwallis tried desperately to free himself,
but to no avail, and on October 19, 1781, he surrendered his entire
force.

There is a pretty legend that, as Cornwallis delivered up his sword, a
cheer started through the American lines, but that Washington
stilled it on the instant, remarking, "Let posterity cheer for us."
Whether the legend be true or not, posterity _has_ cheered, for that
brilliant victory really ended the war, although two years passed before
peace was declared and the independence of the United States
acknowledged by the King of England.

Long before this, everybody knew what the end would be, and there was
much discussion as to how the new country should be governed. A great
many people were dissatisfied with the Congress, and it was suggested to
Washington that there would be a more stable government if he would
consent himself to be King or Dictator, or whatever title he might wish,
and that the army, which had won the independence of the country, would
support him. Washington's response was prompt and decisive.

"Let me conjure you," he wrote, "if you have any regard for your
country, concern for yourself, or respect for me, to banish these
thoughts from your mind, and never communicate, as from yourself or any
one else, a sentiment of like nature."

It was perhaps the first time in the history of the world that men had
witnessed the like. Soon afterwards, the army was disbanded, and
Washington, proceeding to Annapolis, where the Congress was in session,
resigned his commission as commander-in-chief. There are some who
consider that the greatest scene in history--the hero sheathing his
sword "after a life of spotless honor, a purity unreproached, a courage
indomitable, and a consummate victory."

A private citizen again, Washington returned quietly to his
estate at Mount Vernon. But he could not remain there--the country
needed him too badly, and his great work was yet to do. For let us
remember that his great work was not the leading of the American army to
victory, not the securing of independence, but the establishment of this
Republic. More than of any other man was this the work of Washington. He
saw the feeble Confederation breaking to pieces, now that the stress of
danger was removed; he beheld the warring interests and petty jealousies
of statesmen who yet remained colonial; but he was determined that out
of these thirteen jarring colonies should come a nation; and when the
convention to form a constitution met at Philadelphia, he presided over
it, and it was his commanding will which brought a constitution out of a
turmoil of selfish interests, through difficulties and past obstacles
which would have discouraged any other man.

And, the Constitution once adopted, all men turned to Washington to
start the new Nation on her great voyage. Remember, there was no
government, only some written pages saying that a government was to be;
it was Washington who converted that idea into a reality, who brought
that government into existence. It was a venture new to history; a
Republic founded upon principles which, however admirable in the
abstract, had been declared impossible to embody in the life of a
nation. And yet, eight years later, when Washington retired from the
presidency, he left behind him an effective government, with an
established revenue, a high credit, a strong judiciary, a vigorous
foreign policy, and an army which had repressed insurrections, and which
already showed the beginnings of a truly national spirit.

At the end of his second term as President, the country demanded that he
accept a third; the country, without Washington at the head of it,
seemed to many people like a ship on a dangerous sea without a pilot.
But he had guided her past the greatest dangers, and he refused a third
term, setting a precedent which no man in the country's history has been
strong enough to disregard. In March, 1797, he was back again at Mount
Vernon, a private citizen.

He looked forward to and hoped for long years of quiet, but it was not
to be. On December 12, 1799, he was caught by a rain and sleet storm,
while riding over his farm, and returned to the house chilled through.
An illness followed, which developed into pneumonia, and three days
later he was dead.

He was buried at Mount Vernon, which has become one of the great shrines
of America, and rightly so. For no man, at once so august and so
lovable, has graced American history. Indeed, he stands among the
greatest men of all history. There are few men with such a record of
achievement, and fewer still who, at the end of a life so crowded and
cast in such troubled places, can show a fame so free from spot, a
character so unselfish and so pure.

We know Washington to-day as well as it is possible to know any man. We
know him far better than the people of his own household knew
him. Behind the silent and reserved man, of courteous and serious
manner, which his world knew, we perceive the great nature, the warm
heart and the mighty will. We have his letters, his journals, his
account-books, and there remains no corner of his life hidden from us.
There is none that needs to be. Think what that means--not a single
corner of his life that needs to be shadowed or passed over in silence!
