     least shut up, and secluded from company, for the fear of some
     infection at first not appearing.

     _Burial of the Dead._

     That the burial of the dead by this visitation be at most
     convenient hours, always before sunrising, or after sunsetting,
     with the privity[80] of the churchwardens, or constable, and not
     otherwise; and that no neighbors nor friends be suffered to
     accompany the corpse to church, or to enter the house visited, upon
     pain of having his house shut up, or be imprisoned.

     And that no corpse dying of the infection shall be buried, or
     remain in any church, in time of common prayer, sermon, or lecture.
     And that no children be suffered, at time of burial of any corpse,
     in any church, churchyard, or burying place, to come near the
     corpse, coffin, or grave; and that all graves shall be at least six
     feet deep.

     And further, all public assemblies at other burials are to be
     forborne during the continuance of this visitation.

     _No Infected Stuff to be uttered._[81]

     That no clothes, stuff, bedding, or garments, be suffered to be
     carried or conveyed out of any infected houses, and that the criers
     and carriers abroad of bedding or old apparel to be sold or pawned
     be utterly prohibited and restrained, and no brokers of bedding or
     old apparel be permitted to make any public show, or hang forth on
     their stalls, shop boards, or windows towards any street, lane,
     common way, or passage, any old bedding or apparel to be sold, upon
     pain of imprisonment. And if any broker or other person shall buy
     any bedding, apparel, or other stuff out of any infected house,
     within two months after the infection hath been there, his house
     shall be shut up as infected, and so shall continue shut up twenty
     days at the least.

     _No Person to be conveyed out of any Infected House._

     If any person visited[82] do fortune,[83] by negligent looking
     unto, or by any other means, to come or be conveyed from a place
     infected to any other place, the parish from whence such party hath
     come, or been conveyed, upon notice thereof given, shall, at their
     charge, cause the said party so visited and escaped to be carried
     and brought back again by night; and the parties in this case
     offending to be punished at the direction of the alderman of the
     ward, and the house of the receiver of such visited person to be
     shut up for twenty days.

     _Every Visited House to be marked._

     That every house visited be marked with a red cross of a foot long,
     in the middle of the door, evident to be seen, and with these usual
     printed words, that is to say, "Lord have mercy upon us," to be set
     close over the same cross, there to continue until lawful opening
     of the same house.

     _Every Visited House to be watched._

     That the constables see every house shut up, and to be attended
     with watchmen, which may keep in, and minister necessaries to them
     at their own charges, if they be able, or at the common charge if
     they be unable. The shutting up to be for the space of four weeks
     after all be whole.

     That precise order be taken that the searchers, chirurgeons,
     keepers, and buriers, are not to pass the streets without holding a
     red rod or wand of three foot in length in their hands, open and
     evident to be seen; and are not to go into any other house than
     into their own, or into that whereunto they are directed or sent
     for, but to forbear and abstain from company, especially when they
     have been lately used[84] in any such business or attendance.

     _Inmates._

     That where several inmates are in one and the same house, and any
     person in that house happens to be infected, no other person or
     family of such house shall be suffered to remove him or themselves
     without a certificate from the examiners of the health of that
     parish; or, in default thereof, the house whither she or they
     remove shall be shut up as is in case of visitation.

     _Hackney Coaches._

     That care be taken of hackney coachmen, that they may not, as some
     of them have been observed to do after carrying of infected persons
     to the pesthouse and other places, be admitted to common use till
     their coaches be well aired, and have stood unemployed by the space
     of five or six days after such service.

     ORDERS FOR CLEANSING AND KEEPING OF THE STREETS SWEPT.

     _The Streets to be kept Clean._

     First, it is thought necessary, and so ordered, that every
     householder do cause the street to be daily prepared before his
     door, and so to keep it clean swept all the week long.

     _That Rakers take it from out the Houses._

     That the sweeping and filth of houses be daily carried away by the
     rakers, and that the raker shall give notice of his coming by the
     blowing of a horn, as hitherto hath been done.

     _Laystalls_[85] _to be made far off from the City._

     That the laystalls be removed as far as may be out of the city and
     common passages, and that no nightman or other be suffered to empty
     a vault into any vault or garden near about the city.

     _Care to be had of Unwholesome Fish or Flesh, and of Musty Corn._

     That special care be taken that no stinking fish, or unwholesome
     flesh, or musty corn, or other corrupt fruits, of what sort soever,
     be suffered to be sold about the city or any part of the same.

     That the brewers and tippling-houses be looked unto for musty and
     unwholesome casks.

     That no hogs, dogs, or cats, or tame pigeons, or conies, be
     suffered to be kept within any part of the city, or any swine to be
     or stray in the streets or lanes, but that such swine be impounded
     by the beadle[86] or any other officer, and the owner punished
     according to the act of common council; and that the dogs be killed
     by the dog killers appointed for that purpose.

     ORDERS CONCERNING LOOSE PERSONS AND IDLE ASSEMBLIES.

     _Beggars._

     Forasmuch as nothing is more complained of than the multitude of
     rogues and wandering beggars that swarm about in every place about
     the city, being a great cause of the spreading of the infection,
     and will not be avoided[87] notwithstanding any orders that have
     been given to the contrary: it is therefore now ordered that such
     constables, and others whom this matter may any way concern, take
     special care that no wandering beggars be suffered in the streets
     of this city, in any fashion or manner whatsoever, upon the penalty
     provided by law to be duly and severely executed upon them.

     _Plays._

     That all plays, bear baitings,[88] games, singing of ballads,
     buckler play,[89] or such like causes of assemblies of people, be
     utterly prohibited, and the parties offending severely punished by
     every alderman in his ward.

     _Feasting prohibited._

     That all public feasting, and particularly by the companies[90] of
     this city, and dinners in taverns, alehouses, and other places of
     public entertainment, be forborne till further order and allowance,
     and that the money thereby spared be preserved, and employed for
     the benefit and relief of the poor visited with the infection.

     _Tippling-Houses._

     That disorderly tippling in taverns, alehouses, coffeehouses, and
     cellars, be severely looked unto as the common sin of the time, and
     greatest occasion of dispersing the plague. And that no company or
     person be suffered to remain or come into any tavern, alehouse, or
     coffeehouse, to drink, after nine of the clock in the evening,
     according to the ancient law and custom of this city, upon the
     penalties ordained by law.

     And for the better execution of these orders, and such other rules
     and directions as upon further consideration shall be found
     needful, it is ordered and enjoined that the aldermen, deputies,
     and common councilmen shall meet together weekly, once, twice,
     thrice, or oftener, as cause shall require, at some one general
     place accustomed in their respective wards, being clear from
     infection of the plague, to consult how the said orders may be put
     in execution, not intending that any dwelling in or near places
     infected shall come to the said meeting while their coming may be
     doubtful. And the said aldermen, deputies, and common councilmen,
     in their several wards, may put in execution any other orders that
     by them, at their said meetings, shall be conceived and devised for
     the preservation of his Majesty's subjects from the infection.

                              Sir JOHN LAWRENCE,     Lord Mayor.
                              Sir GEORGE WATERMAN, }
                              Sir CHARLES DOE,     } Sheriffs.

I need not say that these orders extended only to such places as were
within the lord mayor's jurisdiction: so it is requisite to observe that
the justices of peace within those parishes and places as were called
the "hamlets" and "outparts" took the same method. As I remember, the
orders for shutting up of houses did not take place so soon on our side,
because, as I said before, the plague did not reach to this eastern part
of the town at least, nor begin to be violent till the beginning of
August. For example, the whole bill from the 11th to the 18th of July
was 1,761, yet there died but 71 of the plague in all those parishes we
call the Tower Hamlets; and they were as follows:--

    Aldgate,                 14                 {  34          {  65
    Stepney,                 33   The next      {  58   To     {  76
    Whitechapel,             21   week was      {  48   Aug. 1 {  79
    St. Kath. Tower.[91]      2   thus:         {   4   thus:  {   4
    Trin. Minories,[92]       1                 {   1          {   4
                             --                   ---            ---
                             71                   145            228

It was indeed coming on amain, for the burials that same week were, in
the next adjoining parishes, thus:--

    St. L.[93] Shoreditch    64   The next week {  84   To     { 110
    St. Bot.[94] Bishopsg.   65   prodigiously  { 105   Aug. 1 { 116
    St. Giles's Crippl.[95] 213   increased, as { 431   thus:  { 554
                            ---                   ---            ---
                            342                   620            780

This shutting up of houses was at first counted a very cruel and
unchristian method, and the poor people so confined made bitter
lamentations. Complaints of the severity of it were also daily brought
to my lord mayor, of houses causelessly, and some maliciously, shut up.
I cannot say but upon inquiry many that complained so loudly were found
in a condition to be continued; and others again, inspection being made
upon the sick person, and the sickness not appearing infectious, or, if
uncertain, yet, on his being content to be carried to the pesthouse,
was[96] released.

As I went along Houndsditch one morning, about eight o'clock, there was
a great noise. It is true, indeed, there was not much crowd, because the
people were not very free to gather together, or to stay long together
when they were there, nor did I stay long there; but the outcry was loud
enough to prompt my curiosity, and I called to one, who looked out of a
window, and asked what was the matter.

A watchman, it seems, had been employed to keep his post at the door of
a house which was infected, or said to be infected, and was shut up. He
had been there all night, for two nights together, as he told his story,
and the day watchman had been there one day, and was now come to relieve
him. All this while no noise had been heard in the house, no light had
been seen, they called for nothing, sent him of no errands (which used
to be the chief business of the watchmen), neither had they given him
any disturbance, as he said, from Monday afternoon, when he heard a
great crying and screaming in the house, which, as he supposed, was
occasioned by some of the family dying just at that time. It seems the
night before, the "dead cart," as it was called, had been stopped there,
and a servant maid had been brought down to the door dead; and the
"buriers" or "bearers," as they were called, put her into the cart,
wrapped only in a green rug, and carried her away.

The watchman had knocked at the door, it seems, when he heard that noise
and crying, as above, and nobody answered a great while; but at last one
looked out and said with an angry, quick tone, and yet a kind of crying
voice, or a voice of one that was crying, "What d'ye want, that you make
such a knocking?" He answered, "I am the watchman. How do you do? What
is the matter?" The person answered, "What is that to you? Stop the dead
cart." This, it seems, was about one o'clock. Soon after, as the fellow
said, he stopped the dead cart, and then knocked again, but nobody
answered; he continued knocking, and the bellman called out several
times, "Bring out your dead;" but nobody answered, till the man that
drove the cart, being called to other houses, would stay no longer, and
drove away.

The watchman knew not what to make of all this, so he let them alone
till the morning man, or "day watchman," as they called him, came to
relieve him. Giving him an account of the particulars, they knocked at
the door a great while, but nobody answered; and they observed that the
window or casement at which the person looked out who had answered
before, continued open, being up two pair of stairs.

Upon this, the two men, to satisfy their curiosity, got a long ladder,
and one of them went up to the window and looked into the room, where he
saw a woman lying dead upon the floor, in a dismal manner, having no
clothes on her but her shift.[97] But though he called aloud, and,
putting in his long staff, knocked hard on the floor, yet nobody stirred
or answered, neither could he hear any noise in the house.

He came down again upon this, and acquainted his fellow, who went up
also; and finding it just so, they resolved to acquaint either the lord
mayor or some other magistrate of it, but did not offer to go in at the
window. The magistrate, it seems, upon the information of the two men,
ordered the house to be broke open, a constable and other persons being
appointed to be present, that nothing might be plundered; and
accordingly it was so done, when nobody was found in the house but that
young woman, who having been infected, and past recovery, the rest had
left her to die by herself, and every one gone, having found some way to
delude the watchman, and to get open the door, or get out at some back
door, or over the tops of the houses, so that he knew nothing of it. And
as to those cries and shrieks which he heard, it was supposed they were
the passionate cries of the family at this bitter parting, which, to be
sure, it was to them all, this being the sister to the mistress of the
family; the man of the house, his wife, several children and servants,
being all gone and fled: whether sick or sound, that I could never
learn, nor, indeed, did I make much inquiry after it.

At another house, as I was informed, in the street next within Aldgate,
a whole family was shut up and locked in because the maidservant was
taken sick. The master of the house had complained by his friends to the
next alderman, and to the lord mayor, and had consented to have the maid
carried to the pesthouse, but was refused: so the door was marked with a
red cross, a padlock on the outside, as above, and a watchman set to
keep the door, according to public order.

After the master of the house found there was no remedy, but that he,
his wife, and his children, were locked up with this poor distempered
servant, he called to the watchman, and told him he must go then and
fetch a nurse for them to attend this poor girl, for that it would be
certain death to them all to oblige them to nurse her, and told him
plainly that if he would not do this the maid would perish either[98] of
the distemper, or be starved for want of food, for he was resolved none
of his family should go near her; and she lay in the garret, four story
high, where she could not cry out or call to anybody for help.

The watchman consented to that, and went and fetched a nurse as he was
appointed, and brought her to them the same evening. During this
interval, the master of the house took his opportunity to break a large
hole through his shop into a bulk or stall, where formerly a cobbler had
sat before or under his shop window; but the tenant, as may be supposed,
at such a dismal time as that, was dead or removed, and so he had the
key in his own keeping. Having[99] made his way into this stall, which
he could not have done if the man had been at the door, the noise he was
obliged to make being such as would have alarmed the watchman,--I say,
having made his way into this stall, he sat still till the watchman
returned with the nurse, and all the next day also; but the night
following, having contrived to send the watchman of another trifling
errand (which, as I take it, was to an apothecary's for a plaster for
the maid, which he was to stay for the making up, or some other such
errand that might secure his staying some time), in that time he
conveyed himself and all his family out of the house, and left the nurse
and the watchman to bury the poor wench, that is, throw her into the
cart, and take care of the house.

Not far from the same place they blowed up a watchman with gunpowder,
