
The characteristics of the Norman style of architecture was its
massive grandeur.  The churches were built in the form of a cross,
with a square, central tower, the main entrance being at the west.
The interior was divided into a nave, or central portion, with an
aisle on each side for the passage of religious processions.  The
windows were narrow, and rounded at the top.  The roof rested on round
arches supported by heavy columns.  The cathedrals of Peterborough,
Ely, Durham, Norwich, the church of St. Bartholomew, London, and
St. John's Chapel in the Tower of London are fine examples of Norman
work.

The castles consisted of a square keep, or citadel, with walls of
immense thickness, having a few slitlike windows in the lower story
and somewhat larger ones above.  In these buildings everything was
made subordinate to strength and security.  They were surrounded by a
high stone wall and deep ditch, generally filled with water.  The
entrance to them was over a drawbridge through an archway protected by
an iron grating, or portcullis, which could be raised and lowered at
pleasure.  The Tower of London, Rochester Castle, Norwich Castle,
Castle Rising, Richmond Castle, Carisbrooke Keep, New Castle on the
Tyne, and Tintagel Hold were built by William or his Norman
successors.

The so-called Jews' houses at Lincoln and St. Edmundsbury are rare and
excellent examples of Norman domestic architecture.  Although in many
cases the Norman castles are in ruins, yet these ruins bid fair to
stand as long as the Pyramids.  They were mostly the work of
churchmen, who were the best architects of the day, and knew how to
plan a fortress as well as to build a minster.

V. General Industry and Commerce

157. Trade.

No very marked change took place in respect to agriculture or trade
during the Norman period.  Jews are mentioned in a few cases in Saxon
records, but they apparently did not enter England in any number until
after William the Conqueror's accession.  They soon got control of
much of the trade, and were the only capitalists of the time.

They were protected by the Kings in money lending at exorbitant rates
of interest.  In turn, the Kings extorted immense sums from them.

The guilds (S106), or associations for mutual protection among
merchants and manufacturers, now became prominent, and in time they
acquired great political influence.

VI. Mode of Life, Manners, and Customs.

158. Dress.

The Normans were more temperate and refined in their mode of living
than the Saxons.  In dress they made great display.  In Henry I's
reign it became the custom for the nobility to wear their hair very
long, so that their curls resembled those of women.  The clergy
thundered against this effeminate fashion, but with no effect.  At
last, a priest preaching before the King on Easter Sunday, ended his
sermon by taking out a pair of shears and cropping the entire
congregation, King and all.

By the regulation called the curfew, a bell rang at sunset in summer
and at eight in winter, which was the government signal for putting
out lights and covering up fires.  This law, which was especially
hated by the English, as a Norman innovation and act of tyranny, was a
necessary precaution against fire, at a time when London and other
cities were masses of wooden hovels.

Surnames came in with the Normans.  Previous to the Conquest,
Englishmen had but one name; and when, for convenience, another was
needed, they were called by their occupation or from some personal
peculiarity, as Edward the Carpenter, Harold the Dauntless.  Among the
Normans the lack of a second, or family, name had come to be looked
upon as a sign of low birth, and the daughter of a great lord
(Fitz-Haman) refused to marry a nobleman who had but one, saying, "My
father and my grandfather had each two names, and it were a great
shame to me to take a husband who has less."

The principal amusements were hunting, and hawking (catching birds and
other small game by the use of trained hawks).

The Church introduced theatrical plays, written and acted by the
monks.  These represented scenes in Scripture history, and, later, the
careers of the Vices and the Virtues were personified.

Jousts and tournaments, or mock combats between knights, were not
encouraged by William I, or his immediate successors, but became
common in the period following the Norman Kings.  On some occasions
they were fought in earnest, and resulted in the death of one, or
more, of the combatants.



SIXTH PERIOD[1]

"Man bears within him certain ideas of order, of justice, of reason,
with a constant desire to bring them into play...; for this he labors
unceasingly."--Guizot, "History of Civilization."

THE ANGEVINS, OR PLANTAGENETS, 1154-1399

THE BARONS VERSUS THE CROWN

Consolidation of Norman and Saxon Interests--Rise of the New English
Nation

Henry II, 1154-1189
Richard I, 1189-1199
John, 1199-1216
Henry III, 1216-1272
Edward I, 1272-1307
Edward II, 1307-1327
Edward III, 1327-1377
Richard II, 1377-1399

[1] Reference Books on this Period will be found in the Classified
List of Books in the Appendix.  The pronunciation of names will be
found in the Index.  The Leading Dates stand unenclosed; all others
are in parentheses.

159. Accession and Dominions of Henry II.

Henry was just of age when the death of Stephen (S141) called him to
the throne.

From his father, Count Geoffrey of Anjou, a province of France, came
the title of Angevin.  The name Plantagenet, by which the family came
to be known later, was derived from the count's habit of wearing a
sprig of the golden-blossomed broom plant, or Plante-gene^t, as the
French called it, in his helmet.

Henry received from his father the dukedoms of Anjou and Maine, from
his mother Normandy and the dependent province of Brittany, while
through his marriage with Eleanor, the divorced Queen of France, he
acquired the great southern dukedom of Aquitaine.

Thus on his accession he became ruler over all England, and over more
than half of France besides, his realms extending from the borders of
Scorland to the base of the Pyrenees.  (See map facing p. 84.)

To these extensive possessions Henry added the eastern half of
Ireland.[1]  The country was but partially conquered and never justly
ruled.  The English power there remained "like a spear-point embedded
in a living body," inflaming all around it.[2]

[1] Ireland: The population of Ireland at this time consisted mainly
of descendants of the Celtic and other prehistoric races which
inhabited Britain at the period of the Roman invasion.  When the
Saxons conquered Britain, many of the natives, who were of the same
stock and spoke essentially the same language as the Irish, fled to
that country.  Later, the Danes formed settlements on the coast,
especially in the vicinity of Dublin.
   The conquest of England by the Normans was practically a victory
gained by one branch of the German race over another (Saxons, Normans,
and Danes having originally sprung from the same Teutonic stock or
from one closely akin to it, and the three soon mingled); but the
partial conquest of Ireland by the Normans was a radically different
thing.  They and the Irish had really nothing in common.  The latter
refused to accept the feudal system, and continued to split up into
savage tribes or clans under the rule of petty chiefs always at war
with each other.
   Thus for centuries after England had established a settled
government, Ireland remained, partly through the battles of the clans,
and partly through the aggressions of a hostile race, in a state of
anarchic confusion which prevented all true national growth.
[2] W. E. H. Lecky's "England in the XVIIIth Century," II, 102.

160. Henry II's Charter and Reforms.

On his mother's side Henry was a descendent of Alfred the Great (S51);
for this reason he was hailed with enthusiasm by the native English.
He at once began a system of reforms worthy of his illustrious
ancestor.  His first act was to issue a charter confirming the Charter
of Liberties or pledges of good government which his grandfather,
Henry I, had made (S135).  His next was to begin leveling to the
ground the castles unlawfully built in Stephen's reign, which had
caused such widespread misery to the country[3] (S141).  He continued
the work of demolition until it is said he destroyed no less than
eleven hundred of these strongholds of oppression.

[3] Under William the Conqueror and his immediate successors no one
was allowed to erect a castle without a royal license.  During
Stephen's time the great barons constantly violated this salutory
regulation.

The King next turned his attention to the coinage.  During the civil
war (S141) the barons had issued money debased in quality and
deficient in weight.  Henry abolished this dishonest currency and
issued silver pieces of full weight and value.

161. War with France; Scutage (1160).

Having completed these reforms, the King turned his attention to his
Continental possessions.  Through his wife, Henry claimed the county
of Toulouse in southern France.  To enforce this claim he declared
war.

Henry's barons, however, refused to furnish troops to fight outside of
England.  The King wisely compromised the matter by offering to accept
from each knight a sum of money in lieu of service, called scutage, or
shield money.[1]  The proposal was agreed to (1160), and in this way
the knights furnished the King the means to hire soldiers for foreign
wars.

[1] Scutage: from the Latin scutum, a shield; the understanding being
that he who would not take his shield and do battle for the King
should pay enough to hire one who would.  The scutage was assessed at
two marks.  Later, the assessment varied.  The mark was two thirds of
a pound of silver by weight, or thirteen shillings and fourpence
($3.20).  Reckoned in modern money, the tax was probably at least
twenty times two marks, or about $128.

Later in his reign Henry supplemented this tax by the passage of the
Assize of Arms, a law which revived the national militia (SS96, 150)
and placed it at his command for home service.  By these two measures
the King made himself practically independent of the barons, and thus
gained a greater degree of power than any previous ruler had
possessed.

162. Thomas Becket.

There was, however, one man in Henry's kingdom--his Lord Chancellor
(S145), Thomas Becket--who was always ready to serve him.  At his own
expense the Chancellor now equipped seven hundred knights, and,
crossing the Channel, fought valiantly for the suppression of the
rebellion in Toulouse (S161) in the south of France.  (See map facing
p. 84.)

Shortly after Becket's return from the Continent Henry resolved to
appoint him Archbishop of Canterbury.  Becket knew that the King
purposed beginning certain Church reforms with which he was not in
sympathy, and declined the office.  But Henry would take no denial.
At last Becket consented, but he warned the King that he should uphold
the rights of the clergy.  He now became the head of the Catholic
Church in England.  He was the first man of English birth called to
that exalted position since the Norman Conquest.

This promotion made a decided change in Becket's relation to the King.
So long as he was Chancellor he was bound to do what the King ordered,
but as soon as he was made Archbishop he became the servant of the
Church.  Again, on his assumption of this sacred office Becket
underwent a remarkable charge of character.  He had been a man of the
world, fond of pomp and pleasure.  He now gave up all luxury and show.
He put on sackcloth, lived on bread and water, and spent his nights in
prayer, tearing his flesh with a scourge.

163. Becket's First Quarrel with the King.

The new Archbishop's presentiment of trouble soon proved true.  Becket
had hardly taken his seat when a quarrel broke out between him and the
King.  In his need for money Henry levied a tax on all lands, whether
belonging to the barons or to churchmen.  Becket opposed this tax.[1]
He was willing, he said, that the clergy should contribute, if they
desired to do so, but not that they should be compelled to pay the
tax.

[1] See page 76, note 1, on Clergy.

The King declared with an oath that all should pay alike; the
Archbishop vowed with equal determination that not a single penny
should be collected from the Church.  From that time the King and
Becket never met again as friends.

164. The Second Quarrel.

Shortly afterward, a much more serious quarrel broke out between the
King and the Archbishop.  Under the law made by William the Conqueror,
the Church had the right to try in its own courts all offenses
committed by monks and priests (S118).  This privilege, in time, led
to great abuses, since even in cases of the commission of the gravest
crimes the Church had no direct power to inflict the penalty of
death.  On the contrary, the heaviest sentence it could give was
imprisonment in a monastery, with degradation from the clerical
office; while in less serious cases the offenders generally got off
with fasting and flogging.

On this account some criminals who deserved to be hanged escaped with
a comparatively slight penalty.  Such a case now occurred.  In one
instance a priest had committed an unprovoked murder.  Henry commanded
him to be brought before the Kings' court; Becket interfered, and
ordered the case to be tried by the bishop of the diocese.  The bishop
simply sentenced the murderer to lose his place for two years.

165. The Constitutions of Clarendon, 1164.

The King determined that such flagrant disregard of justice should no
longer go on.  He called a council of his chief men at Clarendon, near
Salisbury, in Wiltshire, and laid the case before them.  He demanded
that in future the state or civil courts should be supreme, and that
in every instance their judges should decide whether a criminal should
be tried by the common law of the land or handed over to the Church
courts.

He furthermore required that the clergy should be held strictly
responsible to the Crown, so that in case of dispute the final appeal
should be neither to the Archbishop nor to the Pope, but to himself.
In this respect he went even farther than William the Conqueror had
done (S118).  After protracted debate the council, composed of a
committee of bishops and barons, passed the measures which the King
demanded.  The new laws were entitled the Constitutions of Clarendon.
They consisted of sixteen articles which clearly defined the powers
and jurisdiction of the King's courts and the Church courts.  Their
great object was to secure a more uniform administration of justice
for all classes of men.  (See the Constitutional Summary in the
Appendix, pp. viii and xxxii.)

Becket, though bitterly oppsed to the new laws, finally assented, and
swore to obey them.  Afterward, feeling that he had conceded too much,
he retracted his oath and refused to be bound by the Constitutions.
The other Church dignitaries became alarmed at the prospect, and left
Becket to settle with the King as best he might.  Henceforth it was a
battle between the King and the Archbishop, and each resolved that he
would never give up until he had won the final victory (S170).

166. The King enforces the New Laws; Becket leaves the Country.

Henry at once proceeded to put the Constitutions of Clarendon into
execution without fear or favor.  A champion of the Church of that day
says, "Then was seen the mournful spectacle of priests and deacons who
had committed murder, manslaughter, robbery, theft, and other crimes,
carried in carts before the comissioners and punished as thogh they
were ordinary men."[1]

[1] William of Newburgh's "Chronicle."

Furthermore, the King sems now to have resolved to ruin Becket or
drive him from the kingdom.  He accordingly summoned the Archbishop
before a royal council at Northampton to answer to certain charges
made against him.  Becket answered the summons, but he refused to
acknowledge the jurisdiction of the council, and appealed to the
Pope.  "Traitor!" cried a courtier, as he picked up a bunch of muddy
rushes from the floor and flung them at the Archbishop's head.  Becket
turned and, looking him sternly in the face, said, "Were I not a
churchman, I would make you repent that word."  Realizing, however,
that he was now in serious danger, he soon after left Northampton and
fled to France.

167. Banishment versus Excommunication (1164).

Finding Becket beyond his reach, Henry next proceeded to banish the
Archbishop's kinsmen and friends, without regard to age or sex, to the
number of nearly four hundred.  These miserable exiles, many of whom
were nearly destitute, were forced to leave the country in midwinter,
and excited the pity of all who saw them.

Becket indignantly retaliated.  He hurled at the King's counselors the
awful sentence of excommunication or expulsion from the Church
(S194).  It declared the King accursed of God and man, deprived of
help in this world, and shut out from hope in the world to come.  In
this manner the quarrel went on with ever-increasing bitterness for
the space of six years.

168. Prince Henry crowned; Reconciliation (1170).

Henry, who had long wished to associate his son, Prince Henry, with
him in the government, had him crowned at Westminster by the
Archbishop of York, the bishops of London and Salisbury taking part.

By custom, if not indeed by law, Becket alone, as Archbishop of
Canterbury, had the right to perform this ceremony.

When Becket heard of the coronation, he declared it an outrage both
against Christianity and the Church.  So great an outcry now arose
that Henry believed it expedient to recall the absent Archbishop,
especially as the King of France was urging the Pope to take up the
matter.  Henry accordingly went over to the Continent, met Becket, and
persuaded him to return.

169. Reneral of the Quarrel; Murder of Becket (1170).

But though the Archbishop and the King had given each other the "kiss
of peace," yet the reconciliation was on the surface only; underneath,
the old hatred smoldered, ready to burst forth into flame.  As soon as
he reached England, Becket invoked the thunders of the Church against
those who had officiated at the coronation of Prince Henry.  He
excommunicated the Archbishop of York with his assistant bishops.

The King took their part, and in an outburst of passion against Becket
he exclaimed, "Will none of the cowards who eat my bread rid me of
that turbulent priest?"  In answer to his angry cry for relief, four
knights set out without Henry's knowledge for Canterbury, and brutally
murdered the Archbishop within the walls of his own cathedral.

170. Results of the Murder.

The crime sent a thrill of horror throughout the realm.  The Pope
proclaimed Becket a saint with the title of Saint Thomas.  The mass of
the English people looked upon the dead ecclesiastic as a martyr who
had died in the defense of the Church, and of all those--but
especially the laboring classes and the poor--around whom the Church
cast its protecting power.

The great cathedral of Canterbury was hung in mourning; Becket's
shrine became the most famous in England.  The stone pavement, and the
steps leading to it, still show by their deep-worn hollows where
thousands of pilgrims coming from all parts of the kingdom, and from
the Continent even, used to creep on their knees to the saint's tomb
to pray for his intercession.

Henry himself was so far vanquished by the reaction in Becket's favor,
that he gave up any further attempt to formally enforce the
Constitutions of Clarendon (S165), by which he had hoped to establish
a uniform system of administration of justice.  But the attempt,
though baffled, was not wholly lost; like seed buried in the soil, it
sprang up and bore good fruit in later generations.  However, it was
not until near the close of the reign of George III (1813) that the
civil courts fully and finally prevailed.

171. The King makes his Will; Civil War.

Some years after the murder, the King bequeathed England and Normandy
(SS108, 159) to Prince Henry.[1]  He at the same time provided for his
sons Geoffrey and Richard.  To John, the youngest of the brothers, he
gave no territory, but requested Henry to grant him several castles,
which the latter refused to do.  "It is our fate," said one of the
sons, "that none should love the rest; that is the only inheritance
which will never be taken from us."

[1] After his coronation Prince Henry had the title of Henry III; but
as he died before his father, he never properly became king in his own
right.

It may be that that legacy of hatred was the result of Henry's unwise
marriage with Eleanor, an able but perverse woman, or it may have
sprung from her jealousy of "Fair Rosamond" and other favorites of the
King.[1]  Eventually this feeling burst out into civil war.  Brother
fought against brother, and Eleanor, conspiring with the King of
France, turned against her husband.

[1] "Fair Rosamond" [Rosa mundi, the Rose of the world (as THEN
interpreted)] was the daughter of Lord Clifford.  According to
tradition the King formed an attachment for this lady before his
unfortunate marriage with Eleanor, and constructed a place of
concealment for her in a forest in Woodstock, near Oxford.  Some
accounts report that Queen Eleanor discovered her rival and put her to
death.  She was buried in the nunnery of Godstow near by.  When
Henry's son John became King, he raised a monument to her memory with
the inscription in Latin:
                "This tomb doth here enclose
                 The world's most beauteous Rose--
                 Rose passing sweet erewhile,
                 Now naught but odor vile."

172. The King's Penance (1173).

The revolt against Henry's power began in Normandy (1173).  While he
was engaged in quelling it, he received intelligence that Earl Bigod
of Norfolk[2] and the bishop of Durham, both of whom hated the King's
reforms, since they curtailed their authority, had risen against him.

[2] Hugh Bigod: The Bigods were among the most prominent and also the
most turbulent of the Norman barons.

Believing that this new trouble was a judgment from Heaven for
Becket's murder, Henry resolved to do penance at his tomb.  Leaving
the Continent with two prisoners in his charge,--one his son Henry's
queen, the other his own,--he traveled with all speed to Canterbury.
There, kneeling abjectly before the grave of his former chancellor and
friend, the King submitted to be beaten with rods by the priests, in
expiation of his sin.

173. End of the Struggle of the Barons against the Crown.

Henry then moved against the rebels in the north (S171).  Convinced of
the hopelessness of holding out against his forces, they submitted.
With their submission the long struggle of the barons against the
Crown came to an end (SS124, 130).  It had lasted nearly a hundred
years (1087-1174).

The King's victory in this contest was of the greatest importance.  It
settled the question, once for all, that England was not, like the
rest of Europe, to be managed in the interest of a body of great
baronial landholders always at war with each other; but was henceforth
to be governed by one central power, restrained but not overridden by
that of the nobles and the Cuhrch.

174. The King again begins his Reforms (1176).

As soon as order was restored, Henry once more set about completing
his legal and judicial reforms (S165).  His great object was to secure
a uniform system of administering justice which should be effective
and impartial.

Henry I had undertaken to divide the kingdom into districts or
circuits, which were assigned to a certain number of judges who
traveled through them at stated times collecting the royal revenue and
administering the law (SS137, 147).  Henry II revised and perfected
this plan.[1]

[1] This was accomplished by means of two laws called the Grand Assize
and the Assize of Clarendon (not to be confounded with the
Constitutions of Clarendon).  The Assize of Clarendon was the first
true code of national law; it was later expanded and made permanent
under the name of the Assize of Northampton.  (See the Constitutional
Summary in the Appendix, p. vii, S8.)

In addition to the private courts which, under feudal law, the barons
had set up on their estates (S150), they had in many cases got the
entire control of the town and other local courts.  There they dealt
out such justice or injustice as they pleased.  The King's judges now
assumed control of these tribunals, and so brought the common law of
the realm to every man's door.

175. Grand Juries.

The Norman method of settling disputed was by Trial by Battle, in
which the contestants or their champions fought the matter out either
with swords or cudgels (S148).  There were those who objected to this
club law.  To them the King offered the privilege of leaving the
decision of twelve knights, chosen from the neighborhood, who were
supposed to know the facts.  (See the Constitutional Summary in the
Appendix, p. vi, S8.)

In like manner, when the judges passed through a circuit, a grand jury
of not less than sixteen was to report to them the criminals of each
district.  These the judges forthwith sent to the Church to be
examined by the Ordeal (S91).  If convicted, they were punished; if
not, the judges considered them to be suspicious characters, and
ordered them to leave the country within eight days.  In that way the
rascals of that generation were summarily disposed of.

Henry II may rightfully be regarded as having taken the first step
toward founding the system of Trial by Jury, which England, and
England alone, fully matured.  That method has since been adopted by
every civilized country of the globe.  (See the Constutional Summary
in the Appendix, p. vii, S8.)

176. Origin of the Modern Trial by Jury, 1350.

In the reign of Henry's son John, the Church abolished the Ordeal
(S91) throughout Christendom (1215).  It then became the custom in
England to choose a petty jury, acquainted with the facts, whoch
confirmed or denied the accusations brought by the grand jury.  When
this petty jury could not agree, the decision of a majority was
sometimes accepted.

The difficulty of securing justice by this method led to the custom of
summoning witnesses.  These witnesses appeared before the petty jury
and testified for or against the party accused.  In this way it became
possible to obtain a unanimous verdict.

The first mention of this change occurs more than a hundred and thirty
years later, in the reign of Edward III (1350); and from that time,
perhaps, may be dated the true beginning of our modern method, by
which the jury bring in a verdict, not from what they personally know,
but from evidence sworn to by those who do.

177. The King's Last Days.

Henry's last days were full of bitterness.  Ever since his memorable
return from the Continent (S172), he had been obliged to hold the
Queen a prisoner lest she should undermine his power (S171).  His sons
were discontented and rebellious.  Toward the close of his reign they
again plotted against him with King Philip of FRance.  Henry then
declared war against that country.

When peace was made, Henry, who was lying ill, asked to see a list of
those who had conspired against him.  At the head of it stood the name
of his youngest son, John, whom he trusted.  At the sight of it the
old man turned his face to the wall, saying, "I have nothing left to
care for; let all things go their way."  Two days afterward he died of
a broken heart.

178. Summary.

Henry II left his work only half done; yet that half was permanent,
and its beneficent mark may be seen on the English law and the English
constitution at the present time.

When he ascended the throne he found a people who had long been
suffering the miseries of a protracted civil war.  He established a
stable government.  He redressed the wrongs of his people.  He
punished the mutinous barons.

He compelled the Church, at least in some degree, to acknowledge the
supremacy of the State.  He reformed the administration of law;
established methods of judicial inquiry which gradually developed into
our modern Trial by Jury; and he made all men feel that a king sat on
the throne who believed in a uniform system of justice and who
endeavered to make it respected.

Richard I (Coeur de Lion)[1]--1189-1199

179. Accession and Character of Richard I.

Henry II was succeeded by his second son, Richard, his first having
died during the civil war (1183) in which he and his brother Geoffrey
had fought against Prince Richard and their father (S171).  Richard
was born at Oxford, but he spent his youth in France.

[1] Richard Coeur de Lion: Richard the Lion-Hearted.  An old
chronicler says that the King got the name from his adventure with a
lion.  The beast attacked him, and as the King had no weapons, he
thrust his hand down his throat and "tore out his heart."  This story
is not without value, since it illustrates how marvelous legends grow
up around the lives of remarkable men.

The only English sentence that he was ever known to speak was when he
was in a raging passion.  He then vented his wrath against an
impertinent Frnchman, in some broken but decidedly strong expressions
of his native tongue.  Richard has been called "a spendid savage,"
having most of the faults and most of the virtues of such a savage.

The King's bravery in battle and his daring exploits gained for him
the flattering surname of Coeur de Lion.  He had a right to it, for he
certainly possessed the heart of a lion, and he never failed to get
the lion's share.  He might, however, have been called, in equal
truth, Richard the Absentee, since out of a nominal reign of ten years
he spent but a few months in England, the remaining time being
consumed in wars abroad.

180. Condition of Society.

Perhaps no better general picture of society in England during this
period can be found than that presented by Sir Walter Scott's novel,
"Ivanhoe."  There every class appears.  One sees the Saxon serf and
swineherd wearing the brazen collar of his master Cedric; the pilgrim
wandering from shrine to shrine, with the palm branch in his cap to
show that he has visited the Holy Land; the outlaw, Robin Hood, lying
in wait to strip rich churchmen and other travelers who were on their
way through Sherwood Forest.  He sees, too, the Norman baron in his
castle torturing the aged Jew to extort his hidden gold; and the
steel-clad knights, with Ivanhoe at their head, splintering lances in
the tournament, presided over by Richard's brother, the traitorous
Prince John (S177).

181. Richard's Coronation.

Richard was on the Continent at the time of his father's death.  His
first act was to liberate his mother from her long imprisonment at
Winchester (S177); his next, to place her at the head of the English
government until his arrival from Normandy.  Unlike Henry II, Richard
did not issue a charter, or pledge of good government (S160).  He,
however, took the usual coronation oath to defend the Church, maintain
justice, make salutary laws, and abolish evil customs; such an oath
might well be considered a charter in itself.

182. The Crusades (1190); how Richard raised Money.

At that period all western Europe was engaged in the series of wars
known as the Crusades.  The object of this long contest, which began
in 1096 and ended in 1270, was to compel the Saracens or Mohammedans
to give up possession of the Holy Land to the Christians (S186).
Immediately after his coronation, Richard resolved to jion the King of
France and the Emperor of Germany in the Third Crusade.  To get money
for the expedition, the King extorted loans from the Jews (S119), who
were the creditors of half England and had almost complete control of
the capital and commerce of every country in Europe.

The English nobles who joined Richard also borrowed largely from the
same source; and then, suddenly turning on the hated lenders, they
tried to extinguish the debt by extinguishing the Jews.  A pretext
against the unfortunate race was easily found.  Riots broke out in
London, York, and elsewhere, and hundreds of Israelites were brutally
massacred.

Richard's next move to obtain funds was to impose a heavy tax; his
next, to dispose of titles of rank and offices in both Church and
State, to all who wished to buy them.  Thus, to the aged and covetous
bishop of Durhap he sold the earldom of Northumberland for life,
saying, as he concluded the bargain, "Out of an old bishop I have made
a new earl."

He sold, also, the office of chief justice to the same prelate for an
additional thousand marks (S161, note 1), while the King of Scotland
purchased freedom from subjection to the English King for ten thousand
marks.

Last of all, Richard sold cities and town, and he also sold charters
to towns.  One of his courtiers remonstrated with him for his greed
for gain.  The King replied, "I would sell London itself could I find
a purchaser rich enough to buy it."

183. The Rise of the Free Towns.

Of all these devices for raising money, that of selling charters to
towns had the most important results.  From the time of the Norman
Conquest the large towns of England, with few exceptions, were
considered part of the King's property; the smaller places generally
belonged to the great barons.

The citizens of these towns were obliged to pay rent and taxes of
various kinds to the King or lord who owned them.  These dues were
collected by an officer appointed by the King or lord (usually the
sheriff), who was bound to obtain a certain sum, whatever more he
could get being his own profit.  For this reason it was for his
interest to exact from every citizen the uttermost penny.  London, as
we have seen, had secured a considerable degree of liberty through the
charter granted to it by William the Conqueror (S107).  Every town was
now anxious to obtain a similar charter.

The three great objects which the citizens of the towns sought were:

(1) To get the right of paying their taxes directly to the King.
(2) To elect their own magistrates.
(3) To administer justice in their own courts in accordance with laws
made by themselves.

The only way to gain these privileges was to pay for them.  Many of
the towns were rich, and, if the King or lord needed money, they
bargained with him for the favors they desired.  When the agreement
was made, it was drawn up in Latin and stamped with the King's seal
(S154).  Then the citizens took it home in triumph and locked it up as
the safeguard of their liberties, or at least of some part of them.

Thus, the people of Leicester, in the next reign, purchased from the
Earl of Leicester, their feudal lord, the right to decide their own
disputes.  For this they payed a yearly tax of threepence on every
house having a gable on the main street.  These concessions may seem
small, but they prepared the way for greater ones.

What was still more important, these charters educated the citizens of
the day in a knowledge of self-government.  The tradesmen and
shopkeepers of these towns did much to preserve free speech and equal
justice.  Richard granted a large number of these town charters, and
thus unintentionally made himself a benefactor to the nation.[1]

[1] Rise of Free Towns: By 1216 the most advanced of the English towns
had become to a very considerable extent self-governing.  See
W. Stubbs's "Constitutional History of England."

184. Failure of the Third Crusade.

The object of the Third Crusade (S182) was to drive the Mohammedans
