but one distinguishing mark that I noticed, and this is wanting here.
The light of the torch fell upon the handle of a dagger in his girdle.
I saw it but for a moment, but I caught the gleam of gems. It was only
a passing impression, but I could swear that he carried a small gold or
yellow metal-handled dagger, and I believe that it was set with gems,
but to this I should not like to swear."

"Produce the dagger found upon the dead man," one of the council said
to an official.

And the officer produced a small dagger with a fine steel blade and
gold handle, thickly encrusted with gems.

"Is this the dagger?" the senator asked Francis.

"I cannot say that it is the dagger," Francis replied; "but it closely
resembles it, if it is not the same."

"You have no doubt, I suppose, seeing that wound on the temple, the
dagger found in the girdle, and the fact that the body has evidently
only been a few days in the water, that this is the man whom you struck
down in the fray on the canal?"

"No, signor, I have no doubt whatever that it is the same person."

"That will do," the council said. "You can retire; and we thank you, in
the name of justice, for the evidence you have given."

Francis was led back to the gondola, and conveyed to his father's
house. An hour later Signor Polani arrived.

"The matter is finished," he said, "I cannot say satisfactorily to me,
for the punishment is wholly inadequate to the offence, but at any rate
he has not got off altogether unpunished. After you left, we passed
from the prison into the palace, and then the whole council assembled,
as before, in the council chamber. I may tell you that the body which
was found was that of a cousin and intimate of Ruggiero Mocenigo. The
two have been constantly together since the return of the latter from
Constantinople. It was found, by inquiry at the house of the young
man's father, that he left home on the evening upon which the attack
was committed, saying that he was going to the mainland, and might not
be expected to return for some days.

"The council took it for granted, from the wound in his head, and the
fact that a leech has testified that the body had probably been in the
water about three days, that he was the man that was stunned by your
blow, and drowned in the canal. Ruggiero urged that the discovery in no
way affected him; and that his cousin had, no doubt, attempted to carry
off my daughter on his own account. There was eventually a division
among the council on this point, but Maria was sent for, and on being
questioned, testified that the young man had never spoken to her, and
that, indeed, she did not know him even by sight; and the majority
thereupon came to the conclusion that he could only have been acting as
an instrument of Ruggiero's.

"We were not in the apartment while the deliberation was going on, but
when we returned the president announced that, although there was no
absolute proof of Ruggiero's complicity in the affair, yet that,
considering his application for my daughter's hand, his threats on my
refusal to his request, his previous character, and his intimacy with
his cousin, the council had no doubt that the attempt had been made at
his instigation, and therefore sentenced him to banishment from Venice
and the islands for three years."

"I should be better pleased if they had sent him back to
Constantinople, or one of the islands of the Levant," Mr. Hammond said.
"If he is allowed to take up his abode on the mainland, he may be only
two or three miles away, which, in the case of a man of his
description, is much too near to be pleasant for those who have
incurred his enmity."

"That is true," Signor Polani agreed, "and I myself, and my friends,
are indignant that he should not have been banished to a distance,
where he at least would have been powerless for fresh mischief. On the
other hand, his friends will doubtless consider that he has been hardly
treated. However, as far as my daughters are concerned, I will take
good care that he shall have no opportunity of repeating his attempt;
for I have ordered them, on no account whatever, to be absent from the
palazzo after the shades of evening begin to fall, unless I myself am
with them; and I shall increase the number of armed retainers in the
house, by bringing some of my men on shore from a ship which arrived
last night in port. I cannot believe that even Ruggiero would have the
insolence to attempt to carry them off from the house by force; but
when one has to deal with a man like this, one cannot take too great
precautions."

"I have already ordered my son, on no account, to be out after
nightfall in the streets. In his gondola I do not mind, for unless the
gondoliers wear badges, it is impossible to tell one boat from another
after dark. Besides, as he tells me, his boat is so fast that he has no
fear whatever of being overtaken, even if recognized and chased. But I
shall not feel comfortable so long as he is here, and shall send him
back to England on the very first occasion that offers."

"I trust that no such occasion may occur just yet, Signor Hammond. I
should be sorry, indeed, for your son to be separated so soon from us.
We must talk the matter over together, and perhaps between us we may
hit on some plan by which, while he may be out of the reach of the
peril he has incurred on behalf of my family, he may yet be neither
wasting his time, nor altogether separated from us."

For the next fortnight Francis spent most of his time at the Palazzo
Polani. The merchant was evidently sincere in his invitation to him to
make his house his home; and if a day passed without the lad paying a
visit, would chide him gently for deserting them. He himself was
frequently present in the balcony, where the four young people--for
Matteo Giustiniani was generally of the party--sat and chatted
together, the gouvernante sitting austerely by, with at times a strong
expression of disapproval on her countenance at their laughter and
merriment, although--as her charges' father approved of the intimacy of
the girls with their young cousin and this English lad--she could offer
no open objections. In the afternoon, the party generally went for a
long row in a four-oared gondola, always returning home upon the
approach of evening.

To Francis this time was delightful. He had had no sister of his own;
and although he had made the acquaintance of a number of lads in
Venice, and had accompanied his father to formal entertainments at the
houses of his friends, he had never before been intimate in any of
their families. The gaiety and high spirits of the two girls, when they
were in the house, amused and pleased him, especially as it was in
contrast to the somewhat stiff and dignified demeanour which they
assumed when passing through the frequented canals in the gondola.

"I do not like that woman Castaldi," Francis said one evening as, after
leaving the palazzo, Giuseppi rowed them towards the Palazzo
Giustiniani, where Matteo was to be landed.

"Gouvernantes are not popular, as a class, with young men," Matteo
laughed.

"But seriously, Matteo, I don't like her; and I am quite sure that, for
some reason or other, she does not like me. I have seen her watching
me, as a cat would watch a mouse she is going to spring on."

"Perhaps she has not forgiven you, Francisco, for saving her two
charges, and leaving her to the mercy of their assailants."

"I don't know, Matteo. Her conduct appeared to me, at the time, to be
very strange. Of course, she might have been paralysed with fright, but
it was certainly curious the way she clung to their dresses, and tried
to prevent them from leaving the boat."

"You don't really think, Francis, that she wanted them to be captured?"

"I don't know whether I should be justified in saying as much as that,
Matteo, and I certainly should not say so to anyone else, but I can't
help thinking that such was the case. I don't like her face, and I
don't like the woman. She strikes me as being deceitful. She certainly
did try to prevent my carrying the girls off and, had not their dresses
given way in her hands, she would have done so. Anyhow, it strikes me
that Ruggiero must have had some accomplice in the house. How else
could he have known of the exact time at which they would be passing
along the Grand Canal? For, that the gondola was in waiting to dash out
and surprise them, there is no doubt.

"I was asking Signora Giulia, the other day, how it was they were so
late, for she says that her father never liked their being out after
dusk in Venice, though at Corfu he did not care how late they were upon
the water. She replied that she did not quite know how it happened. Her
sister had said, some time before, that she thought it was time to be
going, but the gouvernante--who was generally very particular--had said
that there was no occasion to hurry, as their father knew where they
were, and would not be uneasy. She thought the woman must have mistaken
the time, and did not know how late it was.

"Of course, this proves nothing. Still I own that, putting all the
things together, I have my suspicions."

"It is certainly curious, Francisco, though I can hardly believe it
possible that the woman could be treacherous. She has been for some
years in the service of the family, and my cousin has every confidence
in her."

"That may be, Matteo; but Ruggiero may have promised so highly that he
may have persuaded her to aid him. He could have afforded to be
generous, if he had been successful."

"There is another thing, by the bye, Francisco, which did not strike me
at the time; but now you speak of it, may be another link in the chain.
I was laughing at Maria about their screaming, and saying what a noise
the three of them must have made, and she said, 'Oh, no! there were
only two of us--Giulia and I screamed for aid at the top of our voices;
but the signora was as quiet and brave as possible, and did not utter a
sound.'"

"That doesn't agree, Matteo, with her being so frightened as to hold
the girls tightly, and almost prevent their escape, or with the row she
made, sobbing and crying, when she came back. Of course there is not
enough to go upon; and I could hardly venture to speak of it to Signor
Polani, or to accuse a woman, in whom he has perfect confidence, of
such frightful treachery on such vague grounds of suspicion. Still I do
suspect her; and I hope, when I go away from Venice, you will, as far
as you can, keep an eye upon her."

"I do not know how to do that," Matteo said, laughing; "but I will tell
my cousins that we don't like her, and advise them, in future, not on
any account to stay out after dusk, even if she gives them permission
to do so; and if I learn anything more to justify our suspicions, I
will tell my cousin what you and I think, though it won't be a pleasant
thing to do. However, Ruggiero is gone now, and I hope we sha'n't hear
anything more about him."

"I hope not, Matteo; but I am sure he is not the man to give up the
plan he has once formed easily, any more than he is to forgive an
injury.

"However, here we are at your steps. We will talk the other matter over
another time. Anyhow, I am glad I have told you what I thought, for it
has been worrying me. Now that I find you don't think my ideas about
her are altogether absurd, I will keep my eyes more open than ever in
future. I am convinced she is a bad one, and I only hope we may be able
to prove it."

"You have made me very uncomfortable, Francisco," Matteo said as he
stepped ashore; "but we will talk about it again tomorrow."

"We shall meet at your cousin's in the evening. Before that time, we
had better both think over whether we ought to tell anyone our
suspicions, and we can hold a council in the gondola on the way back."

Francis did think the matter over that night. He felt that the fact
told him by Giulia, that the gouvernante had herself been the means of
their staying out later than usual on the evening of the attack, added
great weight to the vague suspicions he had previously entertained; and
he determined to let the matter rest no longer, but that the next day
he would speak to Signor Polani, even at the risk of offending him by
his suspicions of a person who had been, for some years, in his
confidence. Accordingly, he went in the morning to the palazzo, but
found that Signor Polani was absent, and would not be in until two or
three o'clock in the afternoon. He did not see the girls, who, he knew,
were going out to spend the day with some friends.

At three o'clock he returned, and found that Polani had just come in.

"Why, Francisco," the merchant said when he entered, "have you
forgotten that my daughters will be out all day?"

"No, signor, I have not forgotten that, but I wish to speak to you. I
dare say you will laugh at me, but I hope you will not think me
meddlesome, or impertinent, for touching upon a subject which concerns
you nearly."

"I am sure you will not be meddlesome or impertinent, Francisco,"
Signor Polani said reassuringly, for he saw that the lad was nervous
and anxious. "Tell me what you have to say, and I can promise you
beforehand that, whether I agree with you or not in what you may have
to say, I shall be in no way vexed, for I shall know you have said it
with the best intentions."

"What I have to say, sir, concerns the Signora Castaldi, your
daughters' gouvernante. I know, sir, that you repose implicit
confidence in her; and your judgment, formed after years of intimate
knowledge, is hardly likely to be shaken by what I have to tell you. I
spoke to Matteo about it, and, as he is somewhat of my opinion, I have
decided that it is, at least, my duty to tell you all the
circumstances, and you can then form your own conclusions."

Francis then related the facts known to him. First, that the assailants
of the gondola must have had accurate information as to the hour at
which they would come along; secondly, that it was at the gouvernante's
suggestion that the return had been delayed much later than usual;
lastly, that when the attack took place, the gouvernante did not raise
her voice to cry for assistance, and that she had, at the last moment,
so firmly seized their dresses, that it was only by tearing the girls
from her grasp that he had been enabled to get them into the boat.

"There may be nothing in all this," he said when he had concluded. "But
at least, sir, I thought that it was right you should know it; and you
will believe me, that it is only anxiety as to the safety of your
daughters that has led me to speak to you."

"Of that I am quite sure," Signor Polani said cordially, "and you were
perfectly right in speaking to me. I own, however, that I do not for a
moment think that the circumstances are more than mere coincidences.
Signora Castaldi has been with me for upwards of ten years. She has
instructed and trained my daughters entirely to my satisfaction. I do
not say that she is everything that one could wish, but, then, no one
is perfect, and I have every confidence in her fidelity and
trustworthiness. I own that the chain you have put together is a strong
one, and had she but lately entered my service, and were she a person
of whom I knew but little, I should attach great weight to the facts,
although taken in themselves they do not amount to much. Doubtless she
saw that my daughters were enjoying themselves in the society of my
friends, and in her kindness of heart erred, as she certainly did err,
in allowing them to stay longer than she should have done.

"Then, as to her not crying out when attacked, women behave differently
in cases of danger. Some scream loudly, others are silent, as if
paralysed by fear. This would seem to have been her case. Doubtless she
instinctively grasped the girls for their protection, and in her fright
did not even perceive that a boat had come alongside, or know that you
were a friend trying to save them. That someone informed their
assailants of the whereabouts of my daughters, and the time they were
coming home, is clear; but they might have been seen going to the
house, and a swift gondola have been placed on the watch. Had this boat
started as soon as they took their seat in the gondola on their return,
and hastened, by the narrow canals, to the spot where their accomplices
were waiting, they could have warned them in ample time of the approach
of the gondola with my daughters.

"I have, as you may believe, thought the matter deeply over, for it was
evident to me that the news of my daughters' coming must have reached
their assailants beforehand. I was most unwilling to suspect treachery
on the part of any of my household, and came to the conclusion that the
warning was given in the way I have suggested.

"At the same time, Francisco, I thank you deeply for having mentioned
to me the suspicions you have formed, and although I think that you are
wholly mistaken, I certainly shall not neglect the warning, but shall
watch very closely the conduct of my daughters' gouvernante, and shall
take every precaution to put it out of her power to play me false, even
while I cannot, for a moment, believe she would be so base and
treacherous as to attempt to do so."

"In that case, signor, I shall feel that my mission has not been
unsuccessful, however mistaken I may be, and I trust sincerely that I
am wholly wrong. I thank you much for the kind way in which you have
heard me express suspicions of a person in your confidence."

The gravity with which the merchant had heard Francis' story vanished
immediately he left the room, and a smile came over his face.

"Boys are boys all the world over," he said to himself, "and though my
young friend has almost the stature of a man, as well as the quickness
and courage of one, and has plenty of sense in other matters, he has at
once the prejudices and the romantic ideas of a boy. Had Signora
Castaldi been young and pretty, no idea that she was treacherous would
have ever entered his mind; but what young fellow yet ever liked a
gouvernante, who sits by and works at her tambour frame, with a
disapproving expression on her face, while he is laughing and talking
with a girl of his own age. I should have felt the same when I was a
boy. Still, to picture the poor signora as a traitoress, in the pay of
that villain Mocenigo, is too absurd. I had the greatest difficulty in
keeping my gravity when he was unfolding his story. But he is an
excellent lad, nevertheless. A true, honest, brave lad, with a little
of the bluffness that they say all his nation possess, but with a heart
of gold, unless I am greatly mistaken."

At seven o'clock, Francis was just getting into his gondola to go round
again to Signor Polani's, when another gondola came along the canal at
the top of its speed, and he recognized at once the badge of the
Giustiniani. It stopped suddenly as it came abreast of his own boat,
and Matteo, in a state of the highest excitement, jumped from his own
boat into that of Francis.

"What is the matter, Matteo? What has happened?"

"I have terrible news, Francisco. My cousins have both disappeared."

"Disappeared!" Francis repeated in astonishment "How have they
disappeared?"

"Their father has just been round to see mine. He is half mad with
grief and anger. You know they had gone to spend the day at the
Persanis?"

"Yes, yes," Francis exclaimed; "but do go on, Matteo. Tell me all about
it, quickly."

"Well, it seems that Polani, for some reason or other, thought he would
go and fetch them himself, and at five o'clock he arrived there in his
gondola, only to find that they had left two hours before. You were
right, Francisco, it was that beldam Castaldi. She went with them there
in the morning, and left them there, and was to have come in the
gondola for them at six. At three o'clock she arrived, saying that
their father had met with a serious accident, having fallen down the
steps of one of the bridges and broken his leg, and that he had sent
her to fetch them at once.

"Of course, they left with her instantly. Polani questioned the
lackeys, who had aided them to embark. They said that the gondola was
not one of his boats, but was apparently a hired gondola, with a closed
cabin. The girls had stopped in surprise as they came down the steps,
and Maria said, 'Why, this is not our gondola!'

"Castaldi replied, 'No, no; our own gondolas had both gone off to find
and bring a leech, and as your father was urgently wanting you, I
hailed the first passing boat. Make haste, dears, your father is
longing for you.'

"So they got on board at once, and the gondola rowed swiftly away. That
is all I know about it, except that the story was a lie, that their
father never sent for them, and that up to a quarter of an hour ago
they had not reached home."



Chapter 5: Finding A Clue.


"This is awful, Matteo," Francis said, when his friend had finished his
story. "What is to be done?"

"That is just the thing, Francisco. What is to be done? My cousin has
been already to the city magistrates, to tell them what has taken
place, and to request their aid in discovering where the girls have
been carried to. I believe that he is going to put up a proclamation,
announcing that he will give a thousand ducats to whomsoever will bring
information which will enable him to recover the girls. That will set
every gondolier on the canals on the alert, and some of them must
surely have noticed a closed gondola rowed by two men, for at this time
of year very few gondolas have their covers on. It seems to be terrible
not to be able to do anything, so I came straight off to tell you."

"You had better send your gondola home, Matteo. It may be wanted. We
will paddle out to the lagoon and talk it over. Surely there must be
something to be done, if we could but think of it.

"This is terrible, indeed, Matteo," he repeated, after they had sat
without speaking for some minutes. "One feels quite helpless and
bewildered. To think that only yesterday evening we were laughing and
chatting with them, and that now they are lost, and in the power of
that villain Mocenigo, who you may be sure is at the bottom of it.

"By the way," he said suddenly, "do you know where he has taken up his
abode?"

"I heard that he was at Botonda, near Chioggia, a week ago, but whether
he is there still I have not the least idea."

"It seems to me that the thing to do is to find him, and keep him in
sight. He will probably have them hidden away somewhere, and will not
go near them for some time, for he will know that he will be suspected,
and perhaps watched."

"But why should he not force Maria to marry him at once?" Matteo said.
"You see, when he has once made her his wife he will be safe, for my
cousin would be driven then to make terms with him for her sake."

"He may try that," Francis said; "but he must know that Maria has
plenty of spirit, and may refuse to marry him, threaten her as he will.
He may think that, after she has been kept confined for some time, and
finds that there is no hope of escape, except by consenting to be his
wife, she may give way. But in any case, it seems to me that the thing
to be done is to find Ruggiero, and to watch his movements."

