entirely of sugar, and covered with sugar-fruit of every shape and hue,
and from time to time the Sultana would pluck off one of these fruits
and taste a little bit of it and give the remainder to the tiny dwarf,
who ate up everything greedily. Here Irene was seized by a black
eunuch--a horrid, pockmarked man, whose upper lip was split right down
so that all his teeth could be seen."

"Just like the present Kizlar-Aga!" cried Musli laughing, "I fancy I can
see him standing before me now!"

"The Moor commanded Irene to fall on her face before the Sultana. Irene
fell on her face accordingly, and while her forehead beat the ground
before the Sultana she muttered to herself the words: 'Holy Mother of
God! protectress of virgins, thou seest me in this place, when I call
upon thee, deliver me!' The Sultana, meanwhile, had commanded her
handmaidens to let down Irene's tresses, and as she stood before her
there covered by her own hair from head to heel, she bade them paint her
face red because it was so pale, and her eyelashes brown. She commanded
them also to salve her hair with fragrant unguents, and to hang chains
of real pearls about her arms and neck. Irene knew not the meaning of
these things. She knew not what they meant to do with her till the
Kizlar-Aga approached her, and said these words to her in a reassuring
tone: 'Rejoice, fortunate damsel! for a great felicity awaits thee. In a
week's time it will be the Feast of Bairam, and the favourite Sultana
has chosen thee from among the other odalisks as a gift for the
Padishah. Rejoice, therefore, I say.' But Irene at these words would
fain have died. And in the meantime the Sultana had placed a large fan
in her hand made entirely of pea-cocks' feathers, and permitted her to
sit down by her side and hold the little dwarf in her lap. At a later
day Irene discovered that this was a mark of supreme condescension.
During the next six days the damsel lived amidst mortal terrors. Her
companions envied her. The damsels of the harem do not love each other,
they can only hate. Every day she beheld the Sultan, whose gentle face
inspired involuntary respect, but the very idea of loving him filled her
soul with horror. The Sultan spent the greater part of his time with his
favourite wife, but it happened sometimes that he cast a handkerchief
towards this or that odalisk, which was a great piece of good fortune
for her, or the reverse--it all depends upon the point of view. The
damsel whom the Grand Seignior seemed to favour the most was a beautiful
blonde Italian girl; on one occasion this beautiful blonde damsel
neglected to cast her eyes down as they chanced to encounter the eyes of
the Sultana. The following day Irene could not see this damsel anywhere,
and on inquiring after her was told by her bedfellow in a whisper that
she had been strangled during the night. And oftentimes at dead of night
the silence would be broken by a shriek from the secret dungeon of the
Seraglio, followed by the sound of something splashing into the water,
and regularly, on the day following every such occurrence, a familiar
face would be missing from the Seraglio. All these victims were
self-confident slave-girls, who had been unable to conceal their joy at
the Sultan's favours, and therefore had been cast into the water. Nobody
ever inquired about them any more."

Janaki shivered all over.

"It is well that this is all a tale," he observed.

But Guel-Bejaze only continued her story.

"At last the Feast of Bairam arrived, and throughout the day all the
cannons on the Bosphorus sent forth their thunders. In the evening the
Sultan came to the Seraglio weary and inclined to relaxation, and then
the Sultana Asseki took Irene by the hand and conducted her to the
Padishah, and presented her to him, together with gold-embroidered
garments, preserved fruits, and other gifts intended for his
delectation. The Grand Seignior regarded the girl tenderly, while she,
like a kid of the flocks offered to a lion in a cage, stood trembling
before him. But when the Sultan seized her hand to draw her towards him
she sighed: 'Blessed Virgin!'--and lo! at these words her face grew
pale, her eyes closed, and she fell to the ground as one dead. This was
not the first time that such a spectacle had been seen in the harem.
Everyone of the damsels brought thither generally commenced with a
fainting-fit. The slave-girls immediately came running up to her, rubbed
her body with fragrant unguents, applied penetrating essences to her
face, let icy-cold water trickle down upon her bosom--and all was
useless! The damsel did not awaken, and lay there like a corpse till the
following morning--in fact, she never stirred from the spot where they
laid her down. Next day the Padishah again summoned her to his presence.
He spoke to her in the most tender manner. He gave her all manner of
beautiful gifts, glittering raiment, necklaces, bracelets, and diamond
aigrettes. The slave-girls, too, censed her all around with stupefying
perfumes, bathed her in warm baths fragrant with ambergris and
spikenard, and gave her fiery potions to drink. But it was all in vain.
At the name of the Blessed Virgin, the blood ceased to flow to her
heart, she fell down, died away, and every resource of ingenuity failed
to arouse her. The same thing happened on the third day likewise. Then
the Sultana Asseki's wrath was kindled greatly against her. She declared
that this was no doing of Allah's as they might suppose. No, it was the
damsel's own evil temper which made her pretend to be dead, and she
immediately commanded that the damsel should be tortured. First of all
they extended her stark naked on the icy-cold marble pavement--not a
sign of life, not a shiver did she give. Then they held her over a slow
fire on a gridiron--she never moved a muscle. Then they sent and sought
for red ants in the garden among the puspang-trees and scattered them
all over her body. Yet the girl never once quaked beneath the stings of
the poisonous insects. Finally they thrust sharp needles down to the
very quicks of her nails, and still the damsel did not stir. Then the
Sultana Asseki, full of fury, seized a whip, and lashed away at the
damsel's body till she could lash no more, yet she could not thrash a
soul into the lifeless body."

"By Allah!" cried Halil, smiting the table with his heavy fist at this
point of the narration, "that Sultana deserves to be sewn up in a
leather sack and cast into the Bosphorus."

"Why, 'tis only a tale, you know," said Guel-Bejaze, stroking mockingly
the chin of worthy Halil Patrona, and then she resumed her story. "The
Sultan commanded that Irene should be expelled from the harem, for he
had no desire to see this living corpse anywhere near him, and the
Sultana gave her as a present to the Padishah's nephew, the son of his
own brother.

"The prince was a pale, handsome youth, as those whom women love much
are generally wont to be. He was kept in a remote part of the Seraglio,
for although every joy of life was his, and he was surrounded by wealth,
pomp, and slave-girls, he was never permitted to quit the Seraglio. The
Sultana herself led Irene to him, thinking that the fine eyes of the
handsome youth would be the best talisman against the enchantment
obsessing the charms of the strange damsel. The pale prince was charmed
with the looks of the girl. He coaxed and flattered. He begged and
implored her not to die away beneath his kisses and embraces. In vain.
The girl swooned at the very first touch, and he who touched her lips
might just as well have touched the lips of a corpse. The prince knelt
down beside her, and implored her with tears to come to herself again.
She heard not and she answered not. At last the fair Sultana Asseki
herself had compassion on his tears and lamentations which produced no
impression on the dead. Her heart bled for him. She bent over the pale
prince, embraced him tenderly, and comforted him with her caresses. And
the prince allowed himself to be comforted, and they rejoiced greatly
together; for of course there was nobody present to see them, for the
senseless damsel on the floor might have been a corpse so far as they
were concerned."

"Hum!" murmured the Berber-Bashi to himself, "this is a thing well worth
remembering."

"On the following day the pale prince made a present of Irene to the
Grand Vizier. The Grand Vizier also rejoiced greatly at the sight of the
damsel; took her into his cellar, showed her there three great vats full
of gold and precious stones, and told her that all these things should
be hers if only she would love him. Then he took and showed her the
multitude of precious ornaments that he had concealed beneath the
flooring of his palace, and promised these to her also. For every kiss
she should give him, he offered her one of his palaces on the shores of
the Sweet Waters, yes, for every kiss a palace."

"I would burn all these palaces to the ground!" cried Halil impetuously.

"Nay, nay, my son, be sensible!" said Janaki. He himself now began to
feel that there was something more than a mere tale in all this.

But the Berber-Bashi pricked up his ears and grew terribly attentive
when mention was made of the hidden treasures of the Grand Vizier.

"The sight of the treasures," resumed the girl, "had no effect upon
Irene. She never failed to invoke the name of the Blessed Virgin
whenever the face of a man drew near to her face, and the Blessed Virgin
always wrought a miracle in her behalf."

"'Tis my belief," said Halil, "that there were no miracles at all in the
matter; but that the girl had so strong a will that by an effort she
made herself dead to all tortures."

"At last they came to a definite decision concerning this slave-girl, it
was resolved to sell her by public auction in the bazaars--to sell her
as a common slave to the highest bidder. And so Irene fell to a poor
hawker who gave his all for her. For a whole month this man left his
slave-girl untouched, and the girl who could not be subdued by torture,
nor the blandishments of great men, nor by treasures, nor by ardent
desire, became very fond of the poor costermonger, and no longer became
as one dead when _his_ burning lips were impressed upon her face."

And with that Guel-Bejaze embraced her husband and kissed him again and
again, and smiled upon him with her large radiant eyes.

"A very pretty story truly!" observed Musli, smacking his lips; "what a
pity there is not more of it!"

"Oh, no regrets, worthy Mussulman, there _is_ more of it!" cried the
Berber-Bashi, rising from his place; "just listen to the sequel of it!
Having had the girl sold by auction in the bazaar, the Padishah bade Ali
Kermesh, his trusty Berber-Bashi, make inquiries and see what happened
to the damsel _after_ the sale. Now the Berber-Bashi knew that the girl
had only pretended to faint, and the Berber-Bashi brought the girl back
to the Seraglio before she had spent a single night alone with her
husband. For I am the Berber-Bashi and thou art Guel-Bejaze, that same
slave-girl going by the name of Irene who feigned to be dead."

Everyone present leaped in terror to his feet except Janaki, who fell
down on his knees before the Berber-Bashi, embraced his knees, and
implored him to treat all that the girl had said as if he had not heard
it.

"We are lost!" whispered the bloodless Guel-Bejaze. The intoxication of
joy and wine had suddenly left her and she was sober once more.

Janaki implored, Musli cursed and swore, but Halil spake never a word.
He held his wife tightly embraced in his arms and he thought within
himself, I would rather allow my hand to be chopped off than let her go.

Janaki promised money and loads of treasure to Ali Kermesh if only he
would hold his tongue, say nothing of what had happened, and let the
girl remain with her husband.

But the Berber-Bashi was inexorable.

"No," said he, "I will take away the girl, and your treasures also shall
be mine. Ye are the children of Death; yea, all of you who are now
drawing the breath of life in this house, for to have heard the secret
that this slave-girl has blabbed out is sufficient to kill anyone thrice
over. I command you, Irene, to take up your veil and follow me, and you
others must remain here till the Debedzik with the cord comes to fetch
you also."

With these words he cast Janaki from him, approached the damsel and
seized her hand. Halil never once relaxed his embrace.

"Come with me!"

"Blessed Mary! Blessed Mary!" moaned the girl.

"Your guardian saints are powerless to help you now, for your husband's
lips have touched you; come with me!"

Then only did Halil speak. His voice was so deep, gruff, and stern, that
those who heard it scarce recognised it for his:

"Leave go of my wife, Ali Kermesh!" cried he.

"Silence thou dog! in another hour thou wilt be hanging up before thine
own gate."

"Once more I ask you--leave go of my wife, Ali Kermesh!"

Instead of answering, the Berber-Bashi would, with one hand, have torn
the wife from her husband's bosom while he clutched hold of Halil with
the other, whereupon Halil brought down his fist so heavily on the skull
of the Berber-Bashi that he instantly collapsed without uttering a
single word.

"What have you done?" cried Janaki in terror. "You have killed the chief
barber of the Sultan!"

"Yes, I rather fancy I have," replied Halil coolly.

Musli rushed towards the prostrate form of Ali Kermesh, felt him all
over very carefully, and then turned towards the hearth where the others
were sitting.

"Dead he is, there is no doubt about it. He's as dead as a door-nail.
Well, Halil, that was a fine blow of yours I must say. By the Prophet!
one does not see a blow like that every day. With your bare hand too! To
kill a man with nothing but your empty fist! If a cannon-ball had
knocked him over he could not be deader than he is."

"But what shall we do now?" cried Janaki, looking around him with
tremulous terror. "The Sultan is sure to send and make inquiries about
his lost Berber-Bashi. It is known that he came here in disguise. The
affair cannot long remain hidden."

"There is no occasion to fear anything," said Musli reassuringly. "Good
counsel is cheap. We can easily find a way out of it. Before the
business comes to light, we will go to the Etmeidan and join the
Janissaries. There let them send and fetch us if they dare, for we shall
be in a perfectly safe place anyhow. Why, don't you remember that only
last year the rebel, Esref Khan, whom the Padishah had been pursuing to
the death, even in foreign lands, hit, at last, upon the idea of
resorting to the Janissaries, and was safer against the fatal silken
cord here, in the very midst of Stambul, than if he had fled all the way
to the Isle of Rhodes for refuge. Let us all become Janissaries, I and
you and Janaki also."

But Janaki kicked vigorously against the proposition.

"You two may go over to the Janissaries if you like, but in the meantime
my daughter and I will make our escape to the Isle of Tenedos and there
await tidings of you. One jar of dates I will take with me, the other
you may divide among the Janissaries; it will put them in a good humour
and make them receive you more amicably."

Halil embraced his wife, kissed her, and wept over her. There was not
much time for leave-taking. The Debedjis who had accompanied the
Berber-Bashi were beginning to grow impatient at the prolonged absence
of their master; they could be heard stamping about around the door.

"Hasten, hasten! we can have too much of this hugging and kissing,"
whispered Musli, lifting one of the jars on to his shoulders.

Yet Halil pressed one more long, long kiss on Guel-Bejaze's trembling
cheek.

"By Allah!" said he, "it shall not be long before we see each other
again."

And thus their ways parted right and left.

Musli conducted Janaki away in one direction, through a subterranean
cellar, whilst Halil fled away across the house-tops, and within a
quarter of an hour the pair of them arrived at the Etmeidan.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Woodcutter.




CHAPTER V.

THE CAMP.


What a noise, what a commotion in the streets of Stambul! The multitude
pours like a stream towards the harbour of the Golden Horn. Young and
old stimulate each other with looks of excitement and enthusiasm. They
stand together at the corners of the streets in tens and twenties, and
tell each other of the great event that has happened. On the Etmeidan,
in front of the Seraglio, in the doors of the mosques, the people are
swarming, and from street to street they accompany the banner-bearing
Duelbendar, who proclaims to the faithful amidst the flourish of trumpets
that Sultan Achmed III. has declared war against Tamasip, Shah of
Persia.

Everywhere faces radiant with enthusiasm, everywhere shouts of martial
fervour.

From time to time a regiment of Janissaries or a band of Albanian
horsemen passes across the street, or escorts the buffaloes that drag
after them the long heavy guns on wheeled carriages. The mob in its
thousands follows them along the road leading to Scutari, where the camp
has already been pitched. For at last, at any rate, the Padishah is
surfeited with so many feasts and illuminations, and after having
postponed the raising of the banner of the Prophet, under all sorts of
frivolous excuses, from the 18th day of Safer (2nd of September) to the
1st day of Rebusler, and from that day again to the Prophet's birthday
ten days later still, the expected, the appointed day is at length
drawing near, and the whole host is assembling beneath the walls of
Scutari, only awaiting the arrival of the Sultan to take ship at
once--the transports are all ready--and hasten to the assistance of the
heroic Kueprilizade on the battlefield.

The whole Bosphorus was a living forest planted with a maze of huge
masts and spreading sails, and a thousand variegated flags flew and
flapped in the morning breeze. The huge line of battle-ships, with their
triple decks and their long rows of oars, looked like hundred-eyed
sea-monsters swimming with hundreds of legs on the surface of the water,
and the booming reverberation of the thunder of their guns was re-echoed
from the broad foreheads of the palaces looking into the Bosphorus.

Everywhere along the sea-front was to be seen an armed multitude;
sparkling swords and lances in thousands flash back the rays of the sun.
The whole of the grass plain round about was planted with tents of
every hue; white tents for the chief muftis, bright green tents for the
viziers, scarlet tents for the kiayaks, dark blue tents for the great
officers of state, the Emirs, the Mecca, Medina, and Stambul
justiciaries, the Defterdars, and the Nishandji; lilac-coloured tents
for the Ulemas, bright blue tents for the Muederesseks, azure-blue tents
for the Ciaus-Agas, and dark green designates the tent of the Emir Alem,
the bearer of the sacred standard. And high above them all on a hillock
towers the orange-coloured pavilion of the Padishah, with gold and
purple hangings, and two and three fold horse-tails planted in front of
the entrance.

At sunset yesterday there was not a trace of this vast camp, all night
long this city of tents was a-building, and at dawn of day there it
stands all ready like the creation of a magician's wand!

The plain is occupied by the Spahis, the finest, smartest horsemen of
the whole host; along the sea-front are ranged the topidjis, with their
rows and rows of cannons. Other detachments of these gunners are
distributed among the various hillocks. On the wings of the host are
placed the Albanian cavalry, the Tartars, and the Druses of Horan. The
centre of the host belongs of right to the flower, the kernel of the
imperial army--the haughty Janissaries.

And certainly they seemed to be very well aware that they were the cream
of the host, and that therefore it was not lawful for any other division
of the army to draw near them, much less mingle with them, unless it
were a few _delis_, whom they permitted to roam up and down their ranks
full of crazy exaltation.

The whole host is full of the joy of battle, and if, from time to time,
fierce shouts and thunderous murmurings arise from this or that
battalion, that only means that they are rejoicing at the tidings of the
declaration of war: the war-ships express their satisfaction by loud
salvoes.

Sultan Achmed, meanwhile, is engaged in his morning devotions, day by
day he punctually observes this pious practice.

The previous night he did not spend in the harem, but shut himself up
with his viziers and counsellors in that secret chamber of the Divan,
which is roofed over with a golden cupola. Grave were their
