"We slide along," said another; "we're afraid to walk at first. I went
on tiptoe for the first three days."

"Well, I went on my hands and knees the day it was so rough," said a
third. "A fellow has to learn to walk on any part of his anatomy in
this ship when the sea is rough."

The Vesuvius has been described as a ship which fights and then runs
away. That is, she fires three shells and then takes herself out of
the range of an enemy's fire.

I think this is a good place to tell you about a few more of the odd
ships that belong to Uncle Sam's navy, for no nation beside ours has
anything like them.

The Katahdin is an armored ram which relies upon her sharp prow to
disable an adversary. Her armament is only four six-pounder rapid-fire
guns.

Then there is a fleet of vessels whose duty it is to repair the
damages that ships receive in battle, supply fuel and water to
fighting ships, and to care for the wounded. All of these are novel
additions to the navy, but are practical auxiliaries in modern naval
operations.

The Vulcan is one of the repair ships. It is, in fact, a navigable
machine shop, fitted with steam tools for executing any work in metal.
It carries duplicates of nearly every article belonging to a modern
warship; and when you understand that some of these contain nearly
seventy sets of engines, you can easily see the advantage of having a
repair ship attached to a fleet.

Then there are the refrigerating ships, or "pantries," as the sailors
call them. Their mission is to assist in feeding the navy. They are
most valuable additions to a fleet, for they supply fresh meat and
vegetables to improve "Jack's" diet of "salt horse."

Next come the ships that supply fresh water to the crews of our
warships. These are fitted up with distilling apparatus, which
converts salt water into fresh. The Iris, as one of these is named,
belongs to the "sweet water squadron." The water consumption of a
vessel is enormous. A battleship will use seven thousand gallons every
day, which gives you an idea of the work such vessels as the Iris have
to perform.

Now we come to such ships as the Solace and the Relief. These are
hospital ships, and are provided with every appliance and convenience
to be found in a modern hospital, including X-ray outfits to aid in
locating bullets, a microscopic department, and a carbonator for
supplying mineral waters. The hull of the Solace is painted white,
with a wide stripe of green along the sides, and, as befits her
mission, carries no guns or weapons of any kind. Hospital ships fly
the "Red Cross" flag from their mastheads.

[Illustration: (Ships at sea)]

Our ships could guard Santiago and fire at the forts, but our naval
officers had good reasons for thinking that they could not take the
city unless our soldiers were on shore to help in different ways. Our
ships could not go safely into the harbor till the "mines" under the
water had been removed; the "mines" could not be removed till the
forts on the cliffs had been taken. So now the time had come for our
soldiers to go to Cuba.




CHAPTER VII.

OUR ARMY GOES TO CUBA.


Our soldiers--thousands of "Regulars" and thousands and thousands of
"Volunteers"--were waiting in camps in the eastern and southern parts
of the United States, in order to be ready to start for Cuba at short
notice. Thousands of them were never ordered to go, but stayed in camp
during all the war. Still, they were ready to go if needed.

About the middle of June more than 16,000 soldiers, under General
Shafter, sailed from Tampa, on the west coast of Florida, for the
southeastern shore of Cuba. It was hard work to ship so many men, and
2,000 horses and mules, and food, and all the things needed for war.
It took one week to load the ships. How many ships were needed for
this big "excursion party"? Thirty-four. Do you think our soldiers had
a pleasant voyage? They had not. They were crowded together, the
weather was very hot, some of the vessels were old and slow, and it
was six days before our Army drew near our Navy at Santiago, and
waited till plans were made for further movements.

Perhaps you are wondering where the Cubans were all this time, and
what they were doing. As our country was trying to help them, did not
the Cubans now come forward to join our forces? Yes. Several times
brave Americans had made their way in secret to distant parts of Cuba,
had met the Cuban generals, had talked with them, and brought back
messages. And now Admiral Sampson came out in a small boat to meet our
soldiers, and he took General Shafter on shore, a few miles west of
Santiago, to hold an important council with a number of Cuban
generals. The Cuban generals, chief of whom were General Garcia and
General Rabi, told our officers a good deal about the country, the
roads, etc., and planned to unite the Cuban troops with ours.

[Illustration: A Volunteer.]

When General Shafter returned, he ordered the soldiers to sail on
fifteen miles beyond Santiago, to a point called Daiquiri. This was
their landing-place. It was harder to land in Cuba than it had been to
leave Florida. Admiral Sampson sent some of his ships to fire upon
the shore and drive away the Spaniards, and he also sent small boats
to take our soldiers from the ships to the land. There were not boats
enough, so the landing was slow work. There was great trouble in
getting the horses and mules to swim ashore. But it takes less time to
unpack than to pack, and after four days our Army was on shore.

Our men were in a rough part of the country. Steep hills were
everywhere, the valleys were narrow, the roads were more like ditches.
Thick underbrush, prickly bushes and tall grasses grew in many places.
A number of men were set to work making roads, so that the wagons with
the army supplies could push on. It was the wet season, and rain fell
every day. Sometimes the streams would rise quickly and flood the new
roads. When the rain was not falling the air was hot, and a steam
seemed to rise from the ground. It seemed as if our men had no chance
at all.

Spanish soldiers had been sent out from Santiago, and were now busy
building log forts on hills a few miles from our camps, and piling up
stones and branches of trees to make mounds, and putting up fences of
barbed wire. In such places of shelter the Spaniards waited for our
troops to march forward.

You must understand that the city that our troops wanted to reach was
Santiago, but between them and it lay this rough country, where
marching would be so hard, and where the Spaniards had forts on some
of the hilltops.

[Illustration: Landing Troops at Daiquiri.]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE BATTLE OF LAS GUASIMAS.


A Number of our officers thought it would be best not to go forward
till some roads had been made, so that the army wagons could be sent
on; but General Shafter thought it would be best to march on at once.
He feared that after a week or ten days in that climate many of our
men might have fever and be unfit for service. So, even before all the
men had landed, General Shafter ordered the first ones to go forward
and drive the Spaniards from a place near Siboney. Thus, some of our
troops began their march just after landing from the boats. About two
hundred Cuban soldiers went with them, to lead the way and watch for
the hiding places of the Spaniards.

The troops reached the place in the evening, but found that the
Spaniards had left it and gone about three miles further westward to a
stronger fort. Our men rested all night, and before daylight the next
morning--Friday, June 24th--they marched on to hunt the enemy.

Now I must tell you something about these soldiers who were going to
fight their first battle in Cuba. There were nearly a thousand men;
some were "Regulars," others were "Volunteers." They belonged to the
Cavalry division of the Army--the soldiers who go on horses. But for
this first work in Cuba they had to go on foot, without their horses.

The "Volunteers" numbered about five hundred. They belonged to a
regiment called the "Rough Riders," and a strange regiment it was.
Most of these men were from the prairies and cattle-ranches in the
West; some were "cowboys," some were Indians. The others in the
regiment were young men from the East--business men, college men, sons
of rich men; all were brave, hardy fellows, fond of out-door life,
fond of excitement, not afraid of work. These young men had been
trained for the war by a man who was now one of their officers,
Lieutenant Colonel Roosevelt. He had given up a high position in order
to serve his country in this way. People in the United States laughed
when this company of "Rough Riders" was formed, and said that the
"cowboys" and Indians would not obey orders, and that the others would
not stand the hardships of war. But the people in the United States
did not laugh after the battle of Las Guasimas.

That June morning it was thought best to separate and march by two
roads, meeting near the Spanish fort. The way of the "Rough Riders"
led them up steep hills. Thick bushes grew all around, so that the men
could hardly see how to go; the sun rose, and the heat was so awful
that some of the men dropped down, faint and sick. Suddenly, from
among the trees and bushes came bullets, and the men began to fall,
wounded and dead. The Spaniards could not be seen at all, and they
were using smokeless powder that left no trace in the air. But our men
heard the whizz of the bullets, and felt their sting. The "Rough
Riders," as they pressed on quickly toward the fort, fired again and
again into the bushes. At last they met their comrades, who had come
by the other road and who had also had a hard fight, and all now
toiled up the hill, firing as they went. The Spaniards had to retreat,
and could now be seen by our men. The top of the hill was reached at
last, the fort was taken, and the Spaniards fled toward Santiago.

This hard fight, which lasted less than two hours, is called the
Battle of Las Guasimas, from the name of the poisonous kind of trees
in the thicket where the "Rough Riders" were shot down.

[Illustration: Last Stand of the Spaniards at Las Guasimas.]

It would require volumes to tell the bravery and heroism of the men
who fought the Spaniards at Las Guasimas. Every one entered into it
with enthusiasm. All stood their ground while the Spanish bullets were
singing around them, and then, when they were allowed to do so, poured
volley after volley into the brush in the direction from which the
shots came. Colonel Wood walked along his lines as coolly as though on
parade. Lieutenant-Colonel Roosevelt led his men through the brush
when the air seemed full of bullets. Captain Capron, the fifth from
father to son in the United States army, fell early in the fight, but
before he was hit by a Spanish bullet he used his revolver whenever he
saw a Spanish head.

[Illustration: Captain Allyn K. Capron.]

Everybody had confidence in their officers and in themselves. If they
were hit they fought on if the hurt was not mortal. If they could not
stand, they propped themselves against trees, and kept on firing as
the line went forward. Men fought with their arms in slings and with
bandaged heads.

Lieutenant Thomas, of Captain Capron's troop, and who was wounded
himself during that sweltering June day, tells some interesting
stories of the battle. He comes of a fighting family. His father
fought in the Civil War, his grandfather was killed in the Mexican
War, and three ancestors fell in the war of the Revolution.

"I am sorry that I did not have a chance to see more of the fighting,
but what I saw was of the warmest kind. On the 24th of June I was
with Troop L, under Captain Capron. We formed the advance guard, and
went out on a narrow trail toward Siboney. On the way we met some of
the men of the Twenty-second Infantry, who told us we were close to
the enemy, as they had heard them at work during the night. Captain
Capron, with six men, had gone on ahead of us and had come across the
body of a dead Cuban. Ten or fifteen minutes later Private Isbell saw
a Spaniard in the brush ahead of him and fired. This was the first
shot from our troop, and the Spaniard fell dead. Isbell himself was
shot seven times that day, but managed to walk back to our field
hospital, which was fully four miles in the rear.

"It has been said that we were ambushed, but this is not so. Poor
Captain Capron received his death wound early in the fight, and while
he was lying on the ground dying, he said: 'Let me see it out; I want
to see it all.' He lived an hour and fifteen minutes after the bullet
struck him, and up to the moment he fell had acted fearlessly, and had
exposed himself all the time to the enemy's fire.

"I was then next in command of the troop, and I noticed that some of
our men lay too closely together as they were deploying. I went down
the line ordering them to their proper distances, and as I passed
along, poor Hamilton Fish was lying, mortally wounded, a few feet from
me. When he heard my voice, Fish raised himself on his elbow and said:
'I am wounded; I am wounded.' That was the last I saw of him in life.
He was very brave and was very popular among the men of the troops.

"Sergeant Joe Kline, of Troop L, was wounded early that day, and was
ordered to the rear with several other wounded men. On his way to the
rear, Kline discovered a Spanish sharpshooter in a tree and shot at
him. The Spaniard fell dead, and Kline picked up a silver-mounted
revolver, which fell from the man's clothes, as a souvenir, which he
highly prizes. Several of the Spanish sharpshooters had picked up
cast-off clothing of the American soldiers, and wore them while they
were at their deadly work.

"Sergeant Bell, of our troop, was badly injured from an exploding
shell while on the firing line. He was ordered to the rear, but
quickly came back again. He was ordered away a second time, but a few
minutes later he was at the front again, firing away. For a third time
he was sent back, and once more he insisted on going to the front, and
when the other men saw him they greeted him with rousing cheers, and
he fought till the end of the day, although painfully wounded in the
back.

[Illustration: Col. Theodore Roosevelt.]

"While lying in the hospital, I heard a young man named Hall, who
belonged to the Twenty-second Infantry, tell a story which will
illustrate better than anything else the accuracy of the American
shooters. He and five other men had crossed a bend in a road to get
some water in their canteens. As they got into the open they were
attacked by thirty-two Spanish cavalrymen, who cut them up badly with
their sabres. Hall was the only one who was not killed. He was badly
trampled by the horses, and had some sabre wounds on his body. Later
on, Hall was picked up by some comrades to whom he told his story.
These men located the Spaniards who had done the work and opened fire
on them. When they had ceased firing there were thirty live horses,
two dead ones, and thirty-two dead Spaniards. This was pretty good
shooting, wasn't it?"

Many heroic deeds were done in the Battle of Las Guasimas, by the
"Regulars" as well as by the "Hough Eiders." Suffering was bravely
borne. Sixteen of our men were killed, and more than fifty wounded.
Yet all our troops took heart from the victory of that day, and began
to think it would be easy to go on driving the Spaniards back to
Santiago, and then to take that city. But it did not prove to be easy.

There is a little railroad which runs from some mines near Santiago to
the pier at Daiquiri. Before the landing was made, the Spaniards were
driven from the coast by the shells of the American fleet. Before they
hurried away they attempted to disable a locomotive which had steam
up. They took off the connecting rods, throttle gear and other
important parts of the machinery and hid them behind fences and other
places where they thought they would not be found. Then they blocked
the piston guides and ran off. But there were plenty of engineers and
mechanics among the American soldiers, and when they saw the condition
the locomotive was in they started to search for the missing parts.
Most of these were found and the machinery was cleverly patched up.
Then they knocked the blocks of wood out of the slides and threw fresh
coal into the firebox, and in a very short time the locomotive was
pulling a train of ore cars loaded with soldiers.

[Illustration: (Soldiers at rest)]




CHAPTER IX.

EL CANEY AND SAN JUAN.


For a few days after the battle of Las Guasimas no great event took
place. There was no fighting. The other troops were making their way
up from the coast, but the roads were so narrow and so bad that
progress was slow. The army wagons had great trouble to get on, and
many supplies were left at the coast or on the boats, because there
was no proper way of taking them forward. The heavy cannon were hauled
a few miles from the coast and then most of them were left, though
they would have been a great help to our Army, and should have been
taken to the front. It was soon found that many of the doctors'
supplies--the things needed in taking care of the sick and
wounded--had not been taken off the ships that brought the men from
Florida. It was thought by some of our men that now more effort should
be made to clear roads through the woods and thick bushes, but not
much was done. A great deal of fault has been found with the way
things were managed at this time. It seems as if some of the officers
were very much to blame. There need not have been so many men killed
in the battles that followed, or so much suffering and sickness in our
Army, if all our officers had done their duty. Meanwhile, the
Spaniards went on improving their forts on the hills a few miles away.

Nearly two thousand more of our soldiers landed in Cuba about this
time, and more were expected soon.

But I must tell you about another Army that arrived in this part of
Cuba during these days--a very small one beside General Shafter's
Army, but one that did mighty work. Have you ever heard of the Red
Cross Society? This is a society that nurses the sick and wounded. It
has members in all parts of the world. Its chief officer is Miss Clara
Barton, whose work has been so great and noble that it has made the
whole world better. The badge, or flag of the Red Cross Army is a red
cross on a white ground.

[Illustration: Miss Clara Barton.]

The Red Cross Army takes no part in war except to help those who need
help. It does not know the difference between friend and foe. Its work
is a work of love and mercy. No soldiers with any honor would ever
fire upon a tent that has the Red Cross flag floating over it, or harm
any person wearing the Red Cross badge. Yet, to the awful disgrace of
the Spaniards, it is known that some of them, hidden in trees and
bushes, fired upon doctors and nurses who were taking care of the
wounded on the battlefields near Santiago.

This was the new Army, whose soldiers wear the sign of the Red Cross,
that reached this part of Cuba now, and put up a large tent. In this
tent all help that could be given was given, to Spaniards, Cubans and
Americans. There were also "floating hospitals"--ships fitted up as
hospitals. They proved to be great blessings to our Army and Navy.

You will remember that the Red Cross Society took great quantities of
supplies to the suffering Cubans in the early part of 1898. Its work
in Cuba was just well-established when hostilities broke out between
the United States and Spain, and while the members who were on the
ground wanted to stay and carry on the work of relief, General Blanco
told them it was best for them to leave the island. They did so
reluctantly, after doing all they could to insure the proper
distribution of the supplies they left behind them. The result was
that the food and medicines intended for the Cubans were used to
sustain the Spanish army.

When the blockade of Cuban ports was instituted, the Red Cross Society
was asked by the Government to take charge of the steamship State of
Texas which had been loaded with provisions, clothing, medical and
hospital supplies by the generous people of the United States. Miss
Clara Barton instantly responded, but the ship was not allowed to go
to Cuba under a flag of truce, because Acting Rear-Admiral Sampson
would not allow it. He said he was afraid the supplies would fall into
the hands of the Spanish army. But the Red Cross Society would not
give up its errand of mercy, and when the United States army invaded
