falsity or treachery; that which thou hast laid to my charge regarding
the Earl of Carrick, I shrink not, care not to acknowledge; yet, Edward
of England, I am no traitor!"

"Ha! thou specious orator, reconcile the two an thou canst! Thou art a
scholar of deep research and eloquence profound we have heard. Speak on,
then, in heaven's name!" He flung himself back on his cushions as he
spoke, for, despite his wrath, his suspicions, there was that in the
calm, chivalric bearing of the earl that appealed not in vain to one who
had so long been the soul of chivalry himself.

The tone in which his sovereign spoke was softened, though his words
were bitter, and Gloucester at once relaxed from his proud and cold
reserve; kneeling before him, he spoke with fervor and impassioned
truth--

"Condemn me not unheard, my gracious sovereign," he said. "I speak not
to a harsh and despotic king, who brings his faithful subjects to the
block at the first whisper of evil or misguided conduct cast to their
charge; were Edward such Gloucester would speak not, hope not for
justice at his hands; but to thee, my liege, to thee, to whom all true
knights may look up as to the minor of all that knight should be--the
life and soul of chivalry--to thee, the noblest warrior, the truest
knight that ever put lance in rest--to thee, I say, I am no traitor; and
appeal but to the spirit of chivalry actuating thine own heart to acquit
or condemn me, as it listeth. Hear me, my liege. Robert of Carrick and
myself were sworn brothers from the first hour of our entrance together
upon life, as pages, esquires, and finally, as knights, made such by
thine own royal hand; brothers in arms, in dangers, in victories, in
defeat; aye, and brothers--more than brothers--in mutual fidelity and
love; to receive life, to be rescued from captivity at each other's
hand, to become equal sharers of whatever honors might be granted to the
one and not the other. Need my sovereign be reminded that such
constitutes the ties of brothers in arms, and such brothers were Robert
of Carrick and Gilbert of Gloucester. There came a rumor that the
instigations of a base traitor had poisoned your grace's ear against one
of these sworn brothers, threatening his liberty, if not his life; that
which was revealed, its exact truth or falsehood, might Gloucester pause
to list or weigh? My liege, thou knowest it could not be. A piece of
money and a pair of spurs was all the hint, the warning, that he dared
to give, and it was given, and its warning taken; and the imperative
duty the laws of chivalry, of honor, friendship, all alike demanded
done. The brother by the brother saved! Was Gloucester, then, a traitor
to his sovereign, good my liege?"

"Say first, my lord, how Gloucester now will reconcile these widely
adverse duties, how comport himself, if duty to his liege and sovereign
call on him to lift his sword against his brother?" demanded Edward,
raising himself on his elbow, and looking on the kneeling nobleman with
eyes which seemed to have recovered their flashing light to penetrate
his soul. Wrath itself appeared to have subsided before this calm yet
eloquent appeal, which in that age could scarcely have been resisted
without affecting the honor of the knight to whom it was addressed.

An expression of suffering, amounting almost to anguish, took the place
of energy and fervor on the noble countenance of Gloucester, and his
voice, which had never once quivered or failed him in the height of
Edward's wrath, now absolutely shook with the effort to master his
emotion. Twice he essayed to speak ere words came; at length--

"With Robert of Carrick Gilbert of Gloucester was allied as brother, my
liege," he said. "With Robert the rebel, Robert the would-be king, the
daring opposer of my sovereign, Gloucester can have naught in common. My
liege, as a knight and gentleman, I have done my duty fearlessly,
openly; as fearlessly, as openly, as your grace's loyal liegeman, fief,
and subject, in the camp and in the court, in victory or defeat, against
all manner or ranks of men, be they friends or foes; to my secret heart
I am thine, and thine alone. In proof of which submission, my royal
liege, lest still in your grace's judgment Gloucester be not cleared
from treachery, behold I resign alike my sword and coronet to your royal
hands, never again to be resumed, save at my sovereign's bidding."

His voice became again firm ere he concluded, and with the same
respectful deference yet manly pride which had marked his bearing
throughout, he laid his sheathed sword and golden coronet at his
sovereign's feet, and then rising steadily and unflinchingly, returned
Edward's searching glance, and calmly awaited his decision.

"By St. Edward! Baron of Gloucester," he exclaimed, in his own tone of
kingly courtesy, mingled with a species of admiration he cared not to
conceal, "thou hast fairly challenged us to run a tilt with thee, not of
sword and lance, but of all knightly and generous courtesy. I were no
true knight to condemn, nor king to mistrust thee; yet, of a truth, the
fruit of thy rash act might chafe a cooler mood than ours. Knowest thou
Sir John Comyn is murdered--murdered by the arch traitor thou hast saved
from our wrath?"

"I heard it, good my liege," calmly returned Gloucester. "Robert of
Carrick was no temper to pass by injuries, aggravated, traitorous
injuries, unavenged."

"And this is all thou sayest!" exclaimed Edward, his wrath once again
gaining dominion. "Wouldst thou defend this base deed on plea, forsooth,
that Comyn was a traitor? Traitor--and to whom?"

"To the man that trusted him, my liege; to him he falsely swore to
second and to aid. To every law of knighthood and of honor I say he was
a traitor, and deserved his fate."

"And this to thy sovereign, madman? To us, whose dignity and person
have been insulted, lowered, trampled on! By all the saints, thou hast
tempted us too far! What ho, there, guards! Am I indeed so old and
witless," he muttered, sinking back again upon the couch from which he
had started in the moment of excitement, "as so soon to forget a
knightly nobleness, which in former days would have knitted my very soul
to his? Bah! 'tis this fell disease that spoke, not Edward. Away with
ye, sir guards, we want ye not," he added, imperatively, as they
approached at his summons. "And thou, sir earl, take up thy sword, and
hence from my sight a while;--answer not, but obey. I fear more for mine
own honor than thou dost for thy head. We neither disarm nor restrain
thee, for we trust thee still; but away with thee, for on our kingly
faith, thou hast tried us sorely."

Gloucester flung himself on his knee beside his sovereign, his lips upon
the royal hand, which, though scarcely yielded to him, was not withheld,
and hastily resuming his sword and coronet, with a deep reverence,
silently withdrew.

The king looked after him, admiration and fierce anger struggling for
dominion alike on his countenance as in his heart, and then sternly and
piercingly he scanned the noble crowd, who, hushed into a silence of
terror as well as of extreme interest during the scene they had beheld,
now seemed absolutely to shrink from the dark, flashing orbs of the
king, as they rested on each successively, as if the accusation of _lip_
would follow that of eye, and the charge of treason fall
indiscriminately on all; but, exhausted from the passion to which he had
given vent, Edward once more stretched himself on his cushions, and
merely muttered--

"Deserved his fate--a traitor. Is Gloucester mad--or worse, disloyal?
No; that open brow and fearless eye are truth and faithfulness alone. I
will _not_ doubt him; 'tis but his lingering love for that foul traitor,
Bruce, which I were no true knight to hold in blame. But that murder,
that base murder--insult alike to our authority, our realm--by every
saint in heaven, it shall be fearfully avenged, and that madman rue the
day he dared fling down the gauntlet of rebellion!" and as he spoke, his
right hand instinctively grasped the hilt of his sword, and half drew it
from its sheath.

"Madman, in very truth, my liege," said Aymer de Valence, Earl of
Pembroke, who, high in favor with his sovereign, alone ventured to
address him; "as your grace will believe, when I say not only hath he
dared defy thee by the murder of Comyn, but has had the presumptuous
folly to enact the farce of coronation, taking upon himself all the
insignia of a king."

"How! what sayst thou, De Valence," returned Edward, again starting up,
"coronation--king? By St. Edward! this passeth all credence. Whence
hadst thou this witless news?"

"From sure authority, my liege, marvellous as they seem. These papers,
if it please your grace to peruse, contain matters of import which
demand most serious attention."

"Anon, anon, sir earl!" answered Edward, impatiently, as Pembroke,
kneeling, laid the papers on a small table of ivory which stood at the
monarch's side. "Tell me more of this strange farce; a king, ha! ha!
Does the rebel think 'tis but to put a crown upon his head and a sceptre
in his hand that makes the monarch--a king, forsooth. And who officiated
at this right solemn mockery? 'Twas, doubtless, a goodly sight!"

"On my knightly faith, my liege, strangely, yet truly, 'twas a ceremony
regally performed, and, save for numbers, regally attended."

"Thou darest not tell me so!" exclaimed the king, striking his clenched
hand fiercely on the table. "I tell thee thou darest not; 'tis a false
tale, a lie thrust upon thee to rouse thy spirit but to laugh at. De
Valence, I tell thee 'tis a thing that cannot be! Scotland is laid too
low, her energies are crushed; her best and bravest lying in no
bloodless graves. Who is there to attend this puppet king, save the few
we miss? who dared provoke our wrath by the countenance of such a deed?
Who would dare tempt our fury by placing a crown on the rebel's head?
I tell thee they have played thee false--it cannot be!"

"Thy valor hath done much, my gracious liege," returned Pembroke, "far
more than ever king hath done before; but pardon me, your grace, the
_people_ of Scotland are not yet crushed, they lie apparently in peace,
till a chief capable of guiding, lordly in rank and knightly in war,
ariseth, and then they too stand forth. Yet what are they? they do but
nominally swell the rebel's court: they do but _seem_ a multitude, which
needs but thy presence to disperse. He cannot, if he dare, resist thee."

"And wherefore should these tidings so disturb you grace?" interposed
the Earl of Hereford, a brave, blunt soldier, like his own charger,
snuffing the scent of war far off. "We have but to bridle on our
harness, and we shall hear no more of solemn farces like to this. Give
but the word, my sovereign, and these ignoble rebels shall be cut off to
a man, by an army as numerous and well appointed as any that have yet
followed your grace to victory; 'tis a pity they have but to encounter
traitors and rebels, instead of knightly foes," continued the High
Constable of England.

"Perchance Robert of Carrick deems the assumption of king will provoke
your grace to combat even more than his traitorous rebellion, imagining,
in his madness, the title of king may make ye equals," laughingly
observed the Earl of Arundel; and remarks and opinions of similar import
passed round, but Edward, who had snatched the papers as he ceased to
speak, and was now deeply engrossed in their contents, neither replied
to nor heeded them. Darker and darker grew the frown upon his brow; his
tightly compressed lip, his heaving chest betraying the fearful passion
that agitated him; but when he spoke, there was evidently a struggle for
that dignified calmness which in general distinguished him, though ever
and anon burst forth the undisguised voice of wrath.

"'Tis well, 'tis very well," he said. "These wild Scots would tempt us to
the utmost, and they shall be satisfied. Ah! my lords of Buchan and
Fife, give ye good morrow. What think ye of these doings amidst your
countrymen, bethink ye they have done well?"

"Well, as relates to their own ruin, aye, very well, my liege; they act
but as would every follower of the murderer Bruce," replied Buchan,
harshly and sullenly.

"They are mad, stark mad, your highness; the loss of a little blood may
bring them to their senses," rejoined the more volatile Fife.

"And is it thus ye think, base, villainous traitors as ye are, leagued
with the rebel band in his coronation? My Lord of Chester, attach them
of high treason."

"What means your grace?" exclaimed both noblemen at once, but in very
different accents, "Of what are we charged, and who dare make this lying
accusation?"

"Are ye indeed so ignorant?" replied the king, jibingly. "Know ye not
that Isabella, Countess of Buchan, and representative, in the absence
of her brother, of the earldom of Fife, hath so dared our displeasure as
to place the crown on the rebel's head, and vow him homage?"

"Hath she indeed dared so to do? By heaven, she shall rue this!" burst
wrathfully from Buchan, his swarthy countenance assuming a yet swarthier
aspect. "My liege, I swear to thee, by the Holy Cross, I knew no more of
this than did your grace. Thinkest thou I would aid and abet the cause
of one not merely a rebel and a traitor, but the foul murderer of a
Comyn--one at whose hands, by the sword's point, have I sworn to demand
my kinsman, and avenge him?"

"And wherefore did Isabella of Buchan take upon herself this deed, my
liege, but because the only male descendant of her house refused to give
his countenance or aid to this false earl? Because Duncan of Fife was
neither a rebel himself nor gave his aid to rebels, On the honor of a
knight, my liege, I know naught of this foul deed."

"It may be, it may be," answered Edward, impatiently. "We will see to
it, and condemn ye not unheard; but in times like these, when traitors
and rebels walk abroad and insult us to our very teeth, by St. Edward,
our honor, our safety demands the committal of the suspected till they
be cleared. Resign your swords to my Lord of Chester, and confine
yourselves to your apartments. If ye be innocent, we will find means to
repay you for the injustice we have done; if not, the axe and the block
shall make short work. Begone!"

Black as a thunderbolt was the scowl that lowered over the brow of
Buchan, as he sullenly unclasped his sword and gave it into the Lord
Constable's hand; while with an action of careless recklessness the Earl
of Fife followed his example, and they retired together, the one
scowling defiance on all who crossed his path, the other jesting and
laughing with each and all.

"I would not give my best falcon as pledge for the Countess of Buchan's
well-doing, an she hath done this without her lord's connivance,"
whispered the Prince of Wales to one of his favorites, with many of whom
he had been conversing, in a low voice, as if his father's wrathful
accents were not particularly grateful to his ear.

"Nor would I pledge a hawk for her safety, if she fall into his grace's
hands, whether with her lord's consent or no," replied the young
nobleman, laughing. "Your royal father is fearfully incensed."

"Better destroy them root and branch at once," said the prince, who,
like all weak minds, loved any extremity better than a protracted
struggle. "Exterminate with fire and sword; ravage the land till there
be neither food for man nor beast; let neither noble nor serf remain,
and then, perchance, we shall hear no more of Scotland. On my faith, I
am sick of the word."

"Not so the king, my royal lord," returned his companion. "See how
eagerly he talks to my lords of Pembroke and Hereford. We shall have our
sovereign yet again at our head."

And it was even as he said. The king, with that strong self-command
which disease alone could in any way cause to fail, now conquering alike
his bitter disappointment and the fury it engendered, turned his whole
thought and energy towards obtaining the downfall of his insolent
opponents at one stroke; and for that purpose, summoning around him the
brave companions of former campaigns, and other officers of state, he
retired with them to his private closet to deliberate more at length on
the extraordinary news they had received, and the best means of nipping
the rebellion in the bud.




CHAPTER VII.


The evening of this eventful day found the Scottish earls seated
together in a small apartment of one of the buildings adjoining the
royal palace, which in the solemn seasons we have enumerated was always
crowded with guests, who were there feasted and maintained at the king's
expense during the whole of their stay. Inconveniences in their private
quarters were little heeded by the nobles, who seldom found themselves
there, save for the purpose of a few hours sleep, and served but to
enhance by contrast the lavish richness and luxury which surrounded them
in the palace and presence of their king; but to the Earls of Buchan and
Fife the inconveniences of their quarters very materially increased the
irritability and annoyance of their present situation. Fife had
stretched himself on two chairs, and leaning his elbows on the broad
shelf formed by the small casement, cast many wistful glances on the
street below, through which richly-attired gallants, both on foot and
horseback, were continually passing. He was one of those frivolous
little minds with whom the present is all in all, caring little for the
past, and still less for the future. It was no marvel, therefore, that
he preferred the utter abandonment of his distracted country for the
luxury and ease attending the court and camp of Edward, to the great
dangers and little recompense attending the toils and struggles of a
patriot. The only emotion of any weight with him was the remembrance of
and desire of avenging petty injuries, fancying and aggravating them
when, in fact, none was intended.

Very different was the character of the Earl of Buchan; morose, fierce,
his natural hardness of disposition unsoftened by one whisper of
chivalry, although educated in the best school of knighthood, and
continually the follower of King Edward, he adhered to him first, simply
because his estates in England were far more to his taste than those in
Scotland, towards which he felt no filial tie; and soon after his
marriage, repugnance to his high-minded and richly-gifted countess,
which ever seemed a reproach and slur upon himself, kept him still more
aloof, satisfied that the close retirement in which she lived, the
desert and rugged situation of his castle, would effectually debar her
from using that influence he knew she possessed, and keep her wholly and
solely his own; a strange kind of feeling, when, in reality, the wide
contrast between them made her an object of dislike, only to be
accounted for by the fact that a dark, suspicious, jealous temper was
ever at work within him.

"Now, do but look at that fellow's doublet, Comyn. Look, how gay they
pass below, and here am I, with my new, richly-broidered suit, with
which I thought to brave it with the best of them--here am I, I say,
pent up in stone walls like a caged goldfinch, 'stead of the
entertainment I had pictured; 'tis enough to chafe the spirit of a
saint."

"And canst thou think of such things now, thou sorry fool?" demanded
Buchan, sternly, pausing in his hurried stride up and down the narrow
precincts of the chamber; "hast thou no worthier subject for
contemplation?"

"None, save thy dutiful wife's most dutiful conduct, Comyn, which,
being the less agreeable of the two, I dismiss the first I owe her small
thanks for playing the representative of my house; methinks, her
imprisonment would better serve King Edward's cause and ours too."

"Aye, imprisonment--imprisonment for life," muttered the earl, slowly.
"Let but King Edward restore me my good sword, and he may wreak his
vengeance on her as he listeth. Not all the castles of Scotland, the
arms of Scottish men, dare guard a wife against her husband; bitterly
shall she rue this deed."

"And thy son, my gentle kinsman, what wilt thou do with him, bethink
thee? Thou wilt find him as great a rebel as his mother; I have ever
told thee thou wert a fool to leave him so long with his brainstruck
mother."

"She hath not, she dared not bring him with her to the murderer of his
kinsman--Duncan of Fife, I tell thee she dare not; but if she hath, why
he is but a child, a mere boy, incapable of forming judgment one way or
the other."

"Not so much a child as thou thinkest, my good lord; some sixteen years
or so have made a stalwart warrior ere this. Be warned; send off a
trusty messenger to the Tower of Buchan, and, without any time for
warning, bring that boy as the hostage of thy good faith and loyalty to
Edward; thou wilt thus cure him of his patriotic fancies, and render
thine interest secure, and as thou desirest to reward thy dutiful
partner, thou wilt do it effectually; for, trust me, that boy is the
very apple of her eye, in her affections her very doting-place."

"Jest not, Duncan, or by all the saints, thou wilt drive me mad!"
wrathfully exclaimed Buchan. "It shall be as thou sayest; and more, I
will gain the royal warrant for the deed--permission to this effect may
shorten this cursed confinement for us both. I have forgotten the boy's
age; his mother's high-sounding patriotism may have tinctured him
already. Thou smilest."

"At thy marvellous good faith in thy wife's _patriotism_, good
kinsman--oh, well perchance, like charity, it covereth a multitude of
sins."

"What meanest thou, my Lord of Fife?" demanded Buchan, shortly and
abruptly, pausing in his walk to face his companion, his suspicious
temper instantly aroused by Fife's peculiar tone. "What wouldst thou
insinuate? Tamper not with me; thou knowest I am no subject for a
jest."

"I have but to look on thee to know that, my most solemn-visaged
brother. I neither insinuate nor tamper with your lordship. Simply and
heartily I do but give thee joy for thy faith in female patriotism,"
answered Fife, carelessly, but with an expression of countenance that
did not accord with his tone.

"What, in the fiend's name, then, has urged her to this mad act, if it
be not what she and others as mad as she call patriotism?"

"May not a lurking affection for the Bruce have given incentive to love
of country? Buchan, of a truth, thou art dull as a sword-blade when
plunged in muddy water."

"Affection for the Bruce? Thou art mad as she is, Duncan. What the foul
fiend, knows she of the Bruce? No, no! 'tis too wild a tale--when have
they ever met?"

"More often than thou listeth, gentle kinsman," returned Fife, with just
sufficient show of mystery to lash his companion into fury. "I could
tell thee of a time when Robert of Carrick was domesticated with my
immaculate sister, hunting with her, hawking with her, reading with her,
making favorable impressions on every heart in Fife Castle save mine
own."

"And she loved him!--she was loved," muttered Buchan; "and she vowed her
troth to me, the foul-mouthed traitress! She loved him, saidst thou?"

"On my faith, I know not, Comyn. Rumors, I know, went abroad that it
would have been better for the Lady Isabella's peace and honor if this
gallant, fair-spoken knight had kept aloof."

"And then, her brother, carest not to speak these things, and in that
reckless tone? By St. Swithin, ye are well matched," returned Buchan,
with a short and bitter laugh of scorn.

"Faith, Comyn, I love mine own life and comfort too well to stand up the
champion of woman's honor; besides, I vouch not for the truth of
floating rumors. I tell thee but what comes across my brain; for its
worth thou art the best judge."

"I were a fool to mine own interest to doubt thee now, little worth as
are thy words in common," again muttered the incensed earl, resuming his
hasty strides. "Patriotism! loyalty! ha, ha! high-sounding words,
forsooth. And have they not met since then until now?" he demanded,
stopping suddenly before his companion.

"Even so, fair kinsman. Whilst thou wert doing such loyal duty to
Edward, after the battle of Falkirk, forgetting thou hadst a wife and
castle to look after, Robert Earl of Carrick found a comfortable
domicile within thy stone walls, and in the fair, sweet company of thine
Isabella, my lord. No doubt, in all honorable and seemly intercourse;
gallant devotion on the one side, and dignified courtesy on the
other--nothing more, depend on't; still it seems but natural that the
memory of a comely face and knightly form should prove incentives to
loyalty and patriotism."

"The foul fiend take thy jesting!" exclaimed Buchan. "Natural, forsooth;
aye, the same nature that bade me loathe the presence, aye, the very
name of that deceiving traitress. And so that smooth-faced villain
Carrick found welcome in the castle of a Comyn the months we missed him
from the court. Ha, ha! thou hast done me good service, Lord of Fife. I
had not enough of injuries before to demand at the hand of Robert Bruce.
And for Dame Isabella, may the fury of every fiend follow me, if I place
her not in the hands of Edward, alive or dead! his wrath will save me
the trouble of seeking further vengeance."

"Nay, thou art a very fool to be so chafed," coolly observed Fife. "Thou
hast taken no care of thy wife, and therefore hast no right to demand
strict account of her amusements in thy absence; and how do we know she
is not as virtuous as the rest of them? I do but tell thee of these
things to pass away the time. Ha! there goes the prince's Gascon
favorite, by mine honor. Gaveston sports it bravely; look at his crimson
mantle wadded with sables. He hath changed his garb since morning.
Faith, he is a lucky dog! the prince's love may be valued at some
thousand marks a year--worth possessing, by St. Michael!"

A muttered oath was all the reply which his companion vouchsafed, nor
did the thunder-cloud upon his brow disperse that evening.

The careless recklessness of Fife had no power to lessen in the earl's
mind the weight of the shameful charge he had brought against the
countess. Buchan's dark, suspicious mind not alone received it, but
cherished it, revelled in it, as giving him that which he had long
desired, a good foundation for dislike and jealousy, a well-founded
pretence for every species of annoyance and revenge. The Earl of Fife,
who had, in fact, merely spoken, as he had said, to while away the
time, and for the pleasure of seeing his brother-in-law enraged, thought
as little of his words _after_ as he had _before_ they were uttered. A
licentious follower of pleasure in every form himself, he imagined, as
such thoughtless characters generally do, that everybody must be like
him. From his weak and volatile mind, then, all remembrance of that
