    I came, behold, the Danaans, loud in fight,
    Swarmed through the halls; roof-high the fiery glare,
Fanned by the wind, mounts up; the loud blast roars in air.

CIII. "Again to Priam's palace, and again
    Up to the citadel I speed my way.
    Armed, in the vacant courts, by Juno's fane,
    Phoenix and curst Ulysses watched the prey.
    There, torn from many a burning temple, lay
    Troy's wealth; the tripods of the Gods were there,
    Piled in huge heaps, and raiment snatched away,
    And golden bowls, and dames with streaming hair
And tender boys stand round, and tremble with despair.

CIV. "I shout, and through the darkness shout again,
    Rousing the streets, and call and call anew
    'Creusa,' and 'Creusa,' but in vain.
    From house to house in frenzy as I flew,
    A melancholy spectre rose in view,
    Creusa's very image; ay, 'twas there,
    But larger than the living form I knew.
    Aghast I stood, tongue-tied, with stiffening hair.
Then she addressed me thus, and comforted my care.

CV. "'What boots this idle passion? Why so fain
    Sweet husband, thus to sorrow and repine?
    Naught happens here but as the Gods ordain.
    It may not be, nor doth the Lord divine
    Of high Olympus nor the Fates design
    That thou should'st take Creusa. Seas remain
    To plough, long years of exile must be thine,
    Ere thou at length Hesperia's land shalt gain,
Where Lydian Tiber glides through many a peopled plain.

CVI. "'Wide rule and happy days await thee there,
    And royal marriage shall thy portion be.
    Weep not for lov'd Creusa, weep not; ne'er
    To Grecian women shall I bow the knee,
    Never in Argos see captivity,
    I, who my lineage from the Dardans tell,
    Allied to Venus. Now, by Fate's decree,
    Here with the mother of the Gods I dwell.
Farewell, and guard in love our common child. Farewell!'

CVII. "So spake she, and with weeping eyes I yearned
    To answer, wondering at the words she said,
    When lo, the shadowy spirit, as I turned,
    Dissolved in air, and in a moment fled.
    Thrice round the neck with longing I essayed
    To clasp the phantom in a wild delight;
    Thrice, vainly clasped, the visionary shade
    Mocked me embracing, and was lost to sight,
Swift as a winged wind or slumber of the night.

CVIII. "Back to my friends I hasten. There, behold,
    Matrons and men, a miserable band,
    Gathered for exile. From each side they shoaled,
    Resolved and ready over sea and land
    My steps to follow, where the Fates command.
    Now over Ida shone the day-star bright;
    Greeks swarmed at every entrance; help at hand
    Seemed none. I yield, and, hurrying from the fight,
Take up my helpless sire, and climb the mountain height."




BOOK THREE


ARGUMENT

In obedience to oracles the Trojans build a fleet and sail to Thrace
(1-18). Seeking to found a city, they are warned away by the ghost
of Polydorus and visit Anius in Ortygia (19-99). Apollo promises
AEneas and his descendants world-wide empire if they return to "the
ancient motherland" of Troy,--which Anchises declares to be Crete
(100-144). They reach Crete, only to be again baffled. Drought and
plague interrupt this second attempt to found a city. On the point
of returning to ask Apollo for clearer counsel, AEneas in a dream
is certified by the home-gods of Troy that the true motherland is
Italy (145-207). Anchises owns his mistake, and recalls how
Cassandra had in other days been mocked for prophesying that Troy
should eventually be transplanted to Italy (208-225). Landing in the
Strophades, they unwittingly wrong the Harpies, whose queen Celaeno
thereupon threatens them with a portentous famine. Panic-stricken,
they coast along to Actium, where they celebrate their national games
and leave a defiance to the Greeks (226-342). At Buthrotum they find
Helenus and Andromache in possession of the kingdom of Pyrrhus, and
by them are entertained awhile and sent upon their way with gifts
and guidance (343-577). The voyage from Dyrrhachium and the first
glimpse of Italy. They land and propitiate Juno: then coast along
till they sight Mount AEtna (578-666). After a description of the
rescue of Achemenides and the escape from Polyphemus, the voyage and
the story end with the death of Anchises at Drepanum (667-819).


I.  "When now the Gods have made proud Ilion fall,
    And Asia's power and Priam's race renowned
    O'erwhelmed in ruin undeserved, and all
    Neptunian Troy lies smouldering on the ground,
    In desert lands, to diverse exile bound,
    Celestial portents bid us forth to fare;
    Where Ida's heights above Antandros frowned,
    A fleet we build, and gather crews, unware
Which way the Fates will lead, what home is ours and where.

II. "Scarce now the summer had begun, when straight
    My father, old Anchises, gave command
    To spread our canvas and to trust to Fate.
    Weeping, I leave my native port, the land,
    The fields where once the Trojan towers did stand,
    And, homeless, launch upon the boundless brine,
    Heart-broken outcast, with an exiled band,
    Comrades, and son, and household gods divine,
And the great Gods of Troy, the guardians of our line.

III. "Far off there lies, with many a spacious plain,
    The land of Mars, by Thracians tilled and sown,
    Where stern Lycurgus whilom held his reign;
    A hospitable shore, to Troy well-known,
    Her home-gods leagued in union with our own,
    While Fortune smiled. Hither, with fates malign,
    I steer, and landing for our purposed town
    The walls along the winding shore design,
And coin for them a name 'AEneadae' from mine.

IV. "Due rites to Venus and the gods I bore,
    The work to favour, and a sleek, white steer
    To Heaven's high King was slaughtering on the shore.
    With cornel shrubs and many a prickly spear
    Of myrtle crowned, it chanced a mound was near.
    Thither I drew, and strove with eager hold
    A green-leaved sapling from the soil to tear,
    To shade with boughs the altars, when behold
A portent, weird to see and wondrous to unfold!

V.  "Scarce the first stem uprooted, from the wood
    Black drops distilled, and stained the earth with gore.
    Cold horror shook me, in my veins the blood
    Was chilled, and curdled with affright. Once more
    A limber sapling from the soil I tore;
    Once more, persisting, I resolved in mind
    With inmost search the causes to explore
    And probe the mystery that lurked behind;
Dark drops of blood once more come trickling from the rind.

VI. "Much-musing, to the woodland nymphs I pray,
    And Mars, the guardian of the Thracian plain,
    With favouring grace the omen to allay,
    And bless the dreadful vision. Then again
    A third tall shaft I grasp, with sinewy strain
    And firm knees pressed against the sandy ground;
    When O! shall tongue make utterance or refrain?
    Forth from below a dismal, groaning sound
Heaves, and a piteous voice is wafted from the mound:

VII. "'Spare, O AEneas, spare a wretch, nor shame
    Thy guiltless hands, but let the dead repose.
    From Troy, no alien to thy race, I came.
    O, fly this greedy shore, these cruel foes!
    Not from the tree--from Polydorus flows
    This blood, for I am Polydorus. Here
    An iron crop o'erwhelmed me, and uprose
    Bristling with pointed javelins.'--Mute with fear,
Perplext, aghast I stood, and upright rose my hair.

VIII. "This Polydorus Priam from the war
    To Thracia's King in secret had consigned
    With store of gold, when, girt with siege, he saw
    Troy's towers, and trust in Dardan arms resigned.
    But when our fortune and our hopes declined,
    The treacherous King the conqueror's cause professed,
    And, false to faith, to friendship and to kind,
    Slew Polydorus, and his wealth possessed.
Curst greed of gold, what crimes thy tyrant power attest!

IX. "Now, freed from terror, to my father first,
    Then to choice friends the vision I declare.
    All vote to sail, and quit the shore accurst.
    So to his shade, with funeral rites, we rear
    A mound, and altars to the dead prepare,
    Wreathed with dark cypress. Round them, as of yore,
    Pace Troy's sad matrons, with their streaming hair.
    Warm milk from bowls, and holy blood we pour,
And thrice with loud farewell the peaceful shade deplore.

X.  "Soon as our ships can trust the deep once more,
    And South-winds chide, and Ocean smiles serene,
    We crowd the beach, and launch, and town and shore
    Fade from our view. Amid the waves is seen
    An island, sacred to the Nereids' queen
    And Neptune, lord of the AEgean wave,
    Which, floating once, Apollo fixed between
    High Myconos and Gyarus, and gave
For man's resort, unmoved the blustering winds to brave.

XI. "Hither we sail and on this island fair,
    Worn out, find welcome in a sheltered bay,
    And, landing, hail Apollo's town with prayer.
    King Anius here, enwreath'd with laurel spray,
    The priest of Phoebus meets us on the way;
    With joy at once he recognised again
    His friend Anchises of an earlier day.
    And joining hands in fellowship, each fain
To show a friendly heart the palace-halls we gain.

XII. "There, in a temple built of ancient stone
    I worship: 'Grant, Thymbrean lord divine,
    A home, a settled city of our own,
    Walls to the weary, and a lasting line,
    To Troy another Pergamus. Incline
    And harken. Save these Dardans sore-distrest,
    The remnant of Achilles' wrath. Some sign
    Vouchsafe us, whom to follow? where to rest?
Steal into Trojan hearts, and make thy power confessed.'

XIII. "Scarce spake I, suddenly the bays divine
    Shook, and a trembling seized the temple door.
    The mountain heaves, and from the opening shrine
    Loud moans the tripod. Prostrate on the floor
    We hear a voice; 'Brave hearts, the land that bore
    Your sires shall nurse their Dardan sons again.
    Seek out your ancient mother; from her shore
    Through all the world the AEneian house shall reign,
And sons of sons unborn the lasting line sustain.'

XIV. "Straight rose a joyous uproar; each in turn
    Ask what the walls that Phoebus hath designed?
    Which way to wander, whither to return?
    Then spake my sire, revolving in his mind
    The ancient legends of the Trojan kind,
    'Chieftains, give ear, and learn your hopes and mine;
    Jove's island lies, amid the deep enshrined,
    Crete, hundred-towned, a land of corn and wine,
Where Ida's mountain stands, the cradle of our line.

XV. "'Thence Troy's great sire, if I remember right,
    Old Teucer, to Rhoeteum crossed the flood,
    And for his future kingdom chose a site.
    Nor yet proud Ilion nor her towers had stood;
    In lowly vales sequestered they abode.
    Thence Corybantian cymbals clashed and brayed
    In praise of Cybele. In Ida's wood
    Her mystic rites in secrecy were paid,
And lions, yoked in pomp, their sovereign's car conveyed.

XVI. "'Come then and seek we, as the gods command,
    The Gnosian kingdoms, and the winds entreat.
    Short is the way, nor distant lies the land.
    If Jove be present and assist our fleet,
    The third day lands us on the shores of Crete.'
    So spake he and on altars, reared aright,
    Due victims offered, and libations meet;
    A bull to Neptune and Apollo bright,
To tempest a black lamb, to Western winds a white.

XVII. "Fame flies, Idomeneus has left the land,
    Expelled his kingdom; that the shore lies clear
    Of foes, and homes are ready to our hand.
    Ortygia's port we leave, and skim the mere;
    Soon Naxos' Bacchanalian hills appear,
    And past Olearos and Donysa, crowned
    With trees, and Paros' snowy cliffs we steer.
    Far-scattered shine the Cyclades renowned,
And clustering isles thick-sown in many a glittering sound.

XVIII. "Loud rise the shouts of sailors to the sky;
    'Crete and our fathers,' rings for all to hear
    The cry of oarsmen. Through the deep we fly;
    Behind us sings the stern breeze loud and clear.
    So to the shores of ancient Crete we steer.
    There in glad haste I trace the wished-for town,
    And call the walls 'Pergamea,' and cheer
    My comrades, glorying in the name well-known,
The castled keep to raise, and guard the loved hearth-stone.

XIX. "Scarce stand the vessels hauled upon the beach,
    And bent on marriages the young men vie
    To till new settlements, while I to each
    Due law dispense and dwelling place supply,
    When from a tainted quarter of the sky
    Rank vapours, gathering, on my comrades seize,
    And a foul pestilence creeps down from high
    On mortal limbs and standing crops and trees,
A season black with death, and pregnant with disease.

XX. "Sweet life from mortals fled; they drooped and died.
    Fierce Sirius scorched the fields, and herbs and grain
    Were parched, and food the wasting crops denied.
    Once more Anchises bids us cross the main
    And seek Ortygia, and the god constrain
    By prayer to pardon and advise, what end
    Of evils to expect? what woes remain?
    What fate hereafter shall our steps attend?
What rest for toil-worn men, and whitherward to wend?

XXI. "'Twas night; on earth all creatures were asleep,
    When lo! the figures of our gods, the same
    Whom erst from falling Ilion o'er the deep
    I brought, scarce rescued from the midmost flame,
    Before me, sleepless for my country's shame,
    Stood plain, in plenteousness of light confessed,
    Where streaming through the sunken lattice came
    The moon's full splendour, and their speech addressed,
And I in heart took comfort, hearing their behest.

XXII. "'Lo! what Apollo from Ortygia's shrine
    Would sing, unasked he sends us to proclaim.
    We who have followed o'er the billowy brine
    Thee and thine arms, since Ilion sank in flame,
    Will raise thy children to the stars, and name
    Thy walls imperial. Thou build them meet
    For heroes. Shrink not from thy journey's aim,
    Though long the way. Not here thy destined seat,
So saith the Delian god, not thine the shores of Crete.

XXIII. "'Far off there lies, across the rolling wave,
    An ancient land, which Greeks Hesperia name;
    Her soil is fruitful and her people brave.
    Th' OEnotrians held it once, by later fame
    The name Italia from their chief they claim.
    Thence sprang great Dardanus; there lies thy seat;
    Thence sire Iasius and the Trojans came.
    Rise, and thy parent with these tidings greet,
To seek Ausonian shores, for Jove denies thee Crete.'

XXIV. "Awed by the vision and the voice divine
    ('Twas no mere dream; their very looks I knew,
    I saw the fillets round their temples twine,
    And clammy sweat did all my limbs bedew)
    Forthwith, upstarting, from the couch I flew,
    And hands and voice together raised in prayer,
    And wine unmixt upon the altars threw.
    This done, to old Anchises I repair,
Pleased with the rites fulfilled, and all the tale declare.

XXV. "The two-fold race Anchises understands,
    The double sires, and owns himself misled
    By modern error 'twixt two ancient lands.
    'O son, long trained in Ilian fates,' he said,
    This chance Cassandra, she alone, displayed.
    Oft to Hesperia and Italia's reign
    She called us. Ah! who listened or obeyed?
    Who dreamed that Teucrians should Hesperia gain?
Yield we to Phoebus now, nor wisdom's words disdain.'

XXVI. "All hail the speech. We quit this other home,
    And leaving here a handful on the shore,
    Spread sail and scour with hollow keel the foam.
    The fleet was on mid ocean; land no more
    Was visible, naught else above, before
    But sky and sea, when overhead did loom
    A storm-cloud, black as heaven itself, that bore
    Dark night and wintry tempest in its womb,
And all the waves grew rough and shuddered with the gloom.

XXVII. "Winds roll the waters, and the great seas rise.
    Dispersed we welter on the gulfs. Damp night
    Has snatched with rain the heaven from our eyes,
    And storm-mists in a mantle wrapt the light.
    Flash after flash, and for a moment bright,
    Quick lightnings rend the welkin. Driven astray
    We wander, robbed of reckoning, reft of sight.
    No difference now between the night and day
E'en Palinurus sees, nor recollects the way.

XXVIII. "Three days, made doubtful by the blinding gloom,
    As many nights, when not a star is seen,
    We wander on, uncertain of our doom.
    At last the fourth glad daybreak clears the scene,
    And rising land, and opening uplands green,
    And rolling smoke at distance greet the view.
    No longer tarrying; to our oars we lean.
    Down drop the sails; in order ranged, each crew
Flings up the foam to heaven, and sweeps the sparkling blue.

XXIX. "Saved from the sea, the Strophades we gain,
    So called in Greece, where dwells, with Harpies, dire
    Celaeno, in the vast Ionian main,
    Since, forced from Phineus' palace to retire,
    They fled their former banquet. Heavenly ire
    Ne'er sent a pest more loathsome; ne'er were seen
    Worse plagues to issue from the Stygian mire--
    Birds maiden-faced, but trailing filth obscene,
With taloned hands and looks for ever pale and lean.

XXX. "The harbour gained, lo! herds of oxen bright
    And goats untended browse the pastures fair.
    We, sword in hand, make onset, and invite
    The gods and Jove himself the spoil to share,
    And piling couches, banquet on the fare.
    When straight, down-swooping from the hills meanwhile
    The Harpies flap their clanging wings, and tear
    The food, and all with filthy touch defile,
And, mixt with screams, uprose a sickening stench and vile.

XXXI. "Once more, within a cavern screened from view,
    Where circling trees a rustling shade supply,
    The boards are spread, the altars blaze anew.
    Back, from another quarter of the sky,
    Dark-ambushed, round the clamorous Harpies fly
    With taloned claws, and taste and taint the prey.
    To arms I call my comrades, and defy
    The loathsome brood to battle. They obey,
And swords and bucklers hide amid the grass away.

XXXII. "So when their screams descending fill the strand,
    Misenus from his outlook sounds the fray.
    All to the strange encounter, sword in hand,
    Rush forth, these miscreants of the deep to slay.
    No wounds they take, no weapon wins its way.
    Swiftly they soar, all leaving, ere they go,
    Their filthy traces on the half-gorged prey.
    One perched, Celaeno, on a rock, and lo,
Thus croaked the dismal seer her prophecy of woe.

XXXIII. "'War, too, Laomedon's twice-perjured race!
    War do ye bring, our cattle stol'n and slain?
    And unoffending Harpies would ye chase
    Forth from their old, hereditary reign?
    Mark then my words and in your breasts retain.
    What Jove, the Sire omnipotent, of old
    Revealed to Phoebus, and to me again
    Phoebus Apollo at his hest foretold,
I now to thee and thine, the Furies' Queen, unfold.

XXXIV. "'Ye seek Italia and, with favouring wind,
    Shall reach Italia, and her ports attain.
    But ne'er the town, by Destiny assigned,
    Your walls shall gird, till famine's pangs constrain
    To gnaw your boards, in quittance for our slain.'
    So spake the Fiend, and backward to the wood
    Soared on the wing. Cold horror froze each vein.
    Aghast and shuddering my comrades stood;
Down sank at once each heart, and terror chilled the blood.

XXXV. "No more with arms, for peace with vows and prayer
    We sue, and pardon of these powers implore,
    Or be they goddesses or birds of air
    Obscene and dire; and lifting on the shore
    His hands, Anchises doth the gods adore.
    'O Heaven!' he cries, 'avert these threats; be kind
    And stay the curse, and vex with plagues no more
    A pious folk,' then bids the crews unbind
The stern-ropes, loose the sheets and spread them to the wind.

XXXVI. "The South-wind fills the canvas; on we fly
    Where breeze and pilot drive us through the deep.
    Soon, crowned with woods, Zacynthos we espy,
    Dulichium, Same and the rock-bound steep
    Of Neritos. Past Ithaca we creep,
    Laertes' realms, and curse the land that bred
    Ulysses, cause of all the woes we weep.
    Soon, where Leucate lifts her cloud-capt head,
Looms forth Apollo's fane, the seaman's name of dread.

XXXVII. "Tired out we seek the little town, and run
    The sterns ashore and anchor in the bay,
    Saved beyond hope and glad the land is won,
    And lustral rites, with blazing altars, pay
    To Jove, and make the shores of Actium gay
    With Ilian games, as, like our sires, we strip
    And oil our sinews for the wrestler's play.
    Proud, thus escaping from the foemen's grip,
Past all the Argive towns, through swarming Greeks, to slip.

XXXVIII. "Meanwhile the sun rolls round the mighty year,
    And wintry North-winds vex the waves once more.
    In front, above the temple-gates I rear
    The brazen shield which once great Abas bore,
    And mark the deed in writing on the door,
    _'AEneas these from conquering Greeks hath ta'en';_
    Then bid my comrades quit the port and shore,
    And man the benches. They with rival strain
And slanting oar-blades sweep the levels of the main.

XXXIX. "Phaeacia's heights with the horizon blend;
    We skim Epirus, and Chaonia's bay
    Enter, and to Buthrotum's town ascend.
    Strange news we hear: A Trojan Greeks obey,
    Helenus, master of the spouse and sway
    Of Pyrrhus, and Andromache once more
    Has yielded to a Trojan lord. Straightway
    I burn to greet them, and the tale explore,
And from the harbour haste, and leave the ships and shore.

XL. "Within a grove Andromache that day,
    Where Simois in fancy flowed again,
    Her offerings chanced at Hector's grave to pay,
    A turf-built cenotaph, with altars twain,
    Source of her tears and sacred to the slain--
    And called his shade. Distracted with amaze
    She marked me, as the Trojan arms shone plain.
    Heat leaves her frame; she stiffens with the gaze,
She swoons--and scarce at length these faltering words essays:

XLI. "'Real, then, real is thy face, and true
    Thy tidings? Liv'st thou, child of heavenly seed?
    If dead, then where is Hector?' Tears ensue,
    And wailing, shrill as though her heart would bleed.
    Then I, with stammering accents, intercede,
    And, sore perplext, these broken words outthrow
