      Taborine behind him, Attis, thoro' leafy glooms a guide,
      As a restive heifer yields not to the cumbrous onerous yoke.
      Thither his the votaress eunuchs with an emulous alacrity.
      Now faintly sickly plodding to the goddess's holy shrine,       35
      They took the rest which easeth long toil, nor ate withal.
      Slow sleep descends on eyelids ready drowsily to decline,
      In a soft repose departeth the devout spirit-agony.
      When awoke the sun, the golden, that his eyes heaven-orient
      Scann'd lustrous air, the rude seas, earth's massy solidity,    40
      When he smote the shadowy twilight with his healthy team sublime,
      Then arous'd was Attis; o'er him sleep hastily fled away
      To Pasithea's arms immortal with a tremulous hovering.
      But awaked from his reposing, the delirious anguish o'er,
      When as Attis' heart recalled him to the past solitarily,       45
      Saw clearly where he stood, what, an annihilate apathy,
      With a soul that heaved within him, to the water he fled again.
      Then as o'er the waste of ocean with a rainy eye he gazed
      To the land of home he murmur'd miserable a soliloquy.


      "Mother-home of all affection, dear home, my nativity,          50
      Whom in anguish I deserting, as in hatred a runaway
      From a master, hither have hurried to the lonely woods of Ide,

    To be with the snows, the wild beasts, in a wintery domicile,
        To be near each savage houser that a surly fury provokes,
        What horizon, O beloved, may attain to thee anywhere?         55

    Yet an eyeless orb is yearning ineffectually to thee.
      For a little ere returneth the delirious hour again.

    Shall a homeless Attis hie him to the groves uninhabited?
      Shall he leave a country, wealth, friends? bid a sire, a mother, adieu?
      The palaestra lost, the forum, the gymnasium, the course?       60

    O unhappy, fall a-weeping, thou unhappy soul, for aye.

    For is honour of any semblance, any beauty but of it I?
      Who, a woman here, in order was a man, a youth, a boy,
      To the sinewy ring a fam'd flower, the gymnasium's applause.

    With a throng about the portal, with a populace in the gate,      65
      With a flowery coronal hanging upon every column of home,
      When anew my chamber open'd, as awoke the sunny morn.

    O am I to live the god's slave? feodary be to Cybele?
      Or a Maenad I, an eunuch? or a part of a body slain?

    Or am I to range the green tracts upon Ida snowy-chill?           70
      Be beneath the stately caverns colonnaded of Asia?
      Be with hind that haunts the covert, or in hursts that house the boar?

    Woe, woe the deed accomplish'd! woe, woe, the shame to me!"

    From rosy lips ascending when approached the gusty cry
      To celestial ears recording such a message inly borne,          75
      Cybele, the thong relaxing from a lion-haled yoke,
      Said, aleft the goad addressing to the foe that awes the flocks--


    "Come, a service; haste, my brave one; let a fury the madman arm,
      Let a fury, a frenzy prick him to return to the wood again,
      This is he my hest declineth, the unheedy, the runaway.         80

    From an angry tail refuse not to abide the sinewy stroke,
      To a roar let all the regions echo answer everywhere,
      On a nervy neck be tossing that uneasy tawny mane."

      So in ire she spake, adjusting disunitedly then her yoke
      At his own rebuke the lion doth his heart to a fury spur,       85
      With a step, a roar, a bursting unarrested of any brake.
      But anear the foamy places when he came, to the frothy beach,
      When he saw the sexless Attis by the seas' level opaline,
      Then he rushed upon him; affrighted to the wintery wood he flew,
      Cybele's for aye, for all years, in her order a votaress.       90
      Holy deity, great Cybele, holy lady Dindymene,
      Be to me afar for ever that inordinate agony.
      O another hound to madness, O another hurry to rage!


LXIV.

    Born on Pelion height, so legend hoary relateth,
      Pines once floated adrift on Neptune billowy streaming
      On to the Phasis flood, to the borders AEaetean.
      Then did a chosen array, rare bloom of valorous Argos,
      Fain from Colchian earth her fleece of glory to ravish,          5
      Dare with a keel of swiftness adown salt seas to be fleeting,
      Swept with fir-blades oary the fair level azure of Ocean.
      Then that deity bright, who keeps in cities her high ward,
      Made to delight them a car, to the light breeze airily scudding,
      Texture of upright pine with a keel's curved rondure uniting.   10
      That first sailer of all burst ever on Amphitrite.

    Scarcely the forward snout tore up that wintery water,
      Scarcely the wave foamed white to the reckless harrow of oarsmen,
      Straight from amid white eddies arose wild faces of Ocean,
      Nereid, earnest-eyed, in wonderous admiration.                  15
      Then, not after again, saw ever mortal unharmed
      Sea-born Nymphs unveil limbs flushing naked about them.
      Stark to the nursing breasts from foam and billow arising.
      Then, so stories avow, burn'd Peleus hotly to Thetis,
      Then to a mortal lover abode not Thetis unheeding,              20
      Then did a father agree Peleus with Thetis unite him.

    O in an aureat hour, O born in bounteous ages,
      God-sprung heroes, hail: hail, mother of all benediction,
      You my song shall address, you melodies everlasting.
      Thee most chiefly, supreme in glory of heavenly bridal,         25
      Peleus, stately defence of Thessaly. Iuppiter even
      Gave thee his own fair love, thy mortal pleasure approving.
      Thee could Thetis inarm, most beauteous Ocean-daughter?
      Tethys adopt thee, her own dear grandchild's wooer usurping?
      Ocean, who earth's vast globe with a watery girdle inorbeth?    30

    When the delectable hour those days did fully determine,
      Straightway then in crowds all Thessaly flock'd to the palace,
      Thronging hosts uncounted, a company joyous approaching.
      Many a gift they carry, delight their faces illumines.
      Left is Scyros afar, and Phthia's bowery Tempe,                 35
      Vacant Crannon's homes, unvisited high Larisa,
      Towards Pharsalia's halls, Pharsalia's only they hie them.

    Bides no tiller afield; necks soften of oxen in idlesse;
      Feel not a prong'd crook'd hoe lush vines all weedily trailing;
      Tears no steer deep clods with a downward coulter unearthed;    40
      Prunes no hedger's bill broad-verging verdurous arbours;
      Steals a deforming rust on ploughs left rankly to moulder.

    But that sovran abode, each sumptuous inly retiring
      Chamber, aflame with gold, with silver is all resplendent;
      Thrones gleam ivory-white; cup-crown'd blaze brightly the tables; 45
      All the domain with treasure of empery gaudily flushes.

    There, set deeply within the remotest centre, a bridal
    Bed doth a goddess inarm; smooth ivory glossy from Indies,
    Robed in roseate hues, rich seashells' purple adorning.


    It was a broidery freak'd with tissue of images olden,            50
      One whose curious art did blazon valour of heroes.
      Gazing forth from a beach of Dia the billow-resounding,
      Look'd on a vanish'd fleet, on Theseus quickly departing,
      Restless in unquell'd passion, a feverous heart, Ariadne.
      Scarcely her eyes yet seem their seeming clearly to vision.     55
      You might guess that arous'd from slumber's drowsy betrayal,
      Sand-engirded, alone, then first she knew desolation.
      He the betrayer--his oars with fugitive hurry the waters
      Beat, each promise of old to the winds given idly to bear them.

    Him from amid shore-weeds doth Minos' daughter, in anguish        60
      Rigid, a Bacchant-form, dim-gazing stonily follow,
      Stonily still, wave-tost on a sea of troublous affliction.
      Holds not her yellow locks the tiara's feathery tissue;
      Veils not her hidden breast light brede of drapery woven;
      Binds not a cincture smooth her bosom's orbed emotion.          65
      Widely from each fair limb that footward-fallen apparel
      Drifts its lady before, in billowy salt loose-playing.

    Not for silky tiara nor amice gustily floating
      Recks she at all any more; thee, Theseus, ever her earnest
      Heart, all clinging thought, all chained fancy requireth.       70
      Ah unfortunate! whom with miseries ever crazing,
      Thorns in her heart deep planted, affray'd Erycina to madness,
      From that earlier hour, when fierce for victory Theseus
      Started alert from a beach deep-inleted of Piraeus,
      Gain'd Gortyna's abode, injurious halls of oppression.          75

    Once, 'tis sung in stories, a dire distemper atoning
      Death of an ill-blest prince, Androgeos, angrily slaughter'd,
      Taxed of her youthful array, her maidenly bloom fresh-glowing,
      Feast to the monster bull, Cecropia, ransom-laden.
      Then, when a plague so deadly, the garrison undermining,        80
      Spent that slender city, his Athens dearly to rescue,
      Sooner life Theseus and precious body did offer,
      Ere his country to Crete freight corpses, a life in seeming.
      So with a ship fast-fleeted, a gale blown gently behind him,
    Push'd he his onward journey to Minos' haughty dominion.          85

    Him for very delight when a virgin fondly desiring
      Gazed on, a royal virgin, in odours silkily nestled,
      Pure from a maiden's couch, from a mother's pillowy bosom,
      Like some myrtle, anear Eurotas' water arising,
      Like earth's myriad hues, spring's progeny, rais'd to the breezes; 90
      Droop'd not her eyes their gaze unquenchable, ever-burning
      Save when in each charm'd limb to the depths enfolded, a sudden
      Flame blazed hotly within her, in all her marrow abiding.

    O thou cruel of heart, thou madding worker of anguish,
      Boy immortal, of whom joy springs with misery blending,         95
      Yea, thou queen of Golgi, of Idaly leaf-embower'd,
      O'er what a fire love-lit, what billows wearily tossing,
      Drave ye the maid, for a guest so sunnily lock'd deep sighing.
      What most dismal alarms her swooning fancy did echo!
      Oft what a sallower hue than gold's cold glitter upon her!     100
      Whiles, heart-hungry in arms that monster deadly to combat,
      Theseus drew towards death or victory, guerdon of honour.
      Yet not lost the devotion, or offer'd idly the virgin's
      Gifts, as her unvoic'd lips breathed incense faintly to heaven.

    As on Taurus aloft some oak agitatedly waving                    105
      Tosses his arms, or a pine cone-mantled, oozily rinded,
      When as his huge gnarled trunk in furious eddies a whirlwind
      Riving wresteth amain; down falleth he, upward hoven,
      Falleth on earth; far, near, all crackles brittle around him,
      So to the ground Theseus his fallen foeman abasing,            110
      Slew, that his horned front toss'd vainly, a sport to the breezes.
      Thence in safety, a victor, in height of glory returned,
      Guiding errant feet to a thread's impalpable order.
      Lest, upon egress bent thro' tortuous aisles labyrinthine,
      Walls of blindness, a maze unravell'd ever, elude him.         115

    Yet, for again I come to the former story, beseems not
      Linger on all done there; how left that daughter a gazing
      Father, a sister's arms, her mother woefully clinging,
      Mother, who o'er that child moan'd desperate, all heart-broken;
      How not in home that maid, in Theseus only delighted;          120
      How her ship on a shore of foaming Dia did harbour;
      How, when her eyes lay bound in slumber's shadowy prison,
      He forsook, forgot her, a wooer traitorous-hearted:

    Oft, say stories, at heart with frenzied fantasy burning,
      Pour'd she, a deep-wrung breast, clear-ringing cries of oppression; 125
      Sometimes mournfully clomb to the mountain's rugged ascension,
      Straining thence her vision across wide surges of ocean;
      Now to the brine ran forth, upsplashing freshly to meet her,
      Lifting raiment fine her thighs which softly did open;
      Last, when sorrow had end, these words thus spake she lamenting,  130
      While from a mouth tear-stain'd chill sobs gushed dolorous ever.


    'Look, is it here, false heart, that rapt from country, from altar,
      Household altar ashore, I wander, falsely deserted?
      Ah! is it hence, Theseus, that against high heaven a traitor
      Homeward thou thy vileness, alas thy perjury bearest?          135

    Might not a thought, one thought, thy cruel counsel abating
      Sway thee tender? at heart rose no compassion or any
      Mercy, to bend thy soul, or me for pity deliver?

    Yet not this thy promise of old, thy dearly remembered
      Voice, not these the delights thou bad'st thy poor one inherit; 140
      Nay, but wedlock happy, but envied joy hymeneal;
    All now melted in air, with a light wind emptily fleeting.


    Let not a woman trust, since that first treason, a lover's
      Desperate oath, none hope true lover's promise is earnest.
      They, while fondly to win their amorous humour essayeth,       145
      Fear no covetous oath, all false free promises heed not;
      They if once lewd pleasure attain unruly possession,
    Lo they fear not promise, of oath or perjury reck not.

    Yet indeed, yet I, when floods of death were around thee,
      Set thee on high, did rather a brother choose to defend not,   150
      Ere I, in hate's last hour, false heart, fail'd thee to deliver.

    Now, for a goodly reward, to the beasts they give me, the flying
      Fowls; no handful of earth shall bury me, pass'd to the shadows.


    What grim lioness yeaned thee, aneath what rock's desolation?
      What wild sea did bear, what billows foamy regorged thee?      155
      Seething sand, or Scylla the snare, or lonely Charybdis?
    If for a life's dear joy comes back such only requital?

    Hadst not a will with spousal an honour'd wife to receive me?
      Awed thee a father stern, cross age's churlish avising?
      Yet to your household thou, your kindred palaces olden,        160
      Might'st have led me, to wait, joy-filled, a retainer upon thee,
      Now in waters clear thy feet like ivory laving,
    Clothing now thy bed with crimson's gorgeous apparel.

    Yet to the brutish winds why moan I longer unheeded,
      Crazy with an ill wrong? They senseless, voiceless, inhuman    165
      Utter'd cry they hear not, in answers hollow reply not.
      He rides far already, the mid sea's boundary cleaving,
      Strays no mortal along these weeds stretched lonely about me.
      Thus to my utmost need chance, spitefuller injury dealing,
    Grudges an ear, where yet might lamentation have entry.          170


    Jove, almighty, supreme, O would that never in early
      Time on Gnossian earth great Cecrops' navies had harbour'd,
      Ne'er to that unquell'd bull with a ransom of horror atoning,
      Moor'd on Crete his cable a shipman's wily dishonour.
      Never in youth's fair shape such ruthless stratagem hiding     175
    He, that vile one, a guest found with us a safe habitation.

    Whither flee then afar? what hope, poor lost one, upholds thee?
      Mountains Idomenean? alas, broad surges of ocean
      Part us, a rough rude space of flowing water, asunder.
      Trust in a father's help? how trust, whom darkly deserting,    180
      Him I turned to alone, my brother's bloody defier?
      Nay, but a loyal lover, a hand pledg'd surely, shall ease me.
    Surely; for o'er wide water his oars move flexibly fleeting.

    Also a desert lies this region, a tenantless island,
      Nowhere open way, seas splash in circle around me,             185
      Nowhere flight, no glimmer of hope; all mournfully silent,
    Loneliness all, all points me to death, death only remaining.


    Yet these luminous orbs shall sink not feebly to darkness,
      Yet from grief-worn limbs shall feeling wholly depart not,
      Till to the gods I cry, the betrayed, for justice on evil,     190
    Sue for life's last mercy the great federation of heaven.

    Then, O sworn to requite man's evil wrathfully, Powers
      Gracious, on whose grim brows, with viper tresses inorbed,
      Looks red-breathing forth your bosom's feverous anger;

    Now, yea now come surely, to these loud miseries harken,         195
      All I cry, the afflicted, of inmost marrow arising,
      Desolate, hot with pain, with blinding fury bewilder'd.

    Yet, for of heart they spring, grief's children truly begotten,
      Verily, Gods, these moans you will not idly to perish.
      But with counsel of evil as he forsook me deceiving,           200
    Death to his house, to his heart, bring also counsel of evil.


    When from an anguish'd heart these words stream'd sorrowful upwards,
      Words which on iron deeds did sue for deadly requital,
      Bow'd with a nod of assent almighty the ruler of heaven.
      With that dreadful motion aneath earth's hollow, the ruffled   205
      Ocean shook, and stormy the stars 'gan tremble in ether.
      Thereto his heart thick-sown with blindness cloudily dark'ning,
      Thought not of all those words, Theseus, from memory fallen,
      Words which his heedful soul had kept immovable ever.
      Nor to his eager sire fair token of happy returning            210
      Rais'd, when his eyes safe-sighted Erectheus' populous haven.
      Once, so stories tell, when Pallas' city behind him
      Leaving, Theseus' fleet to the winds given hopefully parted,
      Clasping then his son spake Aegeus, straitly commanding.


    Son, mine only delight, than life more lovely to gaze on,        215
      Son, whom needs it faints me to launch full-tided on hazards,
      Whom my winter of years hath laid so lately before me:

    Since my fate unkindly, thy own fierce valour unheeding,
      Needs must wrest thee away, ere yet these dimly-lit eye-balls
      Feed to the full on thee, thy worshipt body beholding;         220

    Neither in exultation of heart I send thee a-warring;
      Nor to the fight shalt bear fair fortune's happier earnest;
    Rather, first in cries mine heart shall lighten her anguish,
      When greylocks I sully with earth, with sprinkle of ashes;

    Next to the swaying mast shall a sail hang duskily swinging;     225
    So this grief, mine own, this burning sorrow within me,
    Want not a sign, dark shrouds of Iberia, sombre as iron.

    Then, if haply the queen, lone ranger on haunted Itonus,
      Pleas'd to defend our people, Erectheus' safe habitations,
      Frown not, allow thine hand that bull all redly to slaughter,  230

    Look that warily then deep-laid in steady remembrance,
      These our words grow greenly, nor age move on to deface them;

    Soon as on home's fair hills thine eyes shall signal a welcome,
      See that on each straight yard down droop their funeral housings,
      Whitely the tight-strung cordage a sparkling canvas aloft swing, 235

    Which to behold straightway with joy shall cheer me, with inward
      Joy, when a prosperous hour shall bring to thee happy returning.

    So for a while that charge did Theseus faithfully cherish.
      Last, it melted away, as a cloud which riven in ether
      Breaks to the blast, high peak and spire snow-silvery leaving. 240
      But from a rock's wall'd eyrie the father wistfully gazing,
      Father whose eyes, care-dimm'd, wore hourly for ever a-weeping,
      Scarcely the wind-puff'd sail from afar 'gan darken upon him,
      Down the precipitous heights headlong his body he hurried,
      Deeming Theseus surely by hateful destiny taken.               245
      So to a dim death-palace, alert from victory, Theseus
      Came, what bitter sorrow to Minos' daughter his evil
      Perjury gave, himself with an even sorrow atoning.
      She, as his onward keel still moved, still mournfully follow'd;
      Passion-stricken, her heart a tumultuous image of ocean.       250

    Also upon that couch, flush'd youthfully, breathless Iacchus
      Roam'd with a Satyr-band, with Nisa-begot Sileni;
      Seeking thee, Ariadna, aflame thy beauty to ravish.
      Wildly behind they rushed and wildly before to the folly,
      Euhoe rav'd, Euhoe with fanatic heads gyrated;                 255
      Some in womanish hands shook rods cone-wreathed above them,
      Some from a mangled steer toss'd flesh yet gorily streaming;
      Some girt round them in orbs, snakes gordian, intertwining;
      Some with caskets deep did blazon mystical emblems,
      Emblems muffled darkly, nor heard of spirit unholy.            260
      Part with a slender palm taborines beat merrily jangling;
      Now with a cymbal slim would a sharp shrill tinkle awaken;
      Often a trumpeter horn blew murmurous, hoarsely resounding.
      Rose on pipes barbaric a jarring music of horror.

    Such, wrought rarely, the shapes this quilt did richly apparel,  265
      Where to the couch close-clasped it hung thick veils of adorning.
      So to the full heart-sated of all their curious eying,
      Thessaly's youth gave place to the Gods high-throned in heaven.
      As, when dawn is awake, light Zephyrus even-breathing
      Brushes a sleeping sea, which slant-wise curved in edges       270
      Breaks, while mounts Aurora the sun's high journey to welcome;
      They, first smitten faintly by his most airy caressing,
      Move slow on, light surges a plashing silvery laughter;
      Soon with a waxing wind they crowd them apace, thick-fleeting,
      Swim in a rose-red glow and far off sparkle in Ocean;          275
      So thro' column'd porch and chambers sumptuous hieing,
      Thither or hither away, that company stream'd, home-wending.

    First from Pelion height, when they were duly departed,
      Chiron came, in his hand green gifts of flowery forest.
      All that on earth's leas blooms, what blossoms Thessaly nursing 280
      Breeds on mountainous heights, what near each showery river
      Swells to the warm west-wind, in gales of foison alighting;
      These did his own hands bear in girlonds twined of all hues,
      That to the perfume sweet for joy laugh'd gaily the palace.
      Follow'd straight Penios, awhile his bowery Tempe,             285
      Tempe, shrined around in shadowy woods o'erhanging,
      Left to the bare-limb'd maids Magnesian, airily ranging.
      No scant carrier he; tall root-torn beeches his heavy
      Burden, bays stemm'd stately, in heights exalted ascending.
      Thereto the nodding plane, and that lithe sister of youthful   290
      Phaethon flame-enwrapt, and cypress in air upspringing:
      These in breadths inwoven he heap'd close-twin'd to the palace,
      Whereto the porch wox green, with soft leaves canopied over.

    Him did follow anear, deep heart and wily, Prometheus,
      Scarr'd and wearing yet dim traces of early dishonour,         295
      All which of old his body to flint fast-welded in iron,
      Bore and dearly abied, on slippery crags suspended.
      Last with his awful spouse, with children goodly, the sovran
      Father approach'd; thou, Phoebus, alone, his warder in heaven,
      Left, with that dear sister, on Idrus ranger eternal.          300
      Peleus sister alike and brother in high misprision
      Held, nor lifted a torch when Thetis wedded at even.
      So when on ivory thrones they rested, snowily gleaming,
      Many a feast high-pil'd did load each table about them;
      Whiles to a tremor of age their gray infirmity rocking,        305
      Busy began that chant which speaketh surely the Parcae.

    Round them a folding robe their weak limbs aguish hiding,
      Fell bright-white to the feet, with a purple border of issue.
      Wreaths sat on each hoar crown, whose snows flush'd rosy beneath them;
