take your place first, unless you would prefer me to do so."

"By no means," said De Wardes. "I shall be delighted to save you the
slightest trouble." And putting his horse into a gallop, he crossed the
wide open space, and took his stand at the point of the circumference of
the cross roads which was immediately opposite to where De Guiche was
stationed. De Guiche remained motionless. At the distance of a hundred
paces, the two adversaries were absolutely invisible to each other,
being completely concealed by the thick shade of elms and chestnuts. A
minute elapsed amid the profoundest silence. At the end of the minute,
each of them, in the deep shade in which he was concealed, heard the
double click of the trigger, as they put the pistols on full cock. De
Guiche, adopting the usual tactics, set his horse into a gallop,
persuaded that he should render his safety doubly sure, both by the
movement, as well as by the speed of the animal. He directed his course
in a straight line toward the point where, in his opinion, De Wardes
would be stationed; and he expected to meet De Wardes about half way;
but in this he was mistaken. He continued his course, presuming that his
adversary was impatiently awaiting his approach. When, however, he had
gone about two-thirds of the distance, he saw the place suddenly
illuminated, and a ball flew by, cutting the plume of his hat in two.
Nearly at the same moment, and as if the flash of the first shot had
served to indicate the direction of the other, a second report was
heard, and a second ball passed through the head of De Guiche's horse,
a little below the ear. The animal fell. These two reports proceeding
from the very opposite direction to that in which he expected to find De
Wardes, surprised him a great deal; but as he was a man of amazing
self-possession, he prepared himself for his horse falling, but not so
completely, however, that the toe of his boot escaped being caught under
the animal as it fell. Very fortunately, the horse in its dying agonies
moved so as to enable him to release the leg which was less entangled
than the other. De Guiche rose, felt himself all over, and found that he
was not wounded. At the very moment he had felt the horse tottering
under him, he placed his pistols in the holsters, afraid that the force
of the fall might explode one at least, if not both of them, by which he
would have been disarmed, and left utterly without defense. Once on his
feet, he took the pistols out of the holsters, and advanced toward the
spot where, by the light of the flash, he had seen De Wardes appear. De
Guiche had at the first shot, accounted for the maneuver, than which
nothing could have been simpler. Instead of advancing to meet Guiche, or
remaining in his place to await his approach, De Wardes had, for about
fifteen paces, followed the circle of the shadow which hid him from his
adversary's observation, and at the very moment when the latter
presented his flank in his career, he had fired from the place where he
stood, carefully taking his aim, and assisted instead of being
inconvenienced by the horse's gallop. It has been seen that,
notwithstanding the darkness, the first ball had passed hardly more than
an inch above De Guiche's head. De Wardes had so confidently relied upon
his aim, that he thought he had seen De Guiche fall; his astonishment
was extreme when he saw that he still remained erect in his saddle. He
hastened to fire his second shot, but his hand trembled, and he killed
the horse instead. It would be a most fortunate chance for him if De
Guiche were to remain held fast under the animal. Before he could have
freed himself, De Wardes would have loaded his pistol and had De Guiche
at his mercy. But De Guiche, on the contrary, was up, and had three
shots to fire. He immediately understood the position of affairs. It
would be necessary to exceed De Wardes in rapidity of execution. He
advanced, therefore, so as to reach him before he should have had time
to reload his pistol. De Wardes saw him approaching like a tempest. The
ball was rather tight, and offered some resistance to the ramrod. To
load it carelessly would be to expose himself to lose his last chance;
to take the proper care in loading it would be to lose his time, or
rather it would be throwing away his life. He made his horse bound on
one side. De Guiche turned round also, and, at the moment the horse was
quiet again, he fired, and the ball carried off De Wardes' hat from his
head. De Wardes now knew that he had a moment's time at his own
disposal; he availed himself of it in order to finish loading his
pistol. De Guiche, noticing that his adversary did not fall, threw the
pistol he had just discharged aside, and walked straight toward De
Wardes, elevating the second pistol as he did so. He had hardly
proceeded more than two or three paces, when De Wardes took aim at him
as he was walking, and fired. An exclamation of anger was De Guiche's
answer; the comte's arm contracted and dropped motionless by his side,
and the pistol fell from his grasp. De Wardes observed the comte stoop
down, pick up the pistol with his left hand, and again advance toward
him. His anxiety was excessive. "I am lost," murmured De Wardes, "he is
not mortally wounded." At the very moment, however, that De Guiche was
about to raise his pistol against De Wardes, the head, shoulders and
limbs of the comte seemed all to give way. He heaved a deep-drawn sigh,
tottered, and fell at the feet of De Wardes' horse.

"That is all right," said De Wardes; and, gathering up the reins, he
struck his spurs into his horse's sides. The horse cleared the comte's
motionless body, and bore De Wardes rapidly back to the chateau. When he
arrived there, he remained a quarter of an hour deliberating within
himself as to the proper course to be adopted. In his impatience to
leave the field of battle, he had omitted to ascertain whether De Guiche
were dead or not. A double hypothesis presented itself to De Wardes'
agitated mind; either De Guiche was killed, or De Guiche was wounded
only. If he were killed, why should he leave his body in that manner to
the tender mercies of the wolves? it was a perfectly useless piece of
cruelty, for if De Guiche were dead, he certainly could not breathe a
syllable of what had passed; if he were not killed, why should he, De
Wardes, in leaving him there uncared for, allow himself to be regarded
as a savage, incapable of one generous feeling? This last consideration
determined his line of conduct.

De Wardes immediately instituted inquiries after Manicamp. He was told
that Manicamp had been looking after De Guiche, and, not knowing where
to find him, had retired to bed. De Wardes went and woke the sleeper
without any delay, and related the whole affair to him, which Manicamp
listened to in perfect silence, but with an expression of momentarily
increasing energy, of which his face could hardly have been supposed
capable. It was only when De Wardes had finished that Manicamp uttered
the words, "Let us go."

As they proceeded, Manicamp became more and more excited, and in
proportion as De Wardes related the details of the affair to him, his
countenance assumed every moment a darkening expression. "And so," he
said, when De Wardes had finished, "you think he is dead?"

"Alas! I do."

"And you fought in that manner, without witnesses?"

"He insisted upon it."

"It is very singular."

"What do you mean by saying it is singular?"

"That it is so very unlike Monsieur de Guiche's disposition."

"You do not doubt my word, I suppose?"

"Hum! hum!"

"You do doubt it, then?"

"A little. But I shall doubt it more than ever, I warn you, if I find
the poor fellow is really dead."

"Monsieur Manicamp!"

"Monsieur de Wardes!"

"It seems you intend to insult me."

"Just as you please. The fact is, I never could like those people who
come and say, 'I have killed such and such a gentleman in a corner; it
is a great pity, but I killed him in a perfectly honorable manner.' It
has a very ugly appearance, M. de Wardes."

"Silence! we have arrived."

In fact, the open glade could now be seen, and in the open space lay the
motionless body of the dead horse. To the right of the horse, upon the
dark grass, with his face against the ground, the poor comte lay, bathed
in his blood. He had remained in the same spot, and did not even seem to
have made the slightest movement. Manicamp threw himself on his knees,
lifted the comte in his arms, and found him quite cold, and steeped in
blood. He let him gently fall again. Then, stretching out his hand and
feeling all over the ground close to where the comte lay, he sought
until he found De Guiche's pistol.

"By Heaven!" he said, rising to his feet, pale as death, and with the
pistol in his hand, "you are not mistaken, he is quite dead."

"Dead!" repeated De Wardes.

"Yes; and his pistol is still loaded," added Manicamp, looking into the
pan.

"But I told you that I took aim as he was walking toward me, and fired
at him at the very moment he was going to fire at me."

"Are you quite sure that you have fought with him, Monsieur de Wardes? I
confess that I am very much afraid that it has been a foul
assassination. Nay, nay, no exclamations! You have had your three shots,
and his pistol is still loaded. You have killed his horse, and he, De
Guiche, one of the best marksmen in France, has not touched even either
your horse or yourself. Well, Monsieur de Wardes, you have been very
unlucky in bringing me here; all the blood in my body seems to have
mounted to my head; and I verily believe that since so good an
opportunity presents itself, I shall blow out your brains on the spot.
So, Monsieur de Wardes, recommend your soul to Heaven."

"Monsieur Manicamp, you cannot think of such a thing!"

"On the contrary, I am thinking of it very strongly."

"Would you assassinate me?"

"Without the slightest remorse, at least for the present."

"Are you a gentleman?"

"I have given a great many proofs of it."

"Let me defend my life, then, at least."

"Very likely; in order, I suppose, that you may do to me what you have
done to poor De Guiche."

And Manicamp slowly raised his pistol to the height of De Wardes'
breast, and, with arms stretched out, and a fixed, determined look on
his face, took a careful aim. De Wardes did not attempt a flight; he was
completely terrified. In the midst, however, of this horrible silence,
which lasted about a second, but which seemed an age to De Wardes, a
faint sigh was heard.

"Oh," exclaimed De Wardes, "he still lives! Help, De Guiche, I am about
to be assassinated!"

Manicamp fell back a step or two, and the two young men saw the comte
raise himself slowly and painfully upon one hand. Manicamp threw the
pistol away a dozen paces, and ran to his friend, uttering a cry of
delight. De Wardes wiped his forehead, which was covered with a cold
perspiration.

"It was just in time," he murmured.

"Where are you hurt?" inquired Manicamp of De Guiche, "and whereabouts
are you wounded?"

De Guiche showed him his mutilated hand and his chest covered with
blood.

"Comte," exclaimed De Wardes, "I am accused of having assassinated you:
speak, I implore you, and say that I fought loyally."

"Perfectly so," said the wounded man; "Monsieur de Wardes fought quite
loyally, and whoever may say the contrary will make me his enemy."

"Then, sir," said Manicamp, "assist me, in the first place, to carry
this poor fellow back, and I will afterward give you every satisfaction
you please; or, if you are in a hurry, we can do better still; let us
stanch the blood from the comte's wounds here, with your
pocket-handkerchief and mine, and then, as there are two shots left, we
can have them between us."

"Thank you," said De Wardes. "Twice already in one hour I have seen
death too close at hand to be agreeable; I don't like his look at all,
and I prefer your apologies."

Manicamp burst out laughing, and Guiche, too, in spite of his
sufferings. The two young men wished to carry him, but he declared he
felt himself quite strong enough to walk alone. The ball had broken his
ring-finger and his little finger, and then had glanced along his side,
but without penetrating deeply into his chest. It was the pain rather
than the seriousness of the wound, therefore, which had overcome De
Guiche. Manicamp passed his arm under one of the comte's shoulders, and
De Wardes did the same with the other, and in this way they brought him
back to Fontainebleau, to the house of the same doctor who had been
present at the death of the Franciscan, Aramis' predecessor.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE KING'S SUPPER.


The king, while these matters were being arranged, had sat down to the
supper-table, and the not very large number of guests invited for that
day had taken their seats, after the usual gesture intimating the royal
permission to be seated. At this period of Louis XIV.'s reign, although
etiquette was not governed by the strict regulations which subsequently
were adopted, the French court had entirely thrown aside the traditions
of good-fellowship and patriarchal affability which existed in the time
of Henry IV., and which the suspicious mind of Louis XIII. had gradually
replaced by the pompous state, forms, and ceremonies which he despaired
of being able fully to realize.

The king, therefore, was seated alone at a small separate table, which,
like the desk of a president, overlooked the adjoining tables. Although
we say a small table, we must not omit to add that this small table was
the largest one there. Moreover, it was the one on which were placed the
greatest number and quantity of dishes; consisting of fish, game, meat,
fruit, vegetables, and preserves. The king was young and full of vigor
and energy, very fond of hunting, addicted to all violent exercises of
the body, possessing, besides, like all the members of the Bourbon
family, a rapid digestion, and an appetite speedily renewed. Louis XIV.
was a formidable table-companion; he delighted to criticise his cooks;
but when he honored them by praise and commendation, the honor was
overwhelming. The king began by eating several kinds of soup, either
mixed together or taken separately. He intermixed, or rather he
separated, each of the soups by a glass of old wine. He ate quickly and
somewhat greedily. Porthos, who from the beginning had, out of respect,
been waiting for a jog of D'Artagnan's arm, seeing the king make such
rapid progress, turned to the musketeer and said in a low tone:

"It seems as if one might go on now; his majesty is very encouraging,
from the example he sets. Look."

"The king eats," said D'Artagnan, "but he talks at the same time; try
and manage matters in such manner that, if he should happen to address a
remark to you, he should not find you with your mouth full, which would
be very disrespectful."

"The best way in that case," said Porthos, "is to eat no supper at all;
and yet I am very hungry, I admit, and everything looks and smells most
invitingly, as if appealing to all my senses at once."

"Don't think of not eating for a moment," said D'Artagnan; "that would
put his majesty out terribly. The king has a saying, 'that he who works
well eats well,' and he does not like people to eat indifferently at his
table."

"How can I avoid having my mouth full if I eat?" said Porthos.

"All you have to do," replied the captain of the musketeers, "is simply
to swallow what you have in it whenever the king does you the honor to
address a remark to you."

"Very good," said Porthos: and from that moment he began to eat with a
well-bred enthusiasm of manner.

The king occasionally looked at the different persons who were at table
with him, and _en connoisseur_, could appreciate the different
dispositions of his guests.

"Monsieur de Valon!" he said.

Porthos was enjoying a _salmi de lievre,_ and swallowed half of the
back. His name pronounced in such a manner had made him start, and by a
vigorous effort of his gullet he absorbed the whole mouthful.

"Sire," replied Porthos, in a stifled voice, but sufficiently
intelligible, nevertheless.

"Let those _filets d'agneau_ be handed to Monsieur de Valon," said the
king. "Do you like brown meats, M. de Valon?"

"Sire, I like everything," replied Porthos.

D'Artagnan whispered, "Everything your majesty sends me."

Porthos repeated, "Everything your majesty sends me," an observation
which the king apparently received with great satisfaction.

"People eat well who work well," replied the king, delighted to have _en
tete-a-tete_ a guest who could eat as Porthos did. Porthos received the
dish of lamb, and put a portion of it on his own plate.

"Well?" said the king.

"Exquisite," said Porthos, calmly.

"Have you as good mutton in your part of the country, Monsieur de
Valon?" continued the king.

"Sire, I believe that from my own province, as everywhere else, the best
of everything is sent to Paris for your majesty's use; but, on the
other hand, I do not eat lamb in the same way your majesty does."

"Ah, ah! and how do you eat it?"

"Generally, I have a lamb dressed quite whole."

"Quite whole?"

"Yes, sire."

"In what manner, then?"

"In this, sire: My cook, who is a German, first stuffs the lamb in
question with small sausages which he procures from Strasburg,
force-meat balls which he procures from Troyes, and larks which he
procures from Pithiviers: by some means or other, which I am not
acquainted with, he bones the lamb as he would do a fowl, leaving-the
skin on, however, which forms a brown crust all over the animal; when it
is cut in beautiful slices, in the same way as an enormous sausage, a
rose-colored gravy pours forth, which is as agreeable to the eye as it
is exquisite to the palate." And Porthos finished by smacking his lips.

The king-opened his eyes with delight, and, while cutting some of the
_faisan en daube_, which was being handed to him, he said:

"That is a dish I should very much like to taste, Monsieur de Valon. Is
it possible! a whole lamb!"

"Completely so, sire."

"Pass those pheasants to M. de Valon; I perceive he is an amateur."

The order was immediately obeyed. Then, continuing the conversation, he
said: "And you do not find the lamb too fat?"

"No, sire; the fat falls down at the same time as the gravy does, and
swims on the surface: then the servant who carves removes the fat with a
spoon, which I have had expressly made for that purpose."

"Where do you reside?" inquired the king.

"At Pierrefonds, sire."

"At Pierrefonds; where is that, M. de Valon--near Belle-Isle?"

"Oh, no, sire; Pierrefonds is in the Soissonnais."

"I thought you alluded to the lamb on account of the salt marshes."

"No, sire; I have marshes which are not salt, it is true, but which are
not the less valuable on that account."

The king had now arrived at the _entremets_, but without losing sight of
Porthos, who continued to play his part in the best manner.

"You have an excellent appetite, M. de Valon," said the king, "and you
make an admirable guest at table."

"Ah, sire, if your majesty were ever to pay a visit to Pierrefonds, we
would both of us eat our lamb together; for your appetite is not an
indifferent one, by any means."

D'Artagnan gave Porthos a severe kick under the table, which made
Porthos color up.

"At your majesty's present happy age," said Porthos, in order to repair
the mistake he had made, "I was in the musketeers, and nothing could
ever satisfy me then. Your majesty has an excellent appetite, as I have
already had the honor of mentioning, but you select what you eat with
too much refinement to be called a great eater."

The king seemed charmed at his guest's politeness.

"Will you try some of these creams?" he said to Porthos.

"Sire, your majesty treats me with far too much kindness to prevent me
speaking the whole truth."

"Pray do so, M. de Valon."

"Well, sire, with regard to sweet dishes. I only recognize pastry, and
even that should be rather solid: all these frothy substances swell the
stomach, and occupy a space which seems to me to be too precious to be
so badly tenanted."

"Ah! gentlemen," said the king, indicating Porthos by a gesture, "here
is indeed a perfect model of gastronomy. It was in such a manner that
our fathers, who so well knew what good living was, used to eat; while
we," added his majesty, "can do nothing but trifle with our food." And
as he spoke he took the breast of a chicken, with ham, while Porthos
attacked a dish of partridges and land-rails. The cup-bearer filled his
majesty's glass. "Give M. de Valon some of my wine," said the king.
This was one of the greatest honors of the royal table. D'Artagnan
pressed his friend's knee.

"If you could only manage to swallow the half of that boar's head I see
yonder," said he to Porthos, "I shall believe you will be a duke and
peer within the next twelvemonth."

"Presently," said Porthos, phlegmatically; "I shall come to it
by-and-by."

In fact it was not long before it came to the boar's turn, for the king
seemed to take a pleasure in urging on his guest. He did not pass any of
the dishes to Porthos until he had tasted them himself, and he
accordingly took some of the boar's head. Porthos showed that he could
keep pace with his sovereign; and instead of eating the half, as
D'Artagnan had told him, he ate three-fourths of it. "It is impossible,"
said the king in an undertone, "that a gentleman who eats so good a
supper every day, and who has such beautiful teeth, can be otherwise
than the most straightforward, upright man in my kingdom."

"Do you hear?" said D'Artagnan in his friend's ear.

"Yes; I think I am rather in favor," said Porthos, balancing himself on
his chair.

"Oh! you are in luck's way."

The king and Porthos continued to eat in the same manner, to the great
satisfaction of the other guests, some of whom, from emulation, had
attempted to follow them, but had been obliged to give up on the way.
The king soon began to get flushed, and the reaction of the blood to his
face announced that the moment of repletion had arrived. It was then
that Louis XIV., instead of becoming gay and cheerful, as most good
livers generally do, became dull, melancholy and taciturn. Porthos, on
the contrary, was lively and communicative. D'Artagnan's foot had more
than once to remind him of this peculiarity of the king. The dessert now
made its appearance. The king had ceased to think anything further of
Porthos: he turned his eyes anxiously toward the entrance-door, and he
was heard occasionally to inquire how it happened that Monsieur de
Saint-Aignan was so long in arriving. At last, at the moment when his
majesty was finishing a pot of preserved plums with a deep sigh,
Saint-Aignan appeared. The king's eyes, which had become somewhat dull,
immediately began to sparkle. The comte advanced toward the king's
table, and Louis arose at his approach. Everybody arose at the same
time, including Porthos, who was just finishing an almond cake, capable
of making the jaws of a crocodile stick together. The supper was over.




CHAPTER XXII.

AFTER SUPPER.


The king took Saint-Aignan by the arm, and passed into the adjoining
apartment. "What has detained you, comte?" said the king.

"I was bringing the answer, sire," replied the comte.

"She has taken a long time to reply to what I wrote her."

"Sire, your majesty has deigned to write in verse, and Mademoiselle de
la Valliere wished to repay your majesty in the same coin; that is to
say, in gold."

"Verses! Saint-Aignan," exclaimed the king in ecstasy. "Give them to me
at once." And Louis broke the seal of a little letter, inclosing the
verses which history has preserved entire for us, and which are more
meritorious in intention than in execution. Such as they were, however,
the king was enchanted with them, and exhibited his satisfaction by
unequivocal transports of delight; but the universal silence which
reigned in the rooms warned Louis, so sensitively particular with regard
to good breeding, that his delight might give rise to various
interpretations. He turned aside and put the note in his pocket, and
then advancing a few steps, which brought him again to the threshold of
the door close to his guests, he said, "M. de Valon, I have seen you
to-day with the greatest pleasure, and my pleasure will be equally
great to see you again." Porthos bowed as the Colossus of Rhodes would
have done, and retired from the room with his face toward the king. "M.
d'Artagnan," continued the king, "you will await my orders in the
gallery; I am obliged to you for having made me acquainted with M. de
Valon. Gentlemen," addressing himself to the other guests, "I return to
Paris to-morrow on account of the departure of the Spanish and Dutch
ambassadors. Until to-morrow, then."

The apartment was immediately cleared of the guests. The king took
Saint-Aignan by the arm, made him read La Valliere's verses over again,
and said. "What do you think of them?"

"Charming, sire."

"They charm me, in fact, and if they were known--"

"Oh! the professional poets would be jealous of them; but it is not at
all likely they will know anything about them."

"Did you give her mine?"

"Oh! sire, she positively devoured them."

"They were very weak, I am afraid."

"That is not what Mademoiselle de la Valliere said of them."

"Do you think she was pleased with them?"

"I am sure of it, sire."

"I must answer them, then."

"Oh! sire, immediately after supper? Your majesty will fatigue
yourself."

"You're right; study after eating is very injurious."

"The labor of a poet, especially so: and besides, there is great
excitement prevailing at Mademoiselle de la Valliere's."

"What do you mean?"

"With her as with all the ladies of the court."

"Why?"

"On account of poor De Guiche's accident."

"Has anything serious happened to De Guiche, then?"

"Yes, sire, he has one hand nearly destroyed, a hole in his breast: in
fact he is dying."


[Illustration: DE GUICHE TURNED ROUND ALSO, AND, AT THE MOMENT THE
HORSE WAS QUIET AGAIN, HE FIRED, AND THE BALL CARRIED OFF DE WARDES' HAT
FROM HIS HEAD.--_Page 91._]


"Good heavens! who told you that?"

"Manicamp brought him back just now to the house of a doctor here in
Fontainebleau, and the rumor soon reached us all here."

"Brought back! Poor De Guiche; and how did it happen?"

"Ah! that is the very question, how did it happen?"

"You say that in a very singular manner, Saint-Aignan. Give me the
details. What does he say himself?"

"He says nothing, sire: but others do."

"What others?"

"Those who brought him back, sire."

"Who are they?"

"I do not know, sire; but M. de Manicamp knows. M. de Manicamp is one of
his friends."

"As everybody is, indeed," said the king.

"Oh! no!" returned Saint-Aignan, "you are mistaken, sire; every one is
not precisely friends with M. de Guiche."

"How do you know that?"

"Does your majesty require me to explain myself?"

"Certainly I do."

"Well, sire, I believe I have heard something said about a quarrel
between two gentlemen."

"When?"

"This very evening, before your majesty's supper was served."

"That can hardly be. I have issued such stringent and severe ordinances
with respect to dueling, that no one, I presume, would dare to disobey
them."

"In that case, Heaven preserve me from excusing any one!" exclaimed
Saint-Aignan. "Your majesty commanded me to speak, and I spoke
accordingly."

"Tell me, then, in what way the Comte de Guiche has been wounded?"

"Sire, it is said to have been at a boar-hunt."

"This evening?"

"Yes, sire."

"One of his hands shattered, and a hole in his breast. Who was at the
hunt with M. de Guiche?"

"I do not know, sire; but M. de Manicamp knows, or ought to know."

"You are concealing something from me, Saint-Aignan."

"Nothing, sire, I assure you."

"Then, explain to me how the accident happened; was it a musket that
burst?"

"Very likely, sire. But yet, on reflection, it could hardly have been
that, for Guiche's pistol was found close by him still loaded."

"His pistol? But a man does not go to a boar-hunt with a pistol, I
should think."

"Sire, it is also said that Guiche's horse was killed, and that the
horse is still to be found in the wide open glade in the forest."

"His horse?--Guiche go on horseback to a boar-hunt!--Saint-Aignan, I do
not understand a syllable of what you have been telling me. Where did
the affair happen?"

"At the Rond-point, in that part of the forest called the Bois-Rochin."

"That will do. Call M. d'Artagnan." Saint-Aignan obeyed, and the
musketeer entered.

"Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the king, "you will leave this place by the
little door of the private staircase."

"Yes, sire."

"You will mount your horse."

"Yes, sire."

"And you will proceed to the Rond-point du Bois-Rochin. Do you know the
spot?"

"Yes, sire. I have fought there twice."

"What!" exclaimed the king, amazed at the reply.

"Under the edicts, sire, of Cardinal Richelieu," returned D'Artagnan,
with his usual impassibility.

"That is very different, monsieur. You will, therefore, go there, and
will examine the locality very carefully. A man has been wounded there,
and you will find a horse lying dead. You will tell me what your opinion
is upon the whole affair."

"Very good, sire."

"It is a matter of course that it is your own opinion I require, and not
that of any one else."

"You shall have it in an hour's time, sire."

"I prohibit your speaking with any one, whoever it may be."

"Except with the person who must give me a lantern," said D'Artagnan.

"Oh! that is a matter of course," said the king, laughing at the
liberty, which he tolerated in no one but his captain of musketeers.
D'Artagnan left by the little staircase.

"Now, let my physician be sent for," said Louis. Ten minutes afterward
the king's physician arrived, quite out of breath.

"You will go, monsieur," said the king to him, "and accompany M. de
Saint-Aignan wherever he may take you; you will render me an account of
the state of the person you may see in the house you will be taken to."
The physician obeyed without a remark, as at that time people began to
obey Louis XIV., and left the room preceding Saint-Aignan.

"Do you, Saint-Aignan, send Manicamp to me, before the physician can
possibly have spoken to him." And Saint-Aignan left in his turn.




CHAPTER XXIII.

SHOWING IN WHAT WAY D'ARTAGNAN DISCHARGED THE MISSION WITH WHICH THE
KING HAD INTRUSTED HIM.


While the king was engaged in making these last-mentioned arrangements
in order to ascertain the truth, D'Artagnan, without losing a second,
ran to the stable, took down the lantern, saddled his horse himself, and
proceeded toward the place which his majesty had indicated. According to
the promise he had made, he had neither seen nor met any one; and, as we
have observed, he had carried his scruples so far as to do without the
assistance of the helpers in the stables altogether. D'Artagnan was one
of those who in moments of difficulty pride themselves on increasing
their own value. By dint of hard galloping, he in less than five minutes
reached the wood, fastened his horse to the first tree he came to, and
penetrated to the broad open space on foot. He then began to inspect
most carefully, on foot and with his lantern in his hand, the whole
surface of the Rond-point, went forward, turned back again, measured,
examined, and after half an hour's minute inspection, he returned
silently to where he had left his horse, and pursued his way in deep
reflection and at a foot-pace to Fontainebleau. Louis was waiting in his
cabinet; he was alone, and with a pencil was scribbling on paper certain
lines which D'Artagnan at the first glance recognized as being very
unequal and very much scratched about. The conclusion he arrived at was,
that they must be verses. The king raised his head and perceived
D'Artagnan. "Well, monsieur," he said, "do you bring me any news?"

"Yes, sire."

"What have you seen?"

"As far as probability goes, sire," D'Artagnan began to reply.

"It was certainty I requested of you."

"I will approach it as near as I possibly can. The weather was very well
adapted for investigations of the character I have just made; it has
been raining this evening, and the roads were wet and muddy--"

"Well, the result, M. d'Artagnan?"

"Sire, your majesty told me that there was a horse lying dead in the
cross-road of the Bois-Rochin, and I began, therefore, by studying the
roads. I say the roads, because the center of the cross-road is reached
by four separate roads. The one that I myself took was the only one that
presented any fresh traces. Two horses had followed it side by side;
their eight feet were marked very distinctly in the clay. One of the
riders was more impatient than the other, for the foot-prints of the one
were invariably in advance of the other about half a horse's length."

"Are you quite sure they came together?" said the king.

"Yes, sire. The horses are two rather large animals of equal
pace--horses well used to maneuvers of all kinds, for they wheeled round
the barrier of the Rond-point together."

"Well--and after?"

"The two cavaliers paused there for a minute, no doubt to arrange the
conditions of the engagement; the horses grew restless and impatient.
One of the riders spoke, while the other listened and seemed to have
contented himself by simply answering. His horse pawed the ground, which
proves that his attention was so taken up by listening that he let the
bridle fall from his hand."

"A hostile meeting did take place, then?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Continue; you are a most accurate observer."

"One of the two cavaliers remained where he was standing, the one, in
fact, who had been listening; the other crossed the open space, and at
first placed himself directly opposite to his adversary. The one who had
remained stationary traversed the Rond-point at a gallop, about
two-thirds of its length, thinking that, by this means he would gain
upon his opponent; but the latter had followed the circumference of the
wood."

"You are ignorant of their names, I suppose?"

"Completely so, sire. Only he who followed the circumference of the wood
was mounted on a black horse."

"How do you know that?"

"I found a few hairs of his tail among the brambles which bordered the
sides of the ditch."

"Go on."

"As for the other horse, there can be no trouble in describing him,
since he was left dead on the field of battle."

"What was the cause of his death?"

"A ball which had passed through his temple."

"Was the ball that of a pistol or a gun?"

"It was a pistol-bullet, sire. Besides, the manner in which the horse
was wounded explained to me the tactics of the man who had killed it. He
had followed the circumference of the wood in order to take his
adversary in flank. Moreover, I followed his foot-tracks on the grass."

"The tracks of the black horse, do you mean?"

"Yes, sire."

"Go on, Monsieur d'Artagnan."

"As your majesty now perceives the position of the two adversaries, I
will, for a moment, leave the cavalier who had remained stationary for
the one who started off at a gallop."

"Do so."

"The horse of the cavalier who rode at full speed was killed on the
spot."

"How do you know that?"

"The cavalier had not time even to throw himself off his horse, and so
fell with it. I observed the impression of his leg, which, with a great
effort, he was enabled to extricate from under the horse. The spur,
pressed down by the weight of the animal, had plowed up the ground."

"Very good; and what did he do as soon as he rose up again?"

"He walked straight up to his adversary."

"Who still remained upon the verge of the forest?"

"Yes, sire. Then, having reached a favorable distance, he stopped
firmly, for the impression of both his heels are left in the ground
quite close to each other, fired, and missed his adversary."

"How do you know he did not hit him?"

"I found a hat with a ball through it."

"Ah, a proof, then!" exclaimed the king.

"Insufficient, sire," replied D'Artagnan, coldly; "it is a hat without
any letters indicating its ownership, without arms: a red feather, as
all hats have: the lace, even, had nothing particular in it."

"Did the man with the hat through which the bullet had passed fire a
second time?"

"Oh, sire, he had already fired twice."

"How did you ascertain that?"

"I found the waddings of the pistol."

"And what became of the bullet which did not kill the horse?"

"It cut in two the feather of the hat belonging to him against whom it
was directed, and broke a small birch at the other end of the open
glade."

"In that case, then, the man on the black horse was disarmed, while his
adversary had still one more shot to fire."

"Sire, while the dismounted rider was extricating himself from his
horse, the other was reloading his pistol. Only, he was much agitated
while he was loading it, and his hand trembled greatly."

"How do you know that?"

"Half the charge fell to the ground, and he threw the ramrod aside, not
having time to replace it in the pistol."

"Monsieur d'Artagnan, it is marvelous what you tell me."

"It is only close observation, sire, and the commonest highwayman would
do as much."

"The whole scene is before me from the manner in which you relate it."

"I have, in fact, reconstructed it in my own mind, with merely a few
alterations."

"And now," said the king, "let us return to the dismounted cavalier. You
were saying that he had walked toward his adversary while the latter was
loading his pistol."

"Yes; but at the very moment he himself was taking aim, the other
fired."

"Oh!" said the king; "and the shot?"

"The shot told terribly, sire; the dismounted cavalier fell upon his
face, after having staggered forward three or four paces."

"Where was he hit?"

"In two places; in the first place, in his right hand, and then, by the
same bullet, in his chest."

"But how could you ascertain that?" inquired the king, full of
admiration.

"By a very simple means; the butt-end of the pistol was covered with
blood, and the trace of the bullet could be observed with fragments of a
broken ring. The wounded man, in all probability, had the ring-finger
and the little finger carried off."

"As far as the hand goes, I have nothing to say; but the chest!"

"Sire, there were two small pools of blood, at a distance of about two
feet and a half from each other. At one of these pools of blood the
grass was torn up by the clenched hand; at the other the grass was
simply pressed down by the weight of the body."

"Poor De Guiche!" exclaimed the king.

"Ah! it was M. de Guiche, then?" said the musketeer, very quietly. "I
suspected it, but did not venture to mention it to your majesty."

"And what made you suspect it?"

"I recognized the De Grammont arms upon the holsters of the dead horse."

"And you think he is seriously wounded?"

"Very seriously, since he fell immediately, and remained a long time in
the same place; however, he was able to walk, as he left the spot,
supported by two friends."

"You met him returning, then?"

"No; but I observed the foot-prints of three men; the one on the right
and the one on the left walked freely and easily, but the one in the
middle dragged his feet as he walked; besides, he left traces of blood
at every step he took."

"Now, monsieur, since you saw the combat so distinctly that not a single
detail seems to have escaped you, tell me something about De Guiche's
adversary?"

"Oh, sire, I do not know him."

"And yet you see everything very clearly."

"Yes, sire, I see everything; but I do not tell all I see; and, since
the poor devil has escaped, your majesty will permit me to say that I do
not intend to denounce him."

"And yet he is guilty, since he has fought a duel, monsieur."

"Not guilty in my eyes, sire," said D'Artagnan, coldly.

"Monsieur!" exclaimed the king, "are you aware of what you are saying?"

"Perfectly, sire; but, according to my notion, a man who fights a duel
is a brave man; such, at least, is my own opinion; but your majesty may
have another; that is very natural--you are the master here."

"Monsieur d'Artagnan, I ordered you, however--"

D'Artagnan interrupted the king, by a respectful gesture. "You ordered
me, sire, to gather what particulars I could, respecting a hostile
meeting that had taken place; those particulars you have. If you order
me to arrest M. de Guiche's adversary, I will do so; but do not order me
to denounce him to you, for in that case I will not obey."

"Very well! Arrest him, then."

"Give me his name, sire."

The king stamped his foot angrily; but after a moment's reflection, he
said, "You are right--ten times, twenty times, a hundred times right."

"That is my opinion, sire; I am happy that, this time, it accords with
your majesty's."

"One word more. Who assisted Guiche?"

"I do not know, sire."

"But you speak of two men. There was a person present, then, as second."

"There was no second, sire. Nay, more than that, when M. de Guiche fell,
his adversary fled without giving him any assistance."

"The miserable coward!" exclaimed the king.

"The consequence of your ordinances, sire. If a man has fought well and
fairly, and has already escaped one chance of death, he naturally wishes
to escape a second. M. de Botteville cannot be forgotten very easily."

"And so, men turn cowards."

"No, they become prudent."

"And he has fled, then, you say?"

"Yes; and as fast as his horse could possibly carry him."

"In what direction?"

"In the direction of the chateau."

"Well; and after--?"

"Afterward, as I have had the honor of telling your majesty, two men on
foot arrived, who carried M. de Guiche back with them."

"What proof have you that these men arrived after the combat?"

"A very evident proof, sire; at the moment the encounter took place,
the rain had just ceased, the ground had not had time to imbibe the
moisture, and had, consequently, become damp; the footsteps sunk in the
ground; but, while M. de Guiche was lying there in a fainting condition
the ground became firm again, and the footsteps made a less sensible
impression."

Louis clapped his hands together in sign of admiration. "Monsieur
d'Artagnan," he said, "you are positively the cleverest man in my
kingdom."

"The very thing that M. de Richelieu thought, and M. de Mazarin said,
sire."

"And, now, it remains for us to see if your sagacity is in fault."

"Oh! sire, a man may be mistaken; _errare humanum est_," said the
musketeer, philosophically.

"In that case, you are not human, Monsieur d'Artagnan, for I believe you
never are mistaken."

"Your majesty said, that we were going to see whether such was the case
or not."

"Yes."

"In what way, may I venture to ask?"

"I have sent for M. de Manicamp, and M. de Manicamp is coming."

"And M. de Manicamp knows the secret?"

"Guiche has no secrets for M. de Manicamp."

D'Artagnan shook his head. "No one was present at the combat, I repeat;
and, unless M. de Manicamp was one of the two men who brought him
back--"

"Hush!" said the king, "he is coming; remain there, and listen
attentively."

"Very good, sire."

And, at the same moment, Manicamp and Saint-Aignan appeared at the
thresh-hold of the door.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE ENCOUNTER.


The king with his hand made, first to the musketeer, and then to
Saint-Aignan, an imperious and significant gesture, as much as to say,
"On your lives, not a word." D'Artagnan withdrew, like a soldier, into a
corner of the room; Saint-Aignan, in his character of favorite, leaned
over the back of the king's chair. Manicamp, with his right foot
properly advanced, a smile upon his lips, and his white and well-formed
hands gracefully disposed, advanced to make his reverence to the king,
who returned the salutation by a bow. "Good evening, M. de Manicamp," he
said.

"Your majesty did me the honor to send for me," said Manicamp.

"Yes, in order to learn from you all the details of the unfortunate
accident which has befallen the Comte de Guiche."

"Oh! sire, it is very grievous indeed."

"You were there?"

"Not precisely so, sire."

"But you arrived on the scene where the accident occurred a few minutes
after it took place?"

"I did so, sire, about half an hour afterward."

"And where did the accident happen?"

"I believe, sire, the place is called the Rond-point du Bois-Rochin."

"Oh! the rendezvous of the hunt."

"The very spot, sire."

"Very good; tell me what details you are acquainted with, respecting
this unhappy affair, Monsieur de Manicamp."

"Perhaps your majesty has already been informed of them, and I fear to
fatigue you by useless repetitions."

"No, do not be afraid of that."

Manicamp looked all around him; he only saw D'Artagnan leaning with his
back against the wainscot--D'Artagnan, calm, kind, and good-natured as
usual--and Saint-Aignan whom he had accompanied, and who still leaned
over the king's armchair with an expression of countenance equally full
of good feeling. He determined, therefore, to speak out. "Your majesty
is perfectly aware," he said, "that accidents are very frequent in
hunting."

"In hunting, do you say?"

"I mean, sire, when an animal is brought to bay."

"Ah! ah!" said the king, "it was when the animal was brought to bay,
then, that the accident happened."

"Alas! sire, unhappily, it was so."

The king paused for a moment before he said: "What animal was being
hunted?"

"A wild boar, sire."

"And what could possibly have possessed De Guiche to go to a wild-boar
hunt by himself; that is but a clownish idea of sport, and only fit for
that class of people who, unlike the Marechal de Grammont, have no dogs
and huntsmen to hunt as gentlemen should do."

Manicamp shrugged his shoulders. "Youth is very rash," he said
sententiously.

"Well, go on," said the king.

"At all events," continued Manicamp, not venturing to be too precipitate
and hasty, and letting his words fall very slowly, one by one, "at all
events, sire, poor De Guiche went hunting--quite alone."

"Quite alone, indeed! What a sportsman. And is not M. de Guiche aware
that the wild boar always stands at bay?"

"That is the very thing that really happened, sire."

"He had some idea, then, of the beast being there?"

"Yes, sire, some peasants had seen it among their potatoes."

"And what kind of animal was it?"

"A short, thick beast."

"You may as well tell me, monsieur, that Guiche had some idea of
committing suicide, for I have seen him hunt, and he is an active and
vigorous hunter. Whenever he fires at an animal brought to bay and held
in check by the dogs, he takes every possible precaution, and yet he
fires with a carbine, and on this occasion he seems to have faced the
boar with pistols only."

Manicamp started.

"A costly pair of pistols, excellent weapons to fight a duel with a man
and not with a wild boar. What absurdity."

"There are some things, sire, which are difficult of explanation."

"You are quite right, and the event which we are now discussing is one
of those things. Go on."

During the recital, Saint-Aignan, who had probably made a sign to
Manicamp to be careful what he was about, found that the king's glance
was constantly fixed upon himself, so that it was utterly impossible to
communicate with Manicamp in any way. As for D'Artagnan, the statue of
Silence at Athens was far more noisy and far more expressive than he.
Manicamp, therefore, was obliged to continue in the same way he had
begun, and so contrived to get more and more entangled in his
explanation. "Sire," he said, "this is probably how the affair happened.
Guiche was waiting to receive the boar as it rushed toward him."

"On foot or on horseback?" inquired the king.

"On horseback. He fired upon the brute and missed his aim, and then it
dashed upon him."

"And the horse was killed?"

"Ah! your majesty knows that, then."

"I have been told that a horse has been found lying dead in the
cross-roads of the Bois-Rochin, and I presume it was De Guiche's horse."

"Perfectly true, sire, it was his."

"Well, so much for the horse, now for De Guiche?"

"Guiche, once down, was attacked and worried by the wild boar, and
wounded in the hand and in the chest."

"It is a horrible accident, but it must be admitted it was De Guiche's
own fault. How could he possibly have gone to hunt such an animal merely
armed with pistols; he must have forgotten the fable of Adonis?"

Manicamp rubbed his ear in seeming perplexity. "Very true," he said, "it
was very imprudent."

"Can you explain it, Monsieur Manicamp?"

"Sire, what is written is written!"

"Ah! you are a fatalist."

Manicamp looked very uncomfortable and ill at ease. "I am angry with
you, Monsieur Manicamp," continued the king.

"With me, sire?"

"Yes. How was it that you, who are De Guiche's intimate friend, and who
know that he is subject to such acts of folly, did not stop him in
time?"

Manicamp hardly knew what to do; the tone in which the king spoke was
not exactly that of a credulous man. On the other hand, the tone did not
indicate any particular severity, nor did he seem to care very much
about the cross-examination. There was more of raillery in it than of
menace. "And you say, then," continued the king, "that it was positively
De Guiche's horse that was found dead?"

"Quite positive, sire."

"Did that astonish you?"

"No, sire: for your majesty will remember that, at the last hunt, M. de
Saint-Maure had a horse killed under him, and in the same way."

"Yes, but that one was ripped open."

"Of course, sire."

"Had Guiche's horse been ripped open, like M. de Saint-Maure's horse,
that would not have astonished me, indeed."

Manicamp opened his eyes very wide. "Am I mistaken," resumed the king,
"was it not in the temple that De Guiche's horse was struck? You must
admit, Monsieur de Manicamp, that that is a very singular wound."

"You are aware, sire, that the horse is a very intelligent animal, and
he endeavored to defend himself."

"But a horse defends himself with his hind feet, and not with his head."

"In that case the terrified horse might have slipped or fallen down,"
said Manicamp, "and the boar, you understand, sire, the boar--"

"Oh! I understand that perfectly, as far as the horse is concerned; but
how about his rider?"

"Well! that, too, is simple enough; the boar left the horse and attacked
the rider; and, as I have already had the honor of informing your
majesty, shattered De Guiche's hand at the very moment he was about to
discharge his second pistol at him, and then, with a blow of his tusk,
made that terrible hole in his chest."

"Nothing can possibly be more likely; really, Monsieur de Manicamp, you
are wrong in placing so little confidence in your own eloquence, and you
can tell a story most admirably."

"Your majesty is exceedingly kind," said Manicamp, saluting him in the
most embarrassed manner.

"From this day henceforth, I will prohibit any gentleman attached to my
court going to a similar encounter. Really, one might just as well
permit dueling."

Manicamp started, and moved as if he were about to withdraw. "Is your
majesty satisfied?" he inquired.

"Delighted; but do not withdraw yet, Monsieur de Manicamp," said Louis,
"I have something to say to you."

"Well, well!" thought D'Artagnan, "there is another who is not up to our
mark;" and he uttered a sigh which might signify, "oh! the men of our
stamp, where are they now?"

At this moment an usher lifted up the curtain before the door, and
announced the king's physician.

"Ah!" exclaimed Louis, "here comes Monsieur Valot, who has just been to
see M. de Guiche. We shall now hear news of the wounded man."

Manicamp felt more uncomfortable than ever. "In this way, at least,"
added the king, "our conscience will be quite clear." And he looked at
D'Artagnan, who did not seem in the slightest degree discomposed.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE PHYSICIAN.


M. Valot entered. The position of the different persons present was
precisely the same: the king was seated, Saint-Aignan still leaning over
the back of his armchair, D'Artagnan with his back against the wall, and
Manicamp still standing.

"Well, M. Valot," said the king, "have you obeyed my directions?"

"With the greatest alacrity, sire."

"You went to the doctor's house in Fontainebleau?"

"Yes, sire."

"And you found M. de Guiche there?"

"I did, sire."

"What state was he in? Speak unreservedly."

"In a very sad state, indeed, sire."

"The wild boar did not quite devour him, however?"

"Devour whom?"

"Guiche."

"What wild boar?"

"The boar that wounded him."

"M. de Guiche wounded by a boar?"

"So it is said, at least."

"By a poacher, rather, or by a jealous husband, or an ill-used lover,
who, in order to be revenged, fired upon him."

"What is that you say, Monsieur Valot? Are not M. de Guiche's wounds
produced by defending himself against a wild boar?"

"M. de Guiche's wounds are produced by a pistol-bullet which broke his
ring-finger and the little finger of the right hand, and afterward
buried itself in the intercostal muscles of the chest."

"A bullet! Are you sure Monsieur de Guiche has been wounded by a
bullet?" exclaimed the king, pretending to look much surprised.

"Indeed I am, sire; so sure, in fact, that here it is." And he presented
to the king a half-flattened bullet, which the king looked at, but did
not touch.

"Did he have that in his chest, poor fellow?" he asked.

"Not precisely. The ball did not penetrate, but was flattened, as you
see, either upon the trigger of the pistol or upon the right side of the
breast-bone."

"Good heavens!" said the king, seriously, "you said nothing to me about
this, Monsieur de Manicamp."

"Sire--"

"What does all this mean, then--this invention about hunting a wild boar
at nightfall? Come, speak, monsieur."

"Sire--"

"It seems, then, that you are right," said the king, turning round
toward his captain of musketeers, "and that a duel actually took place."

The king possessed, to a greater extent than any one else, the faculty
enjoyed by the great in power or position, of compromising and dividing
those beneath him. Manicamp darted a look full of reproaches at the
musketeer. D'Artagnan understood the look at once, and, not wishing to
remain beneath the weight of such an accusation, advanced a step
forward, and said; "Sire, your majesty commanded me to go and explore
the place where the cross-roads meet in the Bois-Rochin, and to report
to you, according to my own ideas, what had taken place there. I
submitted my observations to you, but without denouncing any one. It was
your majesty yourself who was the first to name the Comte de Guiche."

"Well, monsieur, well," said the king, haughtily, "you have done your
duty, and I am satisfied with you. But you, Monsieur de Manicamp, have
failed in yours, for you have told me a falsehood."

"A falsehood, sire. The expression is a hard one."

"Find another instead, then."

"Sire, I will not attempt to do so. I have already been unfortunate
enough to displease your majesty, and it will, in every respect, be far
better for me to accept most humbly any reproaches you may think proper
to address to me."

"You are right, monsieur; whoever conceals the truth from me risks my
displeasure."

"Sometimes, sire, one is ignorant of the truth."

"No further falsehood, monsieur, or I double the punishment."

Manicamp bowed and turned pale. D'Artagnan again made another step
forward, determined to interfere, if the still increasing anger of the
king attained certain limits.

"You see, monsieur," continued the king, "that it is useless to deny the
thing any longer. M. de Guiche has fought a duel."

"I do not deny it, sire; and it would have been generous in your majesty
not to have forced me to tell a falsehood."

"Forced! Who forced you?"

"Sire, M. de Guiche is my friend: your majesty has forbidden duels under
pain of death; a falsehood might save my friend's life, and I told it."

"Good!" murmured D'Artagnan, "an excellent fellow, upon my word!"

"Instead of telling a falsehood, monsieur, you should have prevented him
from fighting," said the king.

"Oh, sire, your majesty, who is the most accomplished gentleman in
France, knows quite as well any of us other gentlemen that we have never
considered M. de Botteville dishonored for having suffered death on the
Place de Greve. That which does in truth dishonor a man is to avoid
meeting his enemy, and not to avoid meeting his executioner."

"Well, monsieur, that may be so," said Louis XIV.; "I am very desirous
of suggesting a means of your repairing all."

"If it be a means of which a gentleman may avail himself, I shall most
eagerly do so."

"The name of M. de Guiche's adversary?"

"Oh, oh!" murmured D'Artagnan, "are we going to take Louis XIII. as a
model?"

"Sire!" said Manicamp, with an accent of reproach.

"You will not name him, it appears, then?" said the king.

"Sire, I do not know him."

"Bravo!" murmured D'Artagnan.

"Monsieur de Manicamp, hand your sword to the captain."

Manicamp bowed very gracefully, unbuckled his sword, smiling as he did
so, and handed it for the musketeer to take. But Saint-Aignan advanced
hurriedly between him and D'Artagnan. "Sire," he said, "will your
majesty permit me to say a word?"

"Do so," said the king, delighted perhaps at the bottom of his heart for
some one to step between him and the wrath which he felt had carried him
too far.

"Manicamp, you are a brave man, and the king will appreciate your
conduct; but to wish to serve your friends too well is to destroy them.
Manicamp, you know the name the king asks you for?"

"It is perfectly true--I do know it."

"You will give it up then?"

"If I felt I ought to have mentioned it, I should have already done so."

"Then I will tell it, for I am not so extremely sensitive on such points
of honor as you are."

"You are at liberty to do so, but it seems to me, however--"

"Oh! a truce to magnanimity; I will not permit you to go to the Bastille
in that way. Do you speak; or I will."

Manicamp was keen-witted enough, and perfectly understood that he had
done quite sufficient to produce a good opinion of his conduct: it was
now only a question of persevering in such a manner as to regain the
good graces of the king. "Speak, monsieur," he said to Saint-Aignan: "I
have on my own behalf done all that my conscience told me to do, and it
must have been very importunate," he added, turning toward the king,
"since its mandates led me to disobey your majesty's commands; but your
majesty will forgive me, I hope, when you learn that I was anxious to
preserve the honor of a lady."

"Of a lady?" said the king, with some uneasiness.

"Yes, sire."

"A lady was the cause of this duel?"

Manicamp bowed.

"If the position of the lady in question warrants it," he said, "I shall
not complain of your having acted with so much circumspection; on the
contrary, indeed."

"Sire, everything which concerns your majesty's household, or the
household of your majesty's brother, is of importance in my eyes."

"In my brother's household," repeated Louis XIV., with a slight
hesitation. "The cause of the duel was a lady belonging to my brother's
household, do you say?"

"Or to Madame's."

"Ah! to Madame's?"

"Yes, sire."

"Well--and this lady?"

"Is one of the maids of honor of her royal highness, Madame la Duchesse
d'Orleans."

"For whom M. de Guiche fought--do you say?"

"Yes, sire, and, this time, I tell no falsehood."

Louis seemed restless and anxious. "Gentlemen," he said, turning toward
the spectators of this scene, "will you have the goodness to retire for
a moment? I wish to be alone with M. de Manicamp, I know he has some
very important communications to make for his own justification, and
which he will not venture to do before witnesses.... Put up your sword,
Monsieur de Manicamp."

Manicamp returned his sword to his belt.

"The fellow decidedly has his wits about him," murmured the musketeer,
taking Saint-Aignan by the arm, and withdrawing with him.

"He will get out of it," said the latter in D'Artagnan's ear.

"And with honor, too, comte."

Manicamp cast a glance of recognition at Saint-Aignan and the captain,
which passed unnoticed by the king.

"Come, come," said D'Artagnan, as he left the room, "I had an
indifferent opinion of the new generation. Well, I was mistaken after
all, and there is some good in them, I perceive."

Valot preceded the favorite and the captain, leaving the king and
Manicamp alone in the cabinet.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WHEREIN D'ARTAGNAN PERCEIVES THAT IT WAS HE WHO WAS MISTAKEN, AND
MANICAMP WHO WAS RIGHT.


The king, determined to be satisfied that no one was listening, went
himself to the door, and then returned precipitately and placed himself
opposite to Manicamp. "And now we are alone, Monsieur de Manicamp,
explain yourself?"

"With the greatest frankness, sire," replied the young man.

"And, in the first place, pray understand," added the king, "that there
is nothing to which I personally attach a greater importance than the
honor of any lady."

"That is the very reason, sire, why I endeavored to study your delicacy
of sentiment and feeling."

"Yes, I understand it all now. You say that it was one of the maids of
honor of my sister-in-law who was the subject of dispute, and that the
person in question, Guiche's adversary, the man, in point of fact, whom
you will not name--"

"But whom M. de Saint-Aignan will name, monsieur."

"Yes; you say, however, that this man has insulted some one belonging to
the household of Madame."

"Yes, sire, Mademoiselle de la Valliere."

"Ah!" said the king, as if he had expected the name, and yet as if its
announcement had caused him a sudden pang; "ah! it was Mademoiselle de
la Valliere who was insulted."

"I do not say precisely that she was insulted, sire."

"But at all events--"

"I merely say that she was spoken of in terms far from respectful."

"A man dares to speak in disrespectful terms of Mademoiselle de la
