each side in their own convictions. A few days later Hulot and his
colleagues received reinforcements. The new minister of war notified
them that General Brune was appointed to command the troops in the west
of France. Hulot, whose experience was known to the government, had
provisional control in the departments of the Orne and Mayenne. An
unusual activity began to show itself in the government offices.
Circulars from the minister of war and the minister of police gave
notice that vigorous measures entrusted to the military commanders would
be taken to stifle the insurrection at its birth. But the Chouans and
the Vendeans had profited by the inaction of the Directory to rouse
the whole region and virtually take possession of it. A new Consular
proclamation was therefore issued. This time, it was the general
speaking to his troops:--

  SOLDIERS:

  There are none but brigands, _emigres_, and hirelings of England
  now remaining in the West.

  The army is composed of more than fifty thousand brave men. Let me
  speedily hear from them that the rebel chiefs have ceased to live.
  Glory is won by toil alone; if it could be had by living in
  barracks in a town, all would have it.

  Soldiers, whatever be the rank you hold in the army, the gratitude
  of the nation awaits you. To be worthy of it, you must brave the
  inclemencies of weather, ice, snow, and the excessive coldness of
  the nights; you must surprise your enemies at daybreak, and
  exterminate those wretches, the disgrace of France.

  Make a short and sure campaign; be inexorable to those brigands,
  and maintain strict discipline.

  National Guards, join the strength of your arms to that of the
  line.

  If you know among you any men who fraternize with the brigands,
  arrest them. Let them find no refuge; pursue them; if traitors
  dare to harbor and defend them, let them perish together.

"What a man!" cried Hulot. "It is just as it was in the army of
Italy--he rings in the mass, and he says it himself. Don't you call that
talking, hey?"

"Yes, but he speaks by himself and in his own name," said Gerard, who
began to feel alarmed at the possible results of the 18th Brumaire.

"And where's the harm, since he's a soldier?" said Merle.

A group of soldiers were clustered at a little distance before the same
proclamation posted on a wall. As none of them could read, they gazed at
it, some with a careless eye, others with curiosity, while two or three
hunted about for a citizen who looked learned enough to read it to them.

"Now you tell us, Clef-des-Coeurs, what that rag of a paper says," cried
Beau-Pied, in a saucy tone to his comrade.

"Easy to guess," replied Clef-des-Coeurs.

At these words the other men clustered round the pair, who were always
ready to play their parts.

"Look there," continued Clef-des-Coeurs, pointing to a coarse
woodcut which headed the proclamation and represented a pair of
compasses,--which had lately superseded the level of 1793. "It means
that the troops--that's us--are to march firm; don't you see the
compasses are open, both legs apart?--that's an emblem."

"Such much for your learning, my lad; it isn't an emblem--it's called
a problem. I've served in the artillery," continued Beau-Pied, "and
problems were meat and drink to my officers."

"I say it's an emblem."

"It's a problem."

"What will you bet?"

"Anything."

"Your German pipe?"

"Done!"

"By your leave, adjutant, isn't that thing an emblem, and not a
problem?" said Clef-des-Coeurs, following Gerard, who was thoughtfully
walking away.

"It is both," he replied, gravely.

"The adjutant was making fun of you," said Beau-Pied. "That paper means
that our general in Italy is promoted Consul, which is a fine grade, and
we are to get shoes and overcoats."




II. ONE OF FOUCHE'S IDEAS

One morning towards the end of Brumaire just as Hulot was exercising his
brigade, now by order of his superiors wholly concentrated at Mayenne,
a courier arrived from Alencon with despatches, at the reading of which
his face betrayed extreme annoyance.

"Forward, then!" he cried in an angry tone, sticking the papers into the
crown of his hat. "Two companies will march with me towards Mortagne.
The Chouans are there. You will accompany me," he said to Merle and
Gerard. "May be I created a nobleman if I can understand one word of
that despatch. Perhaps I'm a fool! well, anyhow, forward, march! there's
no time to lose."

"Commandant, by your leave," said Merle, kicking the cover of the
ministerial despatch with the toe of his boot, "what is there so
exasperating in that?"

"God's thunder! nothing at all--except that we are fooled."

When the commandant gave vent to this military oath (an object it must
be said of Republican atheistical remonstrance) it gave warning of
a storm; the diverse intonations of the words were degrees of a
thermometer by which the brigade could judge of the patience of its
commander; the old soldier's frankness of nature had made this knowledge
so easy that the veriest little drummer-boy knew his Hulot by heart,
simply by observing the variations of the grimace with which the
commander screwed up his cheek and snapped his eyes and vented his oath.
On this occasion the tone of smothered rage with which he uttered the
words made his two friends silent and circumspect. Even the pits of the
small-pox which dented that veteran face seemed deeper, and the skin
itself browner than usual. His broad queue, braided at the edges, had
fallen upon one of his epaulettes as he replaced his three-cornered
hat, and he flung it back with such fury that the ends became untied.
However, as he stood stock-still, his hands clenched, his arms crossed
tightly over his breast, his mustache bristling, Gerard ventured to ask
him presently: "Are we to start at once?"

"Yes, if the men have ammunition."

"They have."

"Shoulder arms! Left wheel, forward, march!" cried Gerard, at a sign
from the commandant.

The drum-corps marched at the head of the two companies designated by
Gerard. At the first roll of the drums the commandant, who still stood
plunged in thought, seemed to rouse himself, and he left the town
accompanied by his two officers, to whom he said not a word. Merle and
Gerard looked at each other silently as if to ask, "How long is he going
to keep us in suspense?" and, as they marched, they cautiously kept
an observing eye on their leader, who continued to vent rambling words
between his teeth. Several times these vague phrases sounded like oaths
in the ears of his soldiers, but not one of them dared to utter a word;
for they all, when occasion demanded, maintained the stern discipline
to which the veterans who had served under Bonaparte in Italy were
accustomed. The greater part of them had belonged, like Hulot, to the
famous battalions which capitulated at Mayenne under a promise not to
serve again on the frontier, and the army called them "Les Mayencais."
It would be difficult to find leaders and men who more thoroughly
understood each other.

At dawn of the day after their departure Hulot and his troop were on the
high-road to Alencon, about three miles from that town towards Mortagne,
at a part of the road which leads through pastures watered by the
Sarthe. A picturesque vista of these meadows lay to the left, while the
woodlands on the right which flank the road and join the great forest
of Menil-Broust, serve as a foil to the delightful aspect of the
river-scenery. The narrow causeway is bordered on each side by ditches
the soil of which, being constantly thrown out upon the fields, has
formed high banks covered with furze,--the name given throughout the
West to this prickly gorse. This shrub, which spreads itself in thorny
masses, makes excellent fodder in winter for horses and cattle; but as
long as it was not cut the Chouans hid themselves behind its breastwork
of dull green. These banks bristling with gorse, signifying to
travellers their approach to Brittany, made this part of the road at the
period of which we write as dangerous as it was beautiful; it was these
dangers which compelled the hasty departure of Hulot and his soldiers,
and it was here that he at last let out the secret of his wrath.

He was now on his return, escorting an old mail-coach drawn by
post-horses, which the weariness of his soldiers, after their forced
march, was compelling to advance at a snail's pace. The company of Blues
from the garrison at Mortagne, who had escorted the rickety vehicle
to the limits of their district, where Hulot and his men had met them,
could be seen in the distance, on their way back to their quarters,
like so many black specks. One of Hulot's companies was in the rear, the
other in advance of the carriage. The commandant, who was marching with
Merle and Gerard between the advance guard and the carriage, suddenly
growled out: "Ten thousand thunders! would you believe that the general
detached us from Mayenne to escort two petticoats?"

"But, commandant," remarked Gerard, "when we came up just now and took
charge I observed that you bowed to them not ungraciously."

"Ha! that's the infamy of it. Those dandies in Paris ordered the
greatest attention paid to their damned females. How dare they dishonor
good and brave patriots by trailing us after petticoats? As for me, I
march straight, and I don't choose to have to do with other people's
zigzags. When I saw Danton taking mistresses, and Barras too, I said to
them: 'Citizens, when the Republic called you to govern, it was not that
you might authorize the vices of the old regime!' You may tell me that
women--oh yes! we must have women, that's all right. Good soldiers of
course must have women, and good women; but in times of danger, no!
Besides, where would be the good of sweeping away the old abuses if
patriots bring them back again? Look at the First Consul, there's a man!
no women for him; always about his business. I'd bet my left mustache
that he doesn't know the fool's errand we've been sent on!"

"But, commandant," said Merle, laughing, "I have seen the tip-end of
the nose of the young lady, and I'll declare the whole world needn't be
ashamed to feel an itch, as I do, to revolve round that carriage and get
up a bit of a conversation."

"Look out, Merle," said Gerard; "the veiled beauties have a man
accompanying them who seems wily enough to catch you in a trap."

"Who? that _incroyable_ whose little eyes are ferretting from one side
of the road to the other, as if he saw Chouans? The fellow seems to have
no legs; the moment his horse is hidden by the carriage, he looks like
a duck with its head sticking out of a pate. If that booby can hinder me
from kissing the pretty linnet--"

"'Duck'! 'linnet'! oh, my poor Merle, you have taken wings indeed! But
don't trust the duck. His green eyes are as treacherous as the eyes of
a snake, and as sly as those of a woman who forgives her husband. I
distrust the Chouans much less than I do those lawyers whose faces are
like bottles of lemonade."

"Pooh!" cried Merle, gaily. "I'll risk it--with the commandant's
permission. That woman has eyes like stars, and it's worth playing any
stakes to see them."

"Caught, poor fellow!" said Gerard to the commandant; "he is beginning
to talk nonsense!"

Hulot made a face, shrugged his shoulders, and said: "Before he swallows
the soup, I advise him to smell it."

"Bravo, Merle," said Gerard, "judging by his friend's lagging step that
he meant to let the carriage overtake him. Isn't he a happy fellow? He
is the only man I know who can laugh over the death of a comrade without
being thought unfeeling."

"He's the true French soldier," said Hulot, in a grave tone.

"Just look at him pulling his epaulets back to his shoulders, to show he
is a captain," cried Gerard, laughing,--"as if his rank mattered!"

The coach toward which the officer was pivoting did, in fact, contain
two women, one of whom seemed to be the servant of the other.

"Such women always run in couples," said Hulot.

A lean and sharp-looking little man ambled his horse sometimes before,
sometimes behind the carriage; but, though he was evidently accompanying
these privileged women, no one had yet seen him speak to them. This
silence, a proof either of respect or contempt, as the case might be;
the quantity of baggage belonging to the lady, whom the commandant
sneeringly called "the princess"; everything, even to the clothes of her
attendant squire, stirred Hulot's bile. The dress of the unknown man
was a good specimen of the fashions of the day then being caricatured as
"incroyable,"--unbelievable, unless seen. Imagine a person trussed up in
a coat, the front of which was so short that five or six inches of the
waistcoat came below it, while the skirts were so long that they hung
down behind like the tail of a cod,--the term then used to describe
them. An enormous cravat was wound about his neck in so many folds that
the little head which protruded from that muslin labyrinth certainly did
justify Captain Merle's comparison. The stranger also wore tight-fitting
trousers and Suwaroff boots. A huge blue-and-white cameo pinned his
shirt; two watch-chains hung from his belt; his hair, worn in ringlets
on each side of his face, concealed nearly the whole forehead; and, for
a last adornment, the collar of his shirt and that of his coat came so
high that his head seemed enveloped like a bunch of flowers in a horn of
paper. Add to these queer accessories, which were combined in utter want
of harmony, the burlesque contradictions in color of yellow trousers,
scarlet waistcoat, cinnamon coat, and a correct idea will be gained of
the supreme good taste which all dandies blindly obeyed in the first
years of the Consulate. This costume, utterly uncouth, seemed to have
been invented as a final test of grace, and to show that there was
nothing too ridiculous for fashion to consecrate. The rider seemed to
be about thirty years old, but he was really twenty-two; perhaps he
owed this appearance of age to debauchery, possibly to the perils of the
period. In spite of his preposterous dress, he had a certain elegance of
manner which proved him to be a man of some breeding.

When the captain had dropped back close to the carriage, the dandy
seemed to fathom his design, and favored it by checking his horse.
Merle, who had flung him a sardonic glance, encountered one of those
impenetrable faces, trained by the vicissitudes of the Revolution to
hide all, even the most insignificant, emotion. The moment the curved
end of the old triangular hat and the captain's epaulets were seen
by the occupants of the carriage, a voice of angelic sweetness said:
"Monsieur l'officier, will you have the kindness to tell us at what part
of the road we now are?"

There is some inexpressible charm in the question of an unknown
traveller, if a woman,--a world of adventure is in every word; but if
the woman asks for assistance or information, proving her weakness or
ignorance of certain things, every man is inclined to construct some
impossible tale which shall lead to his happiness. The words, "Monsieur
l'officier," and the polite tone of the question stirred the captain's
heart in a manner hitherto unknown to him. He tried to examine the lady,
but was cruelly disappointed, for a jealous veil concealed her features;
he could barely see her eyes, which shone through the gauze like onyx
gleaming in the sunshine.

"You are now three miles from Alencon, madame," he replied.

"Alencon! already!" and the lady threw herself, or, rather, she gently
leaned back in the carriage, and said no more.

"Alencon?" said the other woman, apparently waking up; "then you'll see
it again."

She caught sight of the captain and was silent. Merle, disappointed in
his hope of seeing the face of the beautiful incognita, began to examine
that of her companion. She was a girl about twenty-six years of age,
fair, with a pretty figure and the sort of complexion, fresh and white
and well-fed, which characterizes the women of Valognes, Bayeux, and the
environs of Alencon. Her blue eyes showed no great intelligence, but a
certain firmness mingled with tender feeling. She wore a gown of some
common woollen stuff. The fashion of her hair, done up closely under a
Norman cap, without any pretension, gave a charming simplicity to her
face. Her attitude, without, of course, having any of the conventional
nobility of society, was not without the natural dignity of a modest
young girl, who can look back upon her past life without a single cause
for repentance. Merle knew her at a glance for one of those wild
flowers which are sometimes taken from their native fields to Parisian
hot-houses, where so many blasting rays are concentrated, without ever
losing the purity of their color or their rustic simplicity. The naive
attitude of the girl and her modest glance showed Merle very plainly
that she did not wish a listener. In fact, no sooner had he withdrawn
than the two women began a conversation in so low a tone that only a
murmur of it reached his ear.

"You came away in such a hurry," said the country-girl, "that you hardly
took time to dress. A pretty-looking sight you are now! If we are going
beyond Alencon, you must really make your toilet."

"Oh! oh! Francine!" cried the lady.

"What is it?"

"This is the third time you have tried to make me tell you the reasons
for this journey and where we are going."

"Have I said one single word which deserves that reproach?"

"Oh, I've noticed your manoeuvring. Simple and truthful as you are,
you have learned a little cunning from me. You are beginning to hold
questioning in horror; and right enough, too, for of all the known ways
of getting at a secret, questions are, to my mind, the silliest."

"Well," said Francine, "since nothing escapes you, you must admit,
Marie, that your conduct would excite the curiosity of a saint.
Yesterday without a penny, to-day your hands are full of gold; at
Mortagne they give you the mail-coach which was pillaged and the driver
killed, with government troops to protect you, and you are followed by a
man whom I regard as your evil genius."

"Who? Corentin?" said the young lady, accenting the words by two
inflections of her voice expressive of contempt, a sentiment which
appeared in the gesture with which she waved her hand towards the rider.
"Listen, Francine," she said. "Do you remember Patriot, the monkey I
taught to imitate Danton?"

"Yes, mademoiselle."

"Well, were you afraid of him?"

"He was chained."

"And Corentin is muzzled, my dear."

"We used to play with Patriot by the hour," said Francine,--"I know
that; but he always ended by serving us some bad trick." So saying,
Francine threw herself hastily back close to her mistress, whose
hands she caught and kissed in a coaxing way; saying in a tone of deep
affection: "You know what I mean, Marie, but you will not answer me. How
can you, after all that sadness which did so grieve me--oh, indeed it
grieved me!--how can you, in twenty-four hours, change about and become
so gay? you, who talked of suicide! Why have you changed? I have a
right to ask these questions of your soul--it is mine, my claim to it is
before that of others, for you will never be better loved than you are
by me. Speak, mademoiselle."

"Why, Francine, don't you see all around you the secret of my good
spirits? Look at the yellowing tufts of those distant tree-tops; not one
is like another. As we look at them from this distance don't they
seem like an old bit of tapestry? See the hedges from behind which the
Chouans may spring upon us at any moment. When I look at that gorse I
fancy I can see the muzzles of their guns. Every time the road is shady
under the trees I fancy I shall hear firing, and then my heart beats and
a new sensation comes over me. It is neither the shuddering of fear nor
an emotion of pleasure; no, it is better than either, it is the stirring
of everything within me--it is life! Why shouldn't I be gay when a
little excitement is dropped into my monotonous existence?"

"Ah! you are telling me nothing, cruel girl! Holy Virgin!" added
Francine, raising her eyes in distress to heaven; "to whom will she
confess herself if she denies the truth to me?"

"Francine," said the lady, in a grave tone, "I can't explain to you my
present enterprise; it is horrible."

"Why do wrong when you know it to be wrong?"

"How can I help it? I catch myself thinking as if I were fifty, and
acting as if I were still fifteen. You have always been my better self,
my poor Francine, but in this affair I must stifle conscience. And," she
added after a pause, "I cannot. Therefore, how can you expect me to take
a confessor as stern as you?" and she patted the girl's hand.

"When did I ever blame your actions?" cried Francine. "Evil is so mixed
