
"And so you want to learn to read and write and grow into a wise man who
may some day rule over this land?"

"Oh, I want to learn!" cried the boy, dashing away his last tears.  "I
want to be wise and great; but oh, no: I don't want to rule and be King.
I want father to live till I am quite an old man."

"I hope he will!" said Swythe, smiling, and nodding his head pleasantly,
as the boy hurriedly turned the conversation by asking:

"What are you doing there?"

"Making some fresh ink, my boy," was the reply.

"Ink?  How?"

"Hah!" cried the monk, chuckling pleasantly; "now the vessel is opened
and eager for the knowledge to be poured in.  Question away, Fred, my
son, and mine shall be the task to pour the wisdom in--as far as I have
it," he added, with a sigh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Alfred stood at the great entrance late that afternoon when the loud
barking of the dogs told of the young hunters' return, and as soon as
they came in sight Red cried:

"There, I told you so; Fred's along with old Swythe."

For the monk was standing by the boy's side, waiting to see what success
the young hunters had achieved.

They looked to see their brother disappointed and ready to upbraid them
with going and leaving him behind; but they were surprised, for the boy
saluted them with:

"Well, where's the fat buck?"

"Oh," said Bald shortly, "we had a splendid run, but the dogs were so
stupid that he managed to get away.  But you ought to have been there:
it was grand."

"Was it?" said Alfred coolly.  The news did not seem to trouble him in
the least.  He noticed, though, that the three boys were so tired out
that not one of them seemed to care for his supper, and directly after
they went off to bed.



CHAPTER FIVE.

BEGINNING TO BE GREAT.

The boys had some fresh plan for the next day, and when Alfred went up
to bed they were all whispering eagerly; but as soon as their brother
entered the room they pretended to be asleep.

Alfred said nothing till he was undressed and about to get into his bed,
and then he only wished them good night.

There was no reply, and the boy felt hurt; but just then he recollected
something which made him clap his right hand first to his cheek and then
to his forehead, as if he fully expected to find both places still wet
and warm.  They felt still as if his mother's lips had but just left
them.

From that moment Alfred lay quite still in the darkness, feeling very
happy and contented, till all at once a long-drawn restful sigh escaped
his lips, and he was just dropping off to sleep when he awoke again and
lay listening, for his three brothers, believing that he had gone off to
sleep, began talking again in an eager whisper, but what about he could
not tell, till all at once Red said something about "otters."

They were going to have a grand otter hunt up the little Wantage stream
with the dogs; and for a few moments a feeling of bitter disappointment
came over the boy, for he had looked forward to the day when that hunt
would take place.

He felt better when he recalled the Queen's words as he wished her good
night.  They were:

"I am so glad, Fred, my boy.  You have made me feel very happy."

"Father Swythe must have told her what I said," thought Alfred, and in
another minute he was asleep.

The next morning after breakfast the boy did not feel half so brave, and
he was thinking of how he could get away to the monk's quiet cell-like
room without his brothers seeing him; but he was spared from all trouble
in that way, for the monk came up to him smiling.

"I'm going to speak to your brothers, Fred," he said.  "I told the Queen
that you had promised to try very hard, and she said she was very glad,
but she would be so much happier if your brothers came too; so I am
going to ask them to come.  Do you know where they are?"

"Out in the broad courtyard," said Alfred quickly; but Father Swythe
shook his head.

"No," he said; "I came across just now, and they were not there."

At that moment the distant barking of a dog was heard; followed by a
yelping chorus which made the boy run to the window and look out, to
catch sight of three figures and some half-dozen dogs disappearing over
the hill slope.

"I think they have gone after the otters with the dogs," said Alfred
sadly.

"Oh, I see," said the monk; "and you feel dull because you are not with
them?"

Alfred was too honest to deny it.

"Never mind, boy," said the little monk cheerily; "come to my room, and
we'll finish making the ink, and then you can learn to read the letters
as I make them, while I write out a poem for the Queen; and then I'll
get out the red and blue and yellow, and the thin leaves of gold, and
we'll try and make a beautiful big letter like those in the Queen's
book, and finish it off with some gold."

"But you can't do that?" cried Alfred, interested at once.

"Perhaps not so well as in the Queen's beautiful book; but come and
see."

The boy eagerly took hold of the monk's hand, and they were soon seated
at the little table in Swythe's room, with the light shining full upon
the slate slab, the pebble grinder, and the black patch.

"You said that was ink yesterday," said the boy, as Swythe gave the
pebble a few turns round, and then looked to see if the ink was of the
right thickness, which it was not, so a feather was dipped in a
water-jug, and a few drops allowed to fall upon the black patch.

"There," said Swythe, "a good writer makes all his own ink.  Now you
grind that up till it is well mixed.  Gently," cried Swythe; "that ink
is too precious to be spread all over the slab.  Grind it round and
round.  That's the way!  That will do!"

As he spoke, Swythe took a thin-bladed knife and a good-sized,
nicely-cleaned fresh-water mussel-shell, and let the boy carefully
scrape up all the ink from the slab and place it in the shell.

"That's well done!" he said.  "Now we'll write a line of letters."

"Yes," cried the boy; "let me write them."

"I wish you could, Fred, my boy," said the monk, smiling; "but you must
first learn."

"That's what I want to do," cried the boy eagerly.  "But how am I to
learn?"

"By watching me.  Now see."

Swythe rose from the table and opened a box, out of which he took a
crisp clean piece of nearly transparent sheepskin and a couple of quill
pens, sat down again, and then from another box he drew out a piece of
lead and a flat ruler--not a lead-pencil such as is now used, but a
little pointed piece of ordinary lead--with which he deftly made a few
straight lines across the parchment, and then very carefully drew a
beautiful capital A, which he finished off with scrolls and turns and
tiny vine-leaves with a running stalk and half-a-dozen tendrils.

"But you have put no grapes," cried Alfred.

"Give me time," said Swythe good-humouredly, and directly after he
faintly sketched in a bunch of grapes, broad at the top and growing
narrower till it ended in one grape alone.

"Oh, I wish I could do that!" cried Alfred eagerly.  "But I could never
do it so well!"

"I'm going to persevere till I make you do it better," said Swythe.
"Now we'll leave that for a bit and begin a Latin lesson."

Alfred sighed and looked longingly at the faint initial letter.
