it was, "Lord, Mr. Henry!" and "how do you do, Nancy?" many and many a
time in the week. 'Tis surprising the magnetic attraction which draws
people together from ever so far. I blush as I think of poor Nancy now,
in a red bodice and buxom purple cheeks and a canvas petticoat; and that
I devised schemes, and set traps, and made speeches in my heart, which
I seldom had courage to say when in presence of that humble enchantress,
who knew nothing beyond milking a cow, and opened her black eyes with
wonder when I made one of my fine speeches out of Waller or Ovid. Poor
Nancy! from the midst of far-off years thine honest country face beams
out; and I remember thy kind voice as if I had heard it yesterday.

When Doctor Tusher brought the news that the small-pox was at the "Three
Castles," whither a tramper, it was said, had brought the malady, Henry
Esmond's first thought was of alarm for poor Nancy, and then of shame
and disquiet for the Castlewood family, lest he might have brought this
infection; for the truth is that Mr. Harry had been sitting in a back
room for an hour that day, where Nancy Sievewright was with a little
brother who complained of headache, and was lying stupefied and crying,
either in a chair by the corner of the fire, or in Nancy's lap, or on
mine.

Little Lady Beatrix screamed out at Dr. Tusher's news; and my lord cried
out, "God bless me!" He was a brave man, and not afraid of death in
any shape but this. He was very proud of his pink complexion and fair
hair--but the idea of death by small-pox scared him beyond all other
ends. "We will take the children and ride away to-morrow to Walcote:"
this was my lord's small house, inherited from his mother, near to
Winchester.

"That is the best refuge in case the disease spreads," said Dr. Tusher.
"'Tis awful to think of it beginning at the ale-house; half the people
of the village have visited that to-day, or the blacksmith's, which is
the same thing. My clerk Nahum lodges with them--I can never go into my
reading-desk and have that fellow so near me. I WON'T have that man near
me."

"If a parishioner dying in the small-pox sent to you, would you not go?"
asked my lady, looking up from her frame of work, with her calm blue
eyes.

"By the Lord, I wouldn't," said my lord.

"We are not in a popish country; and a sick man doth not absolutely
need absolution and confession," said the Doctor. "'Tis true they are a
comfort and a help to him when attainable, and to be administered with
hope of good. But in a case where the life of a parish priest in the
midst of his flock is highly valuable to them, he is not called upon to
risk it (and therewith the lives, future prospects, and temporal, even
spiritual welfare of his own family) for the sake of a single person,
who is not very likely in a condition even to understand the religious
message whereof the priest is the bringer--being uneducated, and
likewise stupefied or delirious by disease. If your ladyship or his
lordship, my excellent good friend and patron, were to take it . . ."

"God forbid!" cried my lord.

"Amen," continued Dr. Tusher. "Amen to that prayer, my very good lord!
for your sake I would lay my life down"--and, to judge from the alarmed
look of the Doctor's purple face, you would have thought that that
sacrifice was about to be called for instantly.

To love children, and be gentle with them, was an instinct, rather than
a merit, in Henry Esmond; so much so, that he thought almost with a
sort of shame of his liking for them, and of the softness into which it
betrayed him; and on this day the poor fellow had not only had his
young friend, the milkmaid's brother, on his knee, but had been drawing
pictures and telling stories to the little Frank Castlewood, who had
occupied the same place for an hour after dinner, and was never tired
of Henry's tales, and his pictures of soldiers and horses. As luck would
have it, Beatrix had not on that evening taken her usual place, which
generally she was glad enough to have, upon her tutor's lap. For
Beatrix, from the earliest time, was jealous of every caress which was
given to her little brother Frank. She would fling away even from the
maternal arms, if she saw Frank had been there before her; insomuch that
Lady Esmond was obliged not to show her love for her son in the presence
of the little girl, and embraced one or the other alone. She would turn
pale and red with rage if she caught signs of intelligence or affection
between Frank and his mother: would sit apart, and not speak for a whole
night, if she thought the boy had a better fruit or a larger cake than
hers; would fling away a ribbon if he had one; and from the earliest
age, sitting up in her little chair by the great fireplace opposite to
the corner where Lady Castlewood commonly sat at her embroidery, would
utter infantine sarcasms about the favor shown to her brother. These, if
spoken in the presence of Lord Castlewood, tickled and amused his humor;
he would pretend to love Frank best, and dandle and kiss him, and roar
with laughter at Beatrix's jealousy. But the truth is, my lord did not
often witness these scenes, nor very much trouble the quiet fireside at
which his lady passed many long evenings. My lord was hunting all day
when the season admitted; he frequented all the cock-fights and fairs
in the country, and would ride twenty miles to see a main fought, or two
clowns break their heads at a cudgelling-match; and he liked better to
sit in his parlor drinking ale and punch with Jack and Tom, than in
his wife's drawing-room: whither, if he came, he brought only too often
bloodshot eyes, a hiccupping voice, and a reeling gait. The management
of the house, and the property, the care of the few tenants and the
village poor, and the accounts of the estate, were in the hands of his
lady and her young secretary, Harry Esmond. My lord took charge of the
stables, the kennel, and the cellar--and he filled this and emptied it
too.

So it chanced that upon this very day, when poor Harry Esmond had had
the blacksmith's son, and the peer's son, alike upon his knee, little
Beatrix, who would come to her tutor willingly enough with her book and
her writing, had refused him, seeing the place occupied by her brother,
and, luckily for her, had sat at the further end of the room, away from
him, playing with a spaniel dog which she had, (and for which, by fits
and starts, she would take a great affection,) and talking at Harry
Esmond over her shoulder, as she pretended to caress the dog, saying
that Fido would love her, and she would love Fido, and nothing but Fido
all her life.

When, then, the news was brought that the little boy at the "Three
Castles" was ill with the small-pox, poor Harry Esmond felt a shock of
alarm, not so much for himself as for his mistress's son, whom he might
have brought into peril. Beatrix, who had pouted sufficiently, (and who,
whenever a stranger appeared, began, from infancy almost, to play off
little graces to catch his attention,) her brother being now gone to
bed, was for taking her place upon Esmond's knee: for, though the Doctor
was very obsequious to her, she did not like him, because he had thick
boots and dirty hands (the pert young miss said), and because she hated
learning the catechism.

But as she advanced towards Esmond from the corner where she had been
sulking, he started back and placed the great chair on which he was
sitting between him and her--saying in the French language to Lady
Castlewood, with whom the young lad had read much, and whom he had
perfected in this tongue--"Madam, the child must not approach me; I must
tell you that I was at the blacksmith's to-day, and had his little boy
upon my lap."

"Where you took my son afterwards," Lady Castlewood said, very angry,
and turning red. "I thank you, sir, for giving him such company.
Beatrix," she said in English, "I forbid you to touch Mr. Esmond. Come
away, child--come to your room. Come to your room--I wish your Reverence
good-night--and you, sir, had you not better go back to your friends at
the ale-house?" her eyes, ordinarily so kind, darted flashes of anger
as she spoke; and she tossed up her head (which hung down commonly) with
the mien of a princess.

"Hey-day!" says my lord, who was standing by the fireplace--indeed
he was in the position to which he generally came by that hour of the
evening--"Hey-day! Rachel, what are you in a passion about? Ladies ought
never to be in a passion. Ought they, Doctor Tusher? though it does good
to see Rachel in a passion--Damme, Lady Castlewood, you look dev'lish
handsome in a passion."

"It is, my lord, because Mr. Henry Esmond, having nothing to do with
his time here, and not having a taste for our company, has been to the
ale-house, where he has SOME FRIENDS."

My lord burst out, with a laugh and an oath--"You young slyboots, you've
been at Nancy Sievewright. D--- the young hypocrite, who'd have thought
it in him? I say, Tusher, he's been after--"

"Enough, my lord," said my lady, "don't insult me with this talk."

"Upon my word," said poor Harry, ready to cry with shame and
mortification, "the honor of that young person is perfectly unstained
for me."

"Oh, of course, of course," says my lord, more and more laughing and
tipsy. "Upon his HONOR, Doctor--Nancy Sieve-- . . ."

"Take Mistress Beatrix to bed," my lady cried at this moment to Mrs.
Tucker her woman, who came in with her ladyship's tea. "Put her into my
room--no, into yours," she added quickly. "Go, my child: go, I say: not
a word!" And Beatrix, quite surprised at so sudden a tone of authority
from one who was seldom accustomed to raise her voice, went out of the
room with a scared countenance, and waited even to burst out a-crying
until she got to the door with Mrs. Tucker.

For once her mother took little heed of her sobbing, and continued
to speak eagerly--"My lord," she said, "this young man--your
dependant--told me just now in French--he was ashamed to speak in his
own language--that he had been at the ale-house all day, where he has
had that little wretch who is now ill of the small-pox on his knee. And
he comes home reeking from that place--yes, reeking from it--and takes
my boy into his lap without shame, and sits down by me, yes, by ME.
He may have killed Frank for what I know--killed our child. Why was he
brought in to disgrace our house? Why is he here? Let him go--let him
go, I say, to-night, and pollute the place no more."

She had never once uttered a syllable of unkindness to Harry Esmond; and
her cruel words smote the poor boy, so that he stood for some moments
bewildered with grief and rage at the injustice of such a stab from such
a hand. He turned quite white from red, which he had been.

"I cannot help my birth, madam," he said, "nor my other misfortune. And
as for your boy, if--if my coming nigh to him pollutes him now, it was
not so always. Good-night, my lord. Heaven bless you and yours for your
goodness to me. I have tired her ladyship's kindness out, and I will
go;" and, sinking down on his knee, Harry Esmond took the rough hand of
his benefactor and kissed it.

"He wants to go to the ale-house--let him go," cried my lady.

"I'm d--d if he shall," said my lord. "I didn't think you could be so
d--d ungrateful, Rachel."

Her reply was to burst into a flood of tears, and to quit the room with
a rapid glance at Harry Esmond,--as my lord, not heeding them, and
still in great good-humor, raised up his young client from his kneeling
posture (for a thousand kindnesses had caused the lad to revere my lord
as a father), and put his broad hand on Harry Esmond's shoulder.

"She was always so," my lord said; "the very notion of a woman drives
her mad. I took to liquor on that very account, by Jove, for no other
reason than that; for she can't be jealous of a beer-barrel or a bottle
of rum, can she, Doctor? D--- it, look at the maids--just look at
the maids in the house" (my lord pronounced all the words
together--just-look-at-the-maze-in-the-house: jever-see-such-maze?) "You
wouldn't take a wife out of Castlewood now, would you, Doctor?" and my
lord burst out laughing.

The Doctor, who had been looking at my Lord Castlewood from under his
eyelids, said, "But joking apart, and, my lord, as a divine, I
cannot treat the subject in a jocular light, nor, as a pastor of this
congregation, look with anything but sorrow at the idea of so very young
a sheep going astray."

"Sir," said young Esmond, bursting out indignantly, "she told me that
you yourself were a horrid old man, and had offered to kiss her in the
dairy."

"For shame, Henry," cried Doctor Tusher, turning as red as a
turkey-cock, while my lord continued to roar with laughter. "If you
listen to the falsehoods of an abandoned girl--"

"She is as honest as any woman in England, and as pure for me," cried
out Henry, "and, as kind, and as good. For shame on you to malign her!"

"Far be it from me to do so," cried the Doctor. "Heaven grant I may
be mistaken in the girl, and in you, sir, who have a truly PRECOCIOUS
genius; but that is not the point at issue at present. It appears that
the small-pox broke out in the little boy at the 'Three Castles;' that
it was on him when you visited the ale-house, for your OWN reasons; and
that you sat with the child for some time, and immediately afterwards
with my young lord." The Doctor raised his voice as he spoke, and
looked towards my lady, who had now come back, looking very pale, with a
handkerchief in her hand.

"This is all very true, sir," said Lady Esmond, looking at the young
man.

"'Tis to be feared that he may have brought the infection with him."

"From the ale-house--yes," said my lady.

"D--- it, I forgot when I collared you, boy," cried my lord, stepping
back. "Keep off, Harry my boy; there's no good in running into the
wolf's jaws, you know."

My lady looked at him with some surprise, and instantly advancing to
Henry Esmond, took his hand. "I beg your pardon, Henry," she said; "I
spoke very unkindly. I have no right to interfere with you--with your--"

My lord broke out into an oath. "Can't you leave the boy alone, my
lady?" She looked a little red, and faintly pressed the lad's hand as
she dropped it.

"There is no use, my lord," she said; "Frank was on his knee as he was
making pictures, and was running constantly from Henry to me. The evil
is done, if any."

"Not with me, damme," cried my lord. "I've been smoking,"--and he
lighted his pipe again with a coal--"and it keeps off infection; and as
the disease is in the village--plague take it--I would have you leave
it. We'll go to-morrow to Walcote, my lady."

"I have no fear," said my lady; "I may have had it as an infant: it
broke out in our house then; and when four of my sisters had it at home,
two years before our marriage, I escaped it, and two of my dear sisters
died."

"I won't run the risk," said my lord; "I'm as bold as any man, but I'll
not bear that."

"Take Beatrix with you and go," said my lady. "For us the mischief is
done; and Tucker can wait upon us, who has had the disease."

"You take care to choose 'em ugly enough," said my lord, at which her
ladyship hung down her head and looked foolish: and my lord, calling
away Tusher, bade him come to the oak parlor and have a pipe. The Doctor
made a low bow to her ladyship (of which salaams he was profuse), and
walked off on his creaking square-toes after his patron.

When the lady and the young man were alone, there was a silence of some
moments, during which he stood at the fire, looking rather vacantly
at the dying embers, whilst her ladyship busied herself with the
tambour-frame and needles.

"I am sorry," she said, after a pause, in a hard, dry voice,--"I REPEAT
I am sorry that I showed myself so ungrateful for the safety of my son.
It was not at all my wish that you should leave us, I am sure, unless
you found pleasure elsewhere. But you must perceive, Mr. Esmond, that at
your age, and with your tastes, it is impossible that you can continue
to stay upon the intimate footing in which you have been in this family.
You have wished to go to the University, and I think 'tis quite as well
that you should be sent thither. I did not press this matter, thinking
you a child, as you are, indeed, in years--quite a child; and I
should never have thought of treating you otherwise until--until these
CIRCUMSTANCES came to light. And I shall beg my lord to despatch you
as quick as possible: and will go on with Frank's learning as well as I
can, (I owe my father thanks for a little grounding, and you, I'm sure,
for much that you have taught me,)--and--and I wish you a good-night,
Mr. Esmond."

And with this she dropped a stately curtsy, and, taking her candle,
went away through the tapestry door, which led to her apartments. Esmond
stood by the fireplace, blankly staring after her. Indeed, he scarce
seemed to see until she was gone; and then her image was impressed upon
him, and remained for ever fixed upon his memory. He saw her retreating,
the taper lighting up her marble face, her scarlet lip quivering, and
her shining golden hair. He went to his own room, and to bed, where he
tried to read, as his custom was; but he never knew what he was reading
until afterwards he remembered the appearance of the letters of the book
(it was in Montaigne's Essays), and the events of the day passed before
him--that is, of the last hour of the day; for as for the morning, and
the poor milkmaid yonder, he never so much as once thought. And he could
not get to sleep until daylight, and woke with a violent headache, and
quite unrefreshed.

He had brought the contagion with him from the "Three Castles" sure
enough, and was presently laid up with the smallpox, which spared the
hall no more than it did the cottage.




CHAPTER IX.

I HAVE THE SMALL-POX, AND PREPARE TO LEAVE CASTLEWOOD.


When Harry Esmond passed through the crisis of that malady, and returned
to health again, he found that little Frank Esmond had also suffered
and rallied after the disease, and the lady his mother was down with it,
with a couple more of the household. "It was a Providence, for which we
all ought to be thankful," Doctor Tusher said, "that my lady and her son
were spared, while Death carried off the poor domestics of the house;"
and rebuked Harry for asking, in his simple way, For which we ought
to be thankful--that the servants were killed, or the gentlefolks
were saved? Nor could young Esmond agree in the Doctor's vehement
protestations to my lady, when he visited her during her convalescence,
that the malady had not in the least impaired her charms, and had not
been churl enough to injure the fair features of the Viscountess of
Castlewood; whereas, in spite of these fine speeches, Harry thought that
her ladyship's beauty was very much injured by the small-pox. When
the marks of the disease cleared away, they did not, it is true, leave
furrows or scars on her face (except one, perhaps, on her forehead over
her left eyebrow); but the delicacy of her rosy color and complexion was
gone: her eyes had lost their brilliancy, her hair fell, and her face
looked older. It was as if a coarse hand had rubbed off the delicate
tints of that sweet picture, and brought it, as one has seen unskilful
painting-cleaners do, to the dead color. Also, it must be owned, that
for a year or two after the malady, her ladyship's nose was swollen and
redder.

There would be no need to mention these trivialities, but that they
actually influenced many lives, as trifles will in the world, where a
gnat often plays a greater part than an elephant, and a mole-hill, as
we know in King William's case, can upset an empire. When Tusher in his
courtly way (at which Harry Esmond always chafed and spoke scornfully)
vowed and protested that my lady's face was none the worse--the lad
broke out and said, "It IS worse and my mistress is not near so handsome
as she was;" on which poor Lady Castlewood gave a rueful smile, and a
look into a little Venice glass she had, which showed her, I suppose,
that what the stupid boy said was only too true, for she turned away
from the glass, and her eyes filled with tears.

The sight of these in Esmond's heart always created a sort of rage of
pity, and seeing them on the face of the lady whom he loved best, the
young blunderer sank down on his knees, and besought her to pardon him,
saying that he was a fool and an idiot, that he was a brute to make such
a speech, he who had caused her malady; and Doctor Tusher told him that
a bear he was indeed, and a bear he would remain, at which speech poor
young Esmond was so dumbstricken that he did not even growl.

"He is MY bear, and I will not have him baited, Doctor," my lady said,
patting her hand kindly on the boy's head, as he was still kneeling at
her feet. "How your hair has come off! And mine, too," she added with
another sigh.

"It is not for myself that I cared," my lady said to Harry, when the
parson had taken his leave; "but AM I very much changed? Alas! I fear
'tis too true."

"Madam, you have the dearest, and kindest, and sweetest face in the
world, I think," the lad said; and indeed he thought and thinks so.

"Will my lord think so when he comes back?" the lady asked with a sigh,
and another look at her Venice glass. "Suppose he should think as you
do, sir, that I am hideous--yes, you said hideous--he will cease to care
for me. 'Tis all men care for in women, our little beauty. Why did he
select me from among my sisters? 'Twas only for that. We reign but for a
day or two: and be sure that Vashti knew Esther was coming."

"Madam," said Mr. Esmond, "Ahasuerus was the Grand Turk, and to change
was the manner of his country, and according to his law."

"You are all Grand Turks for that matter," said my lady, "or would be if
you could. Come, Frank, come, my child. You are well, praised be Heaven.
YOUR locks are not thinned by this dreadful small-pox: nor your poor
face scarred--is it, my angel?"

Frank began to shout and whimper at the idea of such a misfortune. From
the very earliest time the young lord had been taught to admire his
beauty by his mother: and esteemed it as highly as any reigning toast
valued hers.

One day, as he himself was recovering from his fever and illness, a
pang of something like shame shot across young Esmond's breast, as he
remembered that he had never once during his illness given a thought
to the poor girl at the smithy, whose red cheeks but a month ago he
had been so eager to see. Poor Nancy! her cheeks had shared the fate of
roses, and were withered now. She had taken the illness on the same day
with Esmond--she and her brother were both dead of the small-pox, and
buried under the Castlewood yew-trees. There was no bright face looking
now from the garden, or to cheer the old smith at his lonely fireside.
Esmond would have liked to have kissed her in her shroud (like the
lass in Mr. Prior's pretty poem); but she rested many a foot below the
ground, when Esmond after his malady first trod on it.

Doctor Tusher brought the news of this calamity, about which Harry
Esmond longed to ask, but did not like. He said almost the whole village
had been stricken with the pestilence; seventeen persons were dead
of it, among them mentioning the names of poor Nancy and her little
brother. He did not fail to say how thankful we survivors ought to be.
It being this man's business to flatter and make sermons, it must be
owned he was most industrious in it, and was doing the one or the other
all day.

And so Nancy was gone; and Harry Esmond blushed that he had not a single
tear for her, and fell to composing an elegy in Latin verses over the
rustic little beauty. He bade the dryads mourn and the river-nymphs
deplore her. As her father followed the calling of Vulcan, he said that
surely she was like a daughter of Venus, though Sievewright's wife was
an ugly shrew, as he remembered to have heard afterwards. He made a
long face, but, in truth, felt scarcely more sorrowful than a mute at a
funeral. These first passions of men and women are mostly abortive; and
are dead almost before they are born. Esmond could repeat, to his last
day, some of the doggerel lines in which his muse bewailed his pretty
lass; not without shame to remember how bad the verses were, and how
good he thought them; how false the grief, and yet how he was rather
proud of it. 'Tis an error, surely, to talk of the simplicity of youth.
I think no persons are more hypocritical, and have a more affected
behavior to one another, than the young. They deceive themselves and
each other with artifices that do not impose upon men of the world; and
so we get to understand truth better, and grow simpler as we grow older.

When my lady heard of the fate which had befallen poor Nancy, she said
nothing so long as Tusher was by, but when he was gone, she took Harry
Esmond's hand and said--

"Harry, I beg your pardon for those cruel words I used on the night you
were taken ill. I am shocked at the fate of the poor creature, and
am sure that nothing had happened of that with which, in my anger, I
charged you. And the very first day we go out, you must take me to the
blacksmith, and we must see if there is anything I can do to console
the poor old man. Poor man! to lose both his children! What should I do
without mine?"

And this was, indeed, the very first walk which my lady took, leaning on
Esmond's arm, after her illness. But her visit brought no consolation to
the old father; and he showed no softness, or desire to speak. "The Lord
gave and took away," he said; and he knew what His servant's duty was.
He wanted for nothing--less now than ever before, as there were
fewer mouths to feed. He wished her ladyship and Master Esmond good
morning--he had grown tall in his illness, and was but very little
marked; and with this, and a surly bow, he went in from the smithy to
the house, leaving my lady, somewhat silenced and shamefaced, at the
door. He had a handsome stone put up for his two children, which may be
seen in Castlewood churchyard to this very day; and before a year was
out his own name was upon the stone. In the presence of Death, that
sovereign ruler, a woman's coquetry is seared; and her jealousy will
hardly pass the boundaries of that grim kingdom. 'Tis entirely of
the earth, that passion, and expires in the cold blue air, beyond our
sphere.

At length, when the danger was quite over, it was announced that my lord
and his daughter would return. Esmond well remembered the day. The lady
his mistress was in a flurry of fear: before my lord came, she went into
her room, and returned from it with reddened cheeks. Her fate was about
to be decided. Her beauty was gone--was her reign, too, over? A minute
would say. My lord came riding over the bridge--he could be seen from
the great window, clad in scarlet, and mounted on his gray hackney--his
little daughter ambled by him in a bright riding-dress of blue, on a
shining chestnut horse. My lady leaned against the great mantel-piece,
looking on, with one hand on her heart--she seemed only the more pale
for those red marks on either cheek. She put her handkerchief to her
eyes, and withdrew it, laughing hysterically--the cloth was quite red
with the rouge when she took it away. She ran to her room again, and
came back with pale cheeks and red eyes--her son in her hand--just as my
lord entered, accompanied by young Esmond, who had gone out to meet his
protector, and to hold his stirrup as he descended from horseback.

"What, Harry, boy!" my lord said, good-naturedly, "you look as gaunt as
a greyhound. The small-pox hasn't improved your beauty, and your side of
the house hadn't never too much of it--ho, ho!"

And he laughed, and sprang to the ground with no small agility, looking
handsome and red, within a jolly face and brown hair, like a Beef-eater;
Esmond kneeling again, as soon as his patron had descended, performed
his homage, and then went to greet the little Beatrix, and help her from
her horse.

"Fie! how yellow you look," she said; "and there are one, two, red
holes in your face;" which, indeed, was very true; Harry Esmond's harsh
countenance bearing, as long as it continued to be a human face, the
marks of the disease.

My lord laughed again, in high good-humor.

"D--- it!" said he, with one of his usual oaths, "the little slut sees
everything. She saw the Dowager's paint t'other day, and asked her
why she wore that red stuff--didn't you, Trix? and the Tower; and
St. James's; and the play; and the Prince George, and the Princess
Anne--didn't you, Trix?"

"They are both very fat, and smelt of brandy," the child said.

Papa roared with laughing.

"Brandy!" he said. "And how do you know, Miss Pert?"

"Because your lordship smells of it after supper, when I embrace you
before you go to bed," said the young lady, who, indeed, was as pert
as her father said, and looked as beautiful a little gipsy as eyes ever
gazed on.

"And now for my lady," said my lord, going up the stairs, and passing
under the tapestry curtain that hung before the drawing-room door.
Esmond remembered that noble figure, handsomely arrayed in scarlet.
Within the last few months he himself had grown from a boy to be a man,
and with his figure his thoughts had shot up, and grown manly.

My lady's countenance, of which Harry Esmond was accustomed to watch the
changes, and with a solicitous affection to note and interpret the signs
of gladness or care, wore a sad and depressed look for many weeks
after her lord's return: during which it seemed as if, by caresses and
entreaties, she strove to win him back from some ill humor he had, and
which he did not choose to throw off. In her eagerness to please him she
practised a hundred of those arts which had formerly charmed him, but
which seemed now to have lost their potency. Her songs did not amuse
him; and she hushed them and the children when in his presence. My lord
sat silent at his dinner, drinking greatly, his lady opposite to him,
looking furtively at his face, though also speechless. Her silence
annoyed him as much as her speech; and he would peevishly, and with an
oath, ask her why she held her tongue and looked so glum; or he would
roughly check her when speaking, and bid her not talk nonsense. It
seemed as if, since his return, nothing she could do or say could please
him.

When a master and mistress are at strife in a house, the subordinates
in the family take the one side or the other. Harry Esmond stood in
so great fear of my lord, that he would run a league barefoot to do a
message for him; but his attachment for Lady Esmond was such a passion
of grateful regard, that to spare her a grief, or to do her a service,
he would have given his life daily: and it was by the very depth and
intensity of this regard that he began to divine how unhappy his adored
lady's life was, and that a secret care (for she never spoke of her
anxieties) was weighing upon her.

Can any one, who has passed through the world and watched the nature
of men and women there, doubt what had befallen her? I have seen, to be
sure, some people carry down with them into old age the actual bloom
of their youthful love, and I know that Mr. Thomas Parr lived to be a
hundred and sixty years old. But, for all that, threescore and ten is
the age of men, and few get beyond it; and 'tis certain that a man who
marries for mere beaux yeux, as my lord did, considers this part of the
contract at an end when the woman ceases to fulfil hers, and his love
does not survive her beauty. I know 'tis often otherwise, I say; and can
think (as most men in their own experience may) of many a house,
where, lighted in early years, the sainted lamp of love hath never been
extinguished; but so there is Mr. Parr, and so there is the great giant
at the fair that is eight feet high--exceptions to men--and that poor
lamp whereof I speak, that lights at first the nuptial chamber, is
extinguished by a hundred winds and draughts down the chimney, or
sputters out for want of feeding. And then--and then it is Chloe, in the
dark, stark awake, and Strephon snoring unheeding; or vice versa, 'tis
poor Strephon that has married a heartless jilt, and awoke out of that
absurd vision of conjugal felicity, which was to last for ever, and is
over like any other dream. One and other has made his bed, and so must
lie in it, until that final day when life ends, and they sleep separate.

About this time young Esmond, who had a knack of stringing verses,
turned some of Ovid's Epistles into rhymes, and brought them to his lady
for her delectation. Those which treated of forsaken women touched her
immensely, Harry remarked; and when Oenone called after Paris, and Medea
bade Jason come back again, the lady of Castlewood sighed, and said she
thought that part of the verses was the most pleasing. Indeed, she would
have chopped up the Dean, her old father, in order to bring her husband
back again. But her beautiful Jason was gone, as beautiful Jasons will
go, and the poor enchantress had never a spell to keep him.

My lord was only sulky as long as his wife's anxious face or behavior
seemed to upbraid him. When she had got to master these, and to show an
outwardly cheerful countenance and behavior, her husband's good-humor
returned partially, and he swore and stormed no longer at dinner, but
laughed sometimes, and yawned unrestrainedly; absenting himself often
from home, inviting more company thither, passing the greater part of
his days in the hunting-field, or over the bottle as before; but with
this difference, that the poor wife could no longer see now, as she had
done formerly, the light of love kindled in his eyes. He was with her,
but that flame was out: and that once welcome beacon no more shone
there.

What were this lady's feelings when forced to admit the truth whereof
her foreboding glass had given her only too true warning, that within
her beauty her reign had ended, and the days of her love were over?
What does a seaman do in a storm if mast and rudder are carried away? He
ships a jurymast, and steers as he best can with an oar. What happens if
your roof falls in a tempest? After the first stun of the calamity the
