
'They are pets,' she said, 'of my brother, who considers them as the
better entitled to his kindness that they are a race persecuted by the
world in general. He denieth himself,' she said, 'even the company of a
dog, that these creatures may here at least enjoy undisturbed security.
Yet this harmless or humane propensity, or humour, hath given offence,'
she added, 'to our dangerous neighbours.'

She explained this, by telling me that my host of the preceding night
was remarkable for his attachment to field-sports, which he pursued
without much regard to the wishes of the individuals over whose property
he followed them. The undefined mixture of respect and fear with which
he was generally regarded induced most of the neighbouring land-holders
to connive at what they would perhaps in another have punished as a
trespass; but Joshua Geddes would not permit the intrusion of any
one upon his premises, and as he had before offended several country
neighbours, who, because he would neither shoot himself nor permit
others to do so, compared him to the dog in the manger, so he now
aggravated the displeasure which the Laird of the Lakes had already
conceived against him, by positively debarring him from pursuing his
sport over his grounds--'So that,' said Rachel Geddes, 'I sometimes wish
our lot had been cast elsewhere than in these pleasant borders, where,
if we had less of beauty around us, we might have had a neighbourhood of
peace and, goodwill.'

We at length returned to the house, where Miss Geddes showed me a small
study, containing a little collection of books, in two separate presses.

'These,' said she, pointing to the smaller press, 'will, if thou
bestowest thy leisure upon them, do thee good; and these,' pointing to
the other and larger cabinet, 'can, I believe, do thee little harm. Some
of our people do indeed hold, that every writer who is not with us
is against us; but brother Joshua is mitigated in his opinions, and
correspondeth with our friend John Scot of Amwell, who hath himself
constructed verses well approved of even in the world. I wish thee many
good thoughts till our family meet at the hour of dinner.'

Left alone, I tried both collections; the first consisted entirely
of religious and controversial tracts, and the latter formed a small
selection of history and of moral writers, both in prose and verse.

Neither collection promising much amusement, thou hast, in these close
pages, the fruits of my tediousness; and truly, I think, writing history
(one's self being the subject) is as amusing as reading that of foreign
countries, at any time.

Sam, still more drunk than sober, arrived in due time with my
portmanteau, and enabled me to put my dress into order, better befitting
this temple of cleanliness and decorum, where (to conclude) I believe I
shall be a sojourner more days than one. [See Note 1.]

PS.--I have noted your adventure, as you home-bred youths may perhaps
term it, concerning the visit of your doughty laird. We travellers hold
such an incident no great consequence, though it may serve to embellish
the uniform life of Brown's Square. But art thou not ashamed to attempt
to interest one who is seeing the world at large, and studying human
nature on a large scale, by so bald a narrative? Why, what does it
amount to, after all, but that a Tory laird dined with a Whig lawyer? no
very uncommon matter, especially as you state Mr. Herries to have lost
the estate, though retaining the designation. The laird behaves with
haughtiness and impertinence--nothing out of character in that: is NOT
kicked down stairs, as he ought to have been, were Alan Fairford half
the man that he would wish his friends to think him. Aye, but then, as
the young lawyer, instead of showing his friend the door, chose to make
use of it himself, he overheard the laird aforesaid ask the old lawyer
concerning Darsie Latimer--no doubt earnestly inquiring after the
handsome, accomplished inmate of his family, who has so lately made
Themis his bow and declined the honour of following her farther. You
laugh at me for my air-drawn castles; but confess, have they not surer
footing, in general, than two words spoken by such a man as Herries?
And yet--and yet--I would rally the matter off, Alan; but in dark nights
even the glow-worm becomes an object of lustre, and to one plunged in
my uncertainty and ignorance, the slightest gleam that promises
intelligence is interesting. My life is like the subterranean river in
the Peak of Derby, visible only where it crosses the celebrated cavern.
I am here, and this much I know; but where I have sprung from, or
whither my course of life is like to tend, who shall tell me? Your
father, too, seemed interested and alarmed, and talked of writing; would
to Heaven he may!--I send daily to the post-town for letters.




LETTER VIII

ALAN FAIRFORD TO DARSIE LATIMER

Thou mayst clap thy wings and crow as thou pleasest. You go in search
of adventures, but adventures come to me unsought for; and oh! in what a
pleasing shape came mine, since it arrived in the form of a client--and
a fair client to boot! What think you of that, Darsie! you who are such
a sworn squire of dames? Will this not match my adventures with thine,
that hunt salmon on horseback, and will it not, besides, eclipse
the history of a whole tribe of Broadbrims?--But I must proceed
methodically.

When I returned to-day from the College, I was surprised to see a broad
grin distending the adust countenance of the faithful James Wilkinson,
which, as the circumstance seldom happens above once a year, was matter
of some surprise. Moreover, he had a knowing glance with his eye,
which I should have as soon expected from a dumb-waiter--an article
of furniture to which James, in his usual state, may be happily
assimilated. 'What the devil is the matter, James?'

'The devil may be in the matter, for aught I ken,' said James, with
another provoking grin; 'for here has been a woman calling for you,
Maister Alan.'

'A woman calling for me?' said I in surprise; for you know well, that
excepting old Aunt Peggy, who comes to dinner of a Sunday, and the
still older Lady Bedrooket, who calls ten times a year for the
quarterly payment of her jointure of four hundred merks, a female scarce
approaches our threshold, as my father visits all his female clients at
their own lodgings. James protested, however, that there had been a
lady calling, and for me. 'As bonny a lass as I have seen,' added James,
'since I was in the Fusileers, and kept company with Peg Baxter.' Thou
knowest all James's gay recollections go back to the period of his
military service, the years he has spent in ours having probably been
dull enough.

'Did the lady leave no name nor place of address?'

'No,' replied James; 'but she asked when you wad be at hame, and I
appointed her for twelve o'clock, when the house wad be quiet, and your
father at the Bank.'

'For shame, James! how can you think my father's being at home or abroad
could be of consequence?--The lady is of course a decent person?'

'I'se uphaud her that, sir--she is nane of your--WHEW'--(Here James
supplied a blank with a low whistle)--'but I didna ken--my maister makes
an unco wark if a woman comes here.'

I passed into my own room, not ill-pleased that my father was absent,
notwithstanding I had thought it proper to rebuke James for having so
contrived it, I disarranged my books, to give them the appearance of a
graceful confusion on the table, and laying my foils (useless since your
departure) across the mantelpiece, that the lady might see I was TAM
MARTE QUAM MERCURIO--I endeavoured to dispose my dress so as to resemble
an elegant morning deshabille--gave my hair the general shade of powder
which marks the gentleman--laid my watch and seals on the table, to
hint that I understood the value of time;--and when I had made all these
arrangements, of which I am a little ashamed when I think of them, I had
nothing better to do than to watch the dial-plate till the index
pointed to noon. Five minutes elapsed, which. I allowed for variation
of clocks--five minutes more rendered me anxious and doubtful--and five
minutes more would have made me impatient.

Laugh as thou wilt; but remember, Darsie, I was a lawyer, expecting his
first client--a young man, how strictly bred up I need not remind you,
expecting a private interview with a young and beautiful woman. But ere
the third term of five minutes had elapsed, the door-bell was heard to
tinkle low and modestly, as if touched by some timid hand.

James Wilkinson, swift in nothing, is, as thou knowest, peculiarly slow
in answering the door-bell; and I reckoned on five minutes good, ere his
solemn step should have ascended the stair. Time enough, thought I, for
a peep through the blinds, and was hastening to the window accordingly.
But I reckoned without my host; for James, who had his own curiosity
as well as I, was lying PERDU in the lobby, ready to open at the first
tinkle; and there was, 'This way, ma'am--Yes, ma'am--The lady, Mr.
Alan,' before I could get to the chair in which I proposed to be
discovered, seated in all legal dignity. The consciousness of being
half-caught in the act of peeping, joined to that native air of awkward
bashfulness of which I am told the law will soon free me, kept me
standing on the floor in some confusion; while the lady, disconcerted
on her part, remained on the threshold of the room. James Wilkinson, who
had his senses most about him, and was perhaps willing to prolong his
stay in the apartment, busied himself in setting a chair for the lady,
and recalled me to my good-breeding by the hint. I invited her to take
possession of it, and bid James withdraw.

My visitor was undeniably a lady, and probably considerably above the
ordinary rank--very modest, too, judging from the mixture of grace and
timidity with which she moved, and at my entreaty sat down. Her dress
was, I should suppose, both handsome and fashionable; but it was much
concealed by a walking-cloak of green silk, fancifully embroidered; in
which, though heavy for the season, her person was enveloped, and which,
moreover, was furnished with a hood.

The devil take that hood, Darsie! for I was just able to distinguish
that, pulled as it was over the face, it concealed from me, as I was
convinced, one of the prettiest countenances I have seen, and which,
from a sense of embarrassment, seemed to be crimsoned with a deep blush.
I could see her complexion was beautiful--her chin finely turned--her
lips coral--and her teeth rivals to ivory. But further the deponent
sayeth not; for a clasp of gold, ornamented with it sapphire, closed
the envious mantle under the incognita's throat, and the cursed hood
concealed entirely the upper part of the face.

I ought to have spoken first, that is certain; but ere I could get my
phrases well arranged, the young lady, rendered desperate I suppose by
my hesitation opened the conversation herself.

'I fear I am an intruder, sir--I expected to meet an elderly gentleman.'

This brought me to myself. 'My father, madam, perhaps. But you inquired
for Alan Fairford--my father's name is Alexander.'

'It is Mr. Alan Fairford, undoubtedly, with whom I wished to speak,' she
said, with greater confusion; 'but I was told that he was advanced in
life.'

'Some mistake, madam, I presume, betwixt my father and myself--our
Christian names have the same initials, though the terminations are
different. I--I--I would esteem it a most fortunate mistake if I could
have the honour of supplying my father's place in anything that could be
of service to you.'

'You are very obliging, sir,' A pause, during which she seemed
undetermined whether to rise or sit still.

'I am just about to be called to the bar, madam,' said I, in hopes to
remove her scruples to open her case to me; 'and if my advice or opinion
could be of the slightest use, although I cannot presume to say that
they are much to be depended upon, yet'--

The lady arose. 'I am truly sensible of your kindness, sir; and I have
no doubt of your talents. I will be very plain with you--it is you whom
I came to visit; although, now that we have met, I find it will be much
better that I should commit my communication to writing.'

'I hope, madam, you will not be so cruel--so tantalizing, I would
say. Consider, you are my first client--your business my first
consultation--do not do me the displeasure of withdrawing your
confidence because I am a few years younger than you seem to have
expected. My attention shall make amends for my want of experience.'

'I have no doubt of either,' said the lady, in a grave tone, calculated
to restrain the air of gallantry with which I had endeavoured to address
her. 'But when you have received my letter you will find good reasons
assigned why a written communication will best suit my purpose. I wish
you, sir, a good morning.' And she left the apartment, her poor baffled
counsel scraping, and bowing, and apologizing for anything that might
have been disagreeable to her, although the front of my offence seems to
be my having been discovered to be younger than my father.

The door was opened--out she went--walked along the pavement, turned
down the close, and put the sun, I believe, into her pocket when she
disappeared, so suddenly did dullness and darkness sink down on the
square, when she was no longer visible. I stood for a moment as if I
had been senseless, not recollecting what a fund of entertainment I must
have supplied to our watchful friends on the other side of the green.
Then it darted on my mind that I might dog her, and ascertain at least
who or what she was. Off I set--ran down the close, where she was no
longer to be seen, and demanded of one of the dyer's lads whether he had
seen a lady go down the close, or had observed which way she turned.

'A leddy!'--said the dyer, staring at me with his rainbow countenance.
'Mr. Alan, what takes you out, rinning like daft, without your hat?'

'The devil take my hat!' answered I, running back, however, in quest of
it; snatched it up, and again sallied forth. But as I reached the head
of the close once more, I had sense enough to recollect that all pursuit
would be now in vain. Besides, I saw my friend, the journeyman dyer, in
close confabulation with a pea-green personage of his own profession,
and was conscious, like Scrub, that they talked of me, because they
laughed consumedly. I had no mind, by a second sudden appearance, to
confirm the report that Advocate Fairford was 'gaen daft,' which had
probably spread from Campbell's Close-foot to the Meal-market Stairs;
and so slunk back within my own hole again.

My first employment was to remove all traces of that elegant and
fanciful disposition of my effects, from which I had hoped for so much
credit; for I was now ashamed and angry at having thought an instant
upon the mode of receiving a visit which had commenced so agreeably,
but terminated in a manner so unsatisfactory. I put my folios in their
places--threw the foils into the dressing-closet--tormenting myself all
the while with the fruitless doubt, whether I had missed an opportunity
or escaped a stratagem, or whether the young person had been really
startled, as she seemed to intimate, by the extreme youth of her
intended legal adviser. The mirror was not unnaturally called in to aid;
and that cabinet-counsellor pronounced me rather short, thick-set,
with a cast of features fitter, I trust, for the bar than the ball--not
handsome enough for blushing virgins to pine for my sake, or even to
invent sham cases to bring them to my chambers--yet not ugly enough
either to scare those away who came on real business--dark, to be sure,
but--NIGRI SUNT HYACINTHI--there are pretty things to be said in favour
of that complexion.

At length--as common sense will get the better in all cases when a man
will but give it fair play--I began to stand convicted in my own mind,
as an ass before the interview, for having expected too much--an ass
during the interview, for having failed to extract the lady's real
purpose--and an especial ass, now that it was over, for thinking so much
about it. But I can think of nothing else, and therefore I am determined
to think of this to some good purpose.

You remember Murtough O'Hara's defence of the Catholic doctrine of
confession; because, 'by his soul, his sins were always a great burden
to his mind, till he had told them to the priest; and once confessed, he
never thought more about them.' I have tried his receipt, therefore; and
having poured my secret mortification into thy trusty ear, I will think
no more about this maid of the mist,

   Who, with no face, as 'twere, outfaced me.

--Four o'clock. Plague on her green mantle, she can be nothing
better than a fairy; she keeps possession of my head yet! All during
dinner-time I was terribly absent; but, luckily, my father gave the
whole credit of my reverie to the abstract nature of the doctrine, VINCO
VINCENTEM, ERGO VINCO TE; upon which brocard of law the professor this
morning lectured. So I got an early dismissal to my own crib, and here
am I studying, in one sense, VINCERE VINCENTEM, to get the better of
the silly passion of curiosity--I think--I think it amounts to nothing
else--which has taken such possession of my imagination, and is
perpetually worrying me with the question--will she write or no? She
will not--she will not! So says Reason, and adds, Why should she take
the trouble to enter into correspondence with one who, instead of a
bold, alert, prompt gallant, proved a chicken-hearted boy, and left her
the whole awkwardness of explanation, which he should have met half-way?
But then, says Fancy, she WILL write, for she was not a bit that sort
of person whom you, Mr. Reason, in your wisdom, take her to be. She was
disconcerted enough, without my adding to her distress by any impudent
conduct on my part. And she will write, for--By Heaven, she HAS written,
Darsie, and with a vengeance! Here is her letter, thrown into the
kitchen by a caddie, too faithful to be bribed, either by money or
whisky, to say more than that he received it, with sixpence, from an
ordinary-looking woman, as he was plying on his station near the Cross.


'FOR ALAN FAIRFORD, ESQUIRE, BARRISTER.

'SIR,

'Excuse my mistake of to-day. I had accidentally learnt that Mr. Darsie
Latimer had an intimate friend and associate in Mr. A. Fairford. When I
inquired for such a person, he was pointed out to me at the Cross (as
I think the Exchange of your city is called) in the character of a
respectable elderly man--your father, as I now understand. On inquiry at
Brown's Square, where I understood he resided, I used the full name of
Alan, which naturally occasioned you the trouble of this day's visit.
Upon further inquiry, I am led to believe that you are likely to be the
person most active in the matter to which I am now about to direct your
attention; and I regret much that circumstances, arising out of my own
particular situation, prevent my communicating to you personally what I
now apprise you of in this matter.

'Your friend, Mr. Darsie Latimer, is in a situation of considerable
danger. You are doubtless aware that he has been cautioned not to trust
himself in England. Now, if he has not absolutely transgressed this
friendly injunction, he has at least approached as nearly to the menaced
danger as he could do, consistently with the letter of the prohibition.
He has chosen his abode in a neighbourhood very perilous to him; and
it is only by a speedy return to Edinburgh, or at least by a removal to
some more remote part of Scotland, that he can escape the machinations
of those whose enmity he has to fear. I must speak in mystery, but my
words are not the less certain; and, I believe, you know enough of your
friend's fortunes to be aware that I could not write this much without
being even more intimate with them than you are.

'If he cannot, or will not, take the advice here given, it is my opinion
that you should join him, if possible, without delay, and use, by
your personal presence and entreaty, the arguments which may prove
ineffectual in writing. One word more, and I implore of your candour to
take it as it is meant. No one supposes that Mr. Fairford's zeal in his
friend's service needs to be quickened by mercenary motives. 'But report
says, that Mr. Alan Fairford, not having yet entered on his professional
career, may, in such a case as this, want the means, though he cannot
want the inclination, to act with promptitude. The enclosed note Mr.
Alan Fairford must be pleased to consider as his first professional
emolument; and she who sends it hopes it will be the omen of unbounded
success, though the fee comes from a hand so unknown as that of 'GREEN
MANTLE'.

A bank-note of L20 was the enclosure, and the whole incident left me
speechless with astonishment. I am not able to read over the beginning
of my own letter, which forms the introduction to this extraordinary
communication. I only know that, though mixed with a quantity of foolery
(God knows very much different from my present feelings), it gives an
account sufficiently accurate, of the mysterious person from whom this
letter comes, and that I have neither time nor patience to separate the
absurd commentary from the text, which it is so necessary you should
know.

Combine this warning, so strangely conveyed, with the caution impressed
on you by your London correspondent, Griffiths, against your visiting
England--with the character of your Laird of the Solway Lakes--with the
lawless habits of the people on that frontier country, where warrants
are not easily executed owing to the jealousy entertained by either
country of the legal interference of the other; remember, that even Sir
John Fielding said to my father that he could never trace a rogue beyond
the Briggend of Dumfries--think that the distinctions of Whig and
Tory, Papist and Protestant, still keep that country in a loose and
comparatively lawless state--think of all this, my dearest Darsie, and
remember that, while at this Mount Sharon of yours, you are residing
with a family actually menaced with forcible interference, and who,
while their obstinacy provokes violence, are by principle bound to
abstain from resistance.

Nay, let me tell you, professionally, that the legality of the mode of
fishing practised by your friend Joshua is greatly doubted by our
best lawyers; and that, if the stake-nets be considered as actually an
unlawful obstruction raised in the channel of the estuary, an assembly
of persons who shall proceed, VIA FACTI, to pull dawn and destroy them,
would not, in the eye of the law, be esteemed guilty of a riot. So, by
remaining where you are, YOU are likely to be engaged in a quarrel with
which you have nothing to do, and thus to enable your enemies, whoever
these may be, to execute, amid the confusion of a general hubbub,
whatever designs they may have against your personal safety.
Black-fishers, poachers, and smugglers are a sort of gentry that will
not be much checked, either by your Quaker's texts, or by your chivalry.
If you are Don Quixote enough to lay lance in rest, in defence of those
of the stake-net, and of the sad-coloured garment, I pronounce you but
a lost knight; for, as I said before, I doubt if these potent redressers
of wrongs, the justices and constables, will hold themselves warranted
to interfere. In a word, return, my dear Amadis; the adventure of the
Solway-nets is not reserved for your worship. Come back, and I will be
your faithful Sancho Panza upon a more hopeful quest. We will beat
about together, in search of this Urganda, the Unknown She of the Green
Mantle, who can read this, the riddle of thy fate, better than wise
Eppie of Buckhaven, [Well known in the Chap-Book, called the History of
Buckhaven.] or Cassandra herself.

I would fain trifle, Darsie; for, in debating with you, jests will
sometimes go farther than arguments; but I am sick at heart and cannot
keep the ball up. If you have a moment's regard for the friendship we
have so often vowed to each other, let my wishes for once prevail over
your own venturous and romantic temper. I am quite serious in thinking
that the information communicated to my father by this Mr. Herries, and
the admonitory letter of the young lady, bear upon each other; and that,
were you here, you might learn something from one or other, or from
both, that; might throw light on your birth and parentage. You will not,
surely, prefer an idle whim to the prospect which is thus held out to
you?

I would, agreeably to the hint I have received in the young lady's
letter (for I am confident that such is her condition), have ere now
been with you to urge these things, instead of pouring them out upon
paper. But you know that the day for my trials is appointed; I have
already gone through the form of being introduced to the examinators,
and have gotten my titles assigned me. All this should not keep me at
home, but my father would view any irregularity upon this occasion as a
mortal blow to the hopes which he has cherished most fondly during his
life; viz. my being called to the bar with some credit. For my own
part, I know there is no great difficulty in passing these formal
examinations, else how have some of our acquaintance got through them?
But, to my father, these formalities compose an august and serious
solemnity, to which he has long looked forward, and my absenting myself
at this moment would wellnigh drive him distracted. Yet I shall go
altogether distracted myself, if I have not an instant assurance from
you that you are hastening hither. Meanwhile I have desired Hannah to
get your little crib into the best order possible. I cannot learn
that my father has yet written to you; nor has he spoken more of his
communication with Birrenswork; but when I let him have some inkling
of the dangers you are at present incurring, I know my request that you
will return immediately will have his cordial support.

Another reason yet--I must give a dinner, as usual, upon my admission,
to our friends; and my father, laying aside all his usual considerations
of economy, has desired it may be in the best style possible.
Come hither then, dear Darsie! or, I protest to you, I shall send
examination, admission-dinner, and guests to the devil, and come, in
person, to fetch you with a vengeance. Thine, in much anxiety, A. F.




LETTER IX

ALEXANDER FAIRFORD, W.S., TO MR. DARSIE LATIMER

DEAR MR. DARSIE,

Having been your FACTOR LOCO TUTORIS or rather, I ought to say, in
correctness (since I acted without warrant from the court), your
NEGOTIORUM GESTOR, that connexion occasions my present writing. And
although having rendered an account of my intromissions, which have been
regularly approved of, not only by yourself (whom I could not prevail
upon to look at more than the docket and sum total), but also by the
worthy Mr. Samuel Griffiths of London, being the hand through whom the
remittances were made, I may, in some sense, be considered as to you
FUNCTUS OFFICIO; yet to speak facetiously, I trust you will not hold me
accountable as a vicious intromitter, should I still consider myself as
occasionally interested in your welfare. My motives for writing, at this
time, are twofold.

I have met with a Mr. Herries of Birrenswork, a gentleman of very
ancient descent, but who hath in time past been in difficulties, nor
do I know if his affairs are yet well redd. Birrenswork says that he
believes he was very familiar with your father, whom he states to have
been called Ralph Latimer of Langcote Hall, in Westmoreland; and he
mentioned family affairs, which it may be of the highest importance to
you to be acquainted with; but as he seemed to decline communicating
them to me, I could not civilly urge him thereanent. Thus much I know,
that Mr. Herries had his own share in the late desperate and unhappy
matter of 1745, and was in trouble about it, although that is probably
now over. Moreover, although he did not profess the Popish religion
openly, he had an eye that way. And both of these are reasons why I have
hesitated to recommend him to a youth who maybe hath not altogether so
well founded his opinions concerning Kirk and State, that they might
not be changed by some sudden wind of doctrine. For I have observed
ye, Master Darsie, to be rather tinctured with the old leaven of
prelacy--this under your leave; and although God forbid that you should
be in any manner disaffected to the Protestant Hanoverian line, yet ye
have ever loved to hear the blawing, blazing stories which the Hieland
gentlemen tell of those troublous times, which, if it were their will,
they had better pretermit, as tending rather to shame than to honour.
It is come to me also by a sidewind, as I may say, that you have been
neighbouring more than was needful among some of the pestilent sect of
Quakers--a people who own neither priest nor king, nor civil magistrate,
nor the fabric of our law, and will not depone either IN CIVILIBUS
or CRIMINALIBUS, be the loss to the lieges what it may. Anent which
heresies, it were good ye read 'The Snake in the Grass' or 'The Foot
out of the Snare,' being both well-approved tracts, touching these
doctrines.

Now, Mr. Darsie, ye are to judge for yourself whether ye can safely to
your soul's weal remain longer among these Papists and Quakers--these
defections on the right hand, and failings away on the left; and truly
if you can confidently resist these evil examples of doctrine, I think
ye may as well tarry in the bounds where ye are, until you see Mr.
Herries of Birrenswork, who does assuredly know more of your matters
than I thought had been communicated to any man in Scotland. I would
fain have precognosced him myself on these affairs, but found him
unwilling to speak out, as I have partly intimated before.

To call a new cause--I have the pleasure to tell you, that Alan has
passed his private Scots Law examinations with good approbation--a great
relief to my mind; especially as worthy Mr. Pest told me in my ear there
was no fear of 'the callant', as he familiarly called him, which gives
me great heart. His public trials, which are nothing in comparison
save a mere form, are to take place, by order of the Honourable Dean
of Faculty, on Wednesday first; and on Friday he puts on the gown, and
gives a bit chack of dinner to his friends and acquaintances, as is, you
know, the custom. Your company will be wished for there, Master Darsie,
by more than him, which I regret to think is impossible to have, as well
by your engagements, as that our cousin, Peter Fairford, comes from the
West on purpose, and we have no place to offer him but your chamber
in the wall. And, to be plain with you, after my use and wont, Master
Darsie, it may be as well that Alan and you do not meet till he is
hefted as it were to his new calling. You are a pleasant gentleman, and
full of daffing, which may well become you, as you have enough (as
I understand) to uphold your merry humour. If you regard the matter
wisely, you would perchance consider that a man of substance should have
a douce and staid demeanour; yet you are so far from growing grave and
considerate with the increase of your annual income, that the richer
you become, the merrier I think you grow. But this must be at your own
pleasure, so far as you are concerned. Alan, however (overpassing my
small savings), has the world to win; and louping and laughing, as you
and he were wont to do, would soon make the powder flee out of his wig,
and the pence out of his pocket. Nevertheless, I trust you will meet
when you return from your rambles; for there is a time, as the wise man
sayeth, for gathering, and a time for casting away; it is always the
part of a man of sense to take the gathering time first. I remain,
dear sir, your well-wishing friend; and obedient to command, ALEXANDER
FAIRFORD.

PS.--Alan's Thesis is upon the title DE PERICULO ET COMMODO REI
VENDITAE, and is a very pretty piece of Latinity.--Ross House, in our
neighbourhood, is nearly finished, and is thought to excel Duff House in
ornature.




LETTER X

DARSIE LATIMER TO ALAN FAIRFORD

The plot thickens, Alan. I have your letter, and also one from your
father. The last makes it impossible for me to comply with the kind
request which the former urges. No--I cannot be with you, Alan; and
that, for the best of all reasons--I cannot and ought not to counteract
your father's anxious wishes. I do not take it unkind of him that he
desires my absence. It is natural that he should wish for his son
what his son so well deserves--the advantage of a wiser and steadier
companion than I seem to him. And yet I am sure I have often laboured
hard enough to acquire that decency of demeanour which can no more be
suspected of breaking bounds, than an owl of catching a butterfly.

But it was in vain that I have knitted my brows till I had the headache,
in order to acquire the reputation of a grave, solid, and well-judging
youth. Your father always has discovered, or thought that he discovered,
a hare-brained eccentricity lying folded among the wrinkles of my
forehead, which rendered me a perilous associate for the future
counsellor and ultimate judge. Well, Corporal Nym's philosophy must
be my comfort--'Things must be as they may.'--I cannot come to your
father's house, where he wishes not to see me; and as to your coming
hither,--by all that is dear to me, I vow that if you are guilty of such
a piece of reckless folly--not to say undutiful cruelty, considering
your father's thoughts and wishes--I will never speak to you again as
long as I live! I am perfectly serious. And besides, your father, while
he in a manner prohibits me from returning to Edinburgh, gives me the
strongest reasons for continuing a little while longer in this country,
by holding out the hope that I may receive from your old friend, Mr.
Herries of Birrenswork, some particulars concerning my origin, with
which that ancient recusant seems to be acquainted.

That gentleman mentioned the name of a family in Westmoreland, with
which he supposes me connected. My inquiries here after such a family
have been ineffectual, for the borderers, on either side, know little
of each other. But I shall doubtless find some English person of whom to
make inquiries, since the confounded fetterlock clapped on my movements
by old Griffiths, prevents me repairing to England in person. At
least, the prospect of obtaining some information is greater here than
elsewhere; it will be an apology for my making a longer stay in this
neighbourhood, a line of conduct which seems to have your father's
sanction, whose opinion must be sounder than that of your wandering
damoselle.

If the road were paved with dangers which leads to such a discovery, I
cannot for a moment hesitate to tread it. But in fact there is no peril
in the case. If the Tritons of the Solway shall proceed to pull down
honest Joshua's tide-nets, I am neither Quixote enough in disposition,
nor Goliath enough in person, to attempt their protection. I have no
idea of attempting to prop a falling house by putting my shoulders
against it. And indeed, Joshua gave me a hint that the company which he
belongs to, injured in the way threatened (some of them being men who
thought after the fashion of the world), would pursue the rioters
at law, and recover damages, in which probably his own ideas of
non-resistance will not prevent his participating. Therefore the whole
affair will take its course as law will, as I only mean to interfere
when it may be necessary to direct the course of the plaintiffs to
thy chambers; and I request they may find thee intimate with all the
Scottish statutes concerning salmon fisheries, from the LEX AQUARUM,
downward.

As for the Lady of the Mantle, I will lay a wager that the sun so
bedazzled thine eyes on that memorable morning, that everything thou
didst look upon seemed green; and notwithstanding James Wilkinson's
experience in the Fusileers, as well as his negative whistle, I will
venture to hold a crown that she is but a what-shall-call-'um after all.
Let not even the gold persuade you to the contrary. She may make a shift
to cause you to disgorge that, and (immense spoil!) a session's fees
to boot, if you look not all the sharper about you. Or if it should be
otherwise, and if indeed there lurk some mystery under this visitation,
credit me, it is one which thou canst not penetrate, nor can I as yet
even attempt to explain it; since, if I prove mistaken, and mistaken I
may easily be, I would be fain to creep into Phalaris's bull, were
it standing before me ready heated, rather than be roasted with thy
raillery. Do not tax me with want of confidence; for the instant I can
throw any light on the matter thou shalt have it; but while I am only
blundering about in the dark, I do not choose to call wise folks to see
me, perchance, break my nose against a post. So if you marvel at this,

  E'en marvel on till time makes all things plain.

In the meantime, kind Alan, let me proceed in my diurnal.

On the third or fourth day after my arrival at Mount Sharon, Time, that
bald sexton to whom I have just referred you, did certainly limp more
heavily along with me than he had done at first. The quaint morality
of Joshua, and Huguenot simplicity of his sister, began to lose much of
their raciness with their novelty, and my mode of life, by dint of being
very quiet, began to feel abominably dull. It was, as thou say'st, as
if the Quakers had put the sun in their pockets--all around was soft
and mild, and even pleasant; but there was, in the whole routine, a
uniformity, a want of interest, a helpless and hopeless languor, which
rendered life insipid. No doubt, my worthy host and hostess felt none
of this void, this want of excitation, which was becoming oppressive to
their guest. They had their little round of occupations, charities, and
pleasures; Rachel had her poultry-yard and conservatory, and Joshua
his garden. Besides this, they enjoyed, doubtless, their devotional
meditations; and, on the whole, time glided softly and imperceptibly
on with them, though to me, who long for stream and cataract, it seemed
absolutely to stand still. I meditated returning to Shepherd's Bush, and
began to think, with some hankering, after little Benjie and the rod.
The imp has ventured hither, and hovers about to catch a peep of me
