     wash himself; while you squander my property in bathing,
     as if I were already dead. But go as quickly as possible
     and learn instead of me.

     Phid. What good could any one learn from them?

     Strep. What, really? Whatever wisdom there is among men.
     And you will know yourself, how ignorant and stupid you
     are. But wait for me here a short time.

     [Runs off]

     Phid. Ah me! What shall I do, my father being crazed?
     Shall I bring him into court and convict him of lunacy,
     or shall I give information of his madness to the
     coffin-makers?

     [Re-enter Strepsiades with a cock under one arm and a
     hen under the other]

     Strep. Come, let me see; what do you consider this to
     be? Tell me.

     Phid. Alectryon.

     Strep. Right. And what this?

     Phid. Alectryon.

     Strep. Both the same? You are very ridiculous. Do not do
     so, then, for the future; but call this alektryaina, and
     this one alektor.

     Phid. Alektryaina! Did you learn these clever things by
     going in just now to the Titans?

     Strep. And many others too; but whatever I learned on
     each occasion I used to forget immediately, through
     length of years.

     Phid. Is it for this reason, pray, that you have also
     lost your cloak?

     Strep. I have not lost it; but have studied it away.

     Phid. What have you made of your slippers, you foolish
     man?

     Strep. I have expended them, like Pericles, for needful
     purposes.  Come, move, let us go. And then if you obey
     your father, go wrong if you like. I also know that I
     formerly obeyed you, a lisping child of six years old,
     and bought you a go-cart at the Diasia, with the first
     obolus I received from the Heliaea.

     Phid. You will assuredly some time at length be grieved
     at this.

     Strep. It is well done of you that you obeyed. Come
     hither, come hither O Socrates! Come forth, for I bring
     to you this son of mine, having persuaded him against
     his will.

     [Enter Socrates]

     Soc. For he is still childish, and not used to the
     baskets here.

     Phid. You would yourself be used to them if you were
     hanged.

     Strep. A mischief take you! Do you abuse your teacher?

     Soc. "Were hanged" quoth 'a! How sillily he pronounced
     it, and with lips wide apart! How can this youth ever
     learn an acquittal from a trial or a legal summons, or
     persuasive refutation? And yet Hyperbolus learned this
     at the cost of a talent.

     Strep. Never mind; teach him. He is clever by nature.
     Indeed, from his earliest years, when he was a little
     fellow only so big, he was wont to form houses and carve
     ships within-doors, and make little wagons of leather,
     and make frogs out of pomegranate-rinds, you can't think
     how cleverly. But see that he learns those two causes;
     the better, whatever it may be; and the worse, which, by
     maintaining what is unjust, overturns the better. If not
     both, at any rate the unjust one by all means.

     Soc. He shall learn it himself from the two causes in
     person.

     [Exit Socrates]

     Strep. I will take my departure. Remember this now, that
     he is to be able to reply to all just arguments.

     [Exit Strepsiades and enter Just Cause and Unjust Cause]

     Just Cause. Come hither! Show yourself to the
     spectators, although being audacious.

     Unjust Cause. Go whither you please; for I shall far
     rather do for you, if I speak before a crowd.

     Just. You destroy me? Who are you?

     Unj. A cause.

     Just. Ay, the worse.

     Unj. But I conquer you, who say that you are better than
     I.

     Just. By doing what clever trick?

     Unj. By discovering new contrivances.

     Just. For these innovations flourish by the favour of
     these silly persons.

     Unj. No; but wise persons.

     Just I will destroy you miserably.

     Unj. Tell me, by doing what?

     Just By speaking what is just.

     Unj. But I will overturn them by contradicting them; for
     I deny that justice even exists at all.

     Just Do you deny that it exists?

     Unj. For come, where is it?

     Just With the gods.

     Unj. How, then, if justice exists, has Jupiter not
     perished, who bound his own father?

     Just Bah! This profanity now is spreading! Give me a
     basin.

     Unj. You are a dotard and absurd.

     Just You are debauched and shameless.

     Unj. You have spoken roses of me.

     Just And a dirty lickspittle.

     Unj. You crown me with lilies.

     Just And a parricide.

     Unj. You don't know that you are sprinkling me with
     gold.

     Just Certainly not so formerly, but with lead.

     Unj. But now this is an ornament to me.

     Just You are very impudent.

     Unj. And you are antiquated.

     Just And through you, no one of our youths is willing to
     go to school; and you will be found out some time or
     other by the Athenians, what sort of doctrines you teach
     the simple-minded.

     Unj. You are shamefully squalid.

     Just And you are prosperous. And yet formerly you were a
     beggar saying that you were the Mysian Telephus,  and
     gnawing the maxims of Pandeletus out of your little
     wallet.

     Unj. Oh, the wisdom--

     Just Oh, the madness--

     Unj. Which you have mentioned.

     Just And of your city, which supports you who ruin her
     youths.

     Unj. You shan't teach this youth, you old dotard.

     Just Yes, if he is to be saved, and not merely to
     practise loquacity.

     Unj. (to Phidippides) Come hither, and leave him to
     rave.

     Just You shall howl, if you lay your hand on him.

     Cho. Cease from contention and railing. But show to us,
     you, what you used to teach the men of former times, and
     you, the new system of education; in order that, having
     heard you disputing, he may decide and go to the school
     of one or the other.

     Just. I am willing to do so.

     Unj. I also am willing.

     Cho. Come now, which of the two shall speak first?

     Unj. I will give him the precedence; and then, from
     these things which he adduces, I will shoot him dead
     with new words and thoughts. And at last, if he mutter,
     he shall be destroyed, being stung in his whole face and
     his two eyes by my maxims, as if by bees.

     Cho. Now the two, relying on very dexterous arguments
     and thoughts, and sententious maxims, will show which of
     them shall appear superior in argument. For now the
     whole crisis of wisdom is here laid before them; about
     which my friends have a very great contest. But do you,
     who adorned our elders with many virtuous manners, utter
     the voice in which you rejoice, and declare your nature.

     Just. I will, therefore, describe the ancient system of
     education, how it was ordered, when I flourished in the
     advocacy of justice, and temperance was the fashion. In
     the first place it was incumbent that no one should hear
     the voice of a boy uttering a syllable; and next, that
     those from the same quarter of the town should march in
     good order through the streets to the school of the
     harp-master, naked, and in a body, even if it were to
     snow as thick as meal. Then again, their master would
     teach them, not sitting cross-legged, to learn by rote a
     song, either "pallada persepolin deinan"  or "teleporon
     ti boama"  raising to a higher pitch the harmony which
     our fathers transmitted to us. But if any of them were
     to play the buffoon, or to turn any quavers, like these
     difficult turns the present artists make after the
     manner of Phrynis, he used to be thrashed, being beaten
     with many blows, as banishing the Muses. And it behooved
     the boys, while sitting in the school of the
     Gymnastic-master, to cover the thigh, so that they might
     exhibit nothing indecent to those outside; then again,
     after rising from the ground, to sweep the sand
     together, and to take care not to leave an impression of
     the person for their lovers. And no boy used in those
     days to anoint himself below the navel; so that their
     bodies wore the appearance of blooming health. Nor used
     he to go to his lover, having made up his voice in an
     effeminate tone, prostituting himself with his eyes. Nor
     used it to be allowed when one was dining to take the
     head of the radish, or to snatch from their seniors dill
     or parsley, or to eat fish, or to giggle, or to keep the
     legs crossed.

     Unj. Aye, antiquated and dipolia-like  and full of
     grasshoppers, and of Cecydes, and of the Buphonian
     festival!

     Just Yet certainly these are those principles by which
     my system of education nurtured the men who fought at
     Marathon. But you teach the men of the present day, so
     that I am choked, when at the Panathenaia a fellow,
     holding his shield before his person, neglects
     Tritogenia,  when they ought to dance. Wherefore, O
     youth, choose with confidence, me, the better cause, and
     you will learn to hate the Agora, and to refrain from
     baths, and to be ashamed of what is disgraceful, and to
     be enraged if any one jeer you, and to rise up from
     seats before your seniors when they approach, and not to
     behave ill toward your parents, and to do nothing else
     that is base, because you are to form in your mind an
     image of Modesty: and not to dart into the house of a
     dancing-woman, lest, while gaping after these things,
     being struck with an apple by a wanton, you should be
     damaged in your reputation: and not to contradict your
     father in anything; nor by calling him Iapetus, to
     reproach him with the ills of age, by which you were
     reared in your infancy.

     Unj. If you shall believe him in this, O youth, by
     Bacchus, you will be like the sons of Hippocrates, and
     they will call you a booby.

     Just. Yet certainly shall you spend your time in the
     gymnastic schools, sleek and blooming; not chattering in
     the market-place rude jests, like the youths of the
     present day; nor dragged into court for a petty suit,
     greedy, pettifogging, knavish; but you shall descend to
     the Academy  and run races beneath the sacred olives
     along with some modest compeer, crowned with white
     reeds, redolent of yew, and careless ease, of
     leaf-shedding white poplar, rejoicing in the season of
     spring, when the plane-tree whispers to the elm. If you
     do these things which I say, and apply your mind to
     these, you will ever have a stout chest, a clear
     complexion, broad shoulders, a little tongue, large
     hips, little lewdness. But if you practise what the
