was a dyed-in-the-wool Cavalier, utterly stubborn for King and Church.
The Assemblies likewise leaned that way, as presumably did the mass
of the people. It was ordered in 1631: "That there bee a uniformitie
throughout this colony both in substance and circumstance to the cannons
and constitutions of the church of England as neere as may bee, and
that every person yeald readie obedience unto them uppon penaltie of the
paynes and forfeitures in that case appoynted." And, indeed, the pains
and forfeitures threatened were savage enough.

Official Virginia, loyal to the Established Church, was jealous and
fearful of Papistry and looked askance at Puritanism. It frowned upon
these and upon agnosticisms, atheisms, pantheisms, religious doubts, and
alterations in judgment--upon anything, in short, that seemed to push a
finger against Church and Kingdom. Yet in this Virginia, governed by
Sir William Berkeley, a gentleman more cavalier than the Cavaliers, more
royalist than the King, more churchly than the Church, there lived not
a few Puritans and Dissidents, going on as best they might with
Established Church and fiery King's men. Certain parishes were
predominantly Puritan; certain ministers were known to have leanings
away from surplices and genuflections and to hold that Archbishop Laud
was some kin to the Pope. In 1642, to reenforce these ministers, came
three more from New England, actively averse to conformity. But Governor
and Council and the majority of the Burgesses will have none of that.
The Assembly of 1643 takes sharp action.

For the preservation of the puritie of doctrine and unitie of the
church, IT IS ENACTED that all ministers whatsoever which shall reside
in the collony are to be conformable to the orders and constitutions
of the church of England, and the laws therein established, and not
otherwise to be admitted to teach or preach publickly or privately.
And that the Gov. and Counsel do take care that all nonconformists
upon notice of them shall be compelled to depart the collony with all
conveniencie. And so in consequence out of Virginia, to New England
where Independents were welcome, or to Maryland where any Christian
might dwell, went these tainted ministers. But there stayed behind
Puritan and nonconforming minds in the bodies of many parishioners. They
must hold their tongues, indeed, and outwardly conform--but they watched
lynx-eyed for their opportunity and a more favorable fortune.

Having launched thunderbolts against schismatics of this sort, Berkeley,
himself active and powerful, with the Council almost wholly of his
party and the House of Burgesses dominantly so, turned his attention
to "popish recusants." Of these there were few or none dwelling in
Virginia. Let them then not attempt to come from Maryland! The rulers of
the colony legislated with vigor: papists may not hold any public place;
all statutes against them shall be duly executed; popish priests by
chance or intent arriving within the bounds of Virginia shall be given
five days' warning, and, if at the end of this time they are yet upon
Virginian soil, action shall be brought against them. Berkeley sweeps
with an impatient broom.

The Kingdom is cared for not less than the Church in Virginia. Any
and all persons coming into the colony by land and by sea shall have
administered to them the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance. "Which if any
shall refuse to take," the commander of the fort at Point Comfort
shall "committ him or them to prison." Foreigners in birth and tongue,
foreigners in thought, must have found the place and time narrow indeed.

On the eve of civil war there arose on the part of some in England a
project to revive and restore the old Virginia Company by procuring from
Charles, now deep in troubles of his own, a renewal of the old letters
patent and the transference of the direct government of the colony into
the hands of a reorganized and vast corporation. Virginia, which a score
of years before had defended the Company, now protested vigorously, and,
with regard to the long view of things, it may be thought wisely. The
project died a natural death. The petition sent from Virginia shows
plainly enough the pen of Berkeley. There are a multitude of reasons
why Virginia should not pass from King to Company, among which these
are worthy of note: "We may not admit of so unnatural a distance as a
Company will interpose between his sacred majesty and us his subjects
from whose immediate protection we have received so many royal favours
and gracious blessings. For, by such admissions, we shall degenerate
from the condition of our birth, being naturalized under a monarchical
government and not a popular and tumultuary government depending
upon the greatest number of votes of persons of several humours and
dispositions."

When this paper reached England, it came to a country at civil war. The
Long Parliament was in session. Stafford had been beheaded, the Star
Chamber swept away, the Grand Remonstrance presented. On Edgehill
bloomed flowers that would soon be trampled by Rupert's cavalry. In
Virginia the Assembly took notice of these "unkind differences now
in England," and provided by tithing for the Governor's pension and
allowance, which were for the present suspended and endangered by the
troubles at home. That the forces banded against the Lord's anointed
would prove victorious must at this time have appeared preposterously
unlikely to the fiery Governor and the ultra-loyal Virginia whom he led.
The Puritans and Independents in Virginia--estimated a little earlier
at "a thousand strong" and now, for all the acts against them, probably
stronger yet--were to be found chiefly in the parishes of Isle of Wight
and Nansemond, but had representatives from the Falls to the Eastern
Shore. What these Virginians thought of the "unkind differences" does
not appear in the record, but probably there was thought enough and
secret hopes.

In 1644, the year of Marston Moor, Virginia, too, saw battle and sudden
and bloody death. That Opechancanough who had succeeded Powhatan was
now one hundred years old, hardly able to walk or to see, dwelling
harmlessly in a village upon the upper Pamunkey. All the Indians were
broken and dispersed; serious danger was not to be thought of. Then,
of a sudden, the flame leaped again. There fell from the blue sky a
massacre directed against the outlying plantations. Three hundred men,
women, and children were killed by the Indians. With fury the white men
attacked in return. They sent bodies of horse into the untouched western
forests. They chased and slew without mercy. In 1646 Opechancanough,
brought a prisoner to Jamestown, ended his long tale of years by a shot
from one of his keepers. The Indians were beaten, and, lacking such
another leader, made no more organized and general attacks. But for long
years a kind of border warfare still went on.

Even Maryland, tolerant and just as was the Calvert policy, did not
altogether escape Indian troubles. She had to contend with no such able
chief as Opechancanough, and she suffered no sweeping massacres. But
after the first idyllic year or so there set in a small, constant
friction. So fast did the Maryland colonists arrive that soon there was
pressure of population beyond those first purchased bounds. The more
thoughtful among the Indians may well have taken alarm lest their
villages and hunting-grounds might not endure these inroads. Ere long
the English in Maryland were placing "centinells" over fields where men
worked, and providing penalties for those who sold the savages firearms.
But at no time did young Maryland suffer the Indian woes that had vexed
young Virginia.

Nor did Maryland escape the clash of interests which beset the
beginnings of representative assemblies in all proprietary provinces.
The second, like the first, Lord Baltimore, was a believer in kings and
aristocracies, in a natural division of human society into masters and
men. His effort was to plant intact in Maryland a feudal order. He would
be Palatine, the King his suzerain. In Maryland the great planters, in
effect his barons, should live upon estates, manorial in size and with
manorial rights. The laboring men--the impecunious adventurers whom
these greater adventurers brought out--would form a tenantry, the
Lord Proprietary's men's men. It is true that, according to charter,
provision was made for an Assembly. Here were to sit "freemen of the
province," that is to say, all white males who were not in the position
of indentured servants. But with the Proprietary, and not with the
Assembly, would rest primarily the lawmaking power. The Lord Proprietary
would propose legislation, and the freemen of the country would debate,
in a measure advise, represent, act as consultants, and finally confirm.
Baltimore was prepared to be a benevolent lord, wise, fatherly.

In 1635 met the first Assembly, Leonard Calvert and his Council
sitting with the burgesses, and this gathering of freemen proceeded to
inaugurate legislation. There was passed a string of enactments which
presumably dealt with immediate wants at St. Mary's, and which, the
Assembly recognized, must have the Lord Proprietary's assent. A copy was
therefore sent by the first ship to leave. So long were the voyages and
so slow the procedure in England that it was 1637 before Baltimore's
veto upon the Assembly's laws reached Maryland. It would seem that
he did not disapprove so much of the laws themselves as of the bold
initiative of the Assembly, for he at once sent over twelve bills of
his own drafting. Leonard Calvert was instructed to bring all freemen
together in Assembly and present for their acceptance the substituted
legislation.

Early in 1638 this Maryland Assembly met. The Governor put before it for
adoption the Proprietary's laws. The vote was taken. Governor and some
others were for, the remainder of the Assembly unanimously against, the
proposed legislation. There followed a year or two of struggle over this
question, but in the end the Proprietary in effect acknowledged defeat.
The colonists, through their Assembly, might thereafter propose laws
to meet their exigencies, and Governor Calvert, acting for his brother,
should approve or veto according to need.

When civil war between King and Parliament broke out in England,
sentiment in Maryland as in Virginia inclined toward the King. But
that Puritan, Non-conformist, and republican element that was in
both colonies might be expected to gain if, at home in England, the
Parliamentary party gained. A Royal Governor or a Lord Proprietary's
Governor might alike be perplexed by the political turmoil in the mother
country. Leonard Calvert felt the need of first-hand consultation with
his brother. Leaving Giles Brent in his place, he sailed for England,
talked there with Baltimore himself, perplexed and filled with
foreboding, and returned to Maryland not greatly wiser than when he
went.

Maryland was soon convulsed by disorders which in many ways reflected
the unsettled conditions in England. A London ship, commanded by Richard
Ingle, a Puritan and a staunch upholder of the cause of Parliament,
arrived before St. Mary's, where he gave great offense by his blatant
remarks about the King and Rupert, "that Prince Rogue." Though he was
promptly arrested on the charge of treason, he managed to escape and
soon left the loyal colony far astern.

In the meantime Leonard Calvert had come back to Maryland, where he
found confusion and a growing heat and faction and side-taking of a
bitter sort. To add to the turmoil, William Claiborne, among whose
dominant traits was an inability to recognize defeat, was making
attempts upon Kent Island. Calvert was not long at St. Mary's ere Ingle
sailed in again with letters-of-marque from the Long Parliament. Ingle
and his men landed and quickly found out the Protestant moiety of
the colonists. There followed an actual insurrection, the Marylanders
joining with Ingle and much aided by Claiborne, who now retook Kent
Island. The insurgents then captured St. Mary's and forced the
Governor to flee to Virginia. For two years Ingle ruled and plundered,
sequestrating goods of the Proprietary's adherents, and deporting in
irons Jesuit priests. At the end of this time Calvert reappeared, and
behind him a troop gathered in Virginia. Now it was Ingle's turn to
flee. Regaining his ship, he made sail for England, and Maryland settled
down again to the ancient order. The Governor then reduced Kent Island.
Claiborne, again defeated, retired to Virginia, whence he sailed for
England.

In 1647 Leonard Calvert died. Until the Proprietary's will should be
known, Thomas Greene acted as Governor. Over in England, Lord Baltimore
stood at the parting of the ways. The King's cause had a hopeless look.
Roundhead and Parliament were making way in a mighty tide. Baltimore was
marked for a royalist and a Catholic. If the tide rose farther, he might
lose Maryland. A sagacious mind, he proceeded to do all that he could,
short of denying his every belief, to placate his enemies. He appointed
as Governor of Maryland William Stone, a Puritan, and into the Council,
numbering five members, he put three Puritans. On the other hand the
interests of his Maryland Catholics must not be endangered. He required
of the new Governor not to molest any person "professing to believe
in Jesus Christ, and in particular any Roman Catholic." In this way he
thought that, right and left, he might provide against persecution.

Under these complex influences the Maryland Assembly passed in 1649 an
Act concerning Religion. It reveals, upon the one hand, Christendom's
mercilessness toward the freethinker--in which mercilessness, whether
through conviction or policy, Baltimore acquiesced--and, on the other
hand, that aspiration toward friendship within the Christian fold which
is even yet hardly more than a pious wish, and which in the seventeenth
century could have been felt by very few. To Baltimore and the Assembly
of Maryland belongs, not the glory of inaugurating an era of wide
toleration for men and women of all beliefs or disbeliefs, whether
Christian or not, but the real though lesser glory of establishing
entire toleration among the divisions within the Christian circle
itself. According to the Act,*

"Whatsoever person or persons within this Province and the Islands
thereunto belonging, shall from henceforth blaspheme God, that is curse
him, or deny our Saviour Jesus Christ to bee the sonne of God, or
shall deny the holy Trinity,... or the Godhead of any of the said three
persons of the Trinity, or the unity of the Godhead, or shall use or
utter any reproachful speeches, words or language concerning the
said Holy Trinity, or any of the said three persons thereof, shall be
punished with death and confiscation or forfeiture of all his or her
lands and goods to the Lord Proprietary and his heires.... Whatsoever
person or persons shall from henceforth use or utter any reproachfull
words, or speeches, concerning the blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of
our Saviour, or the holy Apostles or Evangelists, or any of them, shall
in such case for the first offence forfeit to the said Lord Proprietary
and his heires the sum of five pound sterling.... Whatsoever person
shall henceforth upon any occasion... declare, call, or denominate any
person or persons whatsoever inhabiting, residing, traffiqueing, trading
or comerceing within this Province, or within any of the Ports, Harbors,
Creeks or Havens to the same belonging, an heritick, Scismatick,
Idolator, puritan, Independant, Presbiterian, popish priest, Jesuite,
Jesuited papist, Lutheran, Calvenist, Anabaptist, Brownist, Antinomian,
Barrowist, Roundhead, Separtist, or any other name or term in a
reproachful manner relating to matter of Religion, shall for every such
Offence forfeit... the sum of tenne shillings sterling....

"Whereas the inforceing of the conscience in matters of Religion
hath frequently fallen out to be of dangerous Consequence in those
commonwealths where it hath been practised,... be it therefore also
by the Lord Proprietary with the advice and consent of this Assembly,
ordeyned and enacted... that no person or persons whatsoever within this
Province...professing to beleive in Jesus Christ, shall from henceforth
bee any waies troubled, molested or discountenanced for or in respect
of his or her religion nor in the free exercise thereof... nor anyway
compelled to the beleif or exercise of any other Religion against his or
her consent, soe as they be not unfaithfull to the Lord Proprietary or
molest or conspire against the civill Government..."

     * "Archives of Maryland, Proceedings and Acts of the General
     Assembly", vol. I, pp. 244-247.



CHAPTER XI. COMMONWEALTH AND RESTORATION

On the 30th of January, 1649, before the palace of Whitehall, Charles
the First of England was beheaded. In Virginia the event fell with a
shock. Even those within the colony who were Cromwell's men rather than
Charles's men seem to have recoiled from this act. Presently, too, came
fleeing royalists from overseas, to add their passionate voices to those
of the royalists in Virginia. Many came, "nobility, clergy and gentry,
men of the first rate." A thousand are said to have arrived in the year
after the King's death.

In October the Virginia Assembly met. Parliament men--and now these were
walking with head in the air--might regret the execution of the past
January, and yet be prepared to assert that with the fall of the kingdom
fell all powers and offices named and decreed by the hapless monarch.
What was a passionate royalist government doing in Virginia now that
England was a Commonwealth? The passionate government answered for
itself in acts passed by this Assembly. With swelling words, with a
tragic accent, it denounced the late happenings in England and all the
Roundhead wickedness that led up to them. It proclaimed loyalty to "his
sacred Majesty that now is"--that is, to Charles Stuart, afterwards
Charles the Second, then a refugee on the Continent. Finally it enacted
that any who defended the late proceedings, or in the least affected to
question "the undoubted and inherent right of his Majesty that now is to
the Collony of Virginia" should be held guilty of high treason; and
that "reporters and divulgers" of rumors tending to change of government
should be punished "even to severity."

Berkeley's words may be detected in these acts of the Assembly. In no
great time the Cavalier Governor conferred with Colonel Henry Norwood,
one of the royalist refugees to Virginia. Norwood thereupon sailed away
upon a Dutch ship and came to Holland, where he found "his Majesty
that now is." Here he knelt, and invited that same Majesty to visit his
dominion of Virginia, and, if he liked it, there to rest, sovereign of
the Virginian people. But Charles still hoped to be sovereign in England
and would not cross the seas. He sent, however, to Sir William Berkeley
a renewal of his Governor's commission, and appointed Norwood Treasurer
of Virginia, and said, doubtless, many gay and pleasant things.

In Virginia there continued to appear from England adherents of the
ancient regime. Men, women, and children came until to a considerable
degree the tone of society rang Cavalier. This immigration, now lighter,
now heavier, continued through a rather prolonged period. There came now
to Virginia families whose names are often met in the later history
of the land. Now Washingtons appear, with Randolphs, Carys, Skipwiths,
Brodnaxes, Tylers, Masons, Madisons, Monroes, and many more. These
persons are not without means; they bring with them servants; they are
in high favor with Governor and Council; they acquire large tracts
of virgin land; they bring in indentured labor; they purchase African
slaves; they cultivate tobacco. From being English country gentlemen
they turn easily to become Virginia planters.

But the Virginia Assembly had thrown a gauntlet before the victorious
Commonwealth; and the Long Parliament now declared the colony to be
in contumacy, assembled and dispatched ships against her, and laid an
embargo upon trade with the rebellious daughter. In January of 1652
English ships appeared off Point Comfort. Four Commissioners of the
Commonwealth were aboard, of whom that strong man Claiborne was one.
After issuing a proclamation to quiet the fears of the people,
the Commissioners made their way to Jamestown. Here was found the
indomitable Berkeley and his Council in a state of active preparation,
cannon trained. But, when all was said, the Commissioners had brought
wisely moderate terms: submit because submit they must, acknowledge the
Commonwealth, and, that done, rest unmolested! If resistance continued,
there were enough Parliament men in Virginia to make an army. Indentured
servants and slaves should receive freedom in exchange for support to
the Commonwealth. The ships would come up from Point Comfort, and a
determined war would be on. What Sir William Berkeley personally said
has not survived. But after consultation upon consultation Virginia
surrendered to the commonwealth.

Berkeley stepped from the Governor's chair, retiring in wrath and
bitterness of heart to his house at Greenspring. In his place sat
Richard Bennett, one of the Commissioners. Claiborne was made Secretary.
King's men went out of office; Parliament men came in. But there was
no persecution. In the bland and wide Virginia air minds failed to come
into hard and frequent collision. For all the ferocities of the statute
books, acute suffering for difference of opinion, whether political or
religious, did not bulk large in the life of early Virginia.

The Commissioners, after the reduction of Virginia, had a like part to
play with Maryland. At St. Mary's, as at Jamestown, they demanded and at
length received submission to the Commonwealth. There was here the less
trouble owing to Baltimore's foresight in appointing to the office
of Governor William Stone, whose opinions, political and religious,
accorded with those of revolutionary England. Yet the Governor could
not bring himself to forget his oath to Lord Baltimore and agree to the
demand of the Commissioners that he should administer the Government
in the name of "the Keepers of the Liberties of England." After some
hesitation the Commissioners decided to respect his scruples and allow
him to govern in the name of the Lord Proprietary, as he had solemnly
promised.

In Virginia and in Maryland the Commonwealth and the Lord Protector
stand where stood the Kingdom and the King. Many are far better
satisfied than they were before; and the confirmed royalist consumes his
grumbling in his own circle. The old, exhausting quarrel seems laid
to rest. But within this wider peace breaks out suddenly an interior
strife. Virginia would, if she could, have back all her old northward
territory. In 1652 Bennett's Government goes so far as to petition
Parliament to unseat the Catholic Proprietary of Maryland and make whole
again the ancient Virginia. The hand of Claiborne, that remarkable and
persistent man, may be seen in this.

In Maryland, Puritans and Independents were settled chiefly about
the rivers Severn and Patuxent and in a village called Providence,
afterwards Annapolis. These now saw their chance to throw off the
Proprietary's rule and to come directly under that of the Commonwealth.
So thinking, they put themselves into communication with Bennett and
Claiborne. In 1654 Stone charged the Commissioners with having promoted
"faction, sedition, and rebellion against the Lord Baltimore." The
charge was well founded. Claiborne and Bennett assumed that they were
yet Parliament Commissioners, empowered to bring "all plantations within
the Bay of Chesapeake to their due obedience to the Parliament and
Commonwealth of England." And they were indeed set against the Lord
Baltimore. Claiborne would head the Puritans of Providence; and a troop
should be raised in Virginia and march northward. The Commissioners
actually advanced upon St. Mary's, and with so superior a force that
Stone surrendered, and a Puritan Government was inaugurated. A Puritan
Assembly met, debarring any Catholics. Presently it passed an act
annulling the Proprietary's Act of Toleration. Professors of the
religion of Rome should "be restrained from the exercise thereof."
The hand of the law was to fall heavily upon "popery, prelacy, or
licentiousness of opinion." Thus was intolerance alive again in the only
land where she had seemed to die!

In England now there was hardly a Parliament, but only the Lord
Protector, Oliver Cromwell. Content with Baltimore's recognition of the
Protectorate, Cromwell was not prepared to back, in their independent
action, the Commissioners of that now dissolved Parliament. Baltimore
made sure of this, and then dispatched messengers overseas to Stone,
bidding him do all that lay in him to retake Maryland. Stone thereupon
gathered several hundred men and a fleet of small sailing craft, with
which he pushed up the bay to the Severn. In the meantime the Puritans
had not been idle, but had themselves raised a body of men and had taken
over the Golden Lyon, an armed merchantman lying before their town. On
the 24th of March, 1655, the two forces met in the Battle of the Severn.
"In the name of God, fall on!" cried the men of Providence, and "Hey for
St. Mary's!" cried the others. The battle was won by the Providence men.
They slew or wounded fifty of the St. Mary's men and desperately wounded
Stone himself and took many prisoners, ten of whom were afterwards
condemned to death and four were actually executed.

Now followed a period of up and down, the Commissioners and the
Proprietary alike appealing to the Lord Protector for some expression of
his "determinate will." Both sides received encouragement inasmuch as he
decided for neither. His own authority being denied by neither, Cromwell
may have preferred to hold these distant factions in a canceling,
neutralizing posture. But far weightier matters, in fact, were occupying
his mind. In 1657, weary of her "very sad, distracted, and unsettled
condition," Maryland herself proceeded--Puritan, Prelatist, and
Catholic together--to agree henceforth to disagree. Toleration viewed
in retrospect appears dimly to have been seen for the angel that it was.
Maryland would return to the Proprietary's rule, provided there should
be complete indemnity for political offenses and a solemn promise that
the Toleration Act of 1649 should never be repealed. This without a
smile Baltimore promised. Articles were signed; a new Assembly composed
of all manner of Christians was called; and Maryland returned for a time
to her first allegiance.

Quiet years, on the whole, follow in Virginia under the Commonwealth.
The three Governors of this period--Bennett, Digges, and Mathews are
all chosen by the Assembly, which, but for the Navigation Laws,* might
almost forget the Home Government. Then Oliver Cromwell dies; and, after
an interval, back to England come the Stuarts. Charles II is proclaimed
King. And back into office in Virginia is brought that staunch old
monarchist, Sir William Berkeley--first by a royalist Assembly and
presently by commission from the new King.

     * See Editor's Note on the Navigation Laws at the end of
     this volume.


Then Virginia had her Long Parliament or Assembly. In 1661, in the
first gush of the Restoration, there was elected a House of Burgesses so
congenial to Berkeley's mind that he wished to see it perpetuated. For
fifteen years therefore he held it in being, with adjournments from one
year into another and with sharp refusals to listen to any demand for
new elections. Yet this demand grew, and still the Governor shut the
door in the face of the people and looked imperiously forth from the
window. His temper, always fiery, now burned vindictive; his zeal for
King and Church and the high prerogatives of the Governor of Virginia
became a consuming passion.

When Berkeley first came to Virginia, and again for a moment in the
flare of the Restoration, his popularity had been real, but for long now
it had dwindled. He belonged to an earlier time, and he held fast to old
ideas that were decaying at the heart. A bigot for the royal power,
a man of class with a contempt for the generality and its clumsily
expressed needs, he grew in narrowness as he grew in years. Berkeley
could in these later times write home, though with some exaggeration:
"I thank God there are no free schools nor printing, and I hope we shall
not have these hundred years; for learning has brought disobedience into
the world and printing has divulged them, and libels against the best
governments! God keep us from both!" But that was the soured zealot
for absolutism--William Berkeley the man was fond enough of books and
himself had written plays.

The spirit of the time was reactionary in Virginia as it was reactionary
in England. Harsh servant and slave laws were passed. A prison was to
be erected in each county; provision was made for pillory and stocks and
duckingstool; the Quakers were to be proceeded against; the Baptists
who refused to bring children to baptism were to suffer. Then at last in
1670 came restriction of the franchise:

"Act III. ELECTION OF BURGESSES BY WHOM. WHEREAS the usuall way of
chuseing burgesses by the votes of all persons who having served their
tyme are freemen of this country who haveing little interest in the
country doe oftener make tumults at the election to the disturbance of
his Majestie's peace, than by their discretions in their votes provide
for the conservation thereof, by makeing choyce of persons fitly
qualifyed for the discharge of soe greate a trust, And whereas the
lawes of England grant a voyce in such election only to such as by
their estates real or personall have interest enough to tye them to
the endeavour of the publique good; IT IS HEREBY ENACTED, that none but
freeholders and housekeepers who only are answerable to the publique for
the levies shall hereafter have a voice in the election of any burgesses
in this country."

     *Hening's "Statutes", vol. II, p. 280.


Three years later another woe befell the colony. That same Charles
II--to whom in misfortune Virginia had so adhered that for her loyalty
she had received the name of the Old Dominion--now granted "all that
entire tract, territory, region, and dominion of land and water commonly
called Virginia, together with the territory of Accomack," to Lord
Culpeper and the Earl of Arlington. For thirty-one years they were to
hold it, paying to the King the slight annual rent of forty shillings.
They were not to disturb the colonists in any guaranteed right of life
or land or goods, but for the rest they might farm Virginia. The country
cried out in anger. The Assembly hurried commissioners on board a ship
in port and sent them to England to besiege the ear of the King.

Distress and discontent increased, with good reason, among the mass of
the Virginians. The King in England, his councilors, and Parliament,
played an unfatherly role, while in Virginia economic hardships pressed
ever harder and the administration became more and more oppressive.
By 1676 the gunpowder of popular indignation was laid right and left,
awaiting the match.



CHAPTER XII. NATHANIEL BACON

To add to the uncertainty of life in Virginia, Indian troubles flared up
again. In and around the main settlements the white man was safe enough
from savage attack. But it was not so on the edge of the English world,
where the white hue ran thin, where small clusters of folk and even
single families built cabins of logs and made lonely clearings in the
wilderness.

Not far from where now rises Washington the Susquehannocks had taken
possession of an old fort. These Indians, once in league with the
Iroquois but now quarreling violently with that confederacy, had
been defeated and were in a mood of undiscriminating bitterness and
vengeance. They began to waylay and butcher white men and women and
children. In self protection Maryland and Virginia organized in common
an expedition against the Indian stronghold. In the deep woods beyond
the Potomac, red men and white came to a parley. The Susquehannocks sent
envoys. There was wrong on both sides. A dispute arose. The white men,
