long-handled gourd.

The dress of the pioneer long remained a curious cross between that
of the Indians and that of the white people of the older sections. In
earlier times the hunting-shirt--made of linsey, coarse nettle-bark
linen, buffalo-hair, or even dressed deerskins--was universally worn by
the men, together with breeches, leggings, and moccasins. The women and
children were dressed in simple garments of linsey. In warm weather they
went barefooted; in cold, they wore moccasins or coarse shoes.

Rarely was there lack of food for these pioneer families. The soil was
prodigal, and the forests abounded in game. The piece de resistance of
the backwoods menu was "hog an' hominy"; that is to say, pork served
with Indian corn which, after being boiled in lye to remove the hulls,
had been soaked in clear water and cooked soft. "Johnny cake" and
"pone"--two varieties of cornbread--were regularly eaten at breakfast
and dinner. The standard dish for supper was cornmeal mush and milk. As
cattle were not numerous, the housewife often lacked milk, in which case
she fell back on her one never-failing resource--hominy; or she served
the mush with sweetened water, molasses, the gravy of fried meat, or
even bear's oil. Tea and coffee were long unknown, and when introduced
they were likely to be scorned by the men as "slops" good enough perhaps
for women and children. Vegetables the settlers grew in the garden plot
which ordinarily adjoined the house, and thrifty families had also a
"truck patch" in which they raised pumpkins, squashes, potatoes, beans,
melons, and corn for "roasting ears." The forests yielded game, as well
as fruits and wild grapes, and honey for sweetening.

The first quality for which the life of the frontier called was untiring
industry. It was possible, of course, to eke out an existence by
hunting, fishing, petty trading, and garnering the fruits which Nature
supplied without man's assistance. And many pioneers in whom the roving
instinct was strong went on from year to year in this hand-to-mouth
fashion. But the settler who expected to be a real home-builder, to gain
some measure of wealth, to give his children a larger opportunity in
life, must be prepared to work, to plan, to economize, and to sacrifice.
The forests had to be felled; the great logs had to be rolled together
and burned; crops of maize, tobacco, oats, and cane needed to be
planted, cultivated, and harvested; live-stock to be housed and fed;
fences and barns to be built; pork, beef, grain, whiskey, and other
products to be prepared for market, and perhaps carried scores of miles
to a place of shipment.

All these things had to be done under conditions of exceptional
difficulty. The settler never knew what night his place would be raided
by marauding redskins, who would be lenient indeed if they merely
carried off part of his cattle or burned his barn. Any morning he might
peer out of the "port hole" above the cabin door to see skulking figures
awaiting their chance. Sickness, too, was a menace and a terror. Picture
the horrors of isolation in times of emergency--wife or child suddenly
taken desperately ill, and no physician within a hundred miles; husband
or son hovering between life and death as the result of injury by a
falling tree, a wild beast, a venomous snake, an accidental gun-shot, or
the tomahawk of a prowling Indian. Who shall describe the anxiety, the
agony, which in some measure must have been the lot of every frontier
family? The prosaic illnesses of the flesh were troublesome enough.
On account of defective protection for the feet in wet weather, almost
everybody had rheumatism; most settlers in the bottom-lands fell victims
to fever and ague at one time or another; even in the hill country few
persons wholly escaped malarial disorders. "When this home-building and
land-clearing is accomplished," wrote one whose recollections of the
frontier were vivid, "a faithful picture would reveal not only the
changes that have been wrought, but a host of prematurely brokedown men
and women, besides an undue proportion resting peacefully in country
graveyards."

The frontiersman's best friend was his trusty rifle. With it he defended
his cabin and his crops from marauders, waged warfare on hostile
redskins, and obtained the game which formed an indispensable part of
his food supply. At first the gun chiefly used on the border was the
smooth-bored musket. But toward the close of the eighteenth century a
gunsmith named Deckhard, living at Lancaster, Pennsylvania, began making
flintlock rifles of small bore, and in a short time the "Deckhard rifle"
was to be found in the hands of almost every backwoodsman. The barrel
was heavy and from three feet to three feet and a half in length,
so that the piece, when set on the ground, reached at least to the
huntsman's shoulder. The bore was cut with twisting grooves, and was so
small that seventy bullets were required to weigh a pound. In loading,
a greased linen "patch" was wrapped around the bullet; and only a small
charge of powder was needed. The grin was heavy to carry and difficult
to hold steadily upon a target; but it was economical of ammunition, and
in the hands of the strong-muscled, keen-eyed, iron-nerved frontiersman
it was an exceedingly accurate weapon, at all events within the ordinary
limits of forest ranges. He was a poor marksman who could not shoot
running deer or elk at a distance of one hundred and fifty yards, and
kill ducks and geese on the wing; and "boys of twelve hung their heads
in shame if detected in hitting a squirrel in any other part of the body
than its head."

Life on the frontier was filled with hard work, danger, and anxiety. Yet
it had its lighter side, and, indeed, it may be doubted whether people
anywhere relished sport more keenly or found more pleasure in their
everyday pursuits. The occasional family without neighbors was likely to
suffer from loneliness. But few of the settlers were thus cut off, and
as a rule community life was not only physically possible but highly
developed. Many were the opportunities that served to bring together the
frontiersmen, with their families, throughout a settlement or county.
Foremost among such occasions were the log-rollings.

After a settler had felled the thick-growing trees on a plot which he
desired to prepare for cultivation, he cut them, either by sawing or by
burning, into logs twelve or fifteen feet in length. Frequently these
were three, four, or even five feet in diameter, so that they could not
be moved by one man, even with a team of horses. In such a situation,
the settler would send word to his neighbors for miles around that on
a given day there would be a log-rolling at his place; and when the day
arrived six, or a dozen, or perhaps a score, of sturdy men, with teams
of horses and yokes of oxen, and very likely accompanied by members
of their families, would arrive on the scene with merry shouts of
anticipation. By means of handspikes and chains drawn by horses or oxen,
the great timbers were pushed, rolled, and dragged into heaps, and by
nightfall the field lay open and ready for the plough--requiring, at the
most, only the burning of the huge piles that had been gathered.

Without loss of time the fires were started; and as darkness came on,
the countryside glowed as with the light of a hundred huge torches. The
skies were reddened, and as a mighty oak or poplar log toppled and fell
to the ground, showers of sparks lent the scene volcanic splendor.
Bats and owls and other dim-eyed creatures of the night flew about in
bewilderment, sometimes bumping hard against fences or other objects,
sometimes plunging madly into the flames and contributing to the general
holocaust. For days the great fires were kept going, until the last
remnants of this section of the once imposing forest were consumed;
while smoke hung far out over the country, producing an atmospheric
effect like that of Indian summer.

Heavy exertion called for generous refreshment, and on these occasions
the host could be depended on to provide an abundance of food and drink.
The little cabin could hardly be made to accommodate so many guests,
even in relays. Accordingly, a long table was constructed with planks
and trestles in a shady spot, and at noon--and perhaps again in the
evening--the women folk served a meal which at least made up in "staying
qualities" what it lacked in variety or delicacy. The principal dish
was almost certain to be "pot-pie," consisting of boiled turkeys, geese,
chickens, grouse, veal, or venison, with an abundance of dumplings.
This, with cornbread and milk, met the demands of the occasion; but
if the host was able to furnish a cask of rum, his generosity was
thoroughly appreciated.

In the autumn, corn-huskings were a favorite form of diversion,
especially for the young people; and in the early spring neighbors
sometimes came together to make maple sugar. A wedding was an important
event and furnished diversion of a different kind. From distances of
twenty and thirty miles people came to attend the ceremony, and often
the festivities extended over two or three days. Even now there was
work to be done; for as a rule the neighbors organized a house-building
"bee," and before separating for their homes they constructed a cabin
for the newly wedded pair, or at all events brought it sufficiently near
completion to be finished by the young husband himself.

Even after a day of heavy toil at log-rolling, the young men and boys
bantered one another into foot races, wrestling matches, shooting
contests, and other feats of strength or skill. And if a fiddler could
be found, the day was sure to end with a "hoe-down"--a dance that "made
even the log-walled house tremble." No corn-husking or wedding was
complete without dancing, although members of certain of the more
straitlaced religious sects already frowned upon the diversion.

Rough conditions of living made rough men, and we need not be surprised
by the testimony of English and American travelers, that the frontier
had more than its share of boisterous fun, rowdyism, lawlessness, and
crime. The taste for whiskey was universal, and large quantities were
manufactured in rude stills, not only for shipment down the Mississippi,
but for local consumption. Frequenters of the river-town taverns called
for their favorite brands--"Race Horse," "Moral Suasion," "Vox Populi,"
"Pig and Whistle," or "Split Ticket," as the case might be. But the
average frontiersman cared little for the niceties of color or flavor so
long as his liquor was cheap and produced the desired effect. Hard work
and a monotonous diet made him continually thirsty; and while ordinarily
he drank only water and milk at home, at the taverns and at social
gatherings he often succumbed to potations which left him in happy
drunken forgetfulness of daily hardships. House-raisings and weddings
often became orgies marked by quarreling and fighting and terminating in
brutal and bloody brawls. Foreign visitors to the back country were led
to comment frequently on the number of men who had lost an eye or an
ear, or had been otherwise maimed in these rough-and-tumble contests.

The great majority of the frontiersmen, however, were sober,
industrious, and law-abiding folk; and they were by no means beyond
the pale of religion. On account of the numbers of Scotch-Irish,
Presbyterianism was in earlier days the principal creed, although there
were many Catholics and adherents of the Reformed Dutch and German
churches, and even a few Episcopalians. About the beginning of the
nineteenth century sectarian ascendancy passed to the Methodists and
Baptists, whose ranks were rapidly recruited by means of one of the most
curious and characteristic of backwoods institutions, the camp-meeting
"revival." The years 1799 and 1800 brought the first of the several
great waves of religious excitement by which the West--especially Ohio,
Indiana, Kentucky, and Tennessee was periodically swept until within the
memory of men still living.

Camp-meetings were usually planned and managed by Methodist
circuit-riders or Baptist itinerant preachers, who hesitated not to
carry their work into the remotest and most dangerous parts of the
back country. When the news went abroad that such a meeting was to take
place, people flocked to the scene from far and near, in wagons,
on horseback, and on foot. Pious men and women came for the sake of
religious fellowship and inspiration; others not so pious came from
motives of curiosity, or even to share in the rough sport for which the
scoffers always found opportunity. The meeting lasted days, and even
weeks; and preaching, praying, singing, "testifying," and "exhorting"
went on almost without intermission. "The preachers became frantic
in their exhortations; men, women, and children, falling as if in
catalepsy, were laid out in rows. Shouts, incoherent singing, sometimes
barking as of an unreasoning beast, rent the air. Convulsive leaps and
dancing were common; so, too, 'jerking,' stakes being driven into the
ground to jerk by, the subjects of the fit grasping them as they writhed
and grimaced in their contortions. The world, indeed, seemed demented."
* Whole communities sometimes professed conversion; and it was
considered a particularly good day's work when notorious disbelievers or
wrong-doers--"hard bats," in the phraseology of the frontier--or gangs
of young rowdies whose only object in coming was to commit acts of
deviltry, succumbed to the peculiarly compelling influences of the
occasion.


 * Hosmer, "Short History of the Mississippi Valley," p. 116.


In this sort of religion there was, of course, much wild emotionalism
and sheer hysteria; and there were always people to whom it was
repellent. Backsliders were numerous, and the person who "fell from
grace" was more than likely to revert to his earlier wickedness in its
grossest forms. None the less, in a rough, unlearned, and materialistic
society such spiritual shakings-up were bound to yield much permanent
good. Most western people, at one time or another, came under the
influence of the Methodist and Baptist revivals; and from the men and
women who were drawn by them to a new and larger view of life were
recruited the hundreds of little congregations whose meeting-houses in
the course of time dotted the hills and plains from the Alleghanies
to the Mississippi. As for the hard-working, honest-minded frontier
preachers who braved every sort of danger in the performance of their
great task, the West owes them an eternal debt of gratitude. In the
words of Roosevelt, "their prejudices and narrow dislikes, their raw
vanity and sullen distrust of all who were better schooled than they,
count for little when weighed against their intense earnestness and
heroic self-sacrifice."

Nor was education neglected. Many of the settlers, especially those who
came from the South, were illiterate. But all who made any pretense of
respectability were desirous of giving their children an opportunity
to learn to read and write. Accordingly, wherever half a dozen families
lived reasonably close together, a log schoolhouse was sure to be found.
In the days before public funds existed for the support of education
the teachers were paid directly, and usually in produce, by the patrons.
Sometimes a wandering pedagogue would find his way into a community and,
being engaged to give instruction for two or three months during
the winter, would "board around" among the residents and take such
additional pay as he could get. More often, some one of the settlers who
was fortunate enough to possess the rudiments of an education
undertook the role of schoolmaster in the interval between the autumn
corn-gathering and the spring ploughing and planting.

Instruction rarely extended beyond the three R's; but occasionally a
newcomer who had somewhere picked up a smattering of algebra, Latin,
or astronomy stirred the wonder, if not also the suspicion, of the
neighborhood. Schoolbooks were few and costly; crude slates were made
from pieces of shale; pencils were fashioned from varicolored soapstone
found in the beds of small streams. No frontier picture is more familiar
or more pleasing than that of the farmer's boy sitting or lying on the
floor during the long winter evening industriously tracing by firelight
or by candlelight the proverb or quotation assigned him as an exercise
in penmanship, or wrestling with the intricacies of least common
denominators and highest common divisors. It is in such a setting that
we get our first glimpse of the greatest of western Americans, Abraham
Lincoln.



Chapter VIII. Tecumseh

Wayne's victory in 1795, followed by the Treaty of Fort Greenville, gave
the Northwest welcome relief from Indian warfare, and within four years
the Territory was ready to be advanced to the second of the three grades
of government provided for it in the Ordinance of 1787. A Legislature
was set up at Cincinnati, and in due time it proceeded to the election
of a delegate to Congress. Choice fell on a young man whose name was
destined to a permanent place in the country's history. William Henry
Harrison was the son of a signer of the Declaration of Independence, the
scion of one of Virginia's most honored families. Entering the army in
1791, he had served as an aide-de-camp to Wayne in the campaign which
ended at Fallen Timbers, and at the time of his election was acting as
Secretary of the Territory and ex-officio Lieutenant-Governor.

Although but twenty-six years of age, and without a vote in the House of
Representatives, Harrison succeeded in procuring from Congress in 1800
an act dividing the Territory into two distinct "governments," separated
by the old Greenville treaty line as far as Fort Recovery and then by
a line running due north to the Canadian boundary. The division to the
east was named Ohio, that to the west Indiana; and Harrison was made
Governor of the latter, with his residence at Vincennes. In 1802 the
development of the back country was freshly emphasized by the admission
of Ohio as a State.

Meanwhile the equilibrium between the white man and the red again became
unstable. In the Treaty of 1795 the natives had ceded only southern
Ohio, southeastern Indiana, and a few other small and scattered areas.
Northward and westward, their country stretched to the Lakes and the
Mississippi, unbroken except by military posts and widely scattered
settlements; and title to all of this territory had been solemnly
guaranteed. As late as 1800 the white population of what is now Indiana
was practically confined to Clark's Grant, near the falls of the
Ohio, and a small region around Vincennes. It numbered not more than
twenty-five hundred persons. But thereafter immigration from the
seaboard States, and from the nearer lands of Kentucky and Tennessee,
set in on a new scale. By 1810 Indiana had a white population of
twenty-five thousand, and the cabins of the energetic settlers dotted
river valleys and hillsides never before trodden by white man.

In this new rush of pioneers the rights of the Indians received scant
consideration. Hardy and well-armed Virginians and Kentuckians broke
across treaty boundaries and possessed themselves of fertile lands to
which they had no valid claim. White hunters trespassed far and wide
on Indian territory, until by 1810 great regions, which a quarter of
a century earlier abounded in deer, bear, and buffalo, were made as
useless for Indian purposes as barren wastes. Although entitled to the
protection of law in his person and property, the native was cheated and
overawed at every turn; he might even be murdered with impunity. Abraham
Lincoln's uncle thought it a virtuous act to shoot an Indian on sight,
and the majority of pioneers agreed with him.

"I can tell at once," wrote Harrison in 1801, "upon looking at an Indian
whom I may chance to meet whether he belongs to a neighboring or a
more distant tribe. The latter is generally well-clothed, healthy, and
vigorous; the former half-naked, filthy, and enfeebled by intoxication,
and many of them without arms excepting a knife, which they carry for
the most villainous purposes." The stronger tribes perceived quite as
clearly as did the Governor the ruinous effects of contact between the
two peoples, and the steady destruction of the border warriors became
a leading cause of discontent. Congress had passed laws intended to
prevent the sale of spiritucus liquors to the natives, but the courts
had construed these measures to be operative only outside the bounds of
States and organized Territories, and in the great unorganized Northwest
the laws were not heeded, and the ruinous traffic went on uninterrupted.
Harrison reported that when there were only six hundred warriors on the
Wabash the annual consumption of whiskey there was six thousand gallons,
and that killing each other in drunken brawls had "become so customary
that it was no longer thought criminal."

Most exasperating, however, from the red man's point of view was the
insatiable demand of the newcomers for land. In the years 1803, 1804,
and 1805 Harrison made treaties with the remnants of the Miami, Eel
River, Piankeshaw, and Delaware tribes--characterized by him as "a body
of the most depraved wretches on earth"--which gained for the settlers a
strip of territory fifty miles wide south of White River; and in 1809 he
similarly acquired, by the Treaty of Fort Wayne, three million acres,
in tracts which cut into the heart of the Indian country for almost a
hundred miles up both banks of the Wabash. The Wabash valley was richer
in game than any other region south of Lake Michigan, and its loss was
keenly felt by the Indians. Indeed, it was mainly the cession of 1809
that brought once more to a crisis the long-brewing difficulties with
the Indians.

About the year 1768 the Creek squaw of a Shawnee warrior gave birth
at one time to three boys, in the vicinity of the present city of
Springfield, Ohio. * One of the three barely left his name in aboriginal
annals. A second, known as Laulewasikaw, "the man with the loud voice,"
poses in the pages of history as "the prophet." The third brother was
Tecumseh, "the wild-cat that leaps upon its prey," or "the shooting
star," as the name has been translated. He is described as a tall,
handsome warrior--daring and energetic, of fluent and persuasive speech,
given to deep reflection, an implacable hater of the white man. Other
qualities he possessed which were not so common among his people. He had
perfect self-command, a keen insight into human motives and purposes,
and an exceptional capacity to frame plans and organize men to carry
them out. His crowning scheme for bringing together the tribes of
the Middle West into a grand democratic confederacy to regulate land
cessions and other dealings with the whites stamps him as perhaps the
most statesmanlike member of his race.


 * Authorities differ as to the facts of Tecumseh's birth. His
earliest biographer, Benjamin Drake, holds that he was "wholly a
Shawanoe" and that he was a fourth child, the Prophet and another son
being twins. William Henry Harrison spoke of Tecumseh's mother as a
Creek.


While yet hardly more than a boy, Tecumseh seems to have been stirred to
deep indignation by the persistent encroachment of the whites upon
the hunting-grounds of his fathers. The cessions of 1804 and 1805
he specially resented, and it is not unlikely that they clinched the
decision of the young warrior to take up the task which Pontiac had
left unfinished. At all events, the plan was soon well in hand. A less
far-seeing leader would have been content to call the scattered tribes
to a momentary alliance with a view to a general uprising against the
invaders. But Tecumseh's purposes ran far deeper. All of the Indian
peoples, of whatever name or relationships, from the Lakes to the Gulf
and from the Alleghanies to the Rockies, were to be organized in a
single, permanent confederacy. This union, furthermore, was to consist,
not of chieftains, but of the warriors; and its governing body was to be
a warriors' congress, an organ of genuine popular rule. Joint ownership
of all Indian lands was to be assumed by the confederacy, and the
piecemeal cession of territory by petty tribal chiefs, under pressure
of government agents, was to be made impossible. Only thus, Tecumseh
argued, could the red man hope to hold his own in the uneven contest
that was going on.

The plan was brilliant, even though impracticable. Naturally, it did
not appeal instantly to the chieftains, for it took away--tribal
independence and undermined the chieftain's authority. Besides, its
author was not a chief, and had no sanction of birth or office. Its
success was dependent on the building of an intertribal association such
as Indian history had never known. And while there was nothing in it
which contravened the professed policy of the United States, it ran
counter to the irrepressible tendency of the advancing white population
to spread at will over the great western domain.

By these obstacles Tecumseh was not deterred. With indefatigable zeal he
traveled from one end of the country to the other, arguing with chiefs,
making fervid speeches to assembled warriors, and in every possible
manner impressing his people with his great idea. The Prophet went
with him; and when the orator's logic failed to carry, conviction, the
medicine-man's imprecations were relied upon to save the day. Events,
too, played into their hands. The Leopard-Chesapeake affair, * in 1807,
roused strong feeling in the West and prompted the Governor-General of
Canada to begin intrigues looking to an alliance with the redskins in
the event of war. And when, late in the same year, Governor Hull
of Michigan Territory indiscreetly negotiated a new land cession at
Detroit, the northern tribes at once joined Tecumseh's league, muttering
threats to slay the chiefs by whom the cession had been sanctioned.


 * See "Jefferson and his Colleagues," by Allen Johnson (in "The
Chronicles of America").


In the spring of 1808 Tecumseh and his brother carried their plans
forward another step by taking up their residence at a point in
central Indiana where Tippecanoe Creek flows into the Wabash River.
The place--which soon got the name of the Prophet's Town--was almost
equidistant from Vincennes, Fort Wayne, and Fort Dearborn; from it
the warriors could paddle their canoes to any part of the Ohio or the
Mississippi, and with only a short portage, to the waters of the Maumee
and the Great Lakes. The situation was, therefore, strategic. A village
was laid out, and the population was soon numbered by the hundred.
Livestock was acquired, agriculture was begun, the use of whiskey was
prohibited, and every indication was afforded of peaceful intent.

Seasoned frontiersmen, however, were suspicious. Reports came in that
the Tippecanoe villagers engaged daily in warlike exercises; rumor had
it that emissaries of the Prophet were busily stirring the tribes, far
and near, to rebellion. Governor Harrison was not a man to be easily
frightened, but he became apprehensive, and proposed to satisfy himself
by calling Tecumseh into conference.

The interview took place at Vincennes, and was extended over a period
of two weeks. There was a show of firmness, yet of good will, on both
sides. The Governor counseled peace, orderliness, and industry; the
warrior guest professed a desire to be a friend to the United States,
but said frankly that if the country continued to deal with the tribes
singly in the purchase of land he would be obliged to ally himself with
Great Britain. To Harrison's admonition that the redskins should leave
off drinking whiskey--"that it was not made for them, but for the white
people, who alone knew how to use it"--the visitor replied pointedly by
asking that the sale of liquor be stopped.

Notwithstanding the tenseness of the situation, Harrison negotiated
the land cessions of 1809, which cost the Indians their last valuable
