of the present system."

The legislature passed the "Consolidation Act," and from 1856 to 1900
county and city were governed as a political unit. At first the hopes
for more frugal government seemed to be fulfilled. But all encouraging
symptoms soon vanished. Partizan rule followed, encouraged by the
tinkering of the legislature, which imposed on the charter layer upon
layer of amendments, dictated by partizan craft, not by local needs.
The administrative departments were managed by Boards of Commissioners,
under the dictation of "Blind Boss Buckley," who governed his kingdom
for many years with the despotic benevolence characteristic of his kind.
The citizens saw their money squandered and their public improvements
lagging. It took twenty-five years to complete the City Hall, at a cost
of $5,500,000. An official of the Citizens' Non-partizan party, in 1895,
said: "There is no city in the Union with a quarter of a million people,
which would not be the better for a little judicious hanging."

The repeated attempts made by citizens of San Francisco to get a new
charter finally succeeded, and in 1900 the city hopefully entered a new
epoch under a charter of its own making which contained several radical
changes. Executive responsibility was centered in the mayor, fortified
by a comprehensive civil service. The foundations were laid for
municipal ownership of public utilities, and the initiative and
referendum were adopted for all public franchises. The legislative power
was vested in a board of eighteen supervisors elected at large.

No other American city so dramatically represents the futility of
basing political optimism on a mere plan. It was only a step from the
mediocrity enthroned by the first election under the new charter to the
gross inefficiency and corruption of a new ring, under a new boss. A
Grand Jury (called the "Andrews Jury") made a report indicating that
the administration was trafficking in favors sold to gamblers,
prize-fighters, criminals, and the whole gamut of the underworld; that
illegal profits were being reaped from illegal contracts, and that every
branch of the executive department was honeycombed with corruption. The
Grand Jury believed and said all this, but it lacked the legal proof
upon which Mayor Schmitz and his accomplices could be indicted. In spite
of this report, Schmitz was reelected in 1905 as the candidate of the
Labor-Union party.

Now graft in San Francisco became simply universal. George Kennan,
summarizing the practices of the looters, says they "took toll
everywhere from everybody and in almost every imaginable way: they went
into partnership with dishonest contractors; sold privileges and permits
to business men; extorted money from restaurants and saloons; levied
assessments on municipal employees; shared the profits of houses of
prostitution; forced beer, whiskey, champagne, and cigars on restaurants
and saloons on commission; blackmailed gamblers, pool-sellers, and
promoters of prize-fights; sold franchises to wealthy corporations;
created such municipal bureaus as the commissary department and the
city commercial company in order to make robbery of the city more easy;
leased rooms and buildings for municipal offices at exorbitant
rates, and compelled the lessees to share profits; held up milkmen,
kite-advertisers, junk-dealers, and even street-sweepers; and took
bribes from everybody who wanted an illegal privilege and was willing
to pay for it. The motto of the administration seemed to be 'Encourage
dishonesty, and then let no dishonest dollar escape.'"

The machinery through which this was effected was simple: the mayor had
vast appointing powers and by this means directly controlled all the
city departments. But the mayor was only an automaton. Back of him was
Abe Ruef, the Boss, an unscrupulous lawyer who had wormed his way into
the labor party, and manipulated the "leaders" like puppets. Ruef's game
also was elementary. He sold his omnipotence for cash, either under
the respectable cloak of "retainer" or under the more common device of
commissions and dividends, so that thugs retained him for their
freedom, contractors for the favors they expected, and public service
corporations for their franchises.

Finally, through the persistence of a few private citizens, a Grand Jury
was summoned. Under the foremanship of B. P. Oliver it made a thorough
investigation. Francis J. Heney was employed as special prosecutor and
William J. Burns as detective. Heney and Burns formed an aggressive
team. The Ring proved as vulnerable as it was rotten. Over three hundred
indictments were returned, involving persons in every walk of life. Ruef
was sentenced to fourteen years in the penitentiary. Schmitz was freed
on a technicality, after being found guilty and sentenced to five years.
Most of the other indictments were not tried, the prosecutor's attention
having been diverted to the trail of the franchise-seekers, who have
thus far eluded conviction.

Minneapolis, a city blending New England traditions with Scandinavian
thrift, illustrates, in its experiences with "Doc" Ames, the maneuvers
of the peripatetic boss. Ames was four times mayor of the city, but
never his own successor. Each succeeding experience with him grew more
lurid of indecency, until his third term was crystallized in Minneapolis
tradition as "the notorious Ames administration." Domestic scandal
made him a social outcast, political corruption a byword, and Ames
disappeared from public view for ten years.

In 1900 a new primary law provided the opportunity to return him to
power for the fourth time. Ames, who had been a Democrat, now found it
convenient to become a Republican. The new law, like most of the early
primary laws, permitted members of one party to vote in the primaries
of the other party. So Ames's following, estimated at about fifteen
hundred, voted in the Republican primaries, and he became a regular
candidate of that party in a presidential year, when citizens felt the
special urge to vote for the party.

Ames was the type of boss with whom discipline is secondary to personal
aggrandizement. He had a passion for popularity; was imposing of
presence; possessed considerable professional skill; and played
constantly for the support of the poor. The attacks upon him he turned
into political capital by saying that he was made a victim by the rich
because he championed the poor. Susceptible to flattery and fond of
display, he lacked the power to command. He had followers, not henchmen.
His following was composed of the lowly, who were duped by his phrases,
and of criminals, who knew his bent; and they followed him into any
party whither he found it convenient to go, Republican, Democratic, or
Populist.

The charter of Minneapolis gave the mayor considerable appointing power.
He was virtually the dictator of the Police Department. This was the
great opportunity of Ames and his floating vote. His own brother, a weak
individual with a dubious record, was made Chief of Police. Within a few
weeks about one-half of the police force was discharged, and the
places filled with men who could be trusted by the gang. The number
of detectives was increased and an ex-gambler placed at their head. A
medical student from Ames's office was commissioned a special policeman
to gather loot from the women of the street.

Through a telepathy of their own, the criminal classes all over the
country soon learned of the favorable conditions in Minneapolis, under
which every form of gambling and low vice flourished; and burglars,
pickpockets, safe-blowers, and harlots made their way thither. Mr. W.
A. Frisbie, the editor of a leading Minneapolis paper, described the
situation in the following words: "It is no exaggeration to say that in
this period fully 99% of the police department's efficiency was devoted
to the devising and enforcing of blackmail. Ordinary patrolmen on beats
feared to arrest known criminals for fear the prisoners would prove to
be 'protected'....The horde of detective favorites hung lazily about
police headquarters, waiting for some citizen to make complaint of
property stolen, only that they might enforce additional blackmail
against the thief, or possibly secure the booty for themselves. One
detective is now (1903) serving time in the state prison for retaining a
stolen diamond pin."

The mayor thought he had a machine for grinding blackmail from every
criminal operation in his city, but he had only a gang, without
discipline or coordinating power, and weakened by jealousy and
suspicion. The wonder is that it lasted fifteen months. Then came
the "April Grand Jury," under the foremanship of a courageous and
resourceful business man. The regime of criminals crumbled; forty-nine
indictments, involving twelve persons, were returned.

The Grand Jury, however, at first stood alone in its investigations. The
crowd of politicians and vultures were against it, and no appropriations
were granted for getting evidence. So its members paid expenses out of
their own pockets, and its foreman himself interviewed prisoners and
discovered the trail that led to the Ring's undoing. Ames's brother was
convicted on second trial and sentenced to six and a half years in the
penitentiary, while two of his accomplices received shorter terms. Mayor
Ames, under indictment and heavy bonds, fled to Indiana.

The President of the City Council, a business man of education, tact,
and sincerity, became mayor, for an interim of four months; enough time,
as it proved, for him to return the city to its normal political life.

These examples are sufficient to illustrate the organization and working
of the municipal machine. It must not be imagined by the reader that
these cities alone, and a few others made notorious by the magazine
muck-rakers, are the only American cities that have developed
oligarchies. In truth, not a single American city, great or small, has
entirely escaped, for a greater or lesser period, the sway of a coterie
of politicians. It has not always been a corrupt sway; but it has
rarely, if ever, given efficient administration.

Happily there are not wanting signs that the general conditions which
have fostered the Ring are disappearing. The period of reform set in
about 1890, when people began to be interested in the study of municipal
government. It was not long afterwards that the first authoritative
books on the subject appeared. Then colleges began to give courses in
municipal government; editors began to realize the public's concern in
local questions and to discuss neighborhood politics as well as national
politics. By 1900 a new era broke--the era of the Grand Jury. Nothing so
hopeful in local politics had occurred in our history as the disclosures
which followed. They provoked the residuum of conscience in the
citizenry and the determination that honesty should rule in public
business and politics as well as in private transactions. The Grand Jury
inquisitions, however, demonstrated clearly that the criminal law was no
remedy for municipal misrule. The great majority of floaters and illegal
voters who were indicted never faced a trial jury. The results of the
prosecutions for bribery and grosser political crimes were scarcely more
encouraging. It is true that one Abe Ruef in a California penitentiary
is worth untold sermons, editorials, and platform admonitions, and
serves as a potent warning to all public malefactors. Yet the example is
soon forgotten; and the people return to their former political habits.

But out of this decade of gang-hunting and its impressive experiences
with the shortcomings of our criminal laws came the new municipal era
which we have now fully entered, the era of enlightened administration.
This new era calls for a reconstruction of the city government. Its
principal feature is the rapid spread of the Galveston or Commission
form of government and of its modification, the City Manager plan, the
aim of which is to centralize governmental authority and to entice able
men into municipal office. And there are many other manifestations of
the new civic spirit. The mesmeric influence of national party names in
civic politics is waning; the rise of home rule for the city is severing
the unholy alliance between the legislature and the local Ring; the
power to grant franchises is being taken away from legislative bodies
and placed directly with the people; nominations are passing out of
the hands of cliques and are being made the gift of the voters through
petitions and primaries; efficient reforms in the taxing and budgetary
machinery have been instituted, and the development of the merit system
in the civil service is creating a class of municipal experts beyond the
reach of political gangsters.

There have sprung up all sorts of collateral organizations to help
the officials: societies for municipal research, municipal reference
libraries, citizens' unions, municipal leagues, and municipal parties.
These are further supplemented by organizations which indirectly add to
the momentum of practical, enlightened municipal sentiment: boards
of commerce, associations of business and professional men of every
variety, women's clubs, men's clubs, children's clubs, recreation clubs,
social clubs, every one with its own peculiar vigilance upon some corner
of the city's affairs. So every important city is guarded by a network
of voluntary organizations.

All these changes in city government, in municipal laws and political
mechanisms, and in the people's attitude toward their cities, have
tended to dignify municipal service. The city job has been lifted to a
higher plane. Lord Rosebery, the brilliant chairman of the first London
County Council, the governing body of the world's largest city, said
many years ago: "I wish that my voice could extend to every municipality
in the kingdom, and impress upon every man, however high his position,
however great his wealth, however consummate his talents may be, the
importance and nobility of municipal work." It is such a spirit as
this that has made the government of Glasgow a model of democratic
efficiency; and it is the beginnings of this spirit that the municipal
historian finds developing in the last twenty years of American life. It
is indeed difficult to see how our cities can slip back again into the
clutches of bosses and rings and repeat the shameful history of the last
decades of the nineteenth century.



CHAPTER VII. LEGISLATIVE OMNIPOTENCE

The American people, when they wrote their first state constitutions,
were filled with a profound distrust of executive authority, the
offspring of their experience with the arbitrary King George. So they
saw to it that the executive authority in their own government was
reduced to its lowest terms, and that the legislative authority, which
was presumed to represent the people, was exalted to legal omnipotence.
In the original States, the legislature appointed many of the judicial
and administrative officers; it was above the executive veto; it had
political supremacy; it determined the form of local governments and
divided the State into election precincts; it appointed the delegates to
the Continental Congress, towards which it displayed the attitude of
a sovereign. It was altogether the most important arm of the state
government; in fact it virtually was the state government. The Federal
Constitution created a government of specified powers, reserving to
the States all authority not expressly given to the central government.
Congress can legislate only on subjects permitted by the Constitution;
on the other hand, a state legislature can legislate on any subject not
expressly forbidden. The state legislature possesses authority over a
far wider range of subjects than Congress--subjects, moreover, which
press much nearer to the daily activities of the citizens, such as the
wide realm of private law, personal relations, local government, and
property.

In the earlier days, men of first-class ability, such as Alexander
Hamilton, Samuel Adams, and James Madison, did not disdain membership in
the state legislatures. But the development of party spirit and machine
politics brought with it a great change. Then came the legislative
caucus; and party politics soon reigned in every capital. As the
legislature was ruled by the majority, the dominant party elected
presiding officers, designated committees, appointed subordinates, and
controlled lawmaking. The party was therefore in a position to pay its
political debts and bestow upon its supporters valuable favors. Further,
as the legislature apportioned the various electoral districts, the
dominant party could, by means of the gerrymander, entrench itself even
in unfriendly localities. And, to crown its political power, it elected
United States Senators. But, as the power of the party increased,
unfortunately the personnel of the legislature deteriorated. Able men,
as a rule, shunned a service that not only took them from their private
affairs for a number of months, but also involved them in partizan
rivalries and trickeries. Gradually the people came to lose confidence
in the legislative body and to put their trust more in the Executive or
else reserved governmental powers to themselves. It was about 1835
that the decline of the legislature's powers set in, when new state
constitutions began to clip its prerogatives, one after another.

The bulky constitutions now adopted by most of the States are
eloquent testimony to the complete collapse of the legislature as an
administrative body and to the people's general distrust of their chosen
representatives. The initiative, referendum, recall, and the withholding
of important subjects from the legislature's power, are among the
devices intended to free the people from the machinations of their
wilful representatives.

Now, most of the evils which these heroic measures have sought to
remedy can be traced directly to the partizan ownership of the state
legislature. The boss controlling the members of the legislature could
not only dole out his favors to the privilege seekers; he could assuage
the greed of the municipal ring; and could, to a lesser degree, command
federal patronage by an entente cordiale with congressmen and senators;
and through his power in presidential conventions and elections he had a
direct connection with the presidential office itself.

It was in the days before the legislature was prohibited from granting,
by special act, franchises and charters, when banks, turnpike companies,
railroads, and all sorts of corporations came asking for charters,
that the figure of the lobbyist first appeared. He acted as a middleman
between the seeker and the giver. The preeminent figure of this type in
state and legislative politics for several decades preceding the Civil
War was Thurlow Weed of New York. As an influencer of legislatures,
he stands easily first in ability and achievement. His great personal
attractions won him willing followers whom he knew how to use. He was
party manager, as well as lobbyist and boss in a real sense long before
that term was coined. His capacity for politics amounted to genius. He
never sought office; and his memory has been left singularly free
from taint. He became the editor of the Albany Journal and made it the
leading Whig "up-state" paper. His friend Seward, whom he had lifted
into the Governor's chair, passed on to the United States Senate; and
when Horace Greeley with the New York Tribune joined their forces, this
potent triumvirate ruled the Empire State. Greeley was its spokesman,
Seward its leader, but Weed was its designer. From his room No. 11
in the old Astor House, he beckoned to forces that made or unmade
presidents, governors, ambassadors, congressmen, judges, and
legislators.

With the tremendous increase of business after the Civil War, New York
City became the central office of the nation's business, and many of the
interests centered there found it wise to have permanent representatives
at Albany to scrutinize every bill that even remotely touched their
welfare, to promote legislation that was frankly in their favor, and
to prevent "strikes"--the bills designed for blackmail. After a time,
however, the number of "strikes" decreased, as well as the number of
lobbyists attending the session. The corporate interests had learned
efficiency. Instead of dealing with legislators individually, they
arranged with the boss the price of peace or of desirable legislation.
The boss transmitted his wishes to his puppets. This form of government
depends upon a machine that controls the legislature. In New York both
parties were moved by machines. "Tom" Platt was the "easy boss" of the
Republicans; and Tammany and its "up-state" affiliations controlled the
Democrats. "Right here," says Platt in his Autobiography (1910), "it
may be appropriate to say that I have had more or less to do with the
organization of the New York legislature since 1873." He had. For forty
years he practically named the Speaker and committees when his party
won, and he named the price when his party lost. All that an "interest"
had to do, under the new plan, was to "see the boss," and the powers of
government were delivered into its lap.

Some of this legislative bargaining was revealed in the insurance
investigation of 1905, conducted by the Armstrong Committee with Charles
E. Hughes as counsel. Officers of the New York Life Insurance Company
testified that their company had given $50,000 to the Republican
campaign of 1904. An item of $235,000, innocently charged to "Home
office annex account," was traced to the hands of a notorious lobbyist
at Albany. Three insurance companies had paid regularly $50,000 each
to the Republican campaign fund. Boss Platt himself was compelled
reluctantly to relate how he had for fifteen years received ten one
thousand dollar bundles of greenbacks from the Equitable Life as
"consideration" for party goods delivered. John A. McCall, President of
the New York Life, said: "I don't care about the Republican side of it
or the Democratic side of it. It doesn't count at all with me. What is
best for the New York Life moves and actuates me."

In another investigation Mr. H. O. Havemeyer of the Sugar Trust said:
"We have large interests in this State; we need police protection and
fire protection; we need everything that the city furnishes and gives,
and we have to support these things. Every individual and corporation
and firm--trust or whatever you call it--does these things and we do
them." No distinction is made, then, between the government that ought
to furnish this "protection" and the machine that sells it!

No episode in recent political history shows better the relations of the
legislature to the political machine and the great power of invisible
government than the impeachment and removal of Governor William Sulzer
in 1913. Sulzer had been four times elected to the legislature. He
served as Speaker in 1893. He was sent to Congress by an East Side
district in New York City in 1895 and served continuously until his
nomination for Governor of New York in 1912. All these years he was
known as a Tammany man. During his campaign for Governor he made many
promises for reform, and after his election he issued a bombastic
declaration of independence. His words were discounted in the light of
his previous record. Immediately after his inauguration, however,
he began a house-cleaning. He set to work an economy and efficiency
commission; he removed a Tammany superintendent of prisons; made
unusually good appointments without paying any attention to the machine;
and urged upon the legislature vigorous and vital laws.

But the Tammany party had a large working majority in both houses, and
the changed Sulzer was given no support. The crucial moment came when
an emasculated primary law was handed to him for his signature. An
effective primary law had been a leading campaign issue, all the parties
being pledged to such an enactment. The one which the Governor was now
requested to sign had been framed by the machine to suit its pleasure.
The Governor vetoed it. The legislature adjourned on the 3rd of May.
The Governor promptly reconvened it in extra session (June 7th) for the
purpose of passing an adequate primary law. Threats that had been made
against him by the machine now took form. An investigating committee,
appointed by the Senate to examine the Governor's record, largely by
chance happened upon "pay dirt," and early on the morning of the 13th of
August, after an all-night session, the Assembly passed a motion made by
its Tammany floor leader to impeach the Governor.

The articles of impeachment charged: first, that the Governor had filed
a false report of his campaign expenses; second, that since he had made
such statement under oath he was guilty of perjury; third, that he had
bribed witnesses to withhold testimony from the investigating committee;
fourth, that he had used threats in suppression of evidence before the
same tribunal; fifth, that he had persuaded a witness from responding to
the committee's subpoena; sixth, that he had used campaign contributions
for private speculation in the stock market; seventh, that he had used
his power as Governor to influence the political action of certain
officials; lastly, that he had used this power for affecting the stock
market to his gain.

Unfortunately for the Governor, the first, second, and sixth charges had
a background of facts, although the rest were ridiculous and trivial. By
a vote of 43 to 12 he was removed from the governorship. The proceeding
was not merely an impeachment of New York's Governor. It was an
impeachment of its government. Every citizen knew that if Sulzer had
obeyed Murphy, his shortcomings would never have been his undoing.

The great commonwealth of Pennsylvania was for sixty years under
the domination of the House of Cameron and the House of Quay. Simon
Cameron's entry into public notoriety was symbolic of his whole career.
In 1838, he was one of a commission of two to disburse to the Winnebago
Indians at Prairie du Chien $100,000 in gold. But, instead of receiving
