found themselves subject to a system which allowed them to introduce all
the bills they wanted, but not to obtain action upon them. Action
was the prerogative of a group of old hands who managed the important
committees and who were divided among themselves on tariff policy. And
now, the little bills which, by dint of persuasion and bargaining, they
had first put through the committees, and then through both Houses of
Congress, were cut down by executive veto, turning to their injury what
they had counted upon to help them in their districts.

During the campaign, Democratic candidates had everywhere contended that
they were just as good friends of the old soldiers as the Republicans.
Now, they felt that to make good this position they must do something to
offset the effect of President Cleveland's vetoes. In his messages, he
had favored "the most generous treatment to the disabled, aged and needy
among our veterans"; but he had argued that it should be done by general
laws, and not by special acts for the benefit of particular claimants.
The Pension Committee of the House responded by reporting a bill "for
the relief of dependent parents and honorably discharged soldiers and
sailors who are now disabled and dependent upon their own labor for
support." It passed the House by a vote of 180 to 76, with 63 not
voting, and it passed the Senate without a division. On the 11th of
February, President Cleveland sent in his veto, accompanied by a message
pointing out in the language of the act defects and ambiguities which he
believed would "but put a further premium on dishonesty and mendacity."
He reiterated his desire that provision should be made "for those who,
having served their country long and well, are reduced to destitution
and dependence," but he did not think that the bill was a proper means
of attaining that object. On the 19th of February, the House committee
on pensions submitted an elaborate report on the veto in which they
recited the history of the bill and the reasons actuating the committee.
Extracts from Cleveland's messages were quoted, and the committee
declared that, in "hearty accord with these views of the President and
largely in accordance with his suggestions, they framed a bill which
they then thought, and still continue to think, will best accomplish the
ends proposed." A motion to pass the bill over the veto on the 24th of
February received 175 votes to 125, but two-thirds not having voted in
the affirmative the bill failed to pass. The Republicans voted solidly
in support of the bill, together with a large group of Democrats.
The negative vote came wholly from the Democratic side. Such a fiasco
amounted to a demonstration of the lack of intelligent leadership.
If the President and his party in Congress were cooperating for the
furtherance of the same objects, as both averred, it was discreditable
all around that there should have been such a complete misunderstanding
as to the procedure.

Meanwhile, the President was making a unique record by his vetoes.
During the period of ninety-six years, from the foundation of the
Government down to the beginning of Cleveland's administration, the
entire number of veto messages was 132. In four years, Cleveland sent
in 301 veto messages, and in addition he practically vetoed 109 bills
by inaction. Of 2042 private pension bills passed by Congress, 1518
were approved and 284 became laws by lapse of time without approval. The
positive results of the President's activity were thus inconsiderable,
unless incidentally he had managed to correct the system which he had
opposed. That claim, indeed, was made in his behalf when "The Nation"
mentioned "the arrest of the pension craze" as a "positive achievement
of the first order.'" But far from being arrested, "the pension craze"
was made the more furious, and it soon advanced to extremes unknown
before.*


     *  March 19, 1887.


The Democratic politicians naturally viewed with dismay the approach
of the national election of 1888. Any one could see that the party was
drifting on to the rocks and nobody deemed to be at the helm. According
to William R. Morrison, who certainly had been in a position to know,
President Cleveland had "up to this time taken no decided ground one way
or the other on the question of tariff." He had included the subject
in the long dissertation on the state of the Union, which ever since
Jefferson's time the President has been wont to send to Congress at
the opening of a session, but he had not singled it out as having
precedence. He now surprised the country, roused his party, and gave
fresh animation to national politics on December 6, 1887, by devoting
his third annual message wholly to the subject of taxation and
revenue. He pointed out that the treasury surplus was mounting up to
$140,000,000; that the redemption of bonds which had afforded a means
for disbursement of excess revenues had stopped because there were no
more bonds that the Government had a right to redeem; and that, hence,
the Treasury "idly holds money uselessly subtracted from the channels
of trade," a situation from which monetary derangement and business
distress would naturally ensue. He strongly urged that the "present
tariff laws, the vicious, inequitable and illogical source of
unnecessary taxation, ought to be at once revised and amended."
Cleveland gave a detailed analysis of the injurious effects which the
existing tariff had upon trade and industry, and went on to remark that
"progress toward a wise conclusion will not be improved by dwelling
upon the theories of protection and free trade. This savors too much of
bandying epithets. It is a condition which confronts us, not a theory."
The effect of the message was very marked both upon public opinion and
party activity. Mr. Morrison correctly summed up the party effect
in saying that "Mr. Mills, obtaining the substantial support of the
Administration, was enabled to press through the House a bill differing
in a very few essential measures from, and combining the general details
and purposes of, the several measures of which I have been the author,
and which had been voted against by many of those who contributed to the
success of the Mills Bill."

An incident which attracted great notice because it was thought to have
a bearing on the President's policy of tariff revision, was the veto of
the Allentown Public Building Bill. This bill was of a type which is one
of the rankest growths of the Congressional system--the grant of
money not for the needs of public service but as a district favor. It
appropriated $100,000 to put up a post-office building at Allentown,
Pennsylvania, where adequate quarters were being occupied by the
post-office at an annual rent of $1300. President Cleveland vetoed the
bill simply on the ground that it proposed an unnecessary expenditure,
but the fact was at once noted that the bill had been fathered by
Congressman Snowden, an active adherent of Randall in opposition to
the tariff reform policy of the Administration. The word went through
Congress and reverberated through the press that "there is an Allentown
for every Snowden." Mr. Morrison said in more polite phrase what came
to the same thing when he observed that "when Mr. Cleveland took decided
ground in favor of revision and reduction, he represented the patronage
of the Administration, in consequence of which he was enabled to enforce
party discipline, so that a man could no longer be a good Democrat and
favor anything but reform of the tariff."

After the Mills Bill had passed the House* and had been sent to the
Senate, it was held in committee until October 3, 1888. When it emerged
it carried an amendment which was in effect a complete substitute,
but it was not taken up for consideration until after the presidential
election, and it was meant simply as a Republican alternative to the
Mills Bill for campaign use. Consideration of the bill began on the
5th of December and lasted until the 22nd of January, when the bill was
returned to the House transformed into a new measure. It was referred to
the Ways and Means Committee, and Chairman Mills reported it back with a
resolution setting forth that "the substitution by the Senate under the
form of an amendment.... of another and different bill," is in conflict
with the section of the Constitution which "vests in the House of
Representatives the sole power to originate such a measure." The House
refused to consider the resolution, a number of Democrats led by Mr.
Randall voting with the Republicans in the negative. No further action
was taken on the bill and since that day the House has never ventured
to question the right of the Senate to amend tax bills in any way and
to any extent. As Senator Cullom remarks in his memoirs, the Democrats,
although they had long held the House and had also gained, the
Presidency, "were just as powerless to enact legislation as they had
been before."

 * The Mills Bill was passed July 21, 1888, yeas 162, nays 149,
not voting 14. Randall, Snowden, and two other Democrats joined the
Republicans in voting against the bill.



CHAPTER VII. THE PUBLIC DISCONTENTS

While President and Congress were passing the time in mutual
obstruction, the public discontents were becoming hot and bitter to
a degree unknown before. A marked feature of the situation was the
disturbance of public convenience involving loss, trouble, and distress
which were vast in extent but not easily expressed in statistical form.
The first three months of 1886 saw an outbreak of labor troubles far
beyond any previous record in their variety and extent. In 1885, the
number of strikes reported was 645 affecting 2284 establishments, a
marked increase over preceding years. In 1886, the number of strikes
rose to 1411, affecting 9861 establishments and directly involving
499,489 persons. The most numerous strikes were in the building trades,
but there were severe struggles in many other industries. There was, for
example, an interruption of business on the New York elevated railway
and on the street railways of New York, Brooklyn, and other cities.

But the greatest public anxiety was caused by the behavior of the
Knights of Labor, an organization then growing so rapidly that it gave
promise of uniting under one control the active and energetic elements
of the working classes of the country. It started in a humble way, in
December, 1869, among certain garment cutters in Philadelphia, and for
some years spread slowly from that center. The organization remained
strictly secret until 1878, in which year it held a national convention
of its fifteen district assemblies at Reading, Pennsylvania. The object
and principles of the order were now made public and, thereafter, it
spread with startling rapidity, so that in 1886 it pitted its strength
against public authority with a membership estimated at from, 500,000
to 800,000. Had this body been an army obedient to its leaders, it
would have wielded great power; but it turned out to be only a mob. Its
members took part in demonstrations which were as much mutinies against
the authority of their own executive board as they were strikes against
their employers. The result of lack of organization soon began to be
evident. In March 1886, the receiver of the Texas Pacific Railroad
discharged an employee prominent in the Knights of Labor and thus
precipitated a strike which was promptly extended to the Missouri
Pacific. There were riots at various points in Missouri and Kansas, and
railroad traffic at St. Louis was completely suspended for some days,
but the strike was eventually broken. The Knights of Labor, however,
had received a blow from which it never recovered, and as a result its
membership declined. The order has since been almost wholly superseded
by the American Federation of Labor, established in 1886 through shrewd
management by an association of labor unions which had been maintained
since 1881. The Knights had been organized by localities with the aim of
merging all classes of working men into one body. The Federation, on
the other hand, is composed of trades unions retaining their autonomy--a
principle of organization which has proved to be more solid and durable.

To these signs of popular discontent the Government could not be blind.
A congressional committee investigated the railroad strikes, and both
parties in Congress busied themselves with labor legislation. But in
spite of this apparent willingness to cope with the situation, there now
followed another display of those cross purposes which occurred so often
during the Cleveland administration. The House had already passed a
bill providing means of submitting to arbitration controversies between
railroads engaged in interstate commerce and their employees. President
Cleveland now sent a special message recommending that "instead of
arbitrators chosen in the heat of conflicting claims and after each
dispute shall arise, there be created a Commission of Labor, consisting
of three members, who shall be regular officers of the government,
charged among other duties with the consideration and settlement when
possible, of all controversies between labor and capital." In spite of
the urgency of the situation, the Senate seized this occasion for a new
display of party tactics, and it allowed the bill already passed by the
House to lie without action while it proceeded to consider various labor
measures of its own. For example, by June 1, 1886, the Senate had
passed a bill providing that eight hours should be a day's work for
letter-carriers; soon afterwards, it passed a bill legalizing the
incorporation of national trades unions, to which the House promptly
assented without a division; and the House then continued its labor
record by passing on the 15th of July a bill against the importation of
contract labor. This last bill was not passed by the Senate until after
the fall elections. It was approved by the President on February 23,
1887.

The Senate also delayed action on the House bill, which proposed
arbitration in labor disputes, until the close of the session; and
then the President, in view of his disregarded suggestion, withheld
his assent. It was not until the following year that the legislation
recommended by the President was enacted. By the Act of June 13, 1888,
the Department of Labor was established, and by the Act of October
1, 1888, in addition to provision for voluntary arbitration between
railroad corporations and their employees, the President was authorized
to appoint a commission to investigate labor conflicts, with power to
act as a board of conciliation. During the ten years in which the act
remained on the statute books, it was actually put to use only in 1894,
when a commission was appointed to investigate the Pullman strike at
Chicago, but this body took no action towards settling the dispute.

Thus far, then, the efforts of the Government to deal with the labor
problem had not been entirely successful. It is true that the labor
conflicts arose over differences which only indirectly involved
constitutional questions. The aims of both the Knights of Labor and of
the American Federation were primarily economic and both organizations
were opposed to agitation of a distinctively political character. But
parallel with the labor agitation, and in communication with it, there
were radical reform movements of a type unknown before. There was now to
arise a socialistic movement opposed to traditional constitutionalism,
and therefore viewed with alarm in many parts of the country. Veneration
of the Constitution of 1787 was practically a national sentiment which
had lasted from the time the Union was successfully established until
the Cleveland era. However violent political differences in regard to
public policy might be, it was the invariable rule that proposals must
claim a constitutional sanction. In the Civil War, both sides felt
themselves to be fighting in defense of the traditional Constitution.

The appeal to antiquity--even such a moderate degree of antiquity as
may be claimed for American institutions--has always been the staple
argument in American political controversy. The views and intentions
of the Fathers of the Constitution are exhibited not so much
for instruction as for imitation, and by means of glosses and
interpretations conclusions may be reached which would have surprised
the Fathers to whom they are imputed. Those who examine the records of
the formative period of American institutions, not to obtain material
for a case but simply to ascertain the facts, will readily observe that
what is known as the principle of strict construction dates only from
the organization of national parties under the Constitution. It was an
invention of the opposition to Federalist rule and was not held by the
makers of the Constitution themselves. The main concern of the framers
was to get power for the National Government, and they went as far as
they could with such success that striking instances may be culled from
the writings of the Fathers showing that the scope they contemplated has
yet to be attained. Strict construction affords a short and easy way
of avoiding troublesome issues--always involved in unforeseen national
developments--by substituting the question of constitutional power for a
question of public propriety. But this method has the disadvantage,
that it belittles the Constitution by making it an obstacle to progress.
Running through much political controversy in the United States is the
argument that, even granting that a proposal has all the merit claimed
for it, nevertheless it cannot be adopted because the Constitution is
against it. By strict logical inference the rejoinder then comes
that, if so, the Constitution is no longer an instrument of national
advantage. The traditional attachment of the American people to the
Constitution has indeed been so strong that they have been loath to
accept the inference that the Constitution is out of date, although the
quality of legislation at Washington kept persistently suggesting that
view of the case.

The failures and disappointments resulting from the series of national
elections from 1874 to 1884, at last, made an opening for party
movements voicing the popular discontent and openly antagonistic to
the traditional Constitution. The Socialist Labor party held its first
national convention in 1877. Its membership was mostly foreign; of
twenty-four periodical publications then carried on in the party
interest, only eight were in the English language; and this polyglot
press gave justification to the remark that the movement was in the
hands of people who proposed to remodel the institutions of the country
before they had acquired its language. The alien origin of the movement
was emphasized by the appearance of two Socialist members of the German
Reichstag, who made a tour of this country in 1881 to stir up interest
in the cause. It was soon apparent that the growth of the Socialist
party organization was hindered by the fact that its methods were too
studious and its discussions too abstract to suit the energetic temper
of the times. Many Socialists broke away to join revolutionary clubs
which were now organized in a number of cities without any clearly
defined principle save to fight the existing system of government.

At this critical moment in the process of social disorganization, the
influence of foreign destructive thought made itself felt. The
arrival of Johann Most from Europe, in the fall of 1882, supplied this
revolutionary movement with a leader who made anarchy its principle.
Originally a German Socialist aiming to make the State the sole landlord
and capitalist, he had gone over to anarchism and proposed to dissolve
the State altogether, trusting to voluntary association to supply
all genuine social needs. Driven from Germany, he had taken refuge in
England, but even the habitual British tolerance had given way under
his praise of the assassination of the Czar Alexander in 1881 and his
proposal to treat other rulers in the same way. He had just completed
a term of imprisonment before coming to the United States. Here, he was
received as a hero; a great mass meeting in his honor was held in Cooper
Union, New York, in December, 1882; and when he toured the country he
everywhere addressed large meetings.

In October 1883, a convention of social revolutionists and anarchists
was held in Chicago, at which a national organization was formed called
the International Working People's Association. The new organization
grew much faster than the Socialist party itself, which now almost
disappeared. Two years later, the International had a party press
consisting of seven German, two Bohemian, and only two English papers.
Like the Socialist party, it was, therefore, mainly foreign in its
membership. It was strongest in and about Chicago, where it included
twenty groups with three thousand enrolled members. The anarchist
papers exhorted their adherents to provide themselves with arms and even
published instructions for the use of dynamite.

Political and industrial conditions thus supplied material for an
explosion which came with shocking violence. On May 4, 1885, towards the
close of an anarchist meeting held in Chicago, a dynamite bomb thrown
among a force of policemen killed one and wounded many. Fire was at
once opened on both sides, and, although the battle lasted only a few
minutes, seven policemen were killed and about sixty wounded; while
on the side of the anarchists, four were killed and about fifty were
wounded. Ten of the anarchist leaders were promptly indicted, of whom
one made his escape and another turned State's evidence. The trial of
the remaining eight began on June 21, 1886, and two months later the
death sentence was imposed upon seven and a penitentiary term of fifteen
years upon one. The sentences of two of the seven were commuted to life
imprisonment; one committed suicide in his cell by exploding a cartridge
in his mouth; and four met death on the scaffold. While awaiting
their fate they were to a startling extent regarded as heroes and
bore themselves as martyrs to a noble cause. Six years later, Illinois
elected as governor John P. Altgeld, one of whose first steps was to
issue a pardon to the three who were serving terms of imprisonment and
to criticize sharply the conduct of the trial which had resulted in the
conviction of the anarchists.

The Chicago outbreak and its result stopped the open spread of
anarchism. Organized labor now withdrew from any sort of association
with it. This cleared the field for a revival of the Socialist movement
as the agency of social and political reconstruction. So rapidly did
it gain in membership and influence that by 1892 it was able to present
itself as an organized national party appealing to public opinion for
confidence and support, submitting its claims to public discussion, and
stating its case upon reasonable grounds. Although its membership was
small in comparison with that of the old parties, the disparity was
not so great as it seemed, since the Socialists represented active
intelligence while the other parties represented political inertia. From
this time on, Socialist views spread among college students, artists,
and men of letters, and the academic Socialist became a familiar figure
in American society.

Probably more significant than the Socialist movement, as an indication
of the popular demand for radical reform in the government of the
country, was the New York campaign of Henry George in 1886. He was a San
Francisco printer and journalist when he published the work on "Progress
and Poverty" which made him famous. Upon the petition of over thirty
thousand citizens, he became the Labor candidate for mayor of New York
City. The movement in support of George developed so much strength that
the regular parties felt compelled to put forward exceptionally strong
candidates. The Democrats nominated Abram S. Hewitt, a man of the
highest type of character, a fact which was not perhaps so influential
in getting him the nomination as that he was the son-in-law of Peter
Cooper, a philanthropist justly beloved by the working classes. The
Republicans nominated Theodore Roosevelt, who had already distinguished
himself by his energy of character and zeal for reform. Hewitt was
elected, but George received 68,110 votes out of a total of 219,679, and
stood second in the poll. His supporters contended that he had really
been elected but had been counted out, and this belief turned their
attention to the subject of ballot reform. To the agitation which
Henry George began, may be fairly ascribed the general adoption of the
Australian ballot in the United States.

The Socialist propaganda carried on in large cities and in factory towns
hardly touched the great mass of the people of the United States, who
belonged to the farm rather than to the workshop. The great agricultural
class, which had more weight at the polls than any other class of
citizens, was much interested in the redress of particular grievances
and very little in any general reform of the governmental system. It
is a class that is conservative in disposition but distrustful of
authority, impatient of what is theoretical and abstract, and bent upon
the quick practical solution of problems by the nearest and simplest
means. While the Socialists in the towns were interested in labor
questions, the farmers more than any other class were affected by the
defective system of currency supply. The national banking system had not
been devised to meet industrial needs but as a war measure to provide
a market for government bonds, deposits of which had to be made as the
basis of note issues. As holdings of government bonds were amassed in
the East, financial operations tended to confine themselves to that
part of the country, and banking facilities seemed to be in danger
of becoming a sectional monopoly, and such, indeed, was the case to a
marked extent. This situation inspired among the farmers, especially
in the agricultural West, a hatred of Wall Street and a belief in the
existence of a malign money power which provided an inexhaustible fund
of sectional feeling for demagogic exploitation.

For lack of proper machinery of credit for carrying on the process of
exchange, there seemed to be an absolute shortage in the amount of money
in circulation, and it was this circumstance that had given such force
to the Greenback Movement. Although that movement was defeated, its
supporters urged that, if the Government could not supply additional
note issues, it should at least permit an increase in the stock of
coined money. This feeling was so strong that as early as 1877 the House
had passed a bill for the free coinage of silver. For this, the
Senate substituted a measure requiring the purchase and coinage by the
Government of from two to four million dollars' worth of silver monthly,
and this compromise was accepted by the House. As a result, in February,
1878, it was passed over President Hayes's veto.

The operation of this act naturally tended to cause the hoarding of
gold as the cheaper silver was equally a legal tender, and meanwhile the
silver dollars did not tend to pass into circulation. In 1885, in his
first annual message to Congress, President Cleveland mentioned the fact
that, although 215,759,431 silver dollars had been coined, only about
fifty million had found their way into circulation, and that "every
month two millions of gold in the public Treasury are paid out for two
millions or more of silver dollars to be added to the idle mass already
accumulated." The process was draining the stock of gold in the Treasury
and forcing the country to a silver basis without really increasing
the amount of money in actual circulation or removing any of the
difficulties in the way of obtaining supplies of currency for business
transactions. President Cleveland recommended the repeal of the Silver
Coinage Act, but he had no plan to offer by which the genuine complaints
of the people against the existing monetary system could be removed.
Free silver thus was allowed to stand before the people as the only
practical proposal for their relief, and upon this issue a conflict soon
began between Congress and the Administration.

At a convention of the American Bankers' Association in September, 1885,
a New York bank president described the methods by which the Treasury
Department was restricting the operation of the Silver Coinage Act so
as to avoid a displacement of the gold standard. On February 3, 1886,
Chairman Bland of the House committee on coinage reported a resolution
reciting statements made in that address, and calling upon the Secretary
of the Treasury for a detailed account of his administration of the
Silver Coinage Act. Secretary Manning's reply was a long and weighty
argument against continuing the coinage of silver. He contended that
there was no hope of maintaining a fixed ratio between gold and silver
except by international concert of action, but "the step is one which
no European nation... will consent to take while the direct or
indirect substitution of European silver for United States gold seems a
possibility." While strong as to what not to do, his reply, like most of
the state papers of this period, was weak as to what to do and how to do
it. The outlook of the Secretary of the Treasury was so narrow that he
was led to remark that "a delusion has spread that the Government has
authority to fix the amount of the people's currency, and the power,
and the duty." The Government certainly has the power and the duty of
providing adequate currency supply through a sound banking system. The
instinct of the people on that point was sounder than the view of their
rulers.

Secretary Manning's plea had so little effect that the House promptly
voted to suspend the rules in order to make a free coinage bill the
special order of business until it was disposed of. But the influence of
the Administration was strong enough to defeat the bill when it came
to a vote. Though for a time, the legislative advance of the silver
movement was successfully resisted, the Treasury Department was left in
a difficult situation, and the expedients to which it resorted to guard
the gold supply added to the troubles of the people in the matter of
obtaining currency. The quick way of getting gold from the Treasury was
to present legal tender notes for redemption. To keep this process in
check, legal tender notes were impounded as they came in, and silver
certificates were substituted in disbursements. But under the law of
1878, silver certificates could not be issued in denominations of less
