tons' burden on the Forth and Clyde Canal at the rate of five miles
an hour. In this same year Fulton and Livingston made successful
experiments on the Seine.

It is fortunate that, in one particular, Livingston's influence did not
prevail with Fulton, for the American Minister was distinctly prejudiced
against paddle wheels. Although Livingston had previously ridden as a
passenger on Morey's sternwheeler at the rate of five miles an hour, yet
he had turned a deaf ear when his partner in experimentation, Nicholas
J. Roosevelt, had insisted strongly on "throwing wheels over the sides."
At the beginning, Fulton himself was inclined to agree with Livingston
in this respect; but, probably late in 1803, he began to investigate
more carefully the possibilities of the paddle wheel as used twice in
America by Morey and by four or five experimenters in Europe. In 1804 an
eight-mile trip which Fulton made on the Charlotte Dundas in an hour and
twenty minutes established his faith in the undeniable superiority of
two fundamental factors of early navigation--paddle wheels and British
engines. Fulton's splendid fame rests, and rightly so, on his perception
of the fact that no mere ingenuity of design could counterbalance
weakness, uncertainty, and inefficiency in the mechanism which was
intended to make a steamboat run and keep running. As early as November,
1803, Fulton had written to Boulton and Watt of Birmingham that he
had "not confidence in any other engines" than theirs and that he was
seeking a means of getting one of those engines to America. "I cannot
establish the boat without the engine," he now emphatically wrote to
James Monroe, then Ambassador to the Court of St. James. "The question
then is shall we or shall we not have such boats."

But there were difficulties in the way. Though England forbade the
exportation of engines, Fulton knew that, in numerous instances, this
rule had not been enforced, and he had hopes of success. "The British
Government," Fulton wrote Monroe, "must have little friendship or even
civility toward America, if they refuse such a request." Before the
steamboat which Fulton and Livingston proposed to build in America could
be operated there was another obstacle to be surmounted. The rights of
steam navigation of New York waters which Livingston had obtained on
the death of Fitch in 1798 had lapsed because of his failure to run a
steamboat at the rate of four miles an hour, which was one provision
of the grant. In April, 1803, the grant was renewed to Livingston,
Roosevelt, and Fulton jointly for another period of twenty years, and
the date when the boat was to make the required four miles an hour was
extended finally to 1807.

Any one who is inclined to criticize the Livingston-Roosevelt-Fulton
monopoly which now came into existence should remember that the
previous state grants formed a precedent of no slight moment. The whole
proceeding was in perfect accord with the spirit of the times, for it
was an era of speculation and monopoly ushered in by the toll-road and
turnpike organizations, when probably no less than two hundred companies
were formed. It was young America showing itself in an unmistakable
manner--"conceived in liberty" and starting on the long road to learn
that obedience to law and respect for public rights constitute true
liberty. Finally, it must be pointed out that Fulton, like his famous
predecessor, Fitch, was impelled by motives far higher than the love
of personal gain. "I consider them [steamboats] of such infinite use in
America," he wrote Monroe, "that I should feel a culpable neglect toward
my country if I relaxed for a moment in pursuing every necessary measure
for carrying it into effect." And later, when repeating his argument, he
says: "I plead this not for myself alone but for our country."

It is now evident why the alliance of Fulton with Livingston was of such
epoch-making importance, for, although it may have in some brief measure
delayed Fulton's adoption of paddle wheels, it gave him an entry to the
waters of New York. Livingston and Fulton thus supplemented each other;
Livingston possessed a monopoly and Fulton a correct estimate of the
value of paddle wheels and, secondly, of Boulton and Watt engines. It
was a rare combination destined to crown with success a long period of
effort and discouragement in the history of navigation.

After considerable delay and difficulty, the two Americans obtained
permission to export the necessary engine from Great Britain and shipped
it to New York, whither Fulton himself proceeded to construct his
steamboat. The hull was built by Charles Brown, a New York shipbuilder,
and the Boulton and Watt machinery, set in masonry, was finally
installed.

The voyage to Albany, against a stiff wind, occupied thirty-two hours;
the return trip was made in thirty. H. Freeland, one of the spectators
who stood on the banks of the Hudson when the boat made its maiden
voyage in 1807, gives the following description:

"Some imagined it to be a sea-monster whilst others did not hesitate
to express their belief that it was a sign of the approaching judgment.
What seemed strange in the vessel was the substitution of lofty and
straight smoke-pipes, rising from the deck, instead of the gracefully
tapered masts... and, in place of the spars and rigging, the curious play
of the walking-beam and pistons, and the slow turning and splashing
of the huge and naked paddlewheels, met the astonished gaze. The dense
clouds of smoke, as they rose, wave upon wave, added still more to
the wonderment of the rustics.... On her return trip the curiosity she
excited was scarcely less intense... fishermen became terrified, and
rode homewards, and they saw nothing but destruction devastating their
fishing grounds, whilst the wreaths of black vapor and rushing noise
of the paddle-wheels, foaming with the stirred-up water, produced great
excitement...."

With the launching of the Clermont on the Hudson a new era in American
history began. How quick with life it was many of the preceding pages
bear testimony. The infatuation of the public for building toll and
turnpike roads was now at its height. Only a few years before, a
comprehensive scheme of internal improvements had been outlined by
Jefferson's Secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin. When a boy, it
is said, he had lain on the floor of a surveyor's cabin on the western
slopes of the Alleghanies and had heard Washington describe to a rough
crowd of Westerners his plan to unite the Great Lakes with the Potomac
in one mighty chain of inland commerce. Jefferson's Administration was
now about to devote the surplus in the Treasury to the construction of
national highways and canals. The Cumberland Road, to be built across
the Alleghanies by the War Department, was authorized by the president
in the same year in which the Clermont made her first trip; and Jesse
Hawley, at his table in a little room in a Pittsburgh boarding
house, was even now penning in a series of articles, published in the
Pittsburgh Commonwealth, beginning in January, 1807, the first clear
challenge to the Empire State to connect the Hudson and Lake Erie by
a canal. Thus the two next steps in the history of inland commerce in
America were ready to be taken.



CHAPTER VIII. The Conquest Of The Alleghanies

The two great thoroughfares of American commerce in the first half of
the nineteenth century were the Cumberland Road and the Erie Canal.
The first generation of the new century witnessed the great burst of
population into the West which at once gave Ohio, Indiana, Illinois,
Michigan, and Wisconsin a place of national importance which they have
never relinquished. So far as pathways of commerce contributed to
the creation of this veritable new republic in the Middle West, the
Cumberland Road and the Erie Canal, cooperating respectively with Ohio
River and Lake Erie steamboats, were of the utmost importance. The
national spirit, said to have arisen from the second war with England,
had its clearest manifestation in the throwing of a great macadamized
roadway across the Alleghanies to the Ohio River and the digging of the
Erie Canal through the swamps and wildernesses of New York.

Both of these pathways were essentially the fruition of the doctrine
to which Washington gave wide circulation in his letter to Harrison
in 1784, wherein he pictured the vision of a vast Republic united
by commercial chains. Both were essentially Western enterprises. The
highway was built to fulfil the promise which the Government had made
in 1802 to use a portion of the money accruing from the sale of public
lands in Ohio in order to connect that young State with Atlantic waters.
It was proposed to build the canal, according to one early plan, with
funds to be obtained by the sale of land in Michigan. So firmly did
the promoters believe in the national importance of this project that
subscriptions, according to another plan, were to be solicited as far
afield as Vermont in the North and Kentucky in the Southwest. All that
Washington had hoped for, and all that Aaron Burr is supposed to have
been hopeless of, were epitomized in these great works of internal
improvement. They bespoke cooperation of the highest existing types of
loyalty, optimism, financial skill, and engineering ability.

Yet, on the other hand, the contrasts between these undertakings were
great. The two enterprises, one the work of the nation and the other
that of a single State, were practically contemporaneous and were
therefore constantly inviting comparison. The Cumberland Road was,
for its day, a gigantic government undertaking involving problems
of finance, civil engineering, eminent domain, state rights, local
favoritism, and political machination. Its purpose was noble and its
successful construction a credit to the nation; but the paternalism to
which it gave rise and the conflicts which it precipitated in Congress
over questions of constitutionality were remembered soberly for a
century. The Erie Canal, after its projectors had failed to obtain
national aid, became the undertaking of one commonwealth conducted, amid
countless doubts and jeers, to a conclusion unbelievably successful. As
a result many States, foregoing Federal aid, attempted to duplicate
the successful feat of New York. In this respect the northern canal
resembled the Lancaster Turnpike and tempted scores of States and
corporations to expenditures which were unwise in circumstances less
favorable than those of the fruitful and strategic Empire State.

In the conception of both the roadway and the canal, it should be noted,
the old idea of making use of navigable rivers still persisted. The act
foreshadowing the Cumberland Road, passed in 1802, called for "making
public roads leading from the navigable waters emptying into the
Atlantic, to the Ohio, to said State Ohio and through the same"; and
Hawley's original plan was to build the Erie Canal from Utica to Buffalo
using the Mohawk from Utica to the Hudson.

Historic Cumberland, in Maryland, was chosen by Congress as the
eastern terminus of the great highway which should bind Ohio to the Old
Thirteen. Commissioners were appointed in 1806 to choose the best
route by which the great highway could reach the Ohio River between
Steubenville, Ohio and the mouth of Grave Creek; but difficulties
of navigation in the neighborhood of the Three Sister Islands near
Charlestown, or Wellsburg, West Virginia, led to the choice of Wheeling,
farther down, as a temporary western terminus.

The route selected was an excellent compromise between the long standing
rival claims of Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia to the trade of
the West. If Baltimore and Alexandria were to be better served than
Philadelphia, the advantage was slight; and Pennsylvania gained
compensation, ere the State gave the National Government permission
to build the road within its limits, by dictating that it should pass
through Uniontown and Washington. In this way Pennsylvania obtained,
without cost, unrivaled advantages for a portion of the State which
might otherwise have been long neglected.

The building of the road, however satisfactory in the main, was not
undertaken without arousing many sectional and personal hopes and
prejudices and jealousies, of which the echoes still linger in local
legends today. Land-owners, mine-owners, factory-owners, innkeepers and
countless townsmen and villagers anxiously watched the course of
the road and were bitterly disappointed if the new sixty-four-foot
thoroughfare did not pass immediately through their property. On the
other hand, promoters of toll and turnpike companies, who had promising
schemes and long lists of shareholders, were far from eager to have
their property taken for a national road. No one believed that, if it
proved successful, it would be the only work of its kind, and everywhere
men looked for the construction of government highways out of the
overflowing wealth of the treasury within the next few years.

In April, 1811, the first contracts were let for building the first ten
miles of the road from its eastern terminus and were completed in 18191.
More contracts were let in 1812, 1813, and 1815. Even in those days
of war when the drain on the national treasury was excessive, over a
quarter of a million dollars was appropriated for the construction of
the road. Onward it crawled, through the beautiful Cumberland gateway of
the Potomac, to Big Savage and Little Savage Mountains, to Little Pine
Run (the first "Western" water), to Red Hill (later called "Shades
of Death" because of the gloomy forest growth), to high-flung
Negro Mountain at an elevation of 2325 feet, and thence on to the
Youghiogheny, historic Great Meadows, Braddock's Grave, Laurel Hill,
Uniontown, and Brownsville, where it crossed the Monongahela. Thence,
on almost a straight line, it sped by way of Washington to Wheeling. Its
average cost was upwards of thirteen thousand dollars a mile from the
Potomac to the Ohio. The road was used in 1817, and in another year
the mail coaches of the United States were running from Washington to
Wheeling, West Virginia. Within five years one of the five commission
houses doing business at Wheeling is said to have handled over a
thousand wagons carrying freight of nearly two tons each. The Cumberland
Road at once leaped into a position of leadership, both in volume of
commerce and in popularity, and held its own for two famous decades. The
pulse of the nation beat to the steady throb of trade along its highway.
Maryland at once stretched out her eager arms, along stone roads,
through Frederick and Hagerstown to Cumberland, and thus formed a single
route from the Ohio to Baltimore. Great stagecoach and freight lines
were soon established, each patronizing its own stage house or wagon
stand in the thriving towns along the road. The primitive box stage gave
way to the oval or football type with curved top and bottom, and this
was displaced in turn by the more practical Concord coach of national
fame. The names of the important stagecoach companies were quite as well
known, a century ago, as those of our great railways today. Chief among
them were the National, Good Intent, June Bug, and Pioneer lines. The
coaches, drawn by four and sometimes six horses, were usually painted in
brilliant colors and were named after eminent statesmen. The drivers
of these gay chariots were characters quite as famous locally as the
personages whose names were borne by the coaches. Westover and his
record of forty-five minutes for the twenty miles between Uniontown
and Brownsville, and "Red" Bunting, with his drive of a hundred and
thirty-one miles in twelve hours with the declaration of war against
Mexico, will be long famous on the curving stretches of the Cumberland
Road.

Although the freight and express traffic of those days lacked the
picturesqueness of the passenger coaches, nothing illustrates so
conclusively what the great road meant to an awakening West as the long
lines of heavy Conestogas and rattling express wagons which raced
at "unprecedented" speed across hill and vale. Searight, the local
historian of the road, describes these large, broad-wheeled wagons
covered with white canvas as

"visible all the day long, at every point, making the highway look
more like a leading avenue of a great city than a road through rural
districts.... I have staid over night with William Cheets on Nigger
[Negro] Mountain when there were about thirty six-horse teams in the
wagon yard, a hundred Kentucky mules in an adjoining lot, a thousand
hogs in their enclosures, and as many fat cattle in adjoining fields.
The music made by this large number of hogs eating corn on a frosty
night I shall never forget. After supper and attention to the teams,
the wagoners would gather in the bar-room and listen to the music on the
violin furnished by one of their fellows, have a Virginia hoe-down, sing
songs, tell anecdotes, and hear the experiences of drivers and drovers
from all points of the road, and, when it was all over, unroll their
beds, lay them down on the floor before the bar-room fire side by
side, and sleep with their feet near the blaze as soundly as under the
parental roof."

Meanwhile New York, the other great rival for Western trade, was intent
on its own darling project, the Erie Canal. In 1808, three years before
the building of the Cumberland Road, Joshua Forman offered a bill
in favor of the canal in the Legislature of New York. In plain but
dignified language this document stated that New York possessed "the
best route of communication between the Atlantic and western waters,"
and that it held "the first commercial rank in the United States." The
bill also noted that, while "several of our sister States" were seeking
to secure "the trade of that wide extended country," their natural
advantages were "vastly inferior." Six hundred dollars was the amount
appropriated for a brief survey, and Congress was asked to vote aid for
the construction of the "Buffalo-Utica Canal." The matter was widely
talked about but action was delayed. Doubt as to the best route to
be pursued caused some discussion. If the western terminus were to be
located on Lake Ontario at the mouth of the Oswego, as some advocated,
would produce not make its way to Montreal instead of to New York? In
1810 a new committee was appointed and, though their report favored
the paralleling of the course of the Mohawk and Oswego rivers, their
engineer, James Geddes, gave strength to the party which believed a
direct canal would best serve the interests of the State. It is worth
noting that Livingston and Fulton were added to the committee in 1811.

The hopes of outside aid from Congress and adjacent States met with
disappointment. In vain did the advocates of the canal in 1812 plead
that its construction would promote "a free and general intercourse
between different parts of the United States, tend to the aggrandizement
and prosperity of the country, and consolidate and strengthen the
Union." The plan to have the Government subsidize the canal by vesting
in the State of New York four million acres of Michigan land brought out
a protest from the West which is notable not so much because it
records the opposition of this section as because it illustrates the
shortsightedness of most of the arguments raised against the New York
enterprise. The purpose of the canal, the detractors asserted, was to
build up New York City to the detriment of Montreal, and the navigation
of Lake Ontario, whose beauty they touchingly described, was to be
abandoned for a "narrow, winding obstructed canal... for an expense which
arithmetic dares not approach." It was, in their minds, unquestionably
a selfish object, and they believed that "both correct science, and the
dictates of patriotism and philanthropy [should] lead to the adoption of
more liberal principles." It was a shortsighted object, "predicated on
the eternal adhesion of the Canadas to England." It would never give
satisfaction since trade would always ignore artificial and seek natural
routes. The attempting of such comparatively useless projects would
discourage worthy schemes, relax the bonds of Union, and depress the
national character. But though these Westerners thus misjudged the
possibilities of the Erie Canal, we must doff our hats to them for their
foresight in suggesting that, instead of aiding the Erie Canal, the
nation ought to build canals at Niagara Falls and Panama!

The War of 1812 suspended all talk of the canal, but the subject was
again brought up by Judge Platt in the autumn of 1816. With alacrity
strong men came to the aid of the measure. De Witt Clinton's Memorial of
1816 addressed to the State Legislature may well rank with Washington's
letter to Harrison in the documentary history of American commercial
development. It sums up the geographical position of New York with
reference to the Great Lakes and the Atlantic, her relationship to
the West and to Canada, the feasibility of the proposed route from an
engineering standpoint, the timeliness of the moment for such a work of
improvement, the value that the canal would give to the state lands of
the interior, and the trade that it would bring to the towns along its
pathway.

The Erie Canal was born in the Act of April 14, 1817, but the decision
of the Council of Revision, which held the power of veto, was in doubt.
An anecdote related by Judge Platt tends to prove that fear of
another war with England was the straw that broke the camel's back of
opposition. Acting-Governor Taylor, Chief Justice Thompson, Chancellor
Kent, Judge Yates, and Judge Platt composed the Council. The two first
named were open opponents of the measure; Kent, Yates, and Platt were
warm advocates of the project, but one of them doubted if the time was
ripe to undertake it.

Taylor opposed the canal on the ground that the late treaty with England
was a mere truce and that the resources of the State should be husbanded
against renewed war.

"Do you think so, Sir?" Chancellor Kent is said to have asked the
Governor.

"Yes, Sir," was the reported reply. "England will never forgive us for
our victories, and, my word for it, we shall have another war with her
within two years."

The Chancellor rose to his feet with determination and sealed the fate
of the great enterprise in a word.

"If we must have war," he exclaimed, "I am in favor of the canal and I
cast my vote for this bill."

On July 4, 1817, work was formally inaugurated at Rome with simple
ceremonies. Thus the year 1817 was marked by three great undertakings:
the navigation of the Mississippi River upstream and down by steamboats,
the opening of the national road across the Alleghany Mountains, and the
beginning of the Erie Canal. No single year in the early history of
the United States witnessed three such important events in the material
progress of the country.

What days the ancient "Long House of the Iroquois" now saw! The
engineers of the Cumberland Road, now nearing the Ohio River, had
enjoyed the advantage of many precedents and examples; but the
Commissioners of the Erie Canal had been able to study only such crude
examples of canal-building as America then afforded. Never on any
continent had such an inaccessible region been pierced by such a
highway. The total length of the whole network of canals in Great
Britain did not equal that of the waterway which the New Yorkers now
undertook to build. The lack of roads, materials, vehicles, methods of
drilling and efficient business systems was overcome by sheer patience
and perseverance in experiment. The frozen winter roads saved the day
by making it possible to accumulate a proper supply of provisions and
materials. As tools of construction, the plough and scraper with
their greater capacity for work soon supplanted the shovel and the
wheelbarrow, which had been the chief implements for such construction
in Europe. Strange new machinery born of Mother Necessity was now heard
groaning in the dark swamps of New York. These giants, worked by means
of a cable, wheel, and endless screw, were made to hoist green stumps
bodily from the ground and, without the use of axe, to lay trees
prostrate, root and branch. A new plough was fashioned with which a yoke
of oxen could cut roots two inches in thickness well beneath the surface
of the ground.

Handicaps of various sorts wore the patience of commissioners,
engineers, and contractors. Lack of snow during one winter all but
stopped the work by cutting off the source of supplies. Pioneer
ailments, such as fever and ague, reaped great harvests, incapacitated
more than a thousand workmen at one time and for a brief while stopped
work completely.

For the most part, however, work was carried on simultaneously on all
the three great links or sections into which the enterprise was divided.
Local contractors were given preference by the commissioners, and
three-fourths of the work was done by natives of the State. Forward up
the Mohawk by Schenectady and Utica to Rome, thence bending southward to
Syracuse, and from there by way of Clyde, Lyons, and Palmyra, the canal
made its way to the giant viaduct over the Genesee River at Rochester.
Keeping close to the summit level on the dividing ridge between Lake
Ontario streams and the Valley of the Tonawanda, the line ran to
Lockport, where a series of locks placed the canal on the Lake Erie
level, 365 miles from and 564 feet above Albany. By June, 1823, the
canal was completed from Rochester to Schenectady; in October boats
passed into the tidewaters of the Hudson at Albany; and in the autumn of
1825 the canal was formally opened by the passage of a triumphant fleet
from Lake Erie to New York Bay. Here two kegs of lake water were emptied
into the Atlantic, while the Governor of the State of New York spoke
these words:

"This solemnity, at this place, on the first arrival of vessels from
Lake Erie, is intended to indicate and commemorate the navigable
communication, which has been accomplished between our Mediterranean
Seas and the Atlantic Ocean, in about eight years, to the extent of more
than four hundred and twenty-five miles, by the wisdom, public spirit,
and energy of the people of the State of New York; and may the God of
the Heavens and the Earth smile most propitiously on this work, and
render it subservient to the best interests of the human race."

Throughout these last seven years, the West was subconsciously getting
ready to meet the East halfway by improving and extending her steamboat
operations. Steamboats were first run on the Great Lakes by enterprising
Buffalo citizens who, in 1818, secured rights from the Fulton-Livingston
