been, as originally conceived, but the preliminary step towards a large
positive system of almost religious philosophy.  Then as now, the
illuminated philosophic mind might apprehend, in what seemed a mass of
lifeless matter, the movement of that universal life, in which things,
and men's impressions of them, were ever "coming to be," alternately
consumed and renewed.  That continual change, to be discovered by the
attentive understanding where common opinion found fixed objects, was
but the indicator of a subtler but all-pervading motion--the sleepless,
ever-sustained, inexhaustible energy of the divine [131] reason itself,
proceeding always by its own rhythmical logic, and lending to all mind
and matter, in turn, what life they had.  In this "perpetual flux" of
things and of souls, there was, as Heraclitus conceived, a continuance,
if not of their material or spiritual elements, yet of orderly
intelligible relationships, like the harmony of musical notes, wrought
out in and through the series of their mutations--ordinances of the
divine reason, maintained throughout the changes of the phenomenal
world; and this harmony in their mutation and opposition, was, after
all, a principle of sanity, of reality, there.  But it happened, that,
of all this, the first, merely sceptical or negative step, that easiest
step on the threshold, had alone remained in general memory; and the
"doctrine of motion" seemed to those who had felt its seduction to make
all fixed knowledge impossible.  The swift passage of things, the still
swifter passage of those modes of our conscious being which seemed to
reflect them, might indeed be the burning of the divine fire: but what
was ascertained was that they did pass away like a devouring flame, or
like the race of water in the mid-stream--too swiftly for any real
knowledge of them to be attainable.  Heracliteanism had grown to be
almost identical with the famous doctrine of the sophist Protagoras,
that the momentary, sensible apprehension of the individual was the
only standard of what is or is [132] not, and each one the measure of
all things to himself.  The impressive name of Heraclitus had become
but an authority for a philosophy of the despair of knowledge.

And as it had been with his original followers in Greece, so it
happened now with the later Roman disciple.  He, too, paused at the
apprehension of that constant motion of things--the drift of flowers,
of little or great souls, of ambitious systems, in the stream around
him, the first source, the ultimate issue, of which, in regions out of
sight, must count with him as but a dim problem.  The bold mental
flight of the old Greek master from the fleeting, competing objects of
experience to that one universal life, in which the whole sphere of
physical change might be reckoned as but a single pulsation, remained
by him as hypothesis only--the hypothesis he actually preferred, as in
itself most credible, however scantily realisable even by the
imagination--yet still as but one unverified hypothesis, among many
others, concerning the first principle of things.  He might reserve it
as a fine, high, visionary consideration, very remote upon the
intellectual ladder, just at the point, indeed, where that ladder
seemed to pass into the clouds, but for which there was certainly no
time left just now by his eager interest in the real objects so close
to him, on the lowlier earthy steps nearest the ground.  And those
childish days of reverie, [133] when he played at priests, played in
many another day-dream, working his way from the actual present, as far
as he might, with a delightful sense of escape in replacing the outer
world of other people by an inward world as himself really cared to
have it, had made him a kind of "idealist." He was become aware of the
possibility of a large dissidence between an inward and somewhat
exclusive world of vivid personal apprehension, and the unimproved,
unheightened reality of the life of those about him.  As a consequence,
he was ready now to concede, somewhat more easily than others, the
first point of his new lesson, that the individual is to himself the
measure of all things, and to rely on the exclusive certainty to
himself of his own impressions. To move afterwards in that outer world
of other people, as though taking it at their estimate, would be
possible henceforth only as a kind of irony.  And as with the Vicaire
Savoyard, after reflecting on the variations of philosophy, "the first
fruit he drew from that reflection was the lesson of a limitation of
his researches to what immediately interested him; to rest peacefully
in a profound ignorance as to all beside; to disquiet himself only
concerning those things which it was of import for him to know."  At
least he would entertain no theory of conduct which did not allow its
due weight to this primary element of incertitude or negation, in the
conditions of man's life. [134] Just here he joined company, retracing
in his individual mental pilgrimage the historic order of human
thought, with another wayfarer on the journey, another ancient Greek
master, the founder of the Cyrenaic philosophy, whose weighty
traditional utterances (for he had left no writing) served in turn to
give effective outline to the contemplations of Marius.  There was
something in the doctrine itself congruous with the place wherein it
had its birth; and for a time Marius lived much, mentally, in the
brilliant Greek colony which had given a dubious name to the philosophy
of pleasure.  It hung, for his fancy, between the mountains and the
sea, among richer than Italian gardens, on a certain breezy table-land
projecting from the African coast, some hundreds of miles southward
from Greece.  There, in a delightful climate, with something of
transalpine temperance amid its luxury, and withal in an inward
atmosphere of temperance which did but further enhance the brilliancy
of human life, the school of Cyrene had maintained itself as almost one
with the family of its founder; certainly as nothing coarse or unclean,
and under the influence of accomplished women.

Aristippus of Cyrene too had left off in suspense of judgment as to
what might really lie behind--flammantia moenia mundi: the flaming
ramparts of the world.  Those strange, bold, sceptical surmises, which
had haunted the minds [135] of the first Greek enquirers as merely
abstract doubt, which had been present to the mind of Heraclitus as one
element only in a system of abstract philosophy, became with Aristippus
a very subtly practical worldly-wisdom.  The difference between him and
those obscure earlier thinkers is almost like that between an ancient
thinker generally, and a modern man of the world: it was the difference
between the mystic in his cell, or the prophet in the desert, and the
expert, cosmopolitan, administrator of his dark sayings, translating
the abstract thoughts of the master into terms, first of all, of
sentiment.  It has been sometimes seen, in the history of the human
mind, that when thus translated into terms of sentiment--of sentiment,
as lying already half-way towards practice--the abstract ideas of
metaphysics for the first time reveal their true significance.  The
metaphysical principle, in itself, as it were, without hands or feet,
becomes impressive, fascinating, of effect, when translated into a
precept as to how it were best to feel and act; in other words, under
its sentimental or ethical equivalent.  The leading idea of the great
master of Cyrene, his theory that things are but shadows, and that we,
even as they, never continue in one stay, might indeed have taken
effect as a languid, enervating, consumptive nihilism, as a precept of
"renunciation," which would touch and handle and busy itself with
nothing.  But in the reception of [136] metaphysical formulae, all
depends, as regards their actual and ulterior result, on the
pre-existent qualities of that soil of human nature into which they
fall--the company they find already present there, on their admission
into the house of thought; there being at least so much truth as this
involves in the theological maxim, that the reception of this or that
speculative conclusion is really a matter of will.  The persuasion that
all is vanity, with this happily constituted Greek, who had been a
genuine disciple of Socrates and reflected, presumably, something of
his blitheness in the face of the world, his happy way of taking all
chances, generated neither frivolity nor sourness, but induced, rather,
an impression, just serious enough, of the call upon men's attention of
the crisis in which they find themselves.  It became the stimulus
towards every kind of activity, and prompted a perpetual,
inextinguishable thirst after experience.

With Marius, then, the influence of the philosopher of pleasure
depended on this, that in him an abstract doctrine, originally somewhat
acrid, had fallen upon a rich and genial nature, well fitted to
transform it into a theory of practice, of considerable stimulative
power towards a fair life.  What Marius saw in him was the spectacle of
one of the happiest temperaments coming, so to speak, to an
understanding with the most depressing of theories; accepting the [137]
results of a metaphysical system which seemed to concentrate into
itself all the weakening trains of thought in earlier Greek
speculation, and making the best of it; turning its hard, bare truths,
with wonderful tact, into precepts of grace, and delicate wisdom, and a
delicate sense of honour.  Given the hardest terms, supposing our days
are indeed but a shadow, even so, we may well adorn and beautify, in
scrupulous self-respect, our souls, and whatever our souls touch
upon--these wonderful bodies, these material dwelling-places through
which the shadows pass together for a while, the very raiment we wear,
our very pastimes and the intercourse of society.  The most discerning
judges saw in him something like the graceful "humanities" of the later
Roman, and our modern "culture," as it is termed; while Horace recalled
his sayings as expressing best his own consummate amenity in the
reception of life.

In this way, for Marius, under the guidance of that old master of
decorous living, those eternal doubts as to the criteria of truth
reduced themselves to a scepticism almost drily practical, a scepticism
which developed the opposition between things as they are and our
impressions and thoughts concerning them--the possibility, if an
outward world does really exist, of some faultiness in our apprehension
of it--the doctrine, in short, of what is termed "the subjectivity of
knowledge."  That is a consideration, indeed, [138] which lies as an
element of weakness, like some admitted fault or flaw, at the very
foundation of every philosophical account of the universe; which
confronts all philosophies at their starting, but with which none have
really dealt conclusively, some perhaps not quite sincerely; which
those who are not philosophers dissipate by "common," but
unphilosophical, sense, or by religious faith.  The peculiar strength
of Marius was, to have apprehended this weakness on the threshold of
human knowledge, in the whole range of its consequences.  Our knowledge
is limited to what we feel, he reflected: we need no proof that we
feel.  But can we be sure that things are at all like our feelings?
Mere peculiarities in the instruments of our cognition, like the little
knots and waves on the surface of a mirror, may distort the matter they
seem but to represent.  Of other people we cannot truly know even the
feelings, nor how far they would indicate the same modifications, each
one of a personality really unique, in using the same terms as
ourselves; that "common experience," which is sometimes proposed as a
satisfactory basis of certainty, being after all only a fixity of
language.  But our own impressions!--The light and heat of that blue
veil over our heads, the heavens spread out, perhaps not like a curtain
over anything!--How reassuring, after so long a debate about the rival
criteria of truth, to fall back upon direct sensation, to limit one's
[139] aspirations after knowledge to that!  In an age still materially
so brilliant, so expert in the artistic handling of material things,
with sensible capacities still in undiminished vigour, with the whole
world of classic art and poetry outspread before it, and where there
was more than eye or ear could well take in--how natural the
determination to rely exclusively upon the phenomena of the senses,
which certainly never deceive us about themselves, about which alone we
can never deceive ourselves!

And so the abstract apprehension that the little point of this present
moment alone really is, between a past which has just ceased to be and
a future which may never come, became practical with Marius, under the
form of a resolve, as far as possible, to exclude regret and desire,
and yield himself to the improvement of the present with an absolutely
disengaged mind.  America is here and now--here, or nowhere: as Wilhelm
Meister finds out one day, just not too late, after so long looking
vaguely across the ocean for the opportunity of the development of his
capacities.  It was as if, recognising in perpetual motion the law of
nature, Marius identified his own way of life cordially with it,
"throwing himself into the stream," so to speak.  He too must maintain
a harmony with that soul of motion in things, by constantly renewed
mobility of character.

Omnis Aristippum decuit color et status et res.--

[140] Thus Horace had summed up that perfect manner in the reception of
life attained by his old Cyrenaic master; and the first practical
consequence of the metaphysic which lay behind that perfect manner, had
been a strict limitation, almost the renunciation, of metaphysical
enquiry itself.  Metaphysic--that art, as it has so often proved, in
the words of Michelet, de s'egarer avec methode, of bewildering oneself
methodically:--one must spend little time upon that!  In the school of
Cyrene, great as was its mental incisiveness, logical and physical
speculation, theoretic interests generally, had been valued only so far
as they served to give a groundwork, an intellectual justification, to
that exclusive concern with practical ethics which was a note of the
Cyrenaic philosophy.  How earnest and enthusiastic, how true to itself,
under how many varieties of character, had been the effort of the
Greeks after Theory--Theoria--that vision of a wholly reasonable world,
which, according to the greatest of them, literally makes man like God:
how loyally they had still persisted in the quest after that, in spite
of how many disappointments!  In the Gospel of Saint John, perhaps,
some of them might have found the kind of vision they were seeking for;
but not in "doubtful disputations" concerning "being" and "not being,"
knowledge and appearance.  Men's minds, even young men's minds, at that
late day, might well seem oppressed by the weariness of systems which
[141] had so far outrun positive knowledge; and in the mind of Marius,
as in that old school of Cyrene, this sense of ennui, combined with
appetites so youthfully vigorous, brought about reaction, a sort of
suicide (instances of the like have been seen since) by which a great
metaphysical acumen was devoted to the function of proving metaphysical
speculation impossible, or useless. Abstract theory was to be valued
only just so far as it might serve to clear the tablet of the mind from
suppositions no more than half realisable, or wholly visionary, leaving
it in flawless evenness of surface to the impressions of an experience,
concrete and direct.

To be absolutely virgin towards such experience, by ridding ourselves
of such abstractions as are but the ghosts of bygone impressions--to be
rid of the notions we have made for ourselves, and that so often only
misrepresent the experience of which they profess to be the
representation--idola, idols, false appearances, as Bacon calls them
later--to neutralise the distorting influence of metaphysical system by
an all-accomplished metaphysic skill: it is this bold, hard, sober
recognition, under a very "dry light," of its own proper aim, in union
with a habit of feeling which on the practical side may perhaps open a
wide doorway to human weakness, that gives to the Cyrenaic doctrine, to
reproductions of this doctrine in the time of Marius or in our own,
their gravity and importance.  It was a [142] school to which the young
man might come, eager for truth, expecting much from philosophy, in no
ignoble curiosity, aspiring after nothing less than an "initiation." He
would be sent back, sooner or later, to experience, to the world of
concrete impressions, to things as they may be seen, heard, felt by
him; but with a wonderful machinery of observation, and free from the
tyranny of mere theories.

So, in intervals of repose, after the agitation which followed the
death of Flavian, the thoughts of Marius ran, while he felt himself as
if returned to the fine, clear, peaceful light of that pleasant school
of healthfully sensuous wisdom, in the brilliant old Greek colony, on
its fresh upland by the sea.  Not pleasure, but a general completeness
of life, was the practical ideal to which this anti-metaphysical
metaphysic really pointed.  And towards such a full or complete life, a
life of various yet select sensation, the most direct and effective
auxiliary must be, in a word, Insight.  Liberty of soul, freedom from
all partial and misrepresentative doctrine which does but relieve one
element in our experience at the cost of another, freedom from all
embarrassment alike of regret for the past and of calculation on the
future: this would be but preliminary to the real business of
education--insight, insight through culture, into all that the present
moment holds in trust for us, as we stand so briefly in its presence.
From that maxim of [143] Life as the end of life, followed, as a
practical consequence, the desirableness of refining all the
instruments of inward and outward intuition, of developing all their
capacities, of testing and exercising one's self in them, till one's
whole nature became one complex medium of reception, towards the
vision--the "beatific vision," if we really cared to make it such--of
our actual experience in the world.  Not the conveyance of an abstract
body of truths or principles, would be the aim of the right education
of one's self, or of another, but the conveyance of an art--an art in
some degree peculiar to each individual character; with the
modifications, that is, due to its special constitution, and the
peculiar circumstances of its growth, inasmuch as no one of us is "like
another, all in all."



CHAPTER IX: NEW CYRENAICISM

[144] SUCH were the practical conclusions drawn for himself by Marius,
when somewhat later he had outgrown the mastery of others, from the
principle that "all is vanity."  If he could but count upon the
present, if a life brief at best could not certainly be shown to
conduct one anywhere beyond itself, if men's highest curiosity was
indeed so persistently baffled--then, with the Cyrenaics of all ages,
he would at least fill up the measure of that present with vivid
sensations, and such intellectual apprehensions, as, in strength and
directness and their immediately realised values at the bar of an
actual experience, are most like sensations.  So some have spoken in
every age; for, like all theories which really express a strong natural
tendency of the human mind or even one of its characteristic modes of
weakness, this vein of reflection is a constant tradition in
philosophy.  Every age of European thought has had its Cyrenaics or
Epicureans, under many disguises: even under the hood of the monk.

[145] But--Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die!--is a proposal,
the real import of which differs immensely, according to the natural
taste, and the acquired judgment, of the guests who sit at the table.
It may express nothing better than the instinct of Dante's Ciacco, the
accomplished glutton, in the mud of the Inferno;+ or, since on no
hypothesis does man "live by bread alone," may come to be identical
with--"My meat is to do what is just and kind;" while the soul, which
can make no sincere claim to have apprehended anything beyond the veil
of immediate experience, yet never loses a sense of happiness in
conforming to the highest moral ideal it can clearly define for itself;
and actually, though but with so faint hope, does the "Father's
business."

In that age of Marcus Aurelius, so completely disabused of the
metaphysical ambition to pass beyond "the flaming ramparts of the
world," but, on the other hand, possessed of so vast an accumulation of
intellectual treasure, with so wide a view before it over all varieties
of what is powerful or attractive in man and his works, the thoughts of
Marius did but follow the line taken by the majority of educated
persons, though to a different issue.  Pitched to a really high and
serious key, the precept--Be perfect in regard to what is here and now:
the precept of "culture," as it is called, or of a complete
education--might at least save him from the vulgarity and heaviness
[146] of a generation, certainly of no general fineness of temper,
though with a material well-being abundant enough.  Conceded that what
is secure in our existence is but the sharp apex of the present moment
between two hypothetical eternities, and all that is real in our
experience but a series of fleeting impressions:--so Marius continued
the sceptical argument he had condensed, as the matter to hold by, from
his various philosophical reading:--given, that we are never to get
beyond the walls of the closely shut cell of one's own personality;
that the ideas we are somehow impelled to form of an outer world, and
of other minds akin to our own, are, it may be, but a day-dream, and
the thought of any world beyond, a day-dream perhaps idler still: then,
he, at least, in whom those fleeting impressions--faces, voices,
material sunshine--were very real and imperious, might well set himself
to the consideration, how such actual moments as they passed might be
made to yield their utmost, by the most dexterous training of capacity.
Amid abstract metaphysical doubts, as to what might lie one step only
beyond that experience, reinforcing the deep original materialism or
earthliness of human nature itself, bound so intimately to the sensuous
world, let him at least make the most of what was "here and now."  In
the actual dimness of ways from means to ends--ends in themselves
desirable, yet for the most part distant and for him, certainly, below
the [147] visible horizon--he would at all events be sure that the
means, to use the well-worn terminology, should have something of
finality or perfection about them, and themselves partake, in a
measure, of the more excellent nature of ends--that the means should
justify the end.

With this view he would demand culture, paideia,+ as the Cyrenaics
said, or, in other words, a wide, a complete, education--an education
partly negative, as ascertaining the true limits of man's capacities,
but for the most part positive, and directed especially to the
expansion and refinement of the power of reception; of those powers,
above all, which are immediately relative to fleeting phenomena, the
powers of emotion and sense.  In such an education, an "aesthetic"
education, as it might now be termed, and certainly occupied very
largely with those aspects of things which affect us pleasurably
through sensation, art, of course, including all the finer sorts of
literature, would have a great part to play.  The study of music, in
that wider Platonic sense, according to which, music comprehends all
those matters over which the Muses of Greek mythology preside, would
conduct one to an exquisite appreciation of all the finer traits of
nature and of man.  Nay! the products of the imagination must
themselves be held to present the most perfect forms of life--spirit
and matter alike under their purest and most perfect conditions--the
most strictly appropriate [148] objects of that impassioned
contemplation, which, in the world of intellectual discipline, as in
the highest forms of morality and religion, must be held to be the
essential function of the "perfect."  Such manner of life might come
even to seem a kind of religion--an inward, visionary, mystic piety, or
religion, by virtue of its effort to live days "lovely and pleasant" in
themselves, here and now, and with an all-sufficiency of well-being in
the immediate sense of the object contemplated, independently of any
faith, or hope that might be entertained as to their ulterior tendency.
In this way, the true aesthetic culture would be realisable as a new
form of the contemplative life, founding its claim on the intrinsic
"blessedness" of "vision"--the vision of perfect men and things.  One's
human nature, indeed, would fain reckon on an assured and endless
future, pleasing itself with the dream of a final home, to be attained
at some still remote date, yet with a conscious, delightful home-coming
at last, as depicted in many an old poetic Elysium.  On the other hand,
the world of perfected sensation, intelligence, emotion, is so close to
us, and so attractive, that the most visionary of spirits must needs
represent the world unseen in colours, and under a form really borrowed
from it.  Let me be sure then--might he not plausibly say?--that I miss
no detail of this life of realised consciousness in the present!  Here
at least is a vision, a theory, [149] theoria,+ which reposes on no
basis of unverified hypothesis, which makes no call upon a future after
all somewhat problematic; as it would be unaffected by any discovery of
an Empedocles (improving on the old story of Prometheus) as to what had
really been the origin, and course of development, of man's actually
attained faculties and that seemingly divine particle of reason or
spirit in him.  Such a doctrine, at more leisurable moments, would of
course have its precepts to deliver on the embellishment, generally, of
what is near at hand, on the adornment of life, till, in a not
impracticable rule of conduct, one's existence, from day to day, came
to be like a well-executed piece of music; that "perpetual motion" in
things (so Marius figured the matter to himself, under the old Greek
imageries) according itself to a kind of cadence or harmony.

It was intelligible that this "aesthetic" philosophy might find itself
(theoretically, at least, and by way of a curious question in
casuistry, legitimate from its own point of view) weighing the claims
of that eager, concentrated, impassioned realisation of experience,
against those of the received morality.  Conceiving its own function in
a somewhat desperate temper, and becoming, as every high-strung form of
sentiment, as the religious sentiment itself, may become, somewhat
antinomian, when, in its effort towards the order of experiences it
prefers, it is confronted with the traditional and popular [150]
morality, at points where that morality may look very like a
convention, or a mere stage-property of the world, it would be found,
from time to time, breaking beyond the limits of the actual moral
order; perhaps not without some pleasurable excitement in so bold a
venture.

With the possibility of some such hazard as this, in thought or even in
practice--that it might be, though refining, or tonic even, in the case
of those strong and in health, yet, as Pascal says of the kindly and
temperate wisdom of Montaigne, "pernicious for those who have any
natural tendency to impiety or vice," the line of reflection traced out
above, was fairly chargeable.--Not, however, with "hedonism" and its
supposed consequences.  The blood, the heart, of Marius were still
pure.  He knew that his carefully considered theory of practice braced
him, with the effect of a moral principle duly recurring to mind every
morning, towards the work of a student, for which he might seem
intended.  Yet there were some among his acquaintance who jumped to the
conclusion that, with the "Epicurean stye," he was making
pleasure--pleasure, as they so poorly conceived it--the sole motive of
life; and they precluded any exacter estimate of the situation by
covering it with a high-sounding general term, through the vagueness of
which they were enabled to see the severe and laborious youth in the
vulgar company of Lais.  Words like "hedonism"-- [151] terms of large
and vague comprehension--above all when used for a purpose avowedly
controversial, have ever been the worst examples of what are called
"question-begging terms;" and in that late age in which Marius lived,
amid the dust of so many centuries of philosophical debate, the air was
full of them.  Yet those who used that reproachful Greek term for the
philosophy of pleasure, were hardly more likely than the old Greeks
themselves (on whom regarding this very subject of the theory of
pleasure, their masters in the art of thinking had so emphatically to
impress the necessity of "making distinctions") to come to any very
delicately correct ethical conclusions by a reasoning, which began with
a general term, comprehensive enough to cover pleasures so different in
quality, in their causes and effects, as the pleasures of wine and
love, of art and science, of religious enthusiasm and political
enterprise, and of that taste or curiosity which satisfied itself with
long days of serious study.  Yet, in truth, each of those pleasurable
modes of activity, may, in its turn, fairly become the ideal of the
"hedonistic" doctrine.  Really, to the phase of reflection through
which Marius was then passing, the charge of "hedonism," whatever its
true weight might be, was not properly applicable at all.  Not
pleasure, but fulness of life, and "insight" as conducting to that
fulness--energy, variety, and choice of experience, including [152]
noble pain and sorrow even, loves such as those in the exquisite old
story of Apuleius, sincere and strenuous forms of the moral life, such
as Seneca and Epictetus--whatever form of human life, in short, might
be heroic, impassioned, ideal: from these the "new Cyrenaicism" of
Marius took its criterion of values.  It was a theory, indeed, which
might properly be regarded as in great degree coincident with the main
principle of the Stoics themselves, and an older version of the precept
"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might"--a doctrine
so widely acceptable among the nobler spirits of that time.  And, as
with that, its mistaken tendency would lie in the direction of a kind
of idolatry of mere life, or natural gift, or strength--l'idolatrie des
talents.

To understand the various forms of ancient art and thought, the various
forms of actual human feeling (the only new thing, in a world almost
too opulent in what was old) to satisfy, with a kind of scrupulous
equity, the claims of these concrete and actual objects on his
sympathy, his intelligence, his senses--to "pluck out the heart of
their mystery," and in turn become the interpreter of them to others:
this had now defined itself for Marius as a very narrowly practical
design: it determined his choice of a vocation to live by. It was the
era of the rhetoricians, or sophists, as they were sometimes called; of
men who came in some instances to [153] great fame and fortune, by way
of a literary cultivation of "science." That science, it has been often
said, must have been wholly an affair of words.  But in a world,
confessedly so opulent in what was old, the work, even of genius, must
necessarily consist very much in criticism; and, in the case of the
more excellent specimens of his class, the rhetorician was, after all,
the eloquent and effective interpreter, for the delighted ears of
others, of what understanding himself had come by, in years of travel
and study, of the beautiful house of art and thought which was the
inheritance of the age.  The emperor Marcus Aurelius, to whose service
Marius had now been called, was himself, more or less openly, a
"lecturer."  That late world, amid many curiously vivid modern traits,
had this spectacle, so familiar to ourselves, of the public lecturer or
essayist; in some cases adding to his other gifts that of the Christian
preacher, who knows how to touch people's sensibilities on behalf of
the suffering. To follow in the way of these successes, was the natural
instinct of youthful ambition; and it was with no vulgar egotism that
Marius, at the age of nineteen, determined, like many another young man
of parts, to enter as a student of rhetoric at Rome.

Though the manner of his work was changed formally from poetry to
prose, he remained, and must always be, of the poetic temper: by which,
I mean, among other things, that quite [154] independently of the
general habit of that pensive age he lived much, and as it were by
system, in reminiscence.  Amid his eager grasping at the sensation, the
consciousness, of the present, he had come to see that, after all, the
main point of economy in the conduct of the present, was the
question:--How will it look to me, at what shall I value it, this day
next year?--that in any given day or month one's main concern was its
impression for the memory.  A strange trick memory sometimes played
him; for, with no natural gradation, what was of last month, or of
yesterday, of to-day even, would seem as far off, as entirely detached
from him, as things of ten years ago. Detached from him, yet very real,
there lay certain spaces of his life, in delicate perspective, under a
favourable light; and, somehow, all the less fortunate detail and
circumstance had parted from them.  Such hours were oftenest those in
which he had been helped by work of others to the pleasurable
apprehension of art, of nature, or of life.  "Not what I do, but what I
am, under the power of this vision"--he would say to himself--"is what
were indeed pleasing to the gods!"

And yet, with a kind of inconsistency in one who had taken for his
philosophic ideal the monochronos hedone+ of Aristippus--the pleasure
of the ideal present, of the mystic now--there would come, together
with that precipitate sinking of things into the past, a desire, after
all, [155] to retain "what was so transitive."  Could he but arrest,
for others also, certain clauses of experience, as the imaginative
memory presented them to himself!  In those grand, hot summers, he
would have imprisoned the very perfume of the flowers.  To create, to
live, perhaps, a little while beyond the allotted hours, if it were but
in a fragment of perfect expression:--it was thus his longing defined
itself for something to hold by amid the "perpetual flux." With men of
his vocation, people were apt to say, words were things. Well! with
him, words should be indeed things,--the word, the phrase, valuable in
exact proportion to the transparency with which it conveyed to others
the apprehension, the emotion, the mood, so vividly real within
himself.  Verbaque provisam rem non invita sequentur:+ Virile
apprehension of the true nature of things, of the true nature of one's
own impression, first of all!--words would follow that naturally, a
true understanding of one's self being ever the first condition of
genuine style.  Language delicate and measured, the delicate Attic
phrase, for instance, in which the eminent Aristeides could speak, was
then a power to which people's hearts, and sometimes even their purses,
readily responded.  And there were many points, as Marius thought, on
which the heart of that age greatly needed to be touched.  He hardly
knew how strong that old religious sense of responsibility, the
conscience, as we call it, [156] still was within him--a body of inward
impressions, as real as those so highly valued outward ones--to offend
against which, brought with it a strange feeling of disloyalty, as to a
person.  And the determination, adhered to with no misgiving, to add
nothing, not so much as a transient sigh, to the great total of men's
unhappiness, in his way through the world:--that too was something to
rest on, in the drift of mere "appearances."

All this would involve a life of industry, of industrious study, only
possible through healthy rule, keeping clear the eye alike of body and
soul.  For the male element, the logical conscience asserted itself
now, with opening manhood--asserted itself, even in his literary style,
by a certain firmness of outline, that touch of the worker in metal,
amid its richness.  Already he blamed instinctively alike in his work
and in himself, as youth so seldom does, all that had not passed a long
and liberal process of erasure.  The happy phrase or sentence was
really modelled upon a cleanly finished structure of scrupulous
thought.  The suggestive force of the one master of his development,
who had battled so hard with imaginative prose; the utterance, the
golden utterance, of the other, so content with its living power of
persuasion that he had never written at all,--in the commixture of
these two qualities he set up his literary ideal, and this rare
blending of grace with an intellectual [157] rigour or astringency, was
the secret of a singular expressiveness in it.
