he opened his mouth to his son and to his lawyer, the two men who sat
before me, and to them only, bidding them seek out the beginning of the
tale, and if it were true, to make restitution to his nephew.

Now--for all this, listening with my ears wide open, and sometimes
filling in what was not told me in words, I gathered from the men before
they left the house--as it chanced the dying lord could not have chosen
two worse people for such an errand, seeing that although the son was
honest, both of them were interested in proving the tale to be false.
Since that time, however, often I have thought that he knew this
himself, and trusted by the choice both to cheat his own conscience
and to preserve the wealth and dignity for his son. God, to whom he has
gone, alone knows the truth of it, but with such a man it may very well
have been as I think. I say that both were interested, for it seems, as
he told me afterwards, that the lawyer was to receive a great sum--ten
thousand pounds--under the will of the dead lord for whom he had done
much during his lifetime. But if Ralph were proved to be the heir this
sum would have been his and not the lawyer's, for the money was part
of his father's inheritance; therefore it was worth just ten thousand
pounds to that lawyer to convince himself and the false lord that Ralph
was not the man, and therefore it was that I found him so easy to deal
with.

Now after his father was dead the lawyer tried to persuade the son to
take no notice of his dying words, and to let the matter rest where it
was, seeing that he had nothing to gain and much to lose. But this he
would not consent to, for, as I have said, he was honest, declaring that
he could not be easy in his mind till he knew the truth, and that if he
did not go to find it out himself he would send others to do so for him.
As the lawyer desired this least of anything, he gave way, and they set
out upon their journey--which in those days was a very great journey
indeed--arriving at last in safety at our stead in the Transkei; for,
whether he liked it or not, his companion--who now was called Lord
Glenthirsk--would not be turned aside from the search or suffer him to
prosecute it alone.

At length, when all the tale was told, the lawyer looked at me with his
sharp eyes and said, through the interpreter:

"Vrouw Botmar, you have heard the story, tell us what you know. Is the
young man who lives with you he whom we seek?"

Now I thought for a second, though that second seemed like a year. All
doubt had left me, there was no room for it. Ralph and no other was the
man, and on my answer might hang his future. But I had argued the thing
out before and made up my mind to lie, though, so far as I know, it is
the only lie I ever told, and I am not a woman who often changes her
mind. Therefore I lied.

"It is not he," I said, "though for his sake I might wish that it were,
and this I can prove to you."

Now, when I had told this great falsehood, prompted to it by my love for
the lad and my love for Suzanne, his affianced wife, my mind grew as it
were empty for a moment, and I remember that in the emptiness I seemed
to hear a sound of laughter echoing in the air somewhere above the roof
of the house. Very swiftly I recovered myself, and looking at the men
I saw that my words rejoiced them, except the interpreter indeed, who
being a paid servant coming from far away, from the neighbourhood of
Capetown I believe, had no interest in the matter one way or the other
beyond that of earning his money with as little trouble as possible.
Yes, they smiled at each other, looking as though a great weight had
been lifted off their minds, till presently the lawyer checked himself
and said:

"Be so good as to set out the proofs of which you speak, Vrouw Botmar."

"I will," I answered, "but tell me first, the ship _India_ was wrecked
in the year 1824, was she not?"

"Undoubtedly," answered the lawyer.

"Well, have you heard that another ship called the _Flora_, travelling
from the Cape I know not whither, was lost on this coast in the same
month of the following year, and that a few of her passengers escaped?"

"I have heard of it," he said.

"Good. Now look here," and going to a chest that stood beneath the
window, I lifted from it the old Bible that belonged to my grandfather
and father, on the white pages at the beginning of which are written the
record of many births, marriages, deaths and other notable events that
had happened in the family. Opening it I searched and pointed to a
certain entry inscribed in the big writing of my husband Jan, and in ink
which was somewhat faint, for the ink that the traders sold us in those
days had little virtue in it. Beneath this entry were others made by Jan
in later years, telling of things that had happened to us, such as the
death of his great-aunt who left him money, the outbreak of small-pox
on the farm, and the number of people who died from it, the attack of a
band of the red Kaffirs upon our house, when by the mercy of God we beat
them off, leaving twelve of their dead behind them, but taking as many
of our best oxen, and so forth.

"Read," I said, and the interpreter read as follows:


"On the twelfth day of September in the year 1825 (the date being
written in letters) our little daughter Suzanne found a starving English
boy in a kloof, who had been shipwrecked on the coast. We have taken him
in as a gift of the Lord. He says that his name is Rolf Kenzie."


"You see the date," I said.

"Yes," answered the lawyer, "and it has not been altered!"

"No," I added, "it has not been altered;" but I did not tell them that
Jan had not written it down till afterwards, and then by mistake had
recorded the year in which he wrote, refusing to change it, although I
pointed out the error, because, he said, there was no room, and that it
would make a mess in the book.

"There is one more thing," I went on; "you say the mother of him you
seek was a great lady. Well, I saw the body of the mother of the boy
who was found, and it was that of a common person very roughly clad with
coarse underclothes and hands hard with labour, on which there was but
one ring, and that of silver. Here it is," and going to a drawer I took
from it a common silver ring which I once bought from a pedlar because
he worried me into it. "Lastly, gentlemen, the father of our lad was no
lord, unless in your country it is the custom of lords to herd sheep,
for the boy told me that in his own land his father was a shepherd,
and that he was travelling to some distant English colony to follow his
trade. That is all I have to say about it, though I am sorry that the
lad is not here to tell it you himself."

When he had heard this statement of mine, which I made in a cold and
indifferent voice, the young lord, Ralph's cousin, rose and stretched
himself, smiling happily.

"Well," he said, "there is the end of a very bad nightmare, and I am
glad enough that we came here and found out the truth, for had we not
done so I should never have been happy in my mind."

"Yes," answered the lawyer, the interpreter rendering their words all
the while, "the Vrouw Botmar's evidence is conclusive, though I shall
put her statement in writing and ask her to sign it. There is only one
thing, and that is the strange resemblance of the names," and he glanced
at him with his quick eyes.

"There are many Mackenzies in Scotland," answered Lord Glenthirsk, "and
I have no doubt that this poor fellow was a shepherd emigrating with his
wife and child to Australia or somewhere." Then he yawned and added, "I
am going outside to get some air before I sleep. Perhaps you will draw
up the paper for the good lady to sign."

"Certainly, my lord," answered the lawyer, and the young man went away
quite convinced.

After he had gone the lawyer produced pen and ink and wrote out the
statement, putting in it all the lies that I had told, and copying the
extract from the fly-leaf of the Bible. When he had done the interpreter
translated it to me, and then it was that the lawyer told me about
the last wishes of the dying lord, and how it would have cost him ten
thousand pounds and much business also had the tale proved true. Now
at last he gave me the paper to sign. Besides the candles on the table,
which being of mutton fat had burnt out, there was a lamp fed with
whale's oil, but this also was dying, the oil being exhausted, so that
its flame, which had sunk low, jumped from time to time with a little
noise, giving out a blue light. In that unholy blue light, which turned
our faces ghastly pale, the lawyer and I looked at each other as I
sat before him, the pen in my hand, and in his eyes I read that he was
certain that I was about to sign to a wicked lie, and in mine he read
that I knew it to be a lie.

For a while we stared at each other thus, discovering each other's
souls. "Sign," he said, shrugging his shoulders, "the light dies."

Then I signed, and as I wrote the lamp went out, leaving us in darkness,
and through the darkness once more I heard that sound of laughter
echoing in the air above the house.



CHAPTER VIII

THE WISDOM OF SUZANNE

Now, although Suzanne heard not a word of our talk, still she grasped
its purport well enough, for she knew that I proposed to throw dust into
the eyes of the Englishmen. This troubled her conscience sorely, for
the more she thought of it the more did it seem to her to be wicked
that just because we loved him and did not wish to part with him,
Ralph should be cheated of his birthright. All night long she lay awake
brooding, and before ever the dawn broke she had settled in her mind
that she herself would speak to the Englishmen, telling them the truth,
come what might of her words, for Suzanne, my daughter, was a determined
girl with an upright heart. Now feeling happier because of her decision,
at length she fell asleep and slept late, and as it happened this
accident of fate was the cause of the miscarriage of her scheme.

It came about in this way. Quite early in the morning--at sun-up,
indeed--the Englishmen rose, and coming out of the little guest-chamber,
drank the coffee that I had made ready for them, and talked together
for a while. Then the young lord--Ralph's cousin--said that as they
journeyed yesterday at a distance of about an hour on horseback from the
farm he had noticed a large _vlei_, or _pan_, where were many ducks and
also some antelope. To this _vlei_ he proposed to ride forward with one
servant only, and to stay there till the others overtook him, shooting
the wild things which lived in the place, for to be happy these
Englishmen must always be killing something. So he bade me farewell,
making me a present of the gold chain which he took off his watch, which
chain I still have. Then he rode away, smiling after his fashion; and
as I watched him go I was glad to think that he was no knave but only an
easy tool in the hands of others. We never met again, but I believe that
death finished his story many years ago; indeed, all those of whom I
tell are dead; only Jan and I survive, and our course is well-nigh run.

When Suzanne awoke at length, having heard from a Kaffir girl that the
strangers had ordered their horses, but not that the young lord had
ridden forward, she slipped from the house silently, fearing lest I
should stay her, and hid herself in a little patch of bush at the corner
of the big mealie field by which she knew the Englishmen must pass on
their return journey. Presently she heard them coming, and when she
saw that the young lord was not with them, she went to the lawyer, who
pulled up his horse and waited for her, the rest of the party riding on,
and asked where his master was, saying that she wished to talk with him.
And here I must say, if I have not said it before, that Suzanne could
speak English, though not well. The Hollander tutor had instructed her
in that tongue, in which Ralph also would converse with her at times
when he did not wish others to understand what they were saying, for he
never forgot his mother language, though he mixed many Dutch words with
it.

"He has ridden forward an hour or more ago. Can I take any message to
him for you?" said the lawyer. "Or if you wish to talk of business, to
speak to me is to speak to him."

"That may be so," answered Suzanne, "still I like to draw my water at
the fountain itself. Yet, as he has gone, I beg you to listen to me, for
when you have heard what I have to say I think that you will bring him
back. You came here about Ralph Kenzie, did you not, and my mother told
you that he is not the man whom you seek, did she not?"

The lawyer nodded.

"Well, I tell you that all this tale is false, for he is the very man,"
and she poured out the true story of Ralph and of the plot that had been
made to deceive them about him.

Now, as I have said, Suzanne's English was none of the best and it is
possible that the lawyer did not understand. For my part, however, I
think that he understood well enough, for she told me afterwards that is
face grew grey and anxious as he listened, and that at length he said:

"All this you tell me is very strange and weighty, so much so that I
must bring my friend back to look more closely into the matter. Return
now to the farm and say nothing of having met me, for by this evening,
or to-morrow at the latest, we will come there again and sift out the
truth of this question."

To this she agreed, being guileless, and the lawyer rode away after the
other. All that day and all the next Suzanne scarcely spoke to me, but
I saw that she was expecting something to happen, and that she glanced
continually towards the path by which the Englishmen had journeyed,
thinking to see them riding back to the farm. But they rode back no
more, and I am sure that the cunning lawyer never breathed one word of
his meeting with Suzanne and of what took place at it to the young lord.
That book was shut and it did not please him to reopen it, since to do
so might have cost him ten thousand pounds. On the third morning I found
Suzanne still looking down the path, and my patience being exhausted by
her silence, I spoke to her sharply.


"What are you doing, girl?" I asked. "Have we not had enough visitors of
late that you must stand here all day awaiting more?"

"I seek no new visitors," Suzanne said, "but those who have been here
only, and I see now that I seek in vain."

"What do you mean, Suzanne?"

Now of a sudden she seemed to make up her mind to speak, for she turned
and faced me boldly, saying:

"I mean, mother, that I told the Englishman with the red hair, the
agent, that all the fine tale you spun to him about Ralph was false, and
that he _was_ the man they came to find."

"You dared to do that, girl?" I said, then checked myself and added,
"Well, what did the man say?"

"He said that he would ride on and bring the young lord back that I
might talk with him, but they have not come."

"No, nor will they, Suzanne, for if they sought they did not wish to
find, or at least the lawyer did not wish it, for he had too much at
stake. Well, things have gone finely with you, seeing that your hands
are clean from sin, and that Ralph still stays at your side."

"The sin of the parents is the sin of the child," she answered, and then
of a sudden she took fire as it were, and fell upon me and beat me with
her tongue; nor could I hold my own before this girl of eighteen, the
truth being that she had right on her side, and I knew it. She told me
that we were wicked plotters who, to pleasure ourselves, had stolen from
Ralph everything except his life; and many other such hard sayings she
threw at me till at last I could bear it no more, but gave her back word
for word. Indeed, it would be difficult to say which had the best of
that quarrel, for if Suzanne's tongue was the nimbler and her words were
winged with truth, I had the weight of experience on my side and the
custom of authority. At last, as she paused breathless, I cried out:

"And for whose sake was all this done, you ungrateful chit, if it was
not for your own?"

"If that was so, which is not altogether true," she answered, "it would
have pleased me better, if, rather than make me a partner in this crime,
and set me as bait to snare Ralph, you had left me to look after my own
welfare."

"What!" I exclaimed, "are you then so shallow hearted that you were
ready to bid farewell to him who for many years has been as your
brother, and is now your affianced husband? You know well whatever he
might promise now, that if once he had gone across the sea to England,
you would have seen him no more."

"No," she answered, growing calm of a sudden, "I was not so prepared,
for sooner would I die than lose Ralph."

"How, then, do you square this with all your fine talk?" I asked,
thinking that at length I had trapped her. "If he had gone you must have
lost him."

"Not so," she answered, innocently, "for I should have married him
before he went, and then I could have been certain that he would return
here whenever I wished it."

Now when I heard this I gasped, partly because the girl's cleverness
took the breath from me, and partly with mortification that I should
have lived to learn wisdom from the mouth of a babe and a suckling. For
there was no doubt of it, this plan, of which I had not even thought,
was the answer to the riddle, since by means of it Ralph might have kept
his own, and we, I doubt not, should have kept Ralph. Once married to
Suzanne he would have returned to her, or if she had gone with him for
a little while, which might have been better, she would certainly have
brought him back, seeing that she loved us and her home too well to
forsake them.

Yes, I gasped, and the only answer that I could make when I reflected
how little need there had been for the sin which we had sinned, was to
burst into weeping, whereon Suzanne ran to me and kissed me and we made
friends again. But all the same, I do not think that she ever thought
quite so well of me afterwards, and if I thought the more of her, still
I made up my mind that the sooner she was married and had a husband of
her own to preach to, the better it would be for all of us.

Thus ended the story of the coming of the Englishmen, and of how Ralph
lost his wealth and rank. We never heard or saw more of them, seeing
that in those days before the great Trek we did not write letters,
and if we had we should not have known where to send them, nor did the
post-cart pass the door twice a week as it does in this overcrowded land
of Natal.



Now I must go on to tell of the doings of that devil upon earth, Swart
Piet, and of how the little Kaffir witch-doctoress, Sihamba Ngenyanga,
which means She-who-walks-by-the-moonlight, became the slave and saviour
of Suzanne.

At this time the Heer van Vooren, Swart Piet's father, had been dead for
two years, and there were strange stories as to the manner of his death
which I do not think it necessary to set out here. Whether or no Swart
Piet did or did not murder his father I cannot say, nor does it matter,
for at the least he worked other crimes as bad. After the death of the
Heer van Vooren, however he may have chanced to die, this is certain,
that Swart Piet inherited great riches as we used to reckon riches in
those days; that is, he had vast herds of cattle and goats and sleep,
some of which were kept for him by native chiefs far away, as much land
as he wanted, and, it was said, a good sum in English gold. But he was
a strange man, not like to other men, for he married no wife and courted
