drawing one of the court coaches; and as it stopped at the castle gate,
two ladies became visible within it--the portly form of Queen Catherine,
and on the back seat the graceful figure of Diane de Ribaumont.

Charles swore a great oath under his breath. He made a step forward,
but then his glance falling on Eustacie's face, which had flushed to
the rosiest hue of the carnation, he put his finger upon his lip with
a menacing air, and then advanced to greet his mother, followed by his
gentlemen.

'Fear not, my dear child,' said the young Queen, taking Eustacie's arm
as she rose for the same purpose. 'Obey the King, and he will take care
that all goes well.'

The gentle Elisabeth was, however, the least regarded member of the
royal family. Her mother-in-law had not even waited to greet her, but
had hurried the King into his cabinet, with a precipitation that made
the young Queen's tender heart conclude that some dreadful disaster had
occurred, and before Mademoiselle de Ribaumont had had time to make her
reverence, she exclaimed, breathlessly, 'Oh, is it ill news? Not from
Vienna?'

'No, no, Madame; reassure yourself,' replied Diane; 'it is merely that
her Majesty, being on the way to Monceaux with Mesdames, turned out
of her road to make a flying visit to your graces, and endeavour to
persuade you to make her party complete.'

Elisabeth looked as if questioning with herself if this would possibly
be the whole explanation. Monceaux was a castle belonging to the Queen
Dowager at no great distance from Montpipeau, but there had been no
intention of leaving Paris before the wedding, which was fixed for the
seventeenth of August, and the bridegroom was daily expected. She asked
who was the party at Monceaux, and was told that Madame de Nemours had
gone thither the evening before, with her son, M. de Guise, to make
ready; and that Monsieur was escorting thither his two sisters, Madame
de Lorraine and Madame Marguerite. The Queen-mother had set out before
them very early in the morning.

'You must have made great speed,' said Elisabeth; 'it is scarcely two
o'clock.'

'Truly we did, Madame; two of our horses even died upon the road; but
the Queen was anxious to find the King ere he should set off on one of
his long chases.'

Diane, at every spare moment, kept her eyes interrogatively fixed on her
cousin, and evidently expected that the taciturn Queen, to whom a long
conversation, in any language but Spanish, was always a grievance, would
soon dismiss them both; and Eustacie did not know whether to be thankful
or impatient, as Elisabeth, with tardy, hesitating, mentally-translated
speech, inquired into every circumstance of the death of the poor
horses, and then into all the court gossip, which she was currently
supposed neither to hear nor understand; and then bethought herself
that this good Mademoiselle de Ribaumont could teach her that embroidery
stitch she had so long wished to learn. Taking her arm, she entered
the hall, and produced her work, so as effectually to prevent any
communication between the cousins; Eustacie, meanwhile her heart
clinging to her friend, felt her eyes filling with tears at the thoughts
of how unkind her morrow's flight would seem without one word of
farewell or of confidence, and was already devising tokens of tenderness
to be left behind for Diane's consolation, when the door of the cabinet
opened, and Catherine sailed down the stairs, with her peculiar
gliding step and sweep of dignity. The King followed her with a face of
irresolution and distress. He was evidently under her displeasure; but
she advanced to the young Queen with much graciousness, and an air of
matronly solicitude.

'My daughter,' she said, 'I have just assured the King that I cannot
leave you in these damp forests. I could not be responsible for the
results of the exposure any longer. It is for him to make his own
arrangements, but I brought my coach empty on purpose to transport you
and your ladies to Monceaux.

The women may follow with the mails. You can be ready as soon as the
horses are harnessed.'

Elisabeth was used to passiveness. She turned one inquiring look to
her husband, but he looked sullen, and, evidently cowed by his mother,
uttered not a word. She could only submit, and Catherine herself add
that there was room for Madame de Sauve and Mademoiselle de Nid de
Merle. Madame la Comtesse should follow! It was self-evident that
propriety would not admit of the only demoiselle being left behind among
the gentlemen. Poor Eustacie, she looked mutely round as if she hoped to
escape! What was the other unkindness to this? And ever under the
eyes of Diane too, who followed her to their chamber, when she went to
prepare, so that she could not even leave a token for him where he would
have been most certain to find it. Moments were few; but at the very
last, while the queens were being handed in the carriage, she caught
the eye of Philip Sidney. He saw the appealing look, and came near. She
tried to laugh. 'Here is my gage, Monsieur Sidney,' she said, and held
out a rose-coloured knot of ribbon; then, as he came near enough, she
whispered imploringly three of her few English words--

'Give to HIM.'

'I take the gage as it is meant,' said Sidney, putting a knee to the
ground, and kissing the trembling fingers, ere he handed her into the
carriage. He smiled and waved his hand as he met her earnest eyes. One
bow contained a scrap of paper pricked with needle-holes. Sidney would
not have made out those pricks for the whole world, even had he been
able to do more than hastily secure the token, before the unhappy King,
with a paroxysm of violent interjections, demanded of him whether the
Queen of England, woman though she were, ever were so beset, and never
allowed a moment to herself; then, without giving time for an answer, he
flung away to his cabinet, and might be heard pacing up and down there
in a tempest of perplexity. He came forth only to order his horse, and
desire M. de Sauve and a few grooms to be ready instantly to ride with
him. His face was full of pitiable perplexity--the smallest obstacle was
met with a savage oath; and he was evidently in all the misery of a weak
yet passionate nature, struggling with impotent violence against a yoke
that evidently mastered it.

He flung a word to his guests that he should return ere night, and they
thus perceived that he did not intend their dismissal.

'Poor youth,' said Coligny, mildly, 'he will be another being when we
have him in our camp with the King of Navarre for his companion.'

And then the Admiral repaired to his chamber to write one of his many
fond letters to the young wife of his old age; while his son-in-law and
Philip Sidney agreed to ride on, so as to met poor young Ribaumont, and
prepare him for the blow that had befallen him personally, while they
anxiously debated what this sudden descent of the Queen-mother might
portend. Teligny was ready to believe in any evil intention on her part,
but he thought himself certain of the King's real sentiments, and in
truth Charles had never treated any man with such confidence as this
young Huguenot noble, to whom he had told his opinion of each of his
counsellors, and his complete distrust of all. That pitying affection
which clings to those who cling to it, as well as a true French loyalty
of heart, made Teligny fully believe that however Catherine might
struggle to regain her ascendancy, and whatever apparent relapses
might be caused by Charles's habitual subjection to her, yet the high
aspirations and strong sense of justice inherent in the King were
asserting themselves as his youth was passing into manhood; and that the
much-desired war would enable him to develop all his higher qualities.
Sidney listened, partially agreed, talked of caution, and mused within
himself whether violence might not sometimes be mistaken for vigour.

Ere long, the merry cadence of an old English song fell with a homelike
sound upon Sidney's ear, and in another moment they were in sight of
Berenger, trotting joyously along, with a bouquet of crimson and
white heather-blossoms in his hand, and his bright young face full of
exultation in his arrangements. He shouted gaily as he saw them, calling
out, 'I thought I should meet you! but I wondered not to have heard the
King's bugle-horn. Where are the rest of the hunters?'

'Unfortunately we have had another sort of hunt to-day,' said Sidney,
who had ridden forward to meet him; 'and one that I fear, will disquiet
you greatly.'

'How! Not her uncle?' exclaimed Berenger.

'No, cheer up, my friend, it was not she who was the object of the
chase; it was this unlucky King,' he added, speaking English, 'who has
been run to earth by his mother.'

'Nay, but what is that to me?' said Berenger, with impatient superiority
to the affairs of the nation. 'How does it touch us?'

Sidney related the abstraction of the young Queen and her ladies, and
then handed over the rose-coloured token, which Berenger took
with vehement ardour; then his features quivered as he read the
needle-pricked words-two that he had playfully insisted on her speaking
and spelling after him in his adopted tongue, then not vulgarized, but
the tenderest in the language, 'Sweet heart.' That was all, but to him
they conveyed constancy to him and his, whatever might betide, and an
entreaty not to leave her to her fate.

'My dearest! never!' he muttered; then turning hastily as he put the
precious token into his bosom, he exclaimed, 'Are their women yet gone?'
and being assured that they were not departed when the two friends had
set out, he pushed his horse on at speed, so as to be able to send
a reply by Veronique. He was barely in time: the clumsy wagon-like
conveyance of the waiting-women stood at the door of the castle, in
course of being packed with the Queen's wardrobe, amid the janglings
of lackeys, and expostulating cries of _femmes de chambre_, all in the
worst possible humour at being crowded up with their natural enemies,
the household of the Queen-mother.

Veronique, a round-faced Angevin girl--who, like her lady, had not
parted with all her rustic simplicity and honesty, and who had been
necessarily taken into their confidence--was standing apart from the
whirl of confusion, holding the leashes of two or three little dogs that
had been confided to her care, that their keepers might with more ease
throw themselves into the _melee_. Her face lighted up as she saw the
Baron de Ribaumont arrive.

'Ah, sir, Madame will be so happy that I have seen Monsieur once more,'
she exclaimed under her breath, as he approached her.

'Alas! there is not a moment to write,' he said, looking at the vehicle,
already fast filling, 'but give her these flowers; they were gathered
for her; give her ten thousand thanks for her token. Tell her to hold
firm, and that neither king nor queen, bolt nor bar, shall keep me from
her. Tell her, our watchword is HOPE.'

The sharp eyes of the duenna of the Queen's household, a rigid Spanish
dame, were already searching for stray members of her flock, and
Veronique had to hurry to her place, while Berenger remained to hatch
new plans, each wilder than the last, and torment himself with guesses
whether his project had been discovered. Indeed, there were moments when
he fancied the frustration of his purpose the special object of Queen
Catherine's journey, but he had the wisdom to keep any such suggestion
to himself.

The King came back by supper-time, looking no longer in a state of
indecision, but pale and morose. He spoke to no one as he entered, and
afterwards took his place at the head of the supper-table in silence,
which he did not break till the meal was nearly over. Then he said
abruptly, 'Gentlemen, our party has been broken up, and I imagine that
after our great hunt tomorrow, no one will have any objection to return
to Paris. We shall have merrier sport at Fontainebleau when this most
troublesome of weddings is over.'

There was nothing to be done but to bow acquiescence, and the King again
became grimly silent. After supper he challenged Coligny to a game of
chess, and not a word passed during the protracted contest, either from
the combatants or any other person in the hall. It was as if the light
had suddenly gone out to others besides the disappointed and anxious
Berenger, and a dull shadow had fallen on the place only yesterday so
lively, joyous, and hopeful.

Berenger, chained by the etiquette of the royal presence, sat like a
statue, his back against the wall, his arms crossed on his breast, his
eyes fixed, chewing the cud of the memories of his dream of bliss, or
striving to frame the future to his will, and to decide what was the
next reasonable step he could take, or whether his irrepressible longing
to ride straight off to Monceaux, claim his wife, and take her on
horseback behind him, were a mere impracticable vision.

The King, having been checkmated twice out of three times by the
Admiral, too honest a man not truly to accept his declaration of not
wanting courtly play, pushed away the board, and was attended by them
all to his COUCHER, which was usually made in public; and the Queen
being absent, the gentlemen were required to stand around him till he
was ready to fall asleep. He did not seem disposed to talk, but begged
Sidney to fetch his lute, and sing to him some English airs that had
taken his fancy much when sung by Sidney and Berenger together.

Berenger felt as if they would choke him in his present turbid state of
resentful uncertainty; but even as the unhappy young King spoke, it was
with a heavy, restless groan, as he added, 'If you know any lullaby that
will give rest to a wretch tormented beyond bearing, let us have it.'

'Alas, Sire!' said the Admiral, seeing that no perilous ears remained
in the room; 'there are better and more soothing words than any mundane
melody.'

'_Peste_! My good father,' said the King, petulantly, 'has not old
Phlipote, my nurse, rocked me to the sound of your Marot's Psalms, and
crooned her texts over me? I tell you I do not want to think. I want
what will drive thought away--to dull---'

'Alas! what dulls slays,' said the Admiral.

'Let it. Nothing can be worse than the present,' said the wretched
Charles; then, as if wishing to break away from Coligny, he threw
himself round towards Berenger, and said, 'Here; stoop down, Ribaumont;
a word with you. Your matters have gone up the mountains, as the
Italians say, with mine. But never fear. Keep silence, and you shall
have the bird in your hand, only you must be patient. Hold! I will make
you and Monsieur Sidney gentlemen of my bed-chamber, which will give you
the _entree_ of the Louvre; and if you cannot get her out of it without
an _eclat_, then you must be a much duller fellow than half my court.
Only that it is not their own wives that they abstract.

With this Berenger must needs content himself; and the certainty of the
poor King's good-will did enable him to do his part with Sidney in the
songs that endeavoured to soothe the torments of the evil spirit which
had on that day effected a fresh lodgment in that weak, unwilling heart.

It was not till the memoirs of the secret actors in this tragedy were
brought to light that the key to these doings was discovered. M. de
Sauve, Charles's secretary, had disclosed his proceedings to his wife;
she, flattered by the attentions of the Duke of Anjou, betrayed them to
him; and the Queen-mother, terrified at the change of policy, and the
loss of the power she had enjoyed for so many years, had hurried to the
spot.

Her influence over her son resembled the fascination of a snake:
once within her reach he was unable to resist her; and when in their
_tete-a-tete_ she reproached him with ill-faith towards her, prophesied
the overthrow of the Church, the desertion of his allies, the ruin of
his throne, and finally announced her intention of hiding her head in
her own hereditary estates in Auvergne, begging, as a last favour, that
he would give his brother time to quit France instead of involving him
in his own ruin, the poor young man's whole soul was in commotion.
His mother knew her strength, left the poison to work, and withdrew in
displeasure to Monceaux, sure that, as in effect happened, he would not
be long in following her, imploring her not to abandon him, and making
an unconditional surrender of himself, his conscience, and his friends
into her hands. Duplicity was so entirely the element of the court,
that, even while thus yielding himself, it was as one checked, but
continuing the game; he still continued his connection with
the Huguenots, hoping to succeed in his aims by some future
counter-intrigue; and his real hatred of the court policy, and the
genuine desire to make common cause with them, served his mother's
purpose completely, since his cajolery thus became sincere. Her purpose
was, probably, not yet formed. It was power that she loved, and hoped to
secure by the intrigues she had played off all her life; but she herself
was in the hands of an infinitely more bloodthirsty and zealous faction,
who could easily accomplish their ends by working on the womanly terrors
of an unscrupulous mind.




CHAPTER IX. THE WEDDING WITH CRIMSON FAVOURS



     And trust me not at all or all in all.
                       --TENNYSON


So extensive was the Louvre, so widely separated the different suites
of apartments, that Diane and Eustacie had not met after the pall-mall
party till they sat opposite to their several queens in the coach
driving through the woods, the elder cousin curiously watching the eyes
of the younger, so wistfully gazing at the window, and now and then
rapidly winking as though to force back a rebellious tear.

The cousins had been bred up together in the convent at Bellaise, and
had only been separated by Diane's having been brought to court two
years sooner than Eustacie. They had always been on very kindly,
affectionate terms; Diane treating her little cousin with the patronage
of an elder sister, and greatly contributing to shield her from
the temptations of the court. The elder cousin was so much the more
handsome, brilliant, and admired, that no notion of rivalry had crossed
her mind; and Eustacie's inheritance was regarded by her as reserved for
her brother, and the means of aggradizement an prosperity for herself
and her father. She looked upon the child as a sort of piece of property
of the family, to be guarded and watched over for her brother; and
when she had first discovered the error that the young baron was making
between the two daughters of the house, it was partly in kindness to
Eustacie, partly to carry out her father's plans, and partly from
her own pleasure in conversing with anything so candid and fresh as
Berenger, that she had maintained the delusion. Her father believed
himself to have placed Berenger so entirely in the background, that he
would hardly be at court long enough to discover the imposition; and
Diane was not devoid of a strong hope of winning his affection and
bending his will so as to induce him to become her husband, and become
a French courtier for her sake--a wild dream, but a better castle in the
air than she had ever yet indulged in.

This arrangement was, however, disconcerted by the King's passion for
Sidney's society, which brought young Ribaumont also to court; and at
the time of the mischievous introduction by Madame Marguerite, Diane had
perceived that the mistake would soon be found out, and that she should
no longer be able to amuse herself with the fresh-coloured, open-faced
boy who was unlike all her former acquaintance; but the magnetism that
shows a woman when she produces an effect had been experienced by her,
and she had been sure that a few efforts more would warm and mould the
wax in her fingers. That he should prefer a little brown thing, whose
beauty was so inferior to her own, had never crossed her mind; she
did not even know that he was invited to the pall-mall party, and was
greatly taken by surprise when her father sought an interview with her,
accused her of betraying their interests, and told her that this
foolish young fellow declared that he had been mistaken, and having now
discovered his veritable wife, protested against resigning her.

By that time the whole party were gone to Montpipeau, but that the Baron
was among them was not known at the Louvre until Queen Catherine, who
had always treated Diane as rather a favoured, quick-witted _protegee_,
commanded her attendance, and on her way let her know that Madame
de Sauve had reported that, among all the follies that were being
perpetrated at the hunting-seat, the young Queen was absolutely throwing
the little Nid-de-Merle into the arms of her Huguenot husband, and that
if measures were not promptly taken all the great estates in the
Bocage would be lost to the young Chevalier, and be carried over to the
Huguenot interest.

Still Diane could not believe that it was so much a matter of love
as that the young had begun to relish court favour and to value the
inheritance, and she could quite believe her little cousin had been
flattered by a few attentions that had no meaning in them. She was not
prepared to find that Eustacie shrank from her, and tried to avoid
a private interview. In truth, the poor child had received such
injunctions from the Queen, and so stern a warning look from the King,
that she durst not utter a syllable of the evening that had sealed her
lot, and was so happy with her secret, so used to tell everything
to Diane, so longing to talk of her husband, that she was afraid of
betraying herself if once they were alone together. Yet Diane, knowing
that her father trusted to her to learn how far things had gone, and
piqued at seeing the transparent little creature, now glowing and
smiling with inward bliss, now pale, pensive, sighing, and anxious, and
scorning her as too childish for the love that she seemed to affect, was
resolved on obtaining confidence from her.

And when the whole female court had sat down to the silk embroidery in
which Catherine de Medicis excelled, Diane seated herself in the recess
of a window and beckoned her cousin to her side, so that it was not
possible to disobey.

'Little one,' she said, 'why have you cast off your poor cousin? There,
sit down'--for Eustacie stood, with her silk in her hand, as if meaning
instantly to return to her former place; and now, her cheeks in a flame,
she answered in an indignant whisper, 'You know, Diane! How could you
try to keep him from me?'

'Because it was better for thee, my child, than to be pestered with an
adventurer,' she said, smiling, though bitterly.

'My husband!' returned Eustacie proudly.

'Bah! You know better than that!' Then, as Eustacie was about to
speak, but checked herself, Diane added, 'Yes, my poor friend, he has
a something engaging about him, and we all would have hindered you from
the pain and embarrassment of a meeting with him.'

Eustacie smiled a little saucy smile, as though infinitely superior to
them all.

'_Pauvre petite_,' said Diane, nettled; 'she actually believes in his
love.'

'I will not hear a word against my husband!' said Eustacie, stepping
back, as if to return to her place, but Diane rose and laid her hand on
hers. 'My dear,' she said, 'we must no part thus. I only wish to know
what touches my darling so nearly. I thought she loved and clung to us;
why should she have turned from me for the sake of one who forgot her
for half his life? What can he have done to master this silly little
heart?'

'I cannot tell you, Diane,' said Eustacie, simply; and though she looked
down, the colour on her face was more of a happy glow than a conscious
blush. 'I love him too much; only we understand each other now, and it
is of no use to try to separate us.'

'Ah, poor little thing, so she thinks,' said Diane; and as Eustacie
again smiled as one incapable of being shaken in her conviction, she
added, 'And how do you know that he loves you?'

Diane was startled by the bright eyes that flashed on her and the bright
colour that made Eustacie perfectly beautiful, as she answered, 'Because
I am his wife! That is enough!' Then, before her cousin could speak
again, 'But, Diane, I promised not to speak of it. I know he would
despise me if I broke my word, so I will not talk to you till I have
leave to tell you all, and I am going back to help Gabrielle de Limeuil
with her shepherdess.'

Mademoiselle de Ribaumont felt her attempt most unsatisfactory, but she
knew of old that Eustacie was very determined--all Bellaise know that
to oppose the tiny Baronne was to make her headstrong in her resolution;
and if she suspected that she was coaxed, she only became more
obstinate. To make any discoveries, Diane must take the line of most
cautious caresses, such as to throw her cousin off her guard; and this
she was forced to confess to her father when he sought an interview with
her on the day of her return to Paris. He shook his head. She must be
on the watch, he said, and get quickly into the silly girl's confidence.
What! had she not found out that the young villain had been on the point
of eloping with her? If such a thing as that should succeed, the whole
family was lost, and she was the only person who could prevent it. He
trusted to her.

The Chevalier had evidently come to regard his niece as his son's lawful
property, and the Baron as the troublesome meddler; and Diane had much
the same feeling, enhanced by sore jealousy at Eustacie's triumph over
her, and curiosity as to whether it could be indeed well founded. She
had an opportunity of judging the same evening--mere habit always caused
Eustacie to keep under her wing, if she could not be near the Queen,
whenever there was a reception, and to that reception of course Berenger
came, armed with his right as gentleman of the bedchamber. Eustacie was
colouring and fluttering, as if by the instinct of his presence, even
before the tall fair head became visible, moving forward as well as the
crowd would permit, and seeking about with anxious eyes. The glances
of the blue and the black eyes met at last, and a satisfied radiance
illuminated each young face; then the young man steered his way through
the throng, but was caught midway by Coligny, and led up to be presented
to a hook-nosed, dark-haired, lively-looking young man, in a suit of
black richly laced with silver. It was the King of Navarre, the royal
bridegroom, who had entered Paris in state that afternoon. Eustacie
tried to be proud of the preferment, but oh! she thought it mistimed,
and was gratified to mark certain wandering of the eye even while the
gracious King was speaking. Then the Admiral said something that brought
the girlish rosy flush up to the very roots of the short curls of flaxen
hair, and made the young King's white teeth flash out in a mirthful,
good-natured laugh, and thereupon the way opened, and Berenger was
beside the two ladies, kissing Eustacie's hand, but merely bowing to
Diane.

She was ready to take the initiative.

'My cousins deem me unpardonable,' she said; 'yet I am going to purchase
their pardon. See this cabinet of porcelain _a le Reine_, and Italian
vases and gems, behind this curtain. There is all the siege of Troy,
which M. le Baron will not doubt explain to Mademoiselle, while I shall
sit on this cushion, and endure the siege of St. Quentin from the _bon_
Sieur de Selinville.'

Monsieur de Selinville was the court bore, who had been in every battle
from Pavia to Montcontour, and gave as full memoirs of each as did
Blaise de Monluc, only _viva voce_ instead of in writing. Diane was
rather a favourite of his; she knew her way through all his adventures.
So soon as she had heard the description of the King of Navarre's entry
into Paris that afternoon, and the old gentleman's lamentation that his
own two nephews were among the three hundred Huguenot gentleman who had
formed the escort, she had only to observe whether his reminiscences
had gone to Italy or to Flanders in order to be able to put in the
appropriate remarks at each pause, while she listened all the while to
the murmurs behind the curtain. Yet it was not easy, with all her court
breeding, to appear indifferent, and solely absorbed in hearing of
the bad lodgings that had fallen to the share of the royal troops at
Brescia, when such sounds were reaching her. It was not so much the
actual words she heard, though these were the phrases--'_mon ange_,
my heart, my love;' those were common, and Diane had lived in the
Queen-mother's squadron long enough to despise those who uttered
them only less than those who believed them. It was the full depth of
tenderness and earnestness, in the subdued tones of the voice, that gave
her a sense of quiet force and reality beyond all she had ever known.
She had heard and overheard men pour out frantic ravings of passion, but
never had listened to anything like the sweet protecting tenderness of
voice that seemed to embrace and shelter its object. Diane had no doubts
now; he had never so spoken to her; nay, perhaps he had had no such
cadences in his voice before. It was quite certain that Eustacie was
everything to him, she herself nothing; she who might have had any
gallant in the court at her feet, but had never seen one whom she
could believe in, whose sense of esteem had been first awakened by this
stranger lad who despised her. Surely he was loving this foolish child
simply as his duty; his belonging, as his right he might struggle hard
for her, and if he gained her, be greatly disappointed; for how could
Eustacie appreciate him, little empty-headed, silly thing, who would be
amused and satisfied by any court flatterer?

However, Diane held out and played her part, caught scraps of the
conversation, and pieced them together, yet avoided all appearance
of inattention to M. de Selinville, and finally dismissed him, and
manoeuvred first Eustacie, and after a safe interval Berenger, out of
the cabinet. The latter bowed as he bade her good night, and said, with
the most open and cordial of smiles, 'Cousin, I thank you with all my
heart.'

The bright look seemed to her another shaft. 'What happiness!' said she
to herself. 'Can I overthrow it? Bah! it will crumble of its own accord,
even if I did nothing! And my father and brother!'

Communication with her father and brother was not always easy to Diane,
for she lived among the Queen-mother's ladies. Her brother was quartered
in a sort of barrack among the gentlemen of Monsieur's suite, and the
old Chevalier was living in the room Berenger had taken for him at the
Croix de Lorraine, and it was only on the most public days that they
attended at the palace. Such a day, however, there was on the ensuing
Sunday, when Henry of Navarre and Marguerite of France were to be
wedded. Their dispensation was come, but, to the great relief of
Eustacie, there was no answer with it to the application for the
CASSATION of her marriage. In fact, this dispensation had never emanated
from the Pope at all. Rome would not sanction the union of a daughter
of France with a Huguenot prince; and Charles had forged the document,
probably with his mother's knowledge, in the hope of spreading her toils
more completely round her prey, while he trusted that the victims might
prove too strong for her, and destroy her web, and in breaking forth
might release himself.

Strange was the pageant of that wedding on Sunday, the 17th of August,
1572. The outward seeming was magnificent, when all that was princely in
France stood on the splendidly decked platform in front of Notre-Dame,
around the bridegroom in the bright promise of his kingly endowments,
and the bride in her peerless beauty. Brave, noble-hearted, and devoted
were the gallant following of the one, splendid and highly gifted the
attendants of the other; and their union seemed to promise peace to a
long distracted kingdom.

Yet what an abyss lay beneath those trappings! The bridegroom and his
comrades were as lions in the toils of the hunter, and the lure that had
enticed them thither was the bride, herself so unwilling a victim that
her lips refused to utter the espousal vows, and her head as force
forward by her brother into a sign of consent; while the favoured lover
of her whole lifetime agreed to the sacrifice in order to purchase the
vengeance for which he thirsted, and her mother, the corrupter of her
own children, looked complacently on at her ready-dug pit of treachery
and bloodshed.

Among the many who played unconscious on the surface of that gulf of
destruction, were the young creatures whose chief thought in the pageant
was the glance and smile from the gallery of the Queen's ladies to the
long procession of the English ambassador's train, as they tried to
remember their own marriage there; Berenger with clear recollection of
his father's grave, anxious face, and Eustacie chiefly remembering her
own white satin and turquoise dress, which indeed she had seen on every
great festival-day as the best raiment of the image of Notre Dame
de Bellaise. She remained in the choir during mass, but Berenger
accompanied the rest of the Protestants with the bridegroom at their
head into the nave, where Coligny beguiled the time with walking about,
looking at the banners that had been taken from himself and Conde at
Montcontour and Jarnac, saying that he hoped soon to see them taken down
and replaced by Spanish banners. Berenger had followed because he felt
the need of doing as Walsingham and Sidney thought right, but he had
not been in London long enough to become hardened to the desecration of
churches by frequenting 'Paul's Walk.' He remained bareheaded, and stood
as near as he could to the choir, listening to the notes that floated
from the priests and acolytes at the high altar, longing from the time
when he and Eustacie should be one in their prayers, and lost in a
reverie, till a grave old nobleman passing near him reproved him for
dallying with the worship of Rimmon. But his listening attitude had not
passed unobserved by others besides Huguenot observers.

The wedding was followed by a ball at the Louvre, from which, however,
all the stricter Huguenots absented themselves out of respect to Sunday,
and among them the family and guests of the English Ambassador, who were
in the meantime attending the divine service that had been postponed on
account of the morning's ceremony. Neither was the Duke of Guise present
at the entertainment; for though he had some months previously been
piqued and entrapped into a marriage with Catherine of Cleves, yet his
passion for Marguerite was still so strong that he could not bear to
join in the festivities of her wedding with another. The absence of so
many distinguished persons caused the admission of many less constantly
privileged, and thus it was that Diane there met both her father and
brother, who eagerly drew her into a window, and demanded what she had
to tell them, laughing too at the simplicity of the youth, who had
left for the Chevalier a formal announcement that he had dispatched his
protest to Rome, and considered himself as free to obtain his wife by
any means in his power.

'Where is _la petite_?' Narcisse demanded. Behind her Queen, as usual?'

'The young Queen keeps her room to-night,' returned Diane. 'Nor do
I advise you, brother, to thrust yourself in the way of _la petite
entetee_ just at present.'

'What, is she so besotted with the peach face? He shall pay for it!'

'Brother, no duel. Father, remind him that she would never forgive him.'

'Fear not, daughter,' said the Chevalier; 'this folly can be ended by
much quieter modes, only you must first give us information.'

'She tells me nothing,' said Diane; 'she is in one of her own
humours--high and mighty.'

'_Peste_! where is your vaunt of winding the little one round your
finger?'

'With time, I said,' replied Diane. Curiously enough, she had no
compunction in worming secrets from Eustacie and betraying them, but
she could not bear to think of the trap she had set for the unsuspecting
youth, and how ingenuously he had thanked her, little knowing how she
had listened to his inmost secrets.

'Time is everything,' said her father; 'delay will be our ruin. Your
inheritance will slip through your fingers, my son. The youth will soon
win favour by abjuring his heresy; he will play the same game with the
King as his father did with King Henri. You will have nothing but your
sword, and for you, my poor girl, there is nothing but to throw yourself
on the kindness of your aunt at Bellaise, if she can receive the vows of
a dowerless maiden.'
