now govern Egypt, obtained the favor of being allowed to remain on the
banks of the Nile; they served in the armies, they distinguished
themselves, and, at last, the first Rameses succeeded in gaining the
troops over to himself, and in pushing the old race of the legitimate
sons of Ra, weakened as they were by heresy, from the throne.  I must
confess, however unwillingly, that some priests of the true faith--among
them your grandfather, and mine--supported the daring usurper who clung
faithfully to the old traditions.  Not less than a hundred generations of
my ancestors, and of yours, and of many other priestly families, have
lived and died here by the banks of the Nile--of Rameses race we have
seen ten, and only know of them that they descend from strangers, from
the caste of Amu!  He is like all the Semitic race; they love to wander,
they call us ploughmen,--[The word Fellah (pl. Fellahin) means ploughman]
--and laugh to scorn the sober regularity with which we, tilling the dark
soil, live through our lives to a tardy death, in honest labor both of
mind and body.  They sweep round on foraying excursions, ride the salt
waves in ships, and know no loved and fixed home; they settle down
wherever they are tempted by rapine, and when there is nothing more to be
got they build a house in another spot.  Such was Seti, such is Rameses!
For a year he will stop in Thebes, then he must set out for wars in
strange lands.  He does not know how to yield piously, or to take advice
of wise counsellors, and he will not learn.  And such as the father is,
so are the children!  Think of the criminal behavior of Bent-Anat!"

"I said the kings liked foreigners.  Have you duly considered the
importance of that to us?  We strive for high and noble aims, and have
wrenched off the shackles of the flesh in order to guard our souls.  The
poorest man lives secure under the shelter of the law, and through us
participates in the gifts of the spirit; to the rich are offered the
priceless treasures of art and learning.  Now look abroad: east and west
wandering tribes roam over the desert with wretched tents; in the south a
debased populace prays to feathers, and to abject idols, who are beaten
if the worshipper is not satisfied.  In the north certainly there are
well regulated states, but the best part of the arts and sciences which
they possess they owe to us, and their altars still reek with the
loathsome sacrifice of human blood.  Only backsliding from the right is
possible under the stranger, and therefore it is prudent to withdraw from
him; therefore he is hateful to our Gods.  And Rameses, the king,
is a stranger, by blood and by nature, in his affections, and in his
appearance; his thoughts are always abroad--this country is too small for
him--and he will never perceive what is really best for him, clear as his
intellect is.  He will listen to no guidance, he does mischief to Egypt,
and therefore I say: Down with him from the throne!"

"Down with him!"--Gagabu eagerly echoed the words.  Ameni gave the old
man his hand, which trembled with excitement, and went on more calmly.

"The Regent Ani is a legitimate child of the soil, by his father and
mother both.  I know him well, and I am sure that though he is cunning
indeed, he is full of true veneration, and will righteously establish us
in the rights which we have inherited.  The choice is easy: I have
chosen, and I always carry through what I have once begun!  Now you know
all, and you will second me."

"With body and soul!"  cried Gagabu.

"Strengthen the hearts of the brethren,"  said Ameni, preparing to go.
"The initiated may all guess what is going on, but it must never be
spoken of."




CHAPTER XXVII.

The sun was up on the twenty-ninth morning of the second month of the
over-flow of the Nile,

     [The 29th Phaophi.  The Egyptians divided the year into three
     seasons of four months each.  Flood-time, seed-time and Harvest.
     (Scha, per and schemu.)  The 29th Phaophi corresponds to the 8th
     November.]

and citizens and their wives, old men and children, freemen and slaves,
led by priests, did homage to the rising day-star before the door of the
temple to which the quarter of the town belonged where each one dwelt.

The Thebans stood together like Huge families before the pylons, waiting
for the processions of priests, which they intended to join in order to
march in their train round the great temple of the city, and thence to
cross with the festal barks to the Necropolis.

To-day was the Feast of the Valley, and Anion, the great God of Thebes,
was carried over in solemn pomp to the City of the Dead, in order that
he--as the priests said--might sacrifice to his fathers in the other
world.  The train marched westward; for there, where the earthly remains
of man also found rest, the millions of suns had disappeared, each of
which was succeeded daily by a new one, born of the night.  The young
luminary, the priests said, did not forget those that had been
extinguished, and from whom he was descended; and Anion paid them this
mark of respect to warn the devout not to forget those who were passed
away, and to whom they owed their existence.

"Bring offerings," says a pious text, "to thy father and thy mother who
rest in the valley of the tombs; for such gifts are pleasing to the Gods,
who will receive them as if brought to themselves.  Often visit thy dead,
so that what thou dost for them, thy son may do for thee."

The Feast of the Valley was a feast of the dead; but it was not a
melancholy solemnity, observed with lamentation and wailing; on the
contrary, it was a cheerful festival, devoted to pious and sentimental
memories of those whom we cease not to love after death, whom we esteem
happy and blest, and of whom we think with affection; to whom too the
throng from Thebes brought offerings, forming groups in the chapel-like
tombs, or in front of the graves, to eat and drink.

Father, mother and children clung together; the house-slaves followed
with provisions, and with torches, which would light up the darkness of
the tomb and show the way home at night.

Even the poorest had taken care to secure beforehand a place in one of
the large boats which conveyed the people across the stream; the barges
of the rich, dressed in the gayest colors, awaited their owners with
their households, and the children had dreamed all night of the sacred
bark of Anion, whose splendor, as their mothers told them, was hardly
less than that of the golden boat in which the Sun-God and his companions
make their daily voyage across the ocean of heaven.  The broad landing
place of the temple of Anion was already crowded with priests, the shore
with citizens, and the river with boats; already loud music drowned the
din of the crowds, who thronged and pushed, enveloped in clouds of dust,
to reach the boats; the houses and hovels of Thebes were all empty, and
the advent of the God through the temple-gates was eagerly expected; but
still the members of the royal family had not appeared, who were wont on
this solemn day to go on foot to the great temple of Anion; and, in the
crowd, many a one asked his neighbor why Bent-Anat, the fair daughter of
Rameses, lingered so long, and delayed the starting of the procession.

The priests had begun their chant within the walls, which debarred the
outer world from any glimpse into the bright precincts of the temple; the
Regent with his brilliant train had entered the sanctuary; the gates were
thrown open; the youths in their short-aprons, who threw flowers in the
path of the God, had come out; clouds of incense announced the approach
of Anion--and still the daughter of Rameses appeared not.

Many rumors were afloat, most of them contradictory; but one was
accurate, and confirmed by the temple servants, to the great regret of
the crowd--Bent-Anat was excluded from the Feast of the Valley.

She stood on her balcony with her brother Rameri and her friend Nefert,
and looked down on the river, and on the approaching God.

Early in the previous morning Bek-en-Chunsu, the old high-priest of the
temple of Anion had pronounced her clean, but in the evening he had come
to communicate to her the intelligence that Ameni prohibited her entering
the Necropolis before she had obtained the forgiveness of the Gods of the
West for her offence.

While still under the ban of uncleanness she had visited the temple of
Hathor, and had defiled it by her presence; and the stern Superior of the
City of the Dead was in the right--that Bek-en-Chunsu himself admitted--
in closing the western shore against her.  Bent-Anat then had recourse to
Ani; but, though he promised to mediate for her, he came late in the
evening to tell her that Ameni was inexorable.  The Regent at the same
time, with every appearance of regret, advised her to avoid an open
quarrel, and not to defy Ameni's lofty severity, but to remain absent
from the festival.

Katuti at the same time sent the dwarf to Nefert, to desire her to join
her mother, in taking part in the procession, and in sacrificing in her
father's tomb; but Nefert replied that she neither could nor would leave
her royal friend and mistress.

Bent-Anat had given leave of absence to the highest members of her
household, and had prayed them to think of her at the splendid solemnity.

When, from her balcony, she saw the mob of people and the crowd of boats,
she went back into her room, called Rameri, who was angrily declaiming at
what he called Ameni's insolence, took his hands in hers, and said:

"We have both done wrong, brother; let us patiently submit to the
consequences of our faults, and conduct ourselves as if our father were
with us."

"He would tear the panther-skin from the haughty priest's shoulders,"
cried Rameri, "if he dared to humiliate you so in his presence;" and
tears of rage ran down his smooth cheeks as he spoke.

"Put anger aside," said Bent-Anat.  "You were still quite little the last
time my father took part in this festival."

"Oh!  I remember that morning well," exclaimed Rameri, "and shall never
forget it."

"So I should think," said the princess.  "Do not leave us, Nefert--you
are now my sister.  It was a glorious morning; we children were collected
in the great hall of the King, all in festival dresses; he had us called
into this room, which had been inhabited by my mother, who then had been
dead only a few months.  He took each of us by the hand, and said he
forgave us everything we might have done wrong if only we were sincerely
penitent, and gave us each a kiss on our forehead.  Then he beckoned us
all to him, and said, as humbly as if he were one of us instead of the
great king, 'Perhaps I may have done one of you some injustice, or have
kept you out of some right; I am not conscious of such a thing, but if it
has occurred I am very sorry'--we all rushed upon him, and wanted to kiss
him, but he put us aside smiling, and said, 'Each of you has enjoyed an
equal share of one thing, that you may be sure--I mean your father's
love; and I see now that you return what I have given you.'  Then he
spoke of our mother, and said that even the tenderest father could not
fill the place of a mother.  He drew a lovely picture of the unselfish
devotion of the dead mother, and desired us to pray and to sacrifice with
him at her resting-place, and to resolve to be worthy of her; not only in
great things but in trifles too, for they make up the sum of life, as
hours make the days, and the years.  We elder ones clasped each other's
hands, and I never felt happier than in that moment, and afterwards by my
mother's grave."  Nefert raised her eyes that were wet with tears.

"With such a father it must be easy to be good," she said.

"Did your mother never speak good words that went to your heart on the
morning of this festival?"  asked Bent-Anat.

Nefert colored, and answered: "We were always late in dressing, and then
had to hurry to be at the temple in time."

"Then let me be your mother to-day," cried the princess, "and yours too,
Rameri.  Do you not remember how my father offered forgiveness to the
officers of the court, and to all the servants, and how he enjoined us to
root out every grudge from our hearts on this day?  'Only stainless
garments,' he said, 'befit this feast; only hearts without spot.'  So,
brother, I will not hear an evil word about Ameni, who is most likely
forced to be severe by the law; my father will enquire into it all and
decide.  My heart is so full, it must overflow.  Come, Nefert, give me a
kiss, and you too, Rameri.  Now I will go into my little temple, in which
the images of our ancestors stand, and think of my mother and the blessed
spirits of those loved ones to whom I may not sacrifice to-day."

"I will go with you," said Rameri.

"You, Nefert--stay here," said Bent-Anat, "and cut as many flowers as you
like; take the best and finest, and make a wreath, and when it is ready
we will send a messenger across to lay it, with other gifts, on the grave
of your Mena's mother."

When, half-an-hour later, the brother and sister returned to the young
wife, two graceful garlands hung in Nefert's bands, one for the grave of
the dead queen, and one for Mena's mother.

"I will carry over the wreaths, and lay them in the tombs," cried the
prince.

"Ani thought it would be better that we should not show ourselves to the
people," said his sister.  "They will scarcely notice that you are not
among the school-boys, but--"

"But I will not go over as the king's son, but as a gardener's boy--"
interrupted the prince.  "Listen to the flourish of trumpets! the God
has now passed through the gates."

Rameri stepped out into the balcony, and the two women followed him, and
looked down on the scene of the embarkation which they could easily see
with their sharp young eyes.

"It will be a thinner and poorer procession without either my father or
us, that is one comfort," said Rameri.  "The chorus is magnificent; here
come the plume-bearers and singers; there is the chief prophet at the
great temple, old Bek-en-Chunsu.  How dignified he looks, but he will not
like going.  Now the God is coming, for I, smell the incense."

With these words the prince fell on his knees, and the women followed his
example--when they saw first a noble bull in whose shining skin the sun
was reflected, and who bore between his horns a golden disk, above which
stood white ostrich-feathers; and then, divided from the bull only by a
few fan-bearers, the God himself, sometimes visible, but more often
hidden from sight by great semi-circular screens of black and white
ostrich-feathers, which were fixed on long poles, and with which the
priests shaded the God.

His mode of progress was as mysterious as his name, for he seemed to
float slowly on his gorgeous throne from the temple-gates towards the
stream.  His seat was placed on a platform, magnificently decorated with
bunches and garlands of flowers, and covered with hangings of purple and
gold brocade, which concealed the priests who bore it along with a slow
and even pace.
