side .  .  .  But how thou look'st!  what is the matter? has aught
happened? speak, speak!"

In the first moment Gyges could not answer a word.  To see his beloved
father, for whose very life he had been in such anxiety, a safe and happy
guest at this rich banquet, seemed to rob him of his speech a second
time.  At last, however, he was able to say: "The gods be praised, my
father, that I see thee safe once more!  Think not I forsook my post
thoughtlessly.  Alas! I am forced to appear as a bird of evil omen in
this cheerful assembly.  Know at once, ye guests, for I dare not lose
time in preparing my words, that a treacherous assault awaits ye!"

They all sprang up as if struck by lightning.  Aristomachus silently
loosened his sword in its scabbard; Phanes extended his arms as if to
discern whether the old athletic elasticity still dwelt there.

"What can it be?--what is their design?"  echoed from all sides.

"This house is surrounded by Ethiopian soldiers!"  answered Gyges.
"A faithful fellow confided to me that the crown-prince had designs on
one of your number; he was to be taken alive if possible, but killed if
he resisted.  Dreading lest thou shouldst be this victim, my father,
I sped hither.  The fellow had not lied.  This house is surrounded.  My
horse shied on reaching your garden-gate, Rhodopis, jaded as he was.  I
dismounted, and could discern behind every bush the glitter of weapons
and the eager eyes of men lying in ambush.  They allowed us, however, to
enter unmolested."

At this moment Knakias rushed in crying, "Important news!  On my way to
the Nile to fetch water with which to prepare the wine-cup, I have just
met a man who, in his haste, nearly ran over me.

     [The water of the Nile has a very agreeable flavor.  It is called by
     one traveller the champagne among the waters.  The ladies of the
     Sultan's harem send for this water even from Constantinople, and the
     Arabs say, that if Mahomet had drunk thereof he would have desired
     to live for ever.]

It was an Ethiop, one of Phanes' boatmen, and he tells that just as he
sprang out of the boat to bathe, a royal bark came alongside and a
soldier asked the rest of the crew in whose service they were.  On the
helmsman answering, 'in Phanes' service,' the royal boat passed on
slowly.  He, however, (the rower who was bathing), seated himself in fun
on the rudder of the royal boat, and heard one Ethiopian soldier on board
say to another, 'Keep that craft well in sight; now we know where the
bird sits, and it will be easy to catch him.  Remember, Psamtik has
promised us fifty gold rings if we bring the Athenian to Sais dead or
alive.'  This is the report of Sebek, who has been in your service seven
years, O Phanes."

To both these accounts Phanes listened calmly.  Rhodopis trembled.
Aristomachus exclaimed, "Not a hair of your head shall be touched, if
Egypt perish for it!"  Croesus advised prudence.  A tremendous excitement
had mastered the whole party.

At last Phanes broke silence, saying: "Reflection is never more necessary
than in a time of danger.  I have thought the matter over, and see
clearly that escape will be difficult.  The Egyptians will try to get
rid of me quietly.  They know that I intend going on board a Phoecean
trireme, which sets sail for Sigeum at a very early hour to-morrow
morning, and have therefore no time to lose, if they will seize me.  Your
garden, Rhodopis, is entirely surrounded, and were I to remain here, your
house would no longer be respected as a sanctuary; it would be searched
and I taken in it.  There can be no doubt that a watch has been set over
the Phoecean ship also.  Blood shall not be shed in vain on my account."

"But  you  dare  not  surrender!"  cried  Aristomachus.

"No, no, I have a plan," shouted Theopompus the Milesian merchant.  "At
sunrise to-morrow a ship sails for Miletus laden with Egyptian corn, but
not from Naukratis, from Canopus.  Take the noble Persian's horse and
ride thither.  We will cut a way for you through the garden."

"But," said Gyges, "our little band is not strong enough to carry out
such an attempt.  We number in all ten men, and of these only three have
swords; our enemies, on the other hand, number at least a hundred, and
are armed to the teeth."

"Lydian!"  cried Aristomachus, "wert thou ten times more fainthearted
than thou art, and were our enemies double their number, I at least, will
fight them!"

Phanes grasped his friend's hand.  Gyges turned pale.  This brave warrior
had called him fainthearted; and again he could find no words to answer;
for at every stirring emotion his tongue failed him.  Suddenly the blood
mounted to his face; his words came quickly and with decision: "Athenian,
follow me! and thou, Spartan, who art not wont to use words heedlessly,
call no man fainthearted again before thou knowest him.  Friends, Phanes
is safe,  Farewell, father!"

The remaining guests surveyed these two departing men in silent wonder.
As they stood there, silently listening, the sound of two horses
galloping swiftly away fell on their ear, and after a longer interval a
prolonged whistle from the Nile and a cry of distress.

"Where is Knakias?"  said Rhodopis to one of her slaves.

"He went into the garden with Phanes and the Persian," was the answer,
and as it was being spoken, the old slave re-entered, pale and trembling.

"Have you seen my son?"  cried Croesus.  "Where is Phanes?"

"I was to bid you farewell from them both."

"Then they are gone.--Whither?  How was it possible?" .  .  .

"The Athenian and the Persian," began the slave, "had a slight dispute in
the anteroom.  This over, I was told to divest both of their robes.
Phanes then put on the stranger's trousers, coat and girdle; on his own
curls he placed the pointed Persian cap.  The stranger wrapped himself in
the Athenian's chiton and mantle, placed the golden circlet above his
brow, caused the hair to be shaved from his upper lip, and ordered me to
follow him into the garden.  Phanes, whom in his present dress, none
could imagine to be other than a Persian, mounted one of the horses still
waiting before the gate; the stranger called after him, 'Farewell Gyges,
farewell beloved Persian, a pleasant journey to thee, Gyges!'  The
servant, who had been waiting, followed on the other horse.  I could hear
the clatter of arms among the bushes, but the Athenian was allowed to
depart unmolested, the soldiers, without doubt, believing him to be a
Persian.

"On returning to the house the stranger's orders were: 'Accompany me to
Phanes' bark, and cease not to call me by the Athenian's name.'  'But the
boatmen will betray you,' I said.  'Then go alone to them,' he answered,
'and command them to receive me as their master, Phanes.'  Then I prayed
him to allow me to take the dress of the fugitive and become a prey to
the pursuers; but he would by no means allow this, and said my gait and
carriage would betray me.  There alas! he spoke truly, for only the free
man can walk erect; the neck of the slave is bent; the schools in which
the noble and the freeborn learn grace and beauty of movement are not for
him.  And so it must remain, the children must be even as the fathers;
can the unclean onion-root produce a rose, or the unsightly radish a
hyacinth?  Constant bondage bows the neck of the slave, but the
consciousness of freedom gives dignity to the stature."

"But what has become of my son?"  interrupted Croesus.

"He would not accept my poor offer, and took his seat in the bark,
sending a thousand greetings unto thee, O king!  I cried after him,
'Farewell Phanes!  I wish thee a prosperous journey, Phanes!'  At that
moment a cloud crossed the moon; and from out the thick darkness I heard
screams, and cries for help; they did not, however, last long, a shrill
whistle followed, then all was silent; and the measured strokes of oars
were the only sounds that fell on my ear.  I was on the point of
returning to relate what I had seen, when the boatman Sebek swam up once
more and told as follows: The Egyptians had caused a leak to be made in
Phanes' boat, and at a short distance from land it had filled and began
to sink.  On the boatmen crying for help, the royal bark, which was
following, had come up and taken the supposed Phanes on board, but had
prevented the rowers from leaving their benches.  They all went down with
the leaking boat, the daring Sebek alone excepted.  Gyges is on board the
royal boat; Phanes has escaped, for that whistle must have been intended
for the soldiers in ambush at the garden-gate.  I searched the bushes,
the soldiers were gone, and I could hear the sound of their voices and
weapons on their way back to Sais."

The guests listened with eager attention to this tale.  At its close a
mingled feeling of relief and anxiety was felt by all; relief that their
favorite companion had escaped so fearful a danger, anxiety for the brave
young Lydian who had risked his life to save him.  They praised his
generosity, congratulated Croesus on possessing such a son, and finally
agreed in the conclusion, that, when the crown-prince discovered the
error into which his emissaries had fallen, he must certainly release
Gyges, and even make him compensation for what he had suffered at their
hands.

The friendship already shown by Amasis, and the fear in which he
evidently stood of the Persian power, were the thoughts which had power
to calm Croesus, who soon left, in order to pass the night at the house
of Theopompus, the Milesian merchant.  At parting, Aristomachus said:
"Salute Gyges in my name; tell him I ask his forgiveness, and hope one
day either to enjoy his friendship, or, if that cannot be, to meet him as
a fair foe on the field of battle."

"Who knows what the future may bring?"  answered Croesus giving his hand
to the Spartan.




CHAPTER IX.

The sun of a new day had risen over Egypt, but was still low in the east;
the copious dew, which, on the Nile, supplies the place of rain, lay
sparkling like jewels on the leaves and blossoms, and the morning air,
freshened by a north-west wind, invited those to enjoy it who could not
bear the heat of mid-day.

Through the door of the country-house, now so well known to us, two
female figures have just passed; Melitta, the old slave, and Sappho, the
grandchild of Rhodopis.

The latter is not less lovely now, than when we saw her last, asleep.
She moves through the garden with a light quick step, her white morning
robe with its wide sleeves falling in graceful drapery over her lithe
limbs, the thick brown hair straying from beneath the purple kerchief
over her head, and a merry, roguish smile lurking round her rosy mouth
and in the dimples of her cheeks and chin.

She stooped to pick a rose, dashed the dew from it into the face of her
old nurse, laughing at her naughty trick till the clear bell-like tones
rang through the garden; fixed the flower in her dress and began to sing
in a wonderfully rich and sweet voice--

                    Cupid once upon a bed
                    Of roses laid his weary head;
                    Luckless urchin! not to see
                    Within the leaves a slumbering bee.
                    The bee awak'd--with anger wild
                    The bee awak'd, and stung the child.
                    Loud and piteous are his cries;
                    To Venus quick he runs, he flies;
                    "Oh mother!  I am wounded through--
                    "I die with pain--in sooth I do!
                    "Stung by some little angry thing.
                    "Some serpent on a tiny wing,
                    "A bee it was--for once, I know,
                    "I heard a rustic call it so."

"Isn't that a very pretty song?"  asked the laughing girl.  "How stupid
of little Eros to mistake a bee for a winged snake!  Grandmother says
that the great poet Anacreon wrote another verse to this song, but she
will not teach it me.  Tell me, Melitta, what can there be in that verse?
There, you are smiling; dear, darling Melitta, do sing me that one verse.
Perhaps though, you don't know it yourself?  No?  then certainly you
can't teach it me."

"That is a new song," answered the old woman, evading her darling's
question, "I only know the songs of the good old times.  But hark! did
not you hear a knock at the gate?"

     [The last lines which contain the point of this song are:

                    Thus he spoke, and she, the while,
                    Heard him with a soothing smile;
