any of his subjects (and he knew no human beings who were not his
subjects) dared to oppose him.

His father Cyrus, conqueror of half the world--the man whose genius had
raised Persia from a small nation to the summit of earthly greatness--who
had secured for himself the reverence and admiration of countless
subjugated tribes--this great king was incapable of carrying out in his
own small family-circle the system of education he had so successfully
adopted towards entire countries.  He could see nought else in Cambyses
but the future king of Persia, and commanded his subjects to pay him an
unquestioning obedience, entirely forgetful of the fact that he who is to
govern well must begin by learning to obey.

Cambyses had been the first-born son of Kassandane, the wife whom Cyrus
had loved and married young; three daughters followed, and at last,
fifteen years later, Bartja had come into the world.  Their eldest son
had already outgrown his parents' caresses, when this little child
appeared to engross all their care and love.  His gentle, affectionate
and clinging nature made him the darling of both father and mother:
Cambyses was treated with consideration by his parents, but their love
was for Bartja.  Cambyses was brave; he distinguished himself often in
the field, but his disposition was haughty and imperious; men served him
with fear and trembling, while Bartja, ever sociable and sympathizing,
converted all his companions into loving friends.  As to the mass of
the people, they feared the king, and trembled when he drew near,
notwithstanding the lavish manner in which he showered rich gifts around
him; but they loved Bartja, and believed they saw in him the image of the
great Cyrus the "Father of his people."

Cambyses knew well that all this love, so freely given to Bartja, was not
to be bought.  He did not hate his younger brother, but he felt annoyed
that a youth who had as yet done nothing to distinguish himself, should
be honored and revered as if he were already a hero and public
benefactor.  Whatever annoyed or displeased him he considered must be
wrong; where he disapproved he did not spare his censures, and from his
very childhood, Cambyses' reproofs had been dreaded even by the mighty.

The enthusiastic shouts of the populace, the overflowing love of his
mother and sister, and above all, the warm encomiums expressed by
Nitetis, had excited a jealousy which his pride had never allowed
hitherto.  Nitetis had taken his fancy in a remarkable degree.  This
daughter of a powerful monarch, like himself disdaining everything mean
and inferior, had yet acknowledged him to be her superior, and to win his
favor had not shrunk from the laborious task of mastering his native
language.  These qualities, added to her peculiar style of beauty, which
excited his admiration from its rare novelty, half Egyptian half Greek,
(her mother having been a Greek), had not failed to make a deep
impression on him.  But she had been liberal in her praise of Bartja;
that was enough to disturb Cambyses' mind and prepare the way for
jealousy.

As he and his brother were leaving the women's apartments, Cambyses
adopted a hasty resolution and exclaimed: "You asked me just now for an
opportunity of proving your courage.  I will not refuse.  The Tapuri have
risen; I have sent troops to the frontier.  Go to Rhagae, take the
command and show what you are worth."

"Thanks, brother," cried Bartja.  "May I take my friends, Darius, Gyges
and Zopyrus with me?"

"That favor shall be granted too.  I hope you will all do your duty
bravely and promptly, that you may be back in three months to join the
main army in the expedition of revenge on the Massagetae.  It will take
place in spring."

"I will start to-morrow."

"Then farewell."

"If Auramazda should spare my life and I should return victorious, will
you promise to grant me one favor?"

"Yes, I will."

"Now, then, I feel confident of victory, even if I should have to stand
with a thousand men against ten thousand of the enemy."  Bartja's eyes
sparkled, he was thinking of Sappho.

"Well," answered his brother, "I shall be very glad if your actions bear
out these glowing words.  But stop; I have something more to say.  You
are now twenty years of age; you must marry.  Roxana, daughter of the
noble Hydarnes, is marriageable, and is said to be beautiful.  Her birth
makes her a fitting bride for you."

"Oh!  brother, do not speak of marriage; I .  .  ."  "You must marry, for
I have no children."

"But you are still young; you will not remain childless.  Besides, I do
not say that I will never marry.  Do not be angry, but just now, when I
am to prove my courage, I would rather hear nothing about women."

"Well, then, you must marry Roxana when you return from the North.  But I
should advise you to take her with you to the field.  A Persian generally
fights better if he knows that, beside his most precious treasures, he
has a beautiful woman in his tent to defend."

"Spare me this one command, my brother.  I conjure thee, by the soul of
our father, not to inflict on me a wife of whom I know nothing, and never
wish to know.  Give Roxana to Zopyrus, who is so fond of women, or to
Darius or Bessus, who are related to her father Hydarnes.  I cannot love
her, and should be miserable .  .  ."

Cambyses interrupted him with a laugh, exclaiming: "Did you learn these
notions in Egypt, where it is the custom to be contented with one wife?
In truth, I have long repented having sent a boy like you abroad.  I am
not accustomed to bear contradiction, and shall listen to no excuses
after the war.  This once I will allow you to go to the field without a
wife.  I will not force you to do what, in your opinion, might endanger
your valor.  But it seems to me that you have other and more secret
reasons for refusing my brotherly proposal.  If that is the case, I am
sorry for you.  However, for the present, you can depart, but after the
war I will hear no remonstrances.  You know me."

"Perhaps after the war I may ask for the very thing, which I am refusing
now--but never for Roxana!  It is just as unwise to try to make a man
happy by force as it is wicked to compel him to be unhappy, and I thank
you for granting my request."

"Don't try my powers of yielding too often!--How happy you look!
I really believe you are in love with some one woman by whose side all
the others have lost their charms."

Bartja blushed to his temples, and seizing his brother's hand, exclaimed:
"Ask no further now, accept my thanks once more, and farewell.  May I bid
Nitetis farewell too, when I have taken leave of our mother and Atossa?"

Cambyses bit his lip, looked searchingly into Bartja's face, and finding
that the boy grew uneasy under his glance, exclaimed abruptly and
angrily: "Your first business is to hasten to the Tapuri.  My wife needs
your care no longer; she has other protectors now."  So saying he turned
his back on his brother and passed on into the great hall, blazing with
gold, purple and jewels, where the chiefs of the army, satraps, judges,
treasurers, secretaries, counsellors, eunuchs, door-keepers, introducers
of strangers, chamberlains, keepers of the wardrobe, dressers, cup-
bearers, equerries, masters of the chase, physicians, eyes and ears of
the king, ambassadors and plenipotentiaries of all descriptions--were in
waiting for him.

     [The "eyes and ears" of the king may be compared to our police-
     ministers.  Darius may have borrowed the name from Egypt, where such
     titles as "the 2 eyes of the king for Upper Egypt, the 2 ears of the
     king for Lower Egypt" are to be found on the earlier monuments, for
     instance in the tomb of Amen en, heb at Abd el Qurnah.  And in
     Herodotus II. 114.  the boy Cyrus calls one of his playfellows "the
     eye of the king,"  Herod.  (I, 100.)]

The king was preceded by heralds bearing staves, and followed by a host
of fan, sedan and footstool-bearers, men carrying carpets, and
secretaries who the moment he uttered a command, or even indicated a
concession, a punishment or a reward, hastened to note it down and at
once hand it over to the officials empowered to execute his decrees.

In the middle of the brilliantly-lighted hall stood a gilded table, which
looked as if it must give way beneath the mass of gold and silver
vessels, plates, cups and bowls which were arranged with great order upon
it.  The king's private table, the service on which was of immense worth
and beauty, was placed in an apartment opening out of the large hall, and
separated from it by purple hangings.  These concealed him from the gaze
of the revellers, but did not prevent their every movement from being
watched by his eye.  It was an object of the highest ambition to be one
of those who ate at the king's table, and even he to whom a portion was
sent might deem himself a highly-favored man.

As Cambyses entered the hall, nearly every one present prostrated
themselves before him; his relations alone, distinguished by the blue and
white fillet on the tiara, contented themselves with a deferential
obeisance.

After the king had seated himself in his private apartment, the rest of
the company took their places, and then a tremendous revel began.
Animals, roasted whole, were placed on the table, and, when hunger was
appeased, several courses of the rarest delicacies followed, celebrated
in later times even among the Greeks under the name of "Persian dessert."

     [Herodotus (I. 133.) writes that the Persians fancied the Greeks'
     hunger was never satisfied, because nothing special was brought to
     the table at the end of the meal.]

Slaves then entered to remove the remains of the food.  Others brought in
immense jugs of wine, the king left his own apartment, took his seat at
the head of the table, numerous cup-bearers filled the golden drinking-
cups in the most graceful manner, first tasting the wine to prove that it
was free from poison, and soon one of those drinking-bouts had begun
under the best auspices, at which, a century or two later, Alexander the
Great, forgot not only moderation but even friendship itself.

Cambyses was unwontedly silent.  The suspicion had entered his mind, that
Bartja loved Nitetis.  Why had he, contrary to all custom, so decidedly
refused to marry a noble and beautiful girl, when his brother's
childlessness rendered marriage an evident and urgent duty for him?  Why
had he wished to see the Egyptian princess again before leaving Babylon?
and blushed as he expressed that wish? and why had she, almost without
being asked, praised him so warmly?

It is well that he is going, thought the king; at least he shall not rob
me of her love.  If he were not my brother I would send him to a place
from whence none can return.

After midnight he broke up the banquet.  Boges appeared to conduct him to
the Harem, which he was accustomed to visit at this hour, when
sufficiently sober.

"Phaedime awaits you with impatience," said the eunuch.

"Let her wait!"  was the king's answer.  "Have you given orders that the
palace on the hanging-gardens shall be set in order?"

"It will be ready for occupation to-morrow."

"What apartments have been assigned to the Egyptian Princess?"

"Those formerly occupied by the second wife of your father Cyrus, the
deceased Amytis."

"That is well.  Nitetis is to be treated with the greatest respect, and
to receive no commands even from yourself, but such as I give you for
her."

Boges bowed low.

"See that no one, not even Croesus, has admission to her before my.....
before I give further orders."

"Croesus was with her this evening."

"What may have been his business with my wife?"

"I do not know, for I do not understand the Greek language, but I heard
the name of Bartja several times, and it seemed to me that the Egyptian
had received sorrowful intelligence.  She was looking very sad when I
came, after Croesus had left, to inquire if she had any commands for me."

"May Ahriman blast thy tongue," muttered the king, and then turning his
back on the eunuch he followed the torch-bearers and attendants, who were
in waiting to disrobe him, to his own private apartments.

At noon on the following clay, Bartja, accompanied by his friends and a
troop of attendants, started on horseback for the frontier.  Croesus went
with the young warriors as far as the city gates, and as their last
farewells and embraces were being exchanged, Bartja whispered to his old
friend: "If the messenger from Egypt should have a letter for me in his
bag, will you send it on?"

"Shall you be able to decipher the Greek writing?"

"Gyges and love will help me!"

"When I told Nitetis of your departure she begged me to wish you
farewell, and tell you not to forget Egypt."

"I am not likely to do that."

"The gods take thee into their care, my son.  Be prudent, do not risk
