But she suddenly pushed the little curls back from her forehead, darted
swiftly down the stairs, and called to Alexas just as he was about to
leave the atrium.

The Syrian hastened towards her, extolling the good fortune that made his
sun rise for him a second time that night, but she cut him short with the
words; "Cease this foolish love-making.  It would be far better for us
both to become allies in serious, bitter earnest.  I am ready."

"So am I!" cried the Syrian rapturously, pressing his hand upon his
heart.

Meanwhile Cleopatra had entered the chamber where the children lay
sleeping.  Deep silence pervaded the lofty hall hung with bright-hued
carpets, and softly lighted by three lamps with rose-colored globes.  An
arch, supported by pillars of Libyan marble, divided the wide space.  In
the first, near a window closely muffled with draperies, stood two
ivory beds, surmounted with crowns of gold and silver set with pearls and
turquoises.  Around the edge, carved by the hands of a great artist, ran
a line of happy children dancing to the songs of birds in blossoming
bushes.

The couches were separated by a heavy curtain which the eunuchs had
raised at the approach of the Queen.  Cleopatra could now see them all at
a single glance, and the picture was indeed one of exquisite charm; for
on these beautiful couches slept the twins, the ten-year-old children of
Cleopatra and Antony--Antonius Helios and Cleopatra Selene.  The girl was
pink and white, fair and wonderfully lovely; the boy no less beautiful,
but with ebon-black hair, like his father.  Both curly heads were turned
towards the side, and rested on a dimpled hand pressed upon the silken
pillow.

Upon a third bed, beyond the arch, was Alexander, the youngest prince, a
lovely boy of six, the Queen's darling.

After gazing a long while at the twins, and pressing a light kiss upon
cheeks flushed with slumber, she turned to the youngest child and sank
beside his couch as if forced to bend the knee before some apparition
which Heaven had vouchsafed to her.  Tears streamed from her eyes as,
drawing the child carefully towards her, she kissed his mouth, eyes, and
cheeks, and then laid him gently back upon the pillows.  The boy,
however, did not instantly relapse into slumber, but threw his little
plump arms around his mother's neck, murmuring incomprehensible words.
She joyously submitted to his caresses, till sleep again overpowered him,
and his little hands fell back upon the bed.

She lingered a short time longer, with her brow resting on the ivory of
the couch, praying for this child and his brother and sister.  When she
rose again her cheeks were wet with tears, and she pressed her hand upon
her breast.  Then, beckoning to Charmian and Archibius, she motioned
towards Alexander and the twins, saying, as she saw tears glittering in
the eyes of both: "I know you have lost this happiness for my sake.  For
each one of these children a great empire would not be too high a price;
for them all----What does earth contain that I would not bestow?  Yet
what can I still call my own?"

Her smiling face clouded as she asked the question.  The vision of the
lost battle again rose before her mind.  Her own power was lost,
forfeited, and with it the independence of the native land which she
loved.  Rome was already stretching out her hand to add it to the others
as a new province.  But this should not be!  Her twin children yonder,
sleeping beneath crowns, must wear them!  And the boy slumbering on the
pillows?  How many kingdoms Antony had bestowed!  What remained for her
to give?

Again she bent to the child.  A beautiful dream must have hovered over
him, for he was smiling in his sleep.  A flood of maternal love welled up
in her agitated heart, and, as she saw the companions of her childhood
also gazing tenderly at the little steeper, she remembered the days of
her own youth, and the quiet happiness which she had enjoyed in her
garden of Epicurus.

Power and splendour had begun for her beyond its confines, but the
greater the heights of worldly grandeur she attained, the more distant,
the more irrecoverable became the consciousness of the happiness which
she had once gratefully enjoyed, and for which she had never ceased to
long.  And as she now gazed once more at the peaceful, smiling face,
whence all pain and anxiety seemed worlds away, and all the love which
her heart contained appeared to be pouring towards him, the question
arose in her mind whether this boy, for whom she possessed no crown,
might not be the only happy mortal of them all-happy in the sense of the
master.  Deeply moved by this thought, she turned to Archibius and
Charmian, exclaiming in a subdued tone, in order not to rouse the
sleeper: "Whatever destiny may await us, I commend this child to your
special love and care.  If Fate denies him the lustre of the crown and
the elation of power, teach him to enjoy that other happiness, which--
how long ago it is!--your father unfolded to his mother."

Archibius kissed her robe, and Charmian her hands; but Cleopatra, drawing
a long breath, said: "The mother has already taken too much time from the
Queen.  I have ordered the news of my arrival to be kept from Caesarion.
This was well.  The most important matters will be settled before our
meeting.  Everything relating to me and to the state must be decided
within an hour.  But, first, I am something more than mother and Queen.
The woman also asserts her claim.  I will find time for you, my friend,
to-morrow!-To my chamber first, Charmian.  But you need rest still more
than I.  Go with your brother.  Send Iras to me.  She will be glad to use
her skilful fingers again in her mistress's service."




CHAPTER XI.

The Queen had left her bath.  Iras had arranged the still abundant waves
of her hair, now dark-brown in hue, and robed her magnificently to
receive the dignitaries whom, spite of the late hour of the night, she
expected.

How wonderfully she had retained her beauty!  It seemed as if Time had
not ventured to touch this masterpiece of feminine loveliness; yet the
Greek's keen eye detected here and there some token of the vanishing
spell of youth.  She loved her mistress, yet her inmost soul rejoiced
whenever  she detected in her the same changes which began to appear in
herself, the woman of seven-and-twenty, so many years her sovereign's
junior.  She would  gladly have given Cleopatra everything at her
command, yet she felt as if she must praise Nature for an act of justice,
when she perceived that even her royal favourite was not wholly relieved
from the law which applied to all.

"Cease your flattery," said Cleopatra, smiling mournfully.
"They say that the works of the Pharaohs here on the Nile flout Time.
The inexorable destroyer is less willing to permit this from the Queen
of Egypt.  These are grey hairs, and they came from this head, however
eagerly you may deny it.  Whose save my own are these lines around the
corners of the eyes and on the brow?  What say you to the tooth which my
lips do not hide so kindly as you assert?  It was injured the night
before the luckless battle.  My dear, faithful, skilful Olympus, the
prince of leeches, is the only one who can conceal such things.  But it
would not do to take the old man to the war, and Glaucus is far less
adroit.  How I missed Olympus during those fatal hours!  I seemed a
monster even to myself, and he--Antony's eye is only too keen for such
matters.  What is the love of men?  A blackened tooth may prove its
destruction.  An aspect obnoxious to the gaze will pour water on the
fiercest fire.  What hours I experienced, Iras!  Many a glance from him
seemed an insult, and, besides, my heart was filled with torturing
anxiety.

"Something had evidently come between us!  I felt it.  The trouble began
soon after he left Alexandria.  It gnawed my soul like a worm, and now
that I am here again I must see clearly.  He will follow me in a few
days, I know.  Pinarius Scarpus, with his untouched legions, is in
Paraetonium, whither he went.  At Taenarum he resolved to retire from the
world which he, on whom it had bestowed so much that is great, hates
because he has given it cause for many a shake of the head.  But the old
spirit woke again, and if Fortune, usually so faithful, still aids him,
a large force will soon join the new African army.  The Asiatic princes--
But the ruler of the state must be silent.  I entered this room to give
the woman her just rights, and the woman shall have them.  He will soon
be here.  He cannot live without me.  It is not alone the beaker of
Nektanebus which draws him after me!"

"When the greatest of the great, Julius Caesar, sued for your love in
Alexandria, and Antony on the Cydnus, you did not possess the goblet,"
observed Iras.  "It is two years since Anubis permitted you to borrow the
masterpiece from the temple treasures, and within a few days you will be
obliged to restore it.  That a mysterious spell emanates from the cup is
certain, but one still more powerful dwells in the magic of your own
nature."

"Would that it might assert itself to-day!" cried the Queen.  "At any
rate the power of the beaker impelled Antony to do many things.  I am not
vain enough to believe that it was love, that it was solely the spell of
my own personality which drew him to me in that disastrous hour.  That
battle, that incomprehensible, disgraceful battle!  You were ill, and
could not see our fleet when it set sail; but even experienced spectators
said that handsomer, larger vessels were never beheld.  I was right in
insisting that the decision of the conflict should be left to them.  I
was entitled to call them mine.  Had we conquered, what a proud delight
it would have been to say, 'The weapons which you gave to the man you
loved gained him the sovereignty of the world!'  Besides, the stars had
assured me that good fortune would attend us on the sea.  They had given
the same message to Anubis here and to Alexas upon Antony's galley.  I
also trusted the spell of the goblet, which had already compelled Antony
to do many things he opposed.  So I succeeded in having the decision of
the conflict left to the fleet, but the prediction was false, false,
false!--how utterly, was to be proved only too soon.

"If I had only been told in time what I learned later!  After the defeat
people were more loquacious.  That one remark of a veteran commander of
the foot-soldiers would probably have sufficed to open my eyes.  He had
asked Mark Antony why he fixed his hopes on miserable wood, exclaiming,
'Let the Phoenician's and Egyptians war on the water, but leave us the
land where we are accustomed, with our feet firmly set upon the earth, to
fight, conquer, or die!'  This alone, I am sure, would have changed my
resolve in a happy hour.  But it was kept from me.

"The conflict began.  Our troops had lost patience.  The left wing of the
fleet advanced.  At first I watched the battle eagerly, with a throbbing
heart.  How proudly the huge galleys moved forward!  Everything was going
admirably.  Antony had made an address, assuring the warriors that, even
without soldiers, our ships would destroy the foe by their mere height
and size.  What orator can so carry his hearers with him!  I, too, was
still fearless.  Who cherishes anxiety when confidently expecting
victory?  When he went on board his own ship, after bidding me farewell
far less cordially than usual, I became more troubled.  I thought it was
evident that his love was waning.  What had I become since we left
Alexandria, and Olympus no longer attended me!  Matters could not
continue in this way.  I would leave the direction of the war to him, and
vanish from his eyes.  After he had looked into the beaker of Nektanebus,
he yielded to my will, but often with indignation.  The unconcealed,
ineffaceable lines, and the years, the cruel years!"

"What thoughts are these?" cried Iras.  "Let me take oath, my sovereign
mistress, that as you stand before me--"

"Thanks to this toilet-table and the new compounds of Olympus in these
boxes!  At that time, I tell you, I was fairly startled at the sight of
my own face.  Trouble does not enhance beauty, and what condemnation the
Romans had heaped on the woman who meddled with war, the craft of man!
I had answers for them, but I would not endure it longer.  I had
previously determined to hold aloof from the battle on land; but even
at the commencement of the conflict, spite of its favourable promise,
I longed to leave Antony and return to the children.  They do not heed
the colour of their mother's hair, nor her wrinkles; and he, when he had
