"And were quite delighted with it!"  cried Gorgo.  "If flowers could sing
it would be like that!"

"Well, well," said Karnis.  "She has a lovely voice--but she wants wings.
Something--what, I know not, keeps the violet rooted to the soil."

"Christian scruples," said the merchant, and Damia added:

"Let Eros touch her--that will loosen her tongue."

"Eros, always Eros!"  repeated Gorgo shrugging her shoulders.  "Nay, love
means suffering--those who love drag a chain with them.  To do the best
of which he is capable man needs only to be free, true, and in health."

"That is a great deal, fair mistress," replied Karnis eagerly.  "With
these three gifts the best work is done.  But as to Agne--what can be
further from freedom than a girl bound to service? her body, to be sure
is healthy, but her spirit suffers; she can get no peace for dread of the
Christian's terrors: Sin, Repentance, and Hell. . . ."

"Oh, we know how their life is ruined!" interrupted the old lady.
"Was it Agne who introduced you to Mary's Asylum?"

"No, noble lady."

"But how then--that  prudent  saint  generally selects her guests, and
those that are not baptized . . ."

"She certainly sheltered heathens on this occasion."

"I am much surprised.  Tell me how it happened."

"We were at Rome," began Karnis, "and my patron there persuaded Marcus,
Mary's son, to take us on board his ship at Ostia.  We dropped anchor at
Cyrene, where the young master wanted to pick up his brother and bring
him also to Alexandria."

"Then is Demetrius here?"  asked Porphyrius.

"Yes, sir.  He came on board at Cyrene.  Hardly had we got fairly to sea
again when we saw two pirate ships.  Our trireme was at once turned
round, but in our hurry to regain the harbor we stuck fast on a sand
bank; the boats were at once put out to save the passengers and Cynegius,
the consul. . ."

"Cynegius--on his way here!"  exclaimed Porphyrius, much excited.

"He landed yesterday with us in the harbor of Eunostus.  The secretaries
and officers of his suite filled one boat and Marcus and his brother were
getting into the other with their men.  We, and others of the free
passengers, should have been left behind if Dada . . ."

"That pretty little blonde?"  asked Damia.

"The very same.  Marcus had taken a great fancy to her prattle and her
songs during the voyage--no nightingale can sing more clearly--and when
she begged and prayed him he gave way at once, and said: he would take
her in his boat.  But the brave child declared that she would jump into
the sea before she would leave without us."

"Well done!"  cried the old lady, and Porphyrius added:

"That speaks well for her and for you."

"So after all Marcus found room for us in the boat--for all of us, and we
got safely to land.  A few days after we all came on in a troop-ship:
Cynegius, the two brothers and the rest, all safe and sound; and, as we
had lost everything we possessed, Marcus gave us a certificate which
procured our admission into his mother's Xenodochium.  And then the gods
brought me and mine under the notice of your noble daughter."

"Then Cynegius is here, positively here?"  asked Porphyrius once more.
Karnis assured him that he was, and the merchant, turning to his mother,
went on:

"And Olympius has not yet come home.  It is always the same thing; he is
as rash as a boy.  If they should take him!  The roads are swarming with
monks.  There is something astir.  Bring out the chariot, Syrus, at once;
and tell Atlas to be ready to accompany me.  Cynegius here!--Ha, ha!
I thank the gods!"

The last exclamation was addressed to a man who at this instant came into
the room, muffled up to the eyes.  He threw off the hood of his cloak and
the wrapper that went round his throat, concealing his long white beard,
and as he did so he exclaimed with a gasp for breath:

"Here I am once more!--Cynegius is here and matters look serious my
friend."

"You have been to the Museum?"

"Without any obstruction.  I found them all assembled.  Brave lads.  They
are all for us and the gods.  There are plenty of weapons.  The Jews--
[At that time about two-fifths of the whole population.]--are not
stirring, Onias thinks he may vouch for that; and we must surely be a
match for the monks and the imperial cohorts."

"If the gods only stand by us to-day and tomorrow," replied Porphyrius
doubtfully.

"For ever, if only the country people do their duty!"  cried the other.
"But who is this stranger?"

"The chief of the singers who were here yesterday," replied Gorgo.

"Karnis, the son of Hiero of Tauromenium," said the musician, bowing to
the stranger, whose stately figure and handsome, thoughtful head struck
him with admiration.

"Karnis of Tauromenium!" exclaimed the newcomer with glad surprise.
"By Hercules! a strange meeting.  Your hand, your hand, old man.  How
many years is it since we last emptied a wine-jar together at the house
of old Hippias?  Seven lustres have turned our hair grey, but we still
can stand upright.  Well, Karnis son of Hiero--and who am I?"

"Olympius--the great Olympius!"  cried Karnis, eagerly grasping the
offered hand.  "May all the gods bless this happy day!"

"All the gods?"  repeated the philosopher.  "Is that what you say?  Then
you have not crawled under the yoke of the cross?"

"The world can rejoice only under the auspices of the gods!"  cried
Karnis excitedly.

"And it shall rejoice still, we will  save it  from gloom!"  added the
other with a flash of vehemence.

"The times are fateful.  We must fight; and no longer over trifles; we
cannot now break each other's heads over a quibble, or believe that the
whole world hangs on the question whether the instant of death is the
last minute of this life or the first of the next.  No--what now remains
to be decided is whether the old gods shall be victorious, whether we
shall continue to live free and happy under the rule of the Immortals,
or whether we shall bow under the dismal doctrine of the carpenter's
crucified son; we must fight for the highest hopes and aims of humanity."

"I know," interrupted Karnis, "you have already done battle valiantly for
great Serapis.  They wanted to lay hands on his sanctuary but you and
your disciples put them to rout.  The rest got off scot-free .  .  ."

"But they have taught me the value of my head," said Olympius laughing.
"Evagrius prices it at three talents.  Why, you might buy a house with
the money and a modest man could live upon the interest.  This worthy man
keeps me concealed here.  We must talk over a few things, Porphyrius; and
you, Gorgo, do not forget the solemn festival of Isis.  Now that Cynegius
is here it must be made as splendid as possible, and he must tell the
Emperor, who has sent him, what temper we Alexandrians are in.  But where
is the dark maiden I saw yesterday?"

"In the garden," replied Gorgo.

"She is to sing at the foot of the bier!" cried Olympius.  "That must not
be altered."

"If I can persuade her--she is a Christian," said Karnis doubtfully.

"She must," said the philosopher positively.  "It will be a bad lookout
indeed for the logic and rhetoric of Alexandria if an old professor and
disputant cannot succeed in turning a young girl's resolutions upside
down.  Leave that to me.  I shall find time for a chat with you by and
bye, friend Karnis.  How in the world does it happen that you, who so
often have helped us with your father's coin, have come down to be the
chief of a band of travelling musicians?  You will have much to tell me,
my good friend; but even such important matters must give way to those
that are more pressing.  One word with you, Porphyrius."

Agne had been all this time awaiting Herse's return in the colonnade that
ran along the garden-front of the house.  She was glad to be alone, and
it was very comfortable to rest on the soft cushions under the gilt-
coffered ceiling of the arcade.  At each end stood large shrubs covered
with bunches of violet-blue flowers and the spreading branches cast a
pleasant shade on the couch where she sat; the beautiful flowers, which
were strange to her, were delightfully fragrant, and from time to time
she helped herself to the refreshments which Gorgo herself had brought
out to her.  All she saw, heard, and felt, was soothing to her mind;
never had she seen or tasted juicier peaches, richer bunches of grapes,
fresher almonds or more tempting cakes; on the shrubs in the garden and
on the grass-plots between the paths there was not a dead leaf, not a dry
stem, not the tiniest weed.  The buds were swelling on the tall trees,
shrubs without end were covered with blossoms--white, blue,  yellow, and
red--while, among the smooth, shining leaves of the orange and lemon
trees, gleamed the swelling fruit.  On a round tank close at hand some
black swans were noiselessly tracing evanescent circles and uttering
their strange lament.  The song of birds mingled with the plash of
fountains, and even the marble statues, for all that they were dumb,
seemed to be enjoying the sweet morning air and the stir and voice of
nature.

Yes, she could be happy here; as she peeled a peach and slowly swallowed
the soft fragrant mouthfuls, she laughed to remember the hard ship's-
biscuit, of the two previous days' fare.  And it was Gorgo's privilege to
revel in these good things day after day, year after year.  It was like
living in Eden, in the perpetual spring of man's first blissful home on
earth.  There could be no suffering here; who could cry here, who could
be sorrowful, who could die? . . .  Here a new train of thought forced
itself upon her.  She was still so young, and yet she was as familiar
