widow, was still sitting at the foot of the statue of justice.  He told
her that her father was ill, and desired a servant to show her the way to
his private room, that she might help the leech in attending on him.
Berenice could not be induced to stir; she longed only for the end and
was persuaded that it could not be far off.  She listened eagerly to the
blows of the battering-engine; each one sounded to her like a shock to
the very structure of the universe.  Another--and another--and at last
the ancient masonry must give way and the grave that had already opened
for her husband and her son would yawn to swallow her up with her
sorrows.  She shuddered and drew her hood over her face to screen it from
the sun which now began to shine in.  Its light was a grievance to her;
she had hoped never to see another day.

The women, and with them a few helpless weaklings, had withdrawn to the
rotunda, and before long they were laughing as saucily as ever.

From the roof blocks of stone and broken statues were hailing down on the
besiegers, and in the halls below, the toiler who paused to wipe the
sweat from his brow would brook no idleness in his comrade; the most
recalcitrant were forced to bestir themselves, and the barricade inside
the southern wall soon rose to a goodly height.  No rampart was ever
built of nobler materials; each stone was a work of art and had been
reverenced for centuries as something sacred, or bore in an elegant
inscription the memorial of noble deeds.  This wall was to protect the
highest of the gods, and among the detachment told off to defend it, were
Karnis, his son, and his wife.




CHAPTER XXIII.

Gorgo sat by the bed of her apparently lifeless father, gazing fondly at
the worn and wax-like features, and listening to his breathing, now soft
and easy and again painful and convulsive, as it fluttered through his
nostrils.  She held his cold damp hand tightly clasped, or stroked it
gently, or now and then, when his closed eyelids quivered, raised it
tenderly to her lips.

The room in which they were lay on one side of the hypostyle and behind
the right-hand--or western--colonnade; more forward, therefore, than the
veiled statue and to its left hand.  The noise of the toilers at the
barricade and the crash of the blows of the battering-ram came up from
just below, and at each thud of the engine the senseless man started
convulsively and a look of intense pain crossed his face.  But, though it
was indeed grievous to Gorgo to see her father suffering, though she told
herself again and again that, ere long, the sanctuary must fall into the
hands of the Christians, she felt safe, thankful and sheltered up here,
in her old friend's half-lighted and barely-furnished room, shut off, at
any rate, from the frenzied wretches of whom she thought only with
loathing and fear.

She was wearied out with her night of unrest, but the agitation and
excitement she had gone through were still vividly present to her mind,
and even on the comfortable couch in her own snug room at home her
perturbed spirit would have prevented her sleeping.  Her brain was still
in a ferment, and here, in comparative peace, she had time to think over
all she had gone through during the last few hours, and the catastrophes
that had befallen her grandmother and her father.  She had exchanged but
few words with the physician, who was still unceasingly busy in trying to
restore his patient to consciousness, and who had assured her that he had
every hope of her father's recovery.

But at length the girl looked up with an eager gaze and said, sadly
enough: "You said something about an antidote to poison, Apuleius?  Then
my father tried to escape the final destruction by attempting to kill
himself.--Is it so?"

The leech looked at her keenly, and after confirming her suspicion and
explaining to her exactly how the fateful deed had been accomplished, he
went on:

"The storm had completely unnerved him--it unmanned us all--and yet that
was only the prelude to the tremendous doom which is hanging over the
universe.  It is at hand; we can hear its approach;  the stones are
yielding! the Christian's engines are opening the way for it to enter!"

Apuleius spoke in a tone of sinister foreboding, and the falling stones
dislodged by the battering-ram thundered a solemn accompaniment to his
prophecy.  Gorgo, turned pale; but it was not the physician's ominous
speech that alarmed her, but the quaking of the walls of the room.
Still, the Serapeum was built for eternity; the ram might bring down a
wall, but it could not destroy or even shake the building itself.

Outside, the hubbub of fighting men grew louder and louder every minute,
and Apuleius, increasingly anxious, went to the door to listen.  Gorgo
could see that his hands trembled!  he--a man--was frightened, while she
felt no anxiety but for her suffering father!  Through that breach
Constantine would enter--and where he commanded she was safe.  As to the
destruction of the universe--she no longer believed in it.  When the
physician turned round and saw her calmly and quietly wiping the cold
drops from the sick man's brow, he said gloomily: "Of what use is it to
shut our eyes like the ostrich.  They are fighting down there for life or
death--we had better prepare for the end.  If they venture--and they
will--to lay a sacrilegious hand on the god, besiegers and besieged
alike--the whole world together, must perish."

But Gorgo shook her head.  "No, no," she cried, with zealous confidence.
"No, Apuleius, Serapis is not what you believe him to be; for, if he
were, would he suffer his enemies to overthrow his temple and his image?
Why does he not, at this supreme moment, inspire his worshippers with
courage?  I have seen the men--mere boys--and the women who have
assembled here to fight for him.  They are nothing but drivellers and
triflers.  If the master is like his men it serves him right if he is
overthrown; to weep for him would be waste of woe!"

"And can the daughter of Porphyrius say this?"  exclaimed the leech.

"Yes, Apuleius, yes.  After what I have seen, and heard, and endured this
night, I cannot speak otherwise.  It was shameful, horrible, sickening;
I could rage at the mere thought of being supposed to be one of that
debased crew.  It is disgrace and ignominy even to be named in the same
breath!  A god who is served as this god has been is no god of mine!  And
you--you are learned--a sage and a philosopher--how can you believe that
the God of the Christians when he has conquered and crippled yours, will
ever permit Serapis to destroy His world and the men He created?"

Apuleius drew himself up.  "Are you then a Christian?"  he asked swiftly
and sternly.

But Gorgo could not reply; she colored deeply and Apuleius vehemently
repeated his question: "Then you really are a Christian?"

She looked frankly in his face: "No," she said, "I am not; but I wish I
were."

The physician turned away with a shrug; but Gorgo drew a breath of
relief, feeling that her avowal had lifted a heavy burthen from her soul.
She hardly knew how the bold and momentous confession had got itself
spoken, but she felt that it was the only veracious answer to the
physician's question.

They spoke no more; she was better pleased to remain silent, for her own
utterance had opened out to her a new land of promise--of feeling and of
thought.

Her lover henceforth was no longer her enemy; and as the tumult of the
struggle by the breach fell on her ear, she could think with joy of his
victorious arms.  She felt that this was the purer, the nobler, the
better cause; and she rejoiced in the love of which he had spoken as the
support and the stay of their future life together--as sheltering them
like a tower of strength and a mighty refuge.  Compared with that love
all that she had hitherto held dear or indispensable as gracing life, now
seemed vain and worthless; and as she looked at her father's still face,
and remembered how he had lived and what he had suffered, she applied
those words of Paul which Constantine had spoken at their meeting after
his return, to him, too; and her heart overflowed with affection towards
her hapless parent.  She knew full well the meaning of the deep lines
that marked his lips and brow; for Porphyrius had never made any secret
of his distress and vexation whenever he found himself compelled to
confess a creed in which he did not honestly believe.  This great
falsehood and constant duplicity, this divided allegiance to two masters,
had poisoned the existence of a man by nature truthful; and Gorgo knew
for whose sake and for what reasons he had subjected himself to this
moral martyrdom.  It was a lesson to her to see him lying there, and his
look of anguish warned her to become, heart and soul, a Christian as she
felt prompted.  She would confess Christ for love's sake-aye, for love's
sake; for in this hour the thing she saw most clearly in the faith which
she purposed to adopt, and of which Constantine had so often spoken to
her with affectionate enthusiasm, was Everlasting Love.

Never in her life had she felt so much at peace, so open to all that was
good and beautiful; and yet, outside, the strife grew louder and more
furious; the Imperial tuba sounded above the battle-cry of the heathen,
and the uproar of the struggle came nearer and nearer.

The battering-ram had made a large breach in the southern wall, and,
protected by their shed, the heavy-armed infantry of the twenty-second
legion had forced their way up; but many a veteran had paid for his
rashness with his life, for the storming party had been met by a perfect
shower of arrows and javelins.  Still, the great shield had turned many a
spear, and many an arrow had glanced harmless from the brazen armor and
helmets; the men that had escaped pressed onwards, while fresh ranks of
soldiers made their way in, over the bodies of the fallen.  The well-
drilled foe came creeping up to the barricade on their knees, and
protected by bronze bucklers, while others, in the rear, flung lances and
arrows over their heads at the besieged.  A few of the heathen fell, and
the sight of their blood had a wonderful effect on their comrades.  Rage
surged up in the breasts of the most timid, and fear vanished before the
passion for revenge; cowardice turned to martial ardor, and philosophers
and artists thirsted for blood.  The red glare of strife danced before
the eyes of the veriest book-worm; fired by the terrible impulse to kill,
to subdue, to destroy the foe, they fought desperately and blindly,
staking their lives on the issue.

Karnis, that zealous votary of the Muses, stood with Orpheus, on the very
top of the barricade throwing lance after lance, while he sang at the top
of his voice snatches of the verses of Tyrtaeus, in the teeth, as it
were, of the foe who were crowding through the breach; the sweat streamed
from his bald head and his eye flashed fire.  By his side stood his son,
sending swift arrows from an enormous bow.  The heavy curls of his hair
had come unbound and fell over his flushed face.  When he hit one of the
Imperial soldiers his father applauded him eagerly; then, collecting all
his strength, flung another lance, chanting a hexameter or a verse of an
ode.  Herse crouched half hidden behind a sacrificial stone which lay at
the top of the hastily-constructed rampart, and handed weapons to the
combatants as they needed them.  Her dress was torn and blood-stained,
her grey hair had come loose from the ribbands and crescent that should
have confined it; the worthy matron had become a Megaera and shrieked to
the men: "Kill the dogs!  Stand steady!  Spare never a Christian!"

But the little garrison needed no incitement; the fevered zeal which
possessed them wholly, seconded their thirst for blood and doubled their
strength.

An arrow, shot by Orpheus, had just glanced over the breastplate and into
the throat of a centurion who had already set foot on the lowest step,
when Karnis suddenly dropped the spear he was preparing to fling and fell
without a cry.  A Roman lance had hit him, and he lay transfixed by the
side of a living purple fount, like a rock in the surf from which a
sapling has sprung.  Orpheus saw his father's life-blood flowing and fell
on his knees by his side; but the old man pointed to the bow that his son
had cast aside and murmured eagerly: "Leave me--let me be.  What does it
matter about me?  Fight--for the gods--I say.  For the gods!  Go on, aim
truly!"

But the lad would not leave the dying man, and seeing how deeply the
spear had struck to the old man's heart he groaned aloud, throwing up his
arms in despair.  Then an arrow hit his shoulder, another pierced his
neck, and he, too, fell gasping for breath.  Karnis saw him drop, and
painfully raised himself a little to help him; but it was too much for
