the present.

Amru, who had not failed to observe Obada's demeanor and who keenly
sympathized with what was going on in the young man's mind, did not
detain him; but his manner changed once more; he again became the
pressing host and invited his guest, as it was growing late, to pass the
night under his roof.  Orion politely declined, and when at length he
quitted the room--without deigning even to look at the Negro--Amru
accompanied him into the anteroom.  There he grasped the young man's
hand, and said in a low voice full of sincere and fatherly interest:

"Beware of the Negro; you let him perceive that you saw through him--it
was brave but rash.  For my part I honestly wish you well."

"I believe it, I know it," replied Orion, on whose perturbed soul the
noble Arab's warm, deep accents fell like balm.  "And now we are alone
I will gladly confide in you.  I, my Lord, I--my father--you knew him.
In cruel wrath, before he closed his eyes, he withdrew his blessing from
his only son."

The memory of the most fearful hour of his life choked his voice for a
moment, but he soon went on: "One single act of criminal folly roused his
anger; but afterwards, in grief and penitence, I thought over my whole
life, and I saw how useless it had been; and now, when I came hither with
a heart full of glad expectancy to place all I have to offer of mind and
gifts at your disposal, I did so, my Lord, because I long to achieve
great and noble, and difficult or, if it might be, impossible deeds--to
be active, to be doing. . ."

Here he was interrupted by Amru, who said, laying his sinewy arm across
the youth's shoulders:

"And because you long to let the spirit of your dead father, that
righteous man, see that a heedless act of youthful recklessness has not
made you unworthy of his blessing; because you hope by valiant deeds to
compel his wrath to turn to approval, his scorn to esteem. . ."

"Yes, yes, that is the thing, the very thing!"  Orion broke in with fiery
enthusiasm; but the Arab eagerly signed to him to lower his voice, as
though to cheat some listener, and whispered hastily, but with warm
kindliness:

"And I, I will help you in this praiseworthy endeavor.  Oh, how much you
remind me of the son of my heart who, like you, erred, and who was
permitted to atone for all, for more than all by dying like a hero for
his faith on the field of battle!--Count on me, and let your purpose
become deed.  In me you have found a friend.--Now, go.  You shall hear
from me before long.  But, once more: Do not provoke the Negro; beware of
him; and the next time you meet him subdue your pride and make as though
you had never seen him before."

He looked sadly at Orion, as though the sight of him revived some loved
image in his mind, kissed his brow, and as soon as the youth had left the
anteroom he hastily drew open the curtain that hung across the door into
the dining-room.--A few steps behind it stood the Vekeel, who was
arranging the straps of his sword-belt.

"Listener!"  exclaimed the Arab with intense scorn, "you, a man of gifts,
a man of deeds!  A hero in battle and in council; lion, serpent, and toad
in one!  When will you cast out of your soul all that is contemptible
and base?  Be what you have made yourself, not what you were; do not
constantly remind the man who helped you to rise that you were born
of a slave!"

"My Lord!"  began the Moor, and the whites of his rolling eyes were
ominously conspicuous in his black face.  But Amru took the words out of
his mouth and went on in stern and determined reproof:

"You behaved to that noble youth like an idiot, like a buffoon at a fair,
like a madman."

"To Hell with him!"  cried Obada, "I hate the gilded upstart."

"Envious wretch!  Do not provoke him!  Times change, and the day may come
when you will have reason to fear him."

"Him?"  shrieked the other.  "I could crush the puppet like a fly!  And
he shall live to know it."

"Your turn first and then his!"  said Amru.  "To us he is the more
important of the two--yes, he, the up start, the puppet.  Do you hear?
Do you understand?  If you touch a hair of his head, it will cost you
your nose and ears!  Never for an hour forget that you live--and ought
not to live--only so long as two pairs of lips are sealed.  You know
whose.  That clever head remains on your shoulders only as long as they
choose.  Cling to it, man; you have only one to lose!  It was necessary,
my lord Vekeel, to remind you of that once more!"

The Negro groaned like a wounded beast and sullenly panted out: "This is
the reward of past services; these are the thanks of Moslem to Moslem!--
And all for the sake of a Christian dog."

"You have had thanks, and more than are your due," replied Amru more
calmly.  "You know what you pledged yourself to before I raised you to be
my Vekeel for the sake of your brains and your sword, and what I had to
overlook before I did so--not on your behalf, but for the great cause of
Islam.  And, if you wish to remain where you are, you will do well to
sacrifice your wild ambition.  If you cannot, I will send you back to the
army, and to-day rather than to-morrow; and if you carry it with too high
a hand you will find yourself at Medina in fetters, with your death-
warrant stuck in your girdle."

The Negro again groaned sullenly; but his master was not to be checked.

"Why should you hate this youth?  Why, a child could see through it!
In the son and heir of George you see the future Mukaukas, while you are
cherishing the insane wish to become the Mukaukas yourself."

"And why should such a wish be insane?"  cried the other in a harsh
voice.  "Putting you out of the question, who is there here that is
shrewder or stronger than I?"

"No Moslem, perhaps.  But neither you nor any other true believer will
succeed to the dead man's office, but an Egyptian and a Christian.
Prudence requires it, and the Khaliff commands it."

"And does he also command that this curled ape shall be left in
possession of his millions?"

"So that is what you covet, you greedy curmudgeon--that is it?  Do not
all the crimes you have committed out of avarice weigh upon you heavily
enough?  Gold, and yet more gold--that is the end, the foul end, of all
your desires.  A fat morsel, no doubt: the Mukaukas' estates, his talents
of gold, his gems, slaves, and horses; I admit that.  But thank God the
All-merciful, we are not thieves and robbers!"

"And who was it that dug out the hidden millions from beneath the
reservoir of Peter the Egyptian, and who made him bite the dust?"

"I--I.  But--as you know--only to send the money to Medina.  Peter had
hidden it before we killed him.  The Mukaukas and his son have declared
all their possessions to the uttermost dinar and hide of land; they have
faithfully paid the taxes, and consequently their property belongs to
them as our swords, our horses, our wives belong to you or me.  What will
not your grasping spirit lead you to!--Take your hand from your dagger!--
Not a copper coin from them shall fall into your hungry maw, so help me
God!  Do not again cast an evil eye on the Mukaukas' son!  Do not try my
patience too far, man, or else--Hold your head tight on your shoulders or
you will have to seek it at your feet; and what I say I mean!--Now, good-
night!  To-morrow morning in the divan you are to explain your scheme for
the new distribution of the land; it will not suit me in any way, and I
shall have other projects to propose for discussion."

With this the Arab turned his back on the Vekeel; but no sooner had the
door closed on him than Obada clenched his fist in fury at his lord and
master, who had hitherto said nothing of his having had purloined a
portion of the consignment of gold which Amru had charged him to escort
to Medina.  Then he rushed up and down the room, snorting and foaming
till slaves came in to clear the tables.




CHAPTER XXV.

Orion made his way home under the moonlit and starry night.  He held his
head high, and not since that evening on the water with Paula had he felt
so glad or so hopeful.  On the other side of the bridge he did not at
once turn his horse's head homewards; the fresh night air was so
delightful, his heart beat so high that he shrunk from the oppression of
a room.  Full of renewed life, freed from a burden as it were, he made
his way at a round pace to the house that held his beloved, picturing to
himself how gladly she would welcome the news that he had found Amru
ready to encourage him in his projects, indeed, to be a fatherly friend.

The Arab general, whose lofty character, intellect, and rectitude his
father had esteemed highly, had impressed him, too, as the ideal of noble
manliness, and as he compared him with the highest officials and warriors
he had met at the Court of Byzantium he could not help smiling.  By the
side of this dignified, but impetuous and warm-hearted man they appeared
like the old, rigid idols of his ancestors in comparison with the freely-
wrought works of Greek art.  He could bless the memory of his father for
having freed the land from that degenerate race.  Now, he felt, that lost
parent, whose image lived in his soul, was satisfied with him, and this
gave him a sense of happiness which he meant to cling to and enhance by
every thought and deed in the future.  "Life is a function, a ministry,
and a duty!"  this watchword, which had been given him by those beloved
lips, should keep him in the new path; and soon he hoped to feel sure of
himself, to be able to look back on such deeds of valor as would give him
a right in his own judgment to unite his lot to that of this noblest of
women.

Full of such thoughts as these, he made his way to the house of Rufinus.
The windows of the corner room on the upper floor were lighted up; two of
these windows looked out on the river and the quay.  He did not know
which rooms were Paula's, but he looked up at the late-burning light with
a vague feeling that it must be hers; a female figure which now appeared
framed m the opening, showed him that he was not mistaken; it was that of
Perpetua.  The sound of hoofs had roused her curiosity, but she did not
seem to recognize him in the dim starlight.

He slowly rode past, and when he presently turned back and again looked
up, in the hope this time of seeing Paula, the place was vacant: however,
he perceived a tall dark shadow moving across from one side of the room
to the other, which could not be that of the nurse nor of her slender
mistress.  It must indeed be that of a remarkably big man, and stopping
to gaze with anxious and unpleasant apprehension, he plainly recognized
Philippus.

It was past midnight.  How could he account for his being with Paula at
this hour?--Was she ill?--Was this room hers after all?--Was it merely by
chance that the nurse was in Rufinus' room with the physician.

No.  The woman whom he could now see pass across the window and go
straight up to the man, with outstretched hands, was Paula and none
other.  Isis heart was already beating fast, and now a suspicion grew
strong in him which his vanity had hitherto held in check, though he had
often seen the friendly relations that subsisted between Paula and the
leech.--Perhaps it was a warmer feeling than friendship and guileless
trust, which had led her so unreservedly to claim this man's protection
and service.  Could he have won Paula's heart--Paula's love?

Was it conceivable!--But why not?

What was there against Philippus but his homely face and humble birth?
And how many a woman had he not seen set her heart on quite other things!
The physician was not more than five years his senior; and recalling the
expression in his eyes as he looked at Paula only that morning Orion felt
