their shawls and cloaks and coats, and Herbert was in the act of
taking special and very suspicious care of Lady Clara's throat, when
there came a ring at the door. The visitor, whoever he might be, was
not kept long waiting, for one servant was in the hall, and another
just outside the front door with the car, and a third holding
Herbert's horse.

"I wish to see Sir Thomas," said a man's voice as soon as the door
was opened; and the man entered the hall, and then seeing that it was
full of ladies, retreated again into the doorway. He was an elderly
man, dressed almost more than well, for there was about him a slight
affectation of dandyism; and though he had for the moment been
abashed, there was about him also a slight swagger. "Good morning,
ladies," he said, re-entering again, and bowing to young Herbert, who
stood looking at him; "I believe Sir Thomas is at home; would you
send your servant in to say that a gentleman wants to see him for a
minute or so, on very particular business? I am a little in a hurry
like."

The door of the drawing-room was ajar, so that Lady Fitzgerald, who
was sitting there tranquilly in her own seat, could hear the voice.
And she did hear it, and knew that some stranger had come to trouble
her husband. But she did not come forth; why should she? was not
Herbert there--if, indeed, even Herbert could be of any service?

"Shall I take your card in to Sir Thomas, sir?" said one of the
servants, coming forward.

"Card!" said Mollett senior out loud; "well, if it is necessary,
I believe I have a card." And he took from his pocket a greasy
pocket-book, and extracted from it a piece of pasteboard on which
his name was written. "There; give that to Sir Thomas. I don't think
there's much doubt but that he'll see me." And then, uninvited, he
sat himself down in one of the hall chairs.

Sir Thomas's study, the room in which he himself sat, and in which
indeed he might almost be said to live at present,--for on many days
he only came out to dine, and then again to go to bed,--was at some
little distance to the back of the house, and was approached by
a passage from the hall. While the servant was gone, the ladies
finished their wrapping, and got up on the car.

"Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald," said Clara, laughing, "I shan't be able to
breathe with all that on me."

"Look at Mary and Emmeline," said he; "they have got twice as much.
You don't know how cold it is."

"You had better have the fur close to your body," said Aunt Letty;
"look here;" and she showed that her gloves were lined with fur, and
her boots, and that she had gotten some nondescript furry article of
attire stuck in underneath the body of her dress.

"But you must let me have them a little looser, Mr. Fitzgerald," said
Clara; "there, that will do," and then they all got upon the car
and started. Herbert was perhaps two minutes after them before he
mounted; but when he left the hall the man was still sitting there;
for the servant had not yet come back from his father's room.

But the clatter of his horse's hoofs was still distinct enough at
the hall door when the servant did come back, and in a serious tone
desired the stranger to follow him. "Sir Thomas will see you," said
the servant, putting some stress on the word will.

"Oh, I did not doubt that the least in the world," said Mr. Mollett,
as he followed the man along the passage.

The morning was very cold. There had been rainy weather, but it now
appeared to be a settled frost. The roads were rough and hard, and
the man who was driving them said a word now and again to his young
master as to the expediency of getting frost nails put into the
horse's shoes. "I'd better go gently, Mr. Herbert; it may be he might
come down at some of these pitches." So they did go gently, and at
last arrived safely at Berryhill.

And very busy they were there all day. The inspection of the site
for the mill was not their only employment. Here also was an
establishment for distributing food, and a crowd of poor half-fed
wretches were there to meet them. Not that at that time things
were so bad as they became afterwards. Men were not dying on the
road-side, nor as yet had the apathy of want produced its terrible
cure for the agony of hunger. The time had not yet come when the
famished living skeletons might be seen to reject the food which
could no longer serve to prolong their lives.

Though this had not come as yet, the complaints of the women
with their throngs of children were bitter enough; and it was
heart-breaking too to hear the men declare that they had worked like
horses, and that it was hard upon them now to see their children
starve like dogs. For in this earlier part of the famine the people
did not seem to realize the fact that this scarcity and want had come
from God. Though they saw the potatoes rotting in their own gardens,
under their own eyes, they still seemed to think that the rich men of
the land could stay the famine if they would; that the fault was with
them; that the famine could be put down if the rich would but stir
themselves to do it. Before it was over they were well aware that no
human power could suffice to put it down. Nay, more than that; they
had almost begun to doubt the power of God to bring back better days.

They strove, and toiled, and planned, and hoped at Berryhill that
day. And infinite was the good that was done by such efforts as
these. That they could not hinder God's work we all know; but much
they did do to lessen the sufferings around, and many were the lives
that were thus saved.

They were all standing behind the counter of a small store that had
been hired in the village--the three girls at least, for Aunt Letty
had already gone to the glebe, and Herbert was still down at the
"water privilege," talking to a millwright and a carpenter. This was
a place at which Indian corn flour, that which after a while was
generally termed "meal" in those famine days, was sold to the poor.
At this period much of it was absolutely given away. This plan,
however, was soon found to be injurious; for hundreds would get it
who were not absolutely in want, and would then sell it;--for the
famine by no means improved the morals of the people.

And therefore it was found better to sell the flour; to sell it at a
cheap rate, considerably less sometimes than the cost price; and to
put the means of buying it into the hands of the people by giving
them work, and paying them wages. Towards the end of these times,
when the full weight of the blow was understood, and the subject had
been in some sort studied, the general rule was thus to sell the meal
at its true price, hindering the exorbitant profit of hucksters by
the use of large stores, and to require that all those who could
not buy it should seek the means of living within the walls of
workhouses. The regular established workhouses,--unions as they were
called,--were not as yet numerous, but supernumerary houses were
provided in every town, and were crowded from the cellars to the
roofs.

It need hardly be explained that no general rule could be established
and acted upon at once. The numbers to be dealt with were so great,
that the exceptions to all rules were overwhelming. But such and
such like were the efforts made, and these efforts ultimately were
successful.

The three girls were standing behind the counter of a little store
which Sir Thomas had hired at Berryhill, when a woman came into the
place with two children in her arms and followed by four others of
different ages. She was a gaunt tall creature, with sunken cheeks and
hollow eyes, and her clothes hung about her in unintelligible rags.
There was a crowd before the counter, for those who had been answered
or served stood staring at the three ladies, and could hardly be got
to go away; but this woman pressed her way through, pushing some and
using harsh language to others, till she stood immediately opposite
to Clara.

"Look at that, madam," she cried, undoing an old handkerchief which
she held in her hand, and displaying the contents on the counter; "is
that what the likes of you calls food for poor people? is that fit
'ating to give to children? Would any av ye put such stuff as that
into the stomachs of your own bairns?" and she pointed to the mess
which lay revealed upon the handkerchief.

The food, as food, was not nice to look at; and could not have been
nice to eat, or probably easy of digestion when eaten.

"Feel of that." And the woman rubbed her forefinger among it to show
that it was rough and hard, and that the particles were as sharp as
though sand had been mixed with it. The stuff was half-boiled Indian
meal, which had been improperly subjected at first to the full heat
of boiling water; and in its present state was bad food either for
children or grown people. "Feel of that," said the woman; "would you
like to be 'ating that yourself now?"

"I don't think you have cooked it quite enough," said Clara, looking
into the woman's face, half with fear and half with pity, and
putting, as she spoke, her pretty delicate finger down into the nasty
daubed mess of parboiled yellow flour.

"Cooked it!" said the woman scornfully. "All the cooking on 'arth
wouldn't make food of that fit for a Christian--feel of the roughness
of it"--and she turned to another woman who stood near her; "would
you like to be putting sharp points like that into your children's
bellies?"

It was quite true that the grains of it were hard and sharp, so as to
give one an idea that it would make good eating neither for women nor
children. The millers and dealers, who of course made their profits
in these times, did frequently grind up the whole corn without
separating the grain from the husks, and the shell of a grain of
Indian corn does not, when ground, become soft flour. This woman had
reason for her complaints, as had many thousands reason for similar
complaints.

"Don't be throubling the ladies, Kitty," said an old man standing by;
"sure and weren't you glad enough to be getting it."

"She'd be axing the ladies to go home wid her and cook it for her
after giving it her," said another.

"Who says it war guv' me?" said the angry mother. "Didn't I buy it,
here at this counter, with Mike's own hard-'arned money? and it's
chaiting us they are. Give me back my money." And she looked at Clara
as though she meant to attack her across the counter.

"Mr. Fitzgerald is going to put up a mill of his own, and then the
corn will be better ground," said Emmeline Fitzgerald, deprecating
the woman's wrath.

"Put up a mill!" said the woman, still in scorn. "Are you going to
give me back my money; or food that my poor bairns can ate?"

This individual little difficulty was ended by a donation to the
angry woman of another lot of meal, in taking away which she was
careful not to leave behind her the mess which she had brought in her
handkerchief. But she expressed no thanks on being so treated.

The hardest burden which had to be borne by those who exerted
themselves at this period was the ingratitude of the poor for whom
they worked;--or rather I should say thanklessness. To call them
ungrateful would imply too deep a reproach, for their convictions
were that they were being ill used by the upper classes. When they
received bad meal which they could not cook, and even in their
extreme hunger could hardly eat half-cooked; when they were desired
to leave their cabins and gardens, and flock into the wretched
barracks which were prepared for them; when they saw their children
wasting away under a suddenly altered system of diet, it would have
been unreasonable to expect that they should have been grateful.
Grateful for what? Had they not at any rate a right to claim life,
to demand food that should keep them and their young ones alive? But
not the less was it a hard task for delicate women to work hard, and
to feel that all their work was unappreciated by those whom they so
thoroughly commiserated, whose sufferings they were so anxious to
relieve.

It was almost dark before they left Berryhill, and then they had to
go out of their way to pick up Aunt Letty at Mr. Townsend's house.

"Don't go in whatever you do, girls," said Herbert; "we should never
get away."

"Indeed we won't unpack ourselves again before we get home; will we,
Clara?"

"Oh, I hope not. I'm very nice now, and so warm. But, Mr. Fitzgerald,
is not Mrs. Townsend very queer?"

"Very queer indeed. But you mustn't say a word about her before Aunt
Letty. They are sworn brothers-in-arms."

"I won't of course. But, Mr. Fitzgerald, she's very good, is she
not?"

"Yes, in her way. Only it's a pity she's so prejudiced."

"You mean about religion?"

"I mean about everything. If she wears a bonnet on her head, she'll
think you very wicked because you wear a hat."

"Will she? what a very funny woman! But, Mr. Fitzgerald, I shan't
give up my hat, let her say what she will."

"I should rather think not."

"And Mr. Townsend? we know him a little; he's very good too, isn't
he?"

"Do you mean me to answer you truly, or to answer you according to
the good-natured idea of never saying any ill of one's neighbour?"

"Oh, both; if you can."

"Oh both; must I? Well, then, I think him good as a man, but bad as a
clergyman."

"But I thought he worked so very hard as a clergyman?"

"So he does. But if he works evil rather than good, you can't call
him a good clergyman. Mind, you would have my opinion; and if I talk
treason and heterodoxy and infidelity and papistry, you must only
take it for what it's worth."

"I'm sure you won't talk infidelity."

"Nor yet treason; and then, moreover, Mr. Townsend would be so much
better a clergyman, to my way of thinking, if he would sometimes
brush his hair, and occasionally put on a clean surplice. But,
remember, not a word of all this to Aunt Letty."

"Oh dear, no; of course not."

Mr. Townsend did come out of the house on the little sweep before
the door to help Miss Letty up on the car, though it was dark and
piercingly cold.

"Well, young ladies, and won't you come in now and warm yourselves?"

They all of course deprecated any such idea, and declared that they
were already much too late.

"Richard, mind you take care going down Ballydahan Hill," said the
parson, giving a not unnecessary caution to the servant. "I came up
it just now, and it was one sheet of ice."

"Now, Richard, do be careful," said Miss Letty.

"Never fear, miss," said Richard.

"We'll take care of you," said Herbert. "You're not frightened, Lady
Clara, are you?"

"Oh, no," said Clara; and so they started.

It was quite dark and very cold, and there was a sharp hard frost.
But the lamps of the car were lighted, and the horse seemed to be on
his mettle, for he did his work well. Ballydahan Hill was not above
a mile from the glebe, and descending that, Richard, by his young
master's orders, got down from his seat and went to the animal's
head. Herbert also himself got off, and led his horse down the hill.
At first the girls were a little inclined to be frightened, and
Miss Letty found herself obliged to remind them that they couldn't
melt the frost by screaming. But they all got safely down, and were
soon chattering as fast as though they were already safe in the
drawing-room of Castle Richmond.

They went on without any accident, till they reached a turn in the
road, about two miles from home; and there, all in a moment, quite
suddenly, when nobody was thinking about the frost or the danger,
down came the poor horse on his side, his feet having gone quite from
under him, and a dreadful cracking sound of broken timber gave notice
that a shaft was smashed. A shaft at least was smashed; if only no
other harm was done!

It can hardly be that Herbert Fitzgerald cared more for such a
stranger as Lady Clara Desmond than he did for his own sisters and
aunt; but nevertheless, it was to Lady Clara's assistance that he
first betook himself. Perhaps he had seen, or fancied that he saw,
that she had fallen with the greatest violence.

"Speak, speak," said he, as he jumped from his horse close to her
side. "Are you hurt? do speak to me." And going down on his knees on
the hard ground, he essayed to lift her in his arms.

"Oh dear, oh dear!" said she. "No; I am not hurt; at least I think
not--only just my arm a very little. Where is Emmeline? Is Emmeline
hurt?"

"No," said Emmeline, picking herself up. "But, oh dear, dear, I've
lost my muff, and I've spoiled my hat! Where are Mary and Aunt
Letty?"

After some considerable confusion it was found that nothing was much
damaged except the car, one shaft of which was broken altogether in
two. Lady Clara's arm was bruised and rather sore, but the three
other ladies had altogether escaped. The quantity of clothes that had
been wrapped round them had no doubt enabled them to fall softly.

"And what about the horse, Richard?" asked young Fitzgerald.

"He didn't come upon his knees at all at all, Master Herbert," said
Richard, scrutinizing the animal's legs with the car lamp in his
hand. "I don't think he's a taste the worse. But the car, Master
Herbert, is clane smashed."

Such being found to be undoubtedly the fact, there was nothing for
it but that the ladies should walk home. Herbert again forgot that
the age of his aunt imperatively demanded all the assistance that he
could lend her, and with many lamentations that fortune and the frost
should have used her so cruelly, he gave his arm to Clara.

"But do think of Miss Fitzgerald," said Clara, speaking gently into
his ear.

"Who? oh, my aunt. Aunt Letty never cares for anybody's arm; she
always prefers walking alone."

"Fie, Mr. Fitzgerald, fie! It is impossible to believe such an
assertion as that." And yet Clara did seem to believe it; for she
took his proffered arm without further objection.

It was half-past seven when they reached the hall door, and at that
time they had all forgotten the misfortune of the car in the fun of
the dark frosty walk home. Herbert had found a boy to lead his horse,
and Richard was of course left with the ruins in the road.

"And how's your arm now?" asked Herbert, tenderly, as they entered in
under the porch.

"Oh, it does not hurt me hardly at all. I don't mind it in the
least." And then the door was opened for them.

They all flocked into the hall, and there they were met by Lady
Fitzgerald.

"Oh, mamma," said Mary, "I know you're quite frightened out of your
life! But there's nothing the matter. The horse tumbled down; but
there's nobody hurt."

"And we had to walk home from the turn to Ballyclough," said
Emmeline. "But, oh mamma, what's the matter?" They all now looked up
at Lady Fitzgerald, and it was evident enough that something was the
matter; something to be thought of infinitely more than that accident
on the road.

"Oh, Mary, Mary, what is it?" said Aunt Letty, coming forward and
taking hold of her sister-in-law's hand. "Is my brother ill?"

"Sir Thomas is not very well, and I've been waiting for you so long.
Where's Herbert? I must speak to Herbert." And then the mother and
son left the hall together.

There was then a silence among the four ladies that were left there
standing. At first they followed each other into the drawing-room,
all wrapped up as they were and sat on chairs apart, saying nothing
to each other. At last Aunt Letty got up.

"You had better go up-stairs with Lady Clara," said she; "I will go
to your mamma."

"Oh, Aunt Letty, do send us word; pray send us word," said Emmeline.

Mary now began to cry. "I know he's very ill. I'm sure he's very ill.
Oh, what shall we do?"

"You had better go up stairs with Lady Clara," said Aunt Letty. "I
will send you up word immediately."

"Oh, don't mind me; pray don't mind me," said Clara. "Pray, pray,
don't take notice of me;" and she rushed forward, and throwing
herself on her knees before Emmeline, began to kiss her.

They remained here, heedless of Aunt Letty's advice, for some ten
minutes, and then Herbert came to them. The two girls flew at him
with questions; while Lady Clara stood by the window, anxious to
learn, but unwilling to thrust herself into their family matters.

"My father has been much troubled to-day, and is not well," said
Herbert. "But I do not think there is anything to frighten us. Come;
let us go to dinner."

The going to dinner was but a sorry farce with any of them; but
nevertheless, they went through the ceremony, each for the sake of
the others.

"Mayn't we see him?" said the girls to their mother, who did come
down into the drawing-room for one moment to speak to Clara.

"Not to-night, loves. He should not be disturbed." And so that day
came to an end; not satisfactorily.




CHAPTER IX.

FAMILY COUNCILS.


When the girls and Aunt Letty went to their chambers that night,
Herbert returned to his mother's own dressing-room, and there, seated
over the fire with her, discussed the matter of his father's sudden
attack. He had been again with his father, and Sir Thomas had seemed
glad to have him there; but now he had left him for the night.

"He will sleep now, mother," said the son; "he has taken laudanum."

"I fear he takes that too often now."

"It was good for him to have it to-night. He did not get too much,
for I dropped it for him." And then they sat silent for a few moments
together.

"Mother," said Herbert, "who can this man have been?"

"I have no knowledge--no idea--no guess even," said Lady Fitzgerald.

"It is that man's visit that has upset him."

"Oh, certainly. I think there is no doubt of that. I was waiting for
the man to go, and went in almost before he was out of the house."

"Well?"

"And I found your father quite prostrated."

"Not on the floor?"

"No, not exactly on the floor. He was still seated on his chair, but
his head was on the table, over his arms."

"I have often found him in that way, mother."

"But you never saw him looking as he looked this morning, Herbert.
When I went in he was speechless, and he remained so, I should say,
for some minutes."

"Was he senseless?"

"No; he knew me well enough, and grasped me by the hand; and when I
would have gone to the bell to ring for assistance, he would not let
me. I thought he would have gone into a fit when I attempted it."

"And what did you do?"

"I sat there by him, with his hand in mine, quite quietly. And then
he uttered a long, deep sigh, and--oh, Herbert!"

"Well, mother?"

"At last, he burst into a flood of tears, and sobbed and cried like a
child."

"Mother!"

"He did, so that it was piteous to see him. But it did him good, for
he was better after it. And all the time he never let go my hand, but
held it and kissed it. And then he took me by the waist, and kissed
me, oh, so often. And all the while his tears were running like the
tears of a girl." And Lady Fitzgerald, as she told the story, could
not herself refrain from weeping.

"And did he say anything afterwards about this man?"

"Yes; not at first, that is. Of course I asked him who he was as soon
as I thought he could bear the question. But he turned away, and
merely said that he was a stupid man about some old London business,
and that he should have gone to Prendergast. But when, after a while,
I pressed him, he said that the man's name was Mollett, and that he
had, or pretended to have, some claim upon the city property."

"A claim on the city property! Why, it's not seven hundred a year
altogether. If any Mollett could run away with it all, that loss
would not affect him like that."

"So I said, Herbert; not exactly in those words, but trying to
comfort him. He then put it off by declaring that it was the
consciousness of his inability to see any one on business which
affected him so grievously."

"It was that he said to me."

"And there may be something in that, Herbert."

"Yes; but then what should make him so weak, to begin with? If you
remember, mother, he was very well,--more like himself than usual
last night."

"Oh, I observed it. He seemed to like having Clara Desmond there."

"Didn't he, mother? I observed that too. But then Clara Desmond is
such a sweet creature." The mother looked at her son as he said this,
but the son did not notice the look. "I do wonder what the real truth
can be," he continued. "Do you think there is anything wrong about
the property in general? About this estate, here?"

"No, I don't think that," said the mother, sadly.

"What can it be then?" But Lady Fitzgerald sat there, and did not
answer the question. "I'll tell you what I will do, mother; I'll go
up to London, and see Prendergast, and consult him."

"Oh, no; you mustn't do that. I am wrong to tell you all this, for he
told me to talk to no one. But it would kill me if I didn't speak of
it to you."

"All the same, mother, I think it would be best to consult
Prendergast."

"Not yet, Herbert. I dare say Mr. Prendergast may be a very good sort
of man, but we none of us know him. And if, as is very probable, this
is only an affair of health, it would be wrong in you to go to a
stranger. It might look--"

"Look what, mother?"

"People might think--he, I mean--that you wanted to interfere."

"But who ought to interfere on his behalf if I don't?"

"Quite true, dearest; I understand what you mean, and know how good
you are. But perhaps Mr. Prendergast might not. He might think you
wanted--"

"Wanted what, mother? I don't understand you."

"Wanted to take the things out of your father's hands."

"Oh, mother!"

"He doesn't know you. And, what is more, I don't think he knows much
of your father. Don't go to him yet." And Herbert promised that he
would not.

"And you don't think that this man was ever here before?" he asked.

"Well, I rather think he was here once before; many years ago--soon
after you went to school."

"So long ago as that?"

"Yes; not that I remember him, or, indeed, ever knew of his coming
then, if he did come. But Jones says that she thinks she remembers
him."

"Did Jones see him now?"

"Yes; she was in the hall as he passed through on his way out. And it
so happened that she let him in and out too when he came before. That
is, if it is the same man."

"That's very odd."

"It did not happen here. We were at Tenby for a few weeks in the
summer."

"I remember; you went there with the girls just when I went back to
school."

"Jones was with us, and Richard. We had none other of our own
servants. And Jones says that the same man did come then; that he
stayed with your father for an hour or two; and that when he left,
your father was depressed--almost as he was yesterday. I well
remember that. I know that a man did come to him at Tenby; and--oh,
Herbert!"

"What is it, mother? Speak out at any rate to me."

"Since that man came to him at Tenby he has never been like what he
was before."

And then there was more questioning between them about Jones and her
remembrances. It must be explained that Jones was a very old and very
valued servant. She had originally been brought up as a child by Mrs.
Wainwright, in that Dorsetshire parsonage, and had since remained
firm to the fortunes of the young lady, whose maid she had become on
her first marriage. As her mistress had been promoted, so had Jones.
At first she had been Kitty to all the world, now she was Mrs. Jones
to the world at large, Jones to Sir Thomas and her mistress and
of late years to Herbert, and known by all manner of affectionate
sobriquets to the young ladies. Sometimes they would call her
Johnny, and sometimes the Duchess; but doubtless they and Mrs. Jones
thoroughly understood each other. By the whole establishment Mrs.
Jones was held in great respect, and by the younger portion in
extreme awe. Her breakfast and tea she had in a little sitting-room
by herself; but the solitude of this was too tremendous for her
to endure at dinner-time. At that meal she sat at the head of the
table in the servants' hall, though she never troubled herself to
carve anything except puddings and pies, for which she had a great
partiality, and of which she was supposed to be the most undoubted
and severe judge known of anywhere in that part of the country.

She was supposed by all her brother and sister servants to be a very
Croesus for wealth; and wondrous tales were told of the money she
had put by. But as she was certainly honest, and supposed to be very
generous to certain poor relations in Dorsetshire, some of these
stories were probably mythic. It was known, however, as a fact, that
two Castle Richmond butlers, one out-door steward, three neighbouring
farmers, and one wickedly ambitious coachman, had endeavoured to
tempt her to matrimony--in vain. "She didn't want none of them," she
told her mistress. "And, what was more, she wouldn't have none of
them." And therefore she remained Mrs. Jones, with brevet rank.

It seemed, from what Lady Fitzgerald said, that Mrs. Jones's manner
had been somewhat mysterious about this man, Mollett. She had
endeavoured to reassure and comfort her mistress, saying that nothing
would come of it as nothing had come of that other Tenby visit, and
giving it as her counsel that the ladies should allow the whole
matter to pass by without further notice. But at the same time Lady
Fitzgerald had remarked that her manner had been very serious when
she first said that she had seen the man before.

"Jones," Lady Fitzgerald had said to her, very earnestly, "if you
know more about this man than you are telling me, you are bound to
speak out, and let me know everything."

"Who--I, my lady? what could I know? Only he do look to me like the
same man, and so I thought it right to say to your ladyship."

Lady Fitzgerald had seen that there was nothing more to be gained by
cross-questioning, and so she had allowed the matter to drop. But she
was by no means satisfied that this servant whom she so trusted did
not know more than she had told. And then Mrs. Jones had been with
her in those dreadful Dorsetshire days, and an undefined fear began
to creep over her very soul.

"God bless you, my child!" said Lady Fitzgerald, as her son got up to
leave her. And then she embraced him with more warmth even than was
her wont. "All that we can do at present is to be gentle with him,
and not to encourage people around him to talk of his illness."

On the next morning Lady Fitzgerald did not come down to breakfast,
but sent her love to Clara, and begged her guest to excuse her on
account of headache. Sir Thomas rarely came in to breakfast, and
therefore his absence was not remarkable. His daughters, however,
went up to see him, as did also his sister; and they all declared
that he was very much better.

"It was some sudden attack, I suppose?" said Clara.

"Yes, very sudden; he has had the same before," said Herbert. "But
they do not at all affect his intellect or bodily powers. Depression
is, I suppose, the name that the doctors would call it."

And then at last it became noticeable by them that Lady Clara did not
use her left arm. "Oh, Clara!" said Emmeline, "I see now that you are
hurt. How selfish we have been! Oh dear, oh dear!" And both Emmeline
and Mary immediately surrounded her, examining her arm, and almost
carrying her to the sofa.

"I don't think it will be much," said Clara. "It's only a little
stiff."

"Oh, Herbert, what shall we do? Do look here; the inside of her arm
is quite black."

Herbert, gently touching her hand, did examine the arm, and declared
his opinion that she had received a dreadfully violent blow. Emmeline
proposed to send for a doctor to pronounce whether or no it were
broken. Mary said that she didn't think it was broken, but that she
was sure the patient ought not to be moved that day, or probably for
a week. Aunt Letty, in the mean time, prescribed a cold-water bandage
with great authority, and bounced out of the room to fetch the
necessary linen and basin of water.

"It's nothing at all," continued Clara. "And indeed I shall go home
to-day; indeed I shall."

"It might be very bad for your arm that you should be moved," said
Herbert.

"And your staying here will not be the least trouble to us. We shall
all be so happy to have you; shall we not, Mary?"

"Of course we shall; and so will mamma."

"I am so sorry to be here now," said Clara, "when I know you are all
in such trouble about Sir Thomas. But as for going, I shall go as
soon as ever you can make it convenient to send me. Indeed I shall."
And so the matter was discussed between them, Aunt Letty in the mean
time binding up the bruised arm with cold-water appliances.

Lady Clara was quite firm about going, and, therefore, at about
twelve she was sent. I should say taken, for Emmeline insisted on
going with her in the carriage. Herbert would have gone also, but he
felt that he ought not to leave Castle Richmond that day, on account
of his father. But he would certainly ride over, he said, and learn
how her arm was the next morning.

"And about Clady, you know," said Clara.

"I will go on to Clady also. I did send a man there yesterday to see
about the flue. It's the flue that's wrong, I know."

"Oh, thank you; I am so much obliged to you," said Clara. And then
the carriage drove off, and Herbert returned into the morning
sitting-room with his sister Mary.

"I'll tell you what it is, Master Herbert," said Mary.

