
"Whilk you mean to mak your excuse for asking the double of its worth,
I warrant?" answered the king. "I ken the tricks of you burrows-town
merchants, man."

"I have no hopes of baffling your Majesty's sagacity," said Heriot; "the
piece is really what I say, and the price a hundred and fifty pounds
sterling, if it pleases your Majesty to make present payment."

"A hundred and fifty punds, man! and as mony witches and warlocks to
raise them!" said the irritated Monarch. "My saul, Jingling Geordie, ye
are minded that your purse shall jingle to a bonny tune!--How am I to
tell you down a hundred and fifty punds for what will not weigh as many
merks? and ye ken that my very household servitors, and the officers of
my mouth, are sax months in arrear!"

The goldsmith stood his ground against all this objurgation, being what
he was well accustomed to, and only answered, that, if his Majesty liked
the piece, and desired to possess it, the price could be easily settled.
It was true that the party required the money, but he, George Heriot,
would advance it on his Majesty's account, if such were his pleasure,
and wait his royal conveniency for payment, for that and other matters;
the money, meanwhile, lying at the ordinary usage.

"By my honour," said James, "and that is speaking like an honest and
reasonable tradesman. We maun get another subsidy frae the Commons, and
that will make ae compting of it. Awa wi' it, Maxwell--awa wi' it,
and let it be set where Steenie and Babie Charles shall see it as they
return from Richmond.--And now that we are secret, my good auld friend
Geordie, I do truly opine, that speaking of Solomon and ourselves, the
haill wisdom in the country left Scotland, when we took our travels to
the Southland here."

George Heriot was courtier enough to say, that "the wise naturally
follow the wisest, as stags follow their leader."

"Troth, I think there is something in what thou sayest," said James;
"for we ourselves, and those of our Court and household, as thou
thyself, for example, are allowed by the English, for as self-opinioned
as they are, to pass for reasonable good wits; but the brains of those
we have left behind are all astir, and run clean hirdie-girdie, like sae
mony warlocks and witches on the Devil's Sabbath e'en."

"I am sorry to hear this, my liege," said Heriot. "May it please your
Grace to say what our countrymen have done to deserve such a character?"

"They are become frantic, man--clean brain-crazed," answered the king.
"I cannot keep them out of the Court by all the proclamations that the
heralds roar themselves hoarse with. Yesterday, nae farther gane,
just as we were mounted, and about to ride forth, in rushed a thorough
Edinburgh gutterblood--a ragged rascal, every dud upon whose back was
bidding good-day to the other, with a coat and hat that would have
served a pease-bogle, and without havings or reverence, thrusts into our
hands, like a sturdy beggar, some Supplication about debts owing by our
gracious mother, and siclike trash; whereat the horse spangs on end,
and, but for our admirable sitting, wherein we have been thought to
excel maist sovereign princes, as well as subjects, in Europe, I promise
you we would have been laid endlang on the causeway."

"Your Majesty," said Heriot, "is their common father, and therefore they
are the bolder to press into your gracious presence."

"I ken I am _pater patriae_ well enough," said James; "but one would
think they had a mind to squeeze my puddings out, that they may divide
the inheritance, Ud's death, Geordie, there is not a loon among them can
deliver a Supplication, as it suld be done in the face of majesty."

"I would I knew the most fitting and beseeming mode to do so,"
said Heriot, "were it but to instruct our poor countrymen in better
fashions."

"By my halidome," said the king, "ye are a ceevileezed fellow, Geordie,
and I carena if I fling awa as much time as may teach ye. And, first,
see you, sir--ye shall approach the presence of majesty thus,--shadowing
your eyes with your hand, to testify that you are in the presence of
the Vice-gerent of Heaven.--Vera weel, George, that is done in a comely
manner.--Then, sir, ye sail kneel, and make as if ye would kiss the
hem of our garment, the latch of our shoe, or such like.--Very weel
enacted--whilk we, as being willing to be debonair and pleasing towards
our lieges, prevent thus,--and motion to you to rise;--whilk, having
a boon to ask, as yet you obey not, but, gliding your hand into your
pouch, bring forth your Supplication, and place it reverentially in our
open palm." The goldsmith, who had complied with great accuracy with all
the prescribed points of the ceremonial, here completed it, to James's
no small astonishment, by placing in his hand the petition of the Lord
of Glenvarloch. "What means this, ye fause loon?" said he, reddening and
sputtering; "hae I been teaching you the manual exercise, that ye suld
present your piece at our ain royal body?--Now, by this light, I had as
lief that ye had bended a real pistolet against me, and yet this hae
ye done in my very cabinet, where nought suld enter but at my ain
pleasure."

"I trust your Majesty," said Heriot, as he continued to kneel, "will
forgive my exercising the lesson you condescended to give me in the
behalf of a friend?"

"Of a friend!" said the king; "so much the waur--so much the waur, I
tell you. If it had been something to do _yoursell_ good there would
have been some sense in it, and some chance that you wad not have
come back on me in a hurry; but a man may have a hundred friends, and
petitions for every ane of them, ilk ane after other."

"Your Majesty, I trust," said Heriot, "will judge me by former
experience, and will not suspect me of such presumption."

"I kenna," said the placable monarch; "the world goes daft, I
think--_sed semel insanivimus omnes_--thou art my old and faithful
servant, that is the truth; and, were't any thing for thy own behoof,
man, thou shouldst not ask twice. But, troth, Steenie loves me so
dearly, that he cares not that any one should ask favours of me but
himself.--Maxwell," (for the usher had re-entered after having carried
off the plate,) "get into the ante-chamber wi' your lang lugs.--In
conscience, Geordie, I think as that thou hast been mine ain auld
fiduciary, and wert my goldsmith when I might say with the Ethnic
poet--_Non mea renidet in domo lacunar_--for, faith, they had pillaged
my mither's auld house sae, that beechen bickers, and treen trenchers,
and latten platters, were whiles the best at our board, and glad we were
of something to put on them, without quarrelling with the metal of the
dishes. D'ye mind, for thou wert in maist of our complots, how we were
fain to send sax of the Blue-banders to harry the Lady of Loganhouse's
dowcot and poultry-yard, and what an awfu' plaint the poor dame made
against Jock of Milch, and the thieves of Annandale, wha were as
sackless of the deed as I am of the sin of murder?"

"It was the better for Jock," said Heriot; "for, if I remember weel, it
saved him from a strapping up at Dumfries, which he had weel deserved
for other misdeeds."

"Ay, man, mind ye that?" said the king; "but he had other virtues, for
he was a tight huntsman, moreover, that Jock of Milch, and could hollow
to a hound till all the woods rang again. But he came to an Annandale
end at the last, for Lord Torthorwald run his lance out through
him.--Cocksnails, man, when I think of those wild passages, in my
conscience, I am not sure but we lived merrier in auld Holyrood in
those shifting days, than now when we are dwelling at heck and manger.
_Cantabit vacuus_--we had but little to care for."

"And if your Majesty please to remember," said the goldsmith, "the awful
task we had to gather silver-vessail and gold-work enough to make some
show before the Spanish Ambassador."

"Vera true," said the king, now in a full tide of gossip, "and I mind
not the name of the right leal lord that helped us with every unce he
had in his house, that his native Prince might have some credit in the
eyes of them that had the Indies at their beck."

"I think, if your Majesty," said the citizen, "will cast your eye on the
paper in your hand, you will recollect his name."

"Ay!" said the king, "say ye sae, man?--Lord Glenvarloch, that was his
name indeed--_Justus et tenax propositi_--A just man, but as obstinate
as a baited bull. He stood whiles against us, that Lord Randal Olifaunt
of Glenvarloch, but he was a loving and a leal subject in the main. But
this supplicator maun be his son--Randal has been long gone where king
and lord must go, Geordie, as weel as the like of you--and what does his
son want with us?"

"The settlement," answered the citizen, "of a large debt due by your
Majesty's treasury, for money advanced to your Majesty in great State
emergency, about the time of the Raid of Ruthven."

"I mind the thing weel," said King James--"Od's death, man, I was just
out of the clutches of the Master of Glamis and his complices, and there
was never siller mair welcome to a born prince,--the mair the shame and
pity that crowned king should need sic a petty sum. But what need he dun
us for it, man, like a baxter at the breaking? We aught him the siller,
and will pay him wi' our convenience, or make it otherwise up to him,
whilk is enow between prince and subject--We are not _in meditatione
fugae,_ man, to be arrested thus peremptorily."

"Alas! an it please your Majesty," said the goldsmith, shaking his head,
"it is the poor young nobleman's extreme necessity, and not his will,
that makes him importunate; for he must have money, and that briefly,
to discharge a debt due to Peregrine Peterson, Conservator of the
Privileges at Campvere, or his haill hereditary barony and estate of
Glenvarloch will be evicted in virtue of an unredeemed wadset."

"How say ye, man--how say ye?" exclaimed the king, impatiently; "the
carle of a Conservator, the son of a Low-Dutch skipper, evict the auld
estate and lordship of the house of Olifaunt?--God's bread, man,
that maun not be--we maun suspend the diligence by writ of favour, or
otherwise."

"I doubt that may hardly be," answered the citizen, "if it please your
Majesty; your learned counsel in the law of Scotland advise, that there
is no remeid but in paying the money."

"Ud's fish," said the king, "let him keep haud by the strong hand
against the carle, until we can take some order about his affairs."

"Alas!" insisted the goldsmith, "if it like your Majesty, your own
pacific government, and your doing of equal justice to all men, has made
main force a kittle line to walk by, unless just within the bounds of
the Highlands."

"Well--weel--weel, man," said the perplexed monarch, whose ideas of
justice, expedience, and convenience, became on such occasions strangely
embroiled; "just it is we should pay our debts, that the young man may
pay his; and he must be paid, and _in verbo regis_ he shall be paid--but
how to come by the siller, man, is a difficult chapter--ye maun try the
city, Geordie."

"To say the truth," answered Heriot, "please your gracious Majesty,
what betwixt loans and benevolences, and subsidies, the city is at this
present----"

"Donna tell me of what the city is," said King James; "our Exchequer is
as dry as Dean Giles's discourses on the penitentiary psalms--_Ex nihilo
nihil fit_--It's ill taking the breeks aff a wild Highlandman--they that
come to me for siller, should tell me how to come by it--the city ye
maun try, Heriot; and donna think to be called Jingling Geordie for
nothing--and _in verbo regis_ I will pay the lad if you get me the
loan--I wonnot haggle on the terms; and, between you and me, Geordie, we
will redeem the brave auld estate of Glenvarloch.--But wherefore comes
not the young lord to Court, Heriot--is he comely--is he presentable in
the presence?"

"No one can be more so," said George Heriot; "but----"

"Ay, I understand ye," said his Majesty--"I understand ye--_Res angusta
domi_--puir lad-puir lad!--and his father a right true leal Scots heart,
though stiff in some opinions. Hark ye, Heriot, let the lad have twa
hundred pounds to fit him out. And, here--here"--(taking the carcanet
of rubies from his old hat)--"ye have had these in pledge before for a
larger sum, ye auld Levite that ye are. Keep them in gage, till I gie ye
back the siller out of the next subsidy."

"If it please your Majesty to give me such directions in writing," said
the cautious citizen.

"The deil is in your nicety, George," said the king; "ye are as preceese
as a Puritan in form, and a mere Nullifidian in the marrow of the
matter. May not a king's word serve ye for advancing your pitiful twa
hundred pounds?"

"But not for detaining the crown jewels," said George Heriot.

And the king, who from long experience was inured to dealing
with suspicious creditors, wrote an order upon George Heriot, his
well-beloved goldsmith and jeweller, for the sum of two hundred pounds,
to be paid presently to Nigel Olifaunt, Lord of Glenvarloch, to be
imputed as so much debts due to him by the crown; and authorizing
the retention of a carcanet of balas rubies, with a great diamond,
as described in a Catalogue of his Majesty's Jewels, to remain in
possession of the said George Heriot, advancer of the said sum, and
so forth, until he was lawfully contented and paid thereof. By another
rescript, his Majesty gave the said George Heriot directions to deal
with some of the monied men, upon equitable terms, for a sum of money
for his Majesty's present use, not to be under 50,000 merks, but as much
more as could conveniently be procured.

"And has he ony lair, this Lord Nigel of ours?" said the king.

George Heriot could not exactly answer this question; but believed "the
young lord had studied abroad."

"He shall have our own advice," said the king, "how to carry on his
studies to maist advantage; and it may be we will have him come to
Court, and study with Steenie and Babie Charles. And, now we think on't,
away--away, George--for the bairns will be coming hame presently, and we
would not as yet they kend of this matter we have been treating anent.
_Propera fedem,_ O Geordie. Clap your mule between your boughs, and
god-den with you."

Thus ended the conference betwixt the gentle King Jamie and his
benevolent jeweller and goldsmith.




CHAPTER VI


  O I do know him--tis the mouldy lemon
  Which our court wits will wet their lips withal,
  When they would sauce their honied conversation
  With somewhat sharper flavour--Marry sir,
  That virtue's wellnigh left him--all the juice
  That was so sharp and poignant, is squeezed out,
  While the poor rind, although as sour as ever,
  Must season soon the draff we give our grunters,
  For two legg'd things are weary on't.
                     _The Chamberlain--A Comedy_

The good company invited by the hospitable citizen assembled at his
house in Lombard Street at the "hollow and hungry hour" of noon, to
partake of that meal which divides the day, being about the time when
modern persons of fashion, turning themselves upon their pillow, begin
to think, not without a great many doubts and much hesitation, that
they will by and by commence it. Thither came the young Nigel, arrayed
plainly, but in a dress, nevertheless, more suitable to his age and
quality than he had formerly worn, accompanied by his servant Moniplies,
whose outside also was considerably improved. His solemn and stern
features glared forth from under a blue velvet bonnet, fantastically
placed sideways on his head--he had a sound and tough coat of English
blue broad-cloth, which, unlike his former vestment, would have
stood the tug of all the apprentices in Fleet Street. The buckler and
broadsword he wore as the arms of his condition, and a neat silver
badge, bearing his lord's arms, announced that he was an appendage of
aristocracy. He sat down in the good citizen's buttery, not a little
pleased to find his attendance upon the table in the hall was likely to
be rewarded with his share of a meal such as he had seldom partaken of.

Mr. David Ramsay, that profound and ingenious mechanic, was safely
conducted to Lombard Street, according to promise, well washed, brushed,
and cleaned, from the soot of the furnace and the forge. His daughter,
who came with him, was about twenty years old, very pretty, very
demure, yet with lively black eyes, that ever and anon contradicted the
expression of sobriety, to which silence, reserve, a plain velvet hood,
and a cambric ruff, had condemned Mistress Marget, as the daughter of a
quiet citizen.

There were also two citizens and merchants of London, men ample in
cloak, and many-linked golden chain, well to pass in the world, and
experienced in their craft of merchandise, but who require no particular
description. There was an elderly clergyman also, in his gown and
cassock, a decent venerable man, partaking in his manners of the
plainness of the citizens amongst whom he had his cure.

These may be dismissed with brief notice; but not so Sir Mungo
Malagrowther, of Girnigo Castle, who claims a little more attention, as
an original character of the time in which he flourished.

That good knight knocked at Master Heriot's door just as the clock began
to strike twelve, and was seated in his chair ere the last stroke
had chimed. This gave the knight an excellent opportunity of making
sarcastic observations on all who came later than himself, not to
mention a few rubs at the expense of those who had been so superfluous
as to appear earlier.

Having little or no property save his bare designation, Sir Mungo had
been early attached to Court in the capacity of whipping-boy, as the
office was then called, to King James the Sixth, and, with his Majesty,
trained to all polite learning by his celebrated preceptor, George
Buchanan. The office of whipping-boy doomed its unfortunate occupant to
undergo all the corporeal punishment which the Lord's Anointed, whose
proper person was of course sacred, might chance to incur, in the course
of travelling through his grammar and prosody. Under the stern rule,
indeed, of George Buchanan, who did not approve of the vicarious mode
of punishment, James bore the penance of his own faults, and Mungo
Malagrowther enjoyed a sinecure; but James's other pedagogue, Master
Patrick Young, went more ceremoniously to work, and appalled the very
soul of the youthful king by the floggings which he bestowed on the
whipping-boy, when the royal task was not suitably performed. And be
it told to Sir Mungo's praise, that there were points about him in the
highest respect suited to his official situation. He had even in youth a
naturally irregular and grotesque set of features, which, when distorted
by fear, pain, and anger, looked like one of the whimsical faces which
present themselves in a Gothic cornice. His voice also was high-pitched
and querulous, so that, when smarting under Master Peter Young's
unsparing inflictions, the expression of his grotesque physiognomy, and
the superhuman yells which he uttered, were well suited to produce all
the effects on the Monarch who deserved the lash, that could possibly be
produced by seeing another and an innocent individual suffering for his
delict.

Sir Mungo Malagrowther, for such he became, thus got an early footing
at Court, which another would have improved and maintained. But, when he
grew too big to be whipped, he had no other means of rendering himself
acceptable. A bitter, caustic, and backbiting humour, a malicious wit,
and an envy of others more prosperous than the possessor of such amiable
qualities, have not, indeed, always been found obstacles to a courtier's
rise; but then they must be amalgamated with a degree of selfish cunning
and prudence, of which Sir Mungo had no share. His satire ran riot, his
envy could not conceal itself, and it was not long after his majority
till he had as many quarrels upon his hands as would have required a
cat's nine lives to answer. In one of these rencontres he received,
perhaps we should say fortunately, a wound, which served him as an
excuse for answering no invitations of the kind in future. Sir Rullion
Rattray, of Ranagullion, cut off, in mortal combat, three of the fingers
of his right hand, so that Sir Mungo never could hold sword again. At
a later period, having written some satirical verses upon the Lady
Cockpen, he received so severe a chastisement from some persons employed
for the purpose, that he was found half dead on the spot where they had
thus dealt with him, and one of his thighs having been broken, and ill
set, gave him a hitch in his gait, with which he hobbled to his grave.
The lameness of his leg and hand, besides that they added considerably
to the grotesque appearance of this original, procured him in future
a personal immunity from the more dangerous consequences of his own
humour; and he gradually grew old in the service of the Court, in safety
of life and limb, though without either making friends or attaining
preferment. Sometimes, indeed, the king was amused with his caustic
sallies, but he had never art enough to improve the favourable
opportunity; and his enemies (who were, for that matter, the whole
Court) always found means to throw him out of favour again. The
celebrated Archie Armstrong offered Sir Mungo, in his generosity, a
skirt of his own fool's coat, proposing thereby to communicate to him
the privileges and immunities of a professed jester--"For," said the man
of motley, "Sir Mungo, as he goes on just now, gets no more for a good
jest than just the king's pardon for having made it."

Even in London, the golden shower which fell around him did not moisten
the blighted fortunes of Sir Mungo Malagrowther. He grew old, deaf,
and peevish--lost even the spirit which had formerly animated his
strictures--and was barely endured by James, who, though himself nearly
as far stricken in years, retained, to an unusual and even an absurd
degree, the desire to be surrounded by young people.

Sir Mungo, thus fallen into the yellow leaf of years and fortune, showed
his emaciated form and faded embroidery at Court as seldom as his duty
permitted; and spent his time in indulging his food for satire in the
public walks, and in the aisles of Saint Paul's, which were then the
general resort of newsmongers and characters of all descriptions,
associating himself chiefly with such of his countrymen as he accounted
of inferior birth and rank to himself. In this manner, hating and
contemning commerce, and those who pursued it, he nevertheless lived a
good deal among the Scottish artists and merchants, who had followed
the Court to London. To these he could show his cynicism without much
offence; for some submitted to his jeers and ill-humour in deference
to his birth and knighthood, which in those days conferred high
privileges--and others, of more sense, pitied and endured the old man,
unhappy alike in his fortunes and his temper.

Amongst the latter was George Heriot, who, though his habits and
education induced him to carry aristocratical feelings to a degree which
would now be thought extravagant, had too much spirit and good sense to
permit himself to be intruded upon to an unauthorized excess, or used
with the slightest improper freedom, by such a person as Sir Mungo, to
whom he was, nevertheless, not only respectfully civil, but essentially
kind, and even generous.

Accordingly, this appeared from the manner in which Sir Mungo
Malagrowther conducted himself upon entering the apartment. He paid
his respects to Master Heriot, and a decent, elderly, somewhat
severe-looking female, in a coif, who, by the name of Aunt Judith, did
the honours of his house and table, with little or no portion of the
supercilious acidity, which his singular physiognomy assumed when he
made his bow successively to David Ramsay and the two sober citizens.
He thrust himself into the conversation of the latter, to observe he
had heard in Paul's, that the bankrupt concern of Pindivide, a great
merchant,--who, as he expressed it, had given the crows a pudding, and
on whom he knew, from the same authority, each of the honest citizens
has some unsettled claim,--was like to prove a total loss--"stock and
block, ship and cargo, keel and rigging, all lost, now and for ever."

The two citizens grinned at each other; but, too prudent to make their
private affairs the subject of public discussion, drew their heads
together, and evaded farther conversation by speaking in a whisper.

The old Scots knight next attacked the watchmaker with the same
disrespectful familiarity.--"Davie," he said,--"Davie, ye donnard auld
idiot, have ye no gane mad yet, with applying your mathematical science,
as ye call it, to the book of Apocalypse? I expected to have heard ye
make out the sign of the beast, as clear as a tout on a bawbee whistle."

"Why, Sir Mungo," said the mechanist, after making an effort to recall
to his recollection what had been said to him, and by whom, "it may be,
that ye are nearer the mark than ye are yoursell aware of; for, taking
the ten horns o' the beast, ye may easily estimate by your digitals--"

"My digits! you d--d auld, rusty, good-for-nothing time-piece!"
exclaimed Sir Mungo, while, betwixt jest and earnest, he laid on his
hilt his hand, or rather his claw, (for Sir Rullion's broadsword
has abridged it into that form,)--"D'ye mean to upbraid me with my
mutilation?"

Master Heriot interfered. "I cannot persuade our friend David," he said,
"that scriptural prophecies are intended to remain in obscurity, until
their unexpected accomplishment shall make, as in former days, that
fulfilled which was written. But you must not exert your knightly valour
on him for all that."

"By my saul, and it would be throwing it away," said Sir Mungo,
laughing. "I would as soon set out, with hound and horn, to hunt
a sturdied sheep; for he is in a doze again, and up to the chin in
numerals, quotients, and dividends.--Mistress Margaret, my pretty
honey," for the beauty of the young citizen made even Sir Mungo
Malagrowther's grim features relax themselves a little, "is your father
always as entertaining as he seems just now?"

Mistress Margaret simpered, bridled, looked to either side, then
straight before her; and, having assumed all the airs of bashful
embarrassment and timidity which were necessary, as she thought, to
cover a certain shrewd readiness which really belonged to her character,
at length replied: "That indeed her father was very thoughtful, but she
had heard that he took the habit of mind from her grandfather."

"Your grandfather!" said Sir Mungo,--after doubting if he had heard her
aright,--"Said she her grandfather! The lassie is distraught!--I ken
nae wench on this side of Temple Bar that is derived from so distant a
relation."

"She has got a godfather, however, Sir Mungo," said George Heriot, again
interfering; "and I hope you will allow him interest enough with you, to
request you will not put his pretty godchild to so deep a blush."

"The better--the better," said Sir Mungo. "It is a credit to her, that,
bred and born within the sound of Bow-bell, she can blush for any thing;
and, by my saul, Master George," he continued, chucking the irritated
and reluctant damsel under the chin, "she is bonny enough to make amends
for her lack of ancestry--at least, in such a region as Cheapside,
where, d'ye mind me, the kettle cannot call the porridge-pot--"

The damsel blushed, but not so angrily as before. Master George Heriot
hastened to interrupt the conclusion of Sir Mungo's homely proverb, by
introducing him personally to Lord Nigel.

Sir Mungo could not at first understand what his host said,--"Bread of
Heaven, wha say ye, man?"

Upon the name of Nigel Olifaunt, Lord Glenvarloch, being again hollowed
into his ear, he drew up, and, regarding his entertainer with some
austerity, rebuked him for not making persons of quality acquainted with
each other, that they might exchange courtesies before they mingled with
other folks. He then made as handsome and courtly a congee to his new
acquaintance as a man maimed in foot and hand could do; and, observing
he had known my lord, his father, bid him welcome to London, and hoped
he should see him at Court.

Nigel in an instant comprehended, as well from Sir Mungo's manner, as
from a strict compression of their entertainer's lips, which intimated
the suppression of a desire to laugh, that he was dealing with an
original of no ordinary description, and accordingly, returned his
courtesy with suitable punctiliousness. Sir Mungo, in the meanwhile,
gazed on him with much earnestness; and, as the contemplation of natural
advantages was as odious to him as that of wealth, or other adventitious
benefits, he had no sooner completely perused the handsome form and good
features of the young lord, than like one of the comforters of the man
of Uz, he drew close up to him, to enlarge on the former grandeur of the
Lords of Glenvarloch, and the regret with which he had heard, that their
representative was not likely to possess the domains of his ancestry.
Anon, he enlarged upon the beauties of the principal mansion of
Glenvarloch--the commanding site of the old castle--the noble expanse
of the lake, stocked with wildfowl for hawking--the commanding screen of
forest, terminating in a mountain-ridge abounding with deer--and all the
other advantages of that fine and ancient barony, till Nigel, in spite
of every effort to the contrary, was unwillingly obliged to sigh.

Sir Mungo, skilful in discerning when the withers of those he conversed
with were wrung, observed that his new acquaintance winced, and would
willingly have pressed the discussion; but the cook's impatient knock
upon the dresser with the haft of his dudgeon-knife, now gave a signal
loud enough to be heard from the top of the house to the bottom,
summoning, at the same time, the serving-men to place the dinner upon
the table, and the guests to partake of it.

Sir Mungo, who was an admirer of good cheer,--a taste which, by the
way, might have some weight in reconciling his dignity to these city
visits,--was tolled off by the sound, and left Nigel and the other
guests in peace, until his anxiety to arrange himself in his due place
of pre-eminence at the genial board was duly gratified. Here, seated on
the left hand of Aunt Judith, he beheld Nigel occupy the station of yet
higher honour on the right, dividing that matron from pretty Mistress
Margaret; but he saw this with the more patience, that there stood
betwixt him and the young lord a superb larded capon.

The dinner proceeded according to the form of the times. All was
excellent of the kind; and, besides the Scottish cheer promised, the
board displayed beef and pudding, the statutory dainties of Old England.
A small cupboard of plate, very choicely and beautifully wrought, did
not escape the compliments of some of the company, and an oblique
sneer from Sir Mungo, as intimating the owner's excellence in his own
mechanical craft.

"I am not ashamed of the workmanship, Sir Mungo," said the honest
citizen. "They say, a good cook knows how to lick his own fingers; and,
methinks, it were unseemly that I, who have furnished half the cupboards
in broad Britain, should have my own covered with paltry pewter."

The blessing of the clergyman now left the guests at liberty to attack
what was placed before them; and the meal went forward with great
decorum, until Aunt Judith, in farther recommendation of the capon,
assured her company that it was of a celebrated breed of poultry, which
she had herself brought from Scotland.

"Then, like some of his countrymen, madam," said the pitiless Sir Mungo,
not without a glance towards his landlord, "he has been well larded in
England."

"There are some others of his countrymen," answered Master Heriot,
"to whom all the lard in England has not been able to render that good
office."

Sir Mungo sneered and reddened, the rest of the company laughed; and the
satirist, who had his reasons for not coming to extremity with Master
George, was silent for the rest of the dinner.

The dishes were exchanged for confections, and wine of the highest
quality and flavour; and Nigel saw the entertainments of the wealthiest
burgomasters, which he had witnessed abroad, fairly outshone by the
hospitality of a London citizen. Yet there was nothing ostentatious, or
which seemed inconsistent with the degree of an opulent burgher.

While the collation proceeded, Nigel, according to the good-breeding of
the time, addressed his discourse principally to Mrs. Judith, whom he
found to be a woman of a strong Scottish understanding, more inclined
towards the Puritans than was her brother George, (for in that relation
she stood to him, though he always called her aunt,) attached to him in
the strongest degree, and sedulously attentive to all his comforts. As
the conversation of this good dame was neither lively nor fascinating,
the young lord naturally addressed himself next to the old horologer's
very pretty daughter, who sat upon his left hand. From her, however,
there was no extracting any reply beyond the measure of a monosyllable;
and when the young gallant had said the best and most complaisant things
which his courtesy supplied, the smile that mantled upon her pretty
mouth was so slight and evanescent, as scarce to be discernible.

Nigel was beginning to tire of his company, for the old citizens were
speaking with his host of commercial matters in language to him totally
unintelligible, when Sir Mungo Malagrowther suddenly summoned their
attention.

That amiable personage had for some time withdrawn from the company into
the recess of a projecting window, so formed and placed as to command
a view of the door of the house, and of the street. This situation was
probably preferred by Sir Mungo on account of the number of objects
which the streets of a metropolis usually offer, of a kind congenial
to the thoughts of a splenetic man. What he had hitherto seen passing
there, was probably of little consequence; but now a trampling of horse
was heard without, and the knight suddenly exclaimed,--"By my faith,
Master George, you had better go look to shop; for here comes Knighton,
the Duke of Buckingham's groom, and two fellows after him, as if he were
my Lord Duke himself."

"My cash-keeper is below," said Heriot, without disturbing himself,
"and he will let me know if his Grace's commands require my immediate
attention."

"Umph!--cash-keeper?" muttered Sir Mungo to himself; "he would have had
an easy office when I first kend ye.--But," said he, speaking aloud,
"will you not come to the window, at least? for Knighton has trundled a
piece of silver-plate into your house--ha! ha! ha!--trundled it upon its
edge, as a callan' would drive a hoop. I cannot help laughing--ha! ha!
ha!--at the fellow's impudence."

"I believe you could not help laughing," said George Heriot, rising up
and leaving the room, "if your best friend lay dying."

"Bitter that, my lord--ha?" said Sir Mungo, addressing Nigel. "Our
friend is not a goldsmith for nothing--he hath no leaden wit. But I will
go down, and see what comes on't."

Heriot, as he descended the stairs, met his cash-keeper coming up, with
some concern in his face.--"Why, how now, Roberts," said the goldsmith,
"what means all this, man?"

"It is Knighton, Master Heriot, from the Court--Knighton, the Duke's
man. He brought back the salver you carried to Whitehall, flung it into
the entrance as if it had been an old pewter platter, and bade me tell
you the king would have none of your trumpery."

"Ay, indeed," said George Heriot--"None of my trumpery!--Come hither
into the compting-room, Roberts.--Sir Mungo," he added, bowing to the
knight, who had joined, and was preparing to follow them, "I pray your
forgiveness for an instant."

In virtue of this prohibition, Sir Mungo, who, as well as the rest of
the company, had overheard what passed betwixt George Heriot and his
cash-keeper, saw himself condemned to wait in the outer business-room,
where he would have endeavoured to slake his eager curiosity by
questioning Knighton; but that emissary of greatness, after having added
to the uncivil message of his master some rudeness of his own, had again
scampered westward, with his satellites at his heels.

In the meanwhile, the name of the Duke of Buckingham, the omnipotent
favourite both of the king and the Prince of Wales, had struck some
anxiety into the party which remained in the great parlour. He was more
feared than beloved, and, if not absolutely of a tyrannical disposition,
was accounted haughty, violent, and vindictive. It pressed on Nigel's
heart, that he himself, though he could not conceive how, nor why,
might be the original cause of the resentment of the Duke against his
benefactor. The others made their comments in whispers, until the sounds
reached Ramsay, who had not heard a word of what had previously passed,
but, plunged in those studies with which he connected every other
incident and event, took up only the catchword, and replied,--"The
Duke--the Duke of Buckingham--George Villiers--ay--I have spoke with
Lambe about him."

"Our Lord and our Lady! Now, how can you say so, father?" said his
daughter, who had shrewdness enough to see that her father was touching
upon dangerous ground.

"Why, ay, child," answered Ramsay; "the stars do but incline, they
cannot compel. But well you wot, it is commonly said of his Grace, by
those who have the skill to cast nativities, that there was a notable
conjunction of Mars and Saturn--the apparent or true time of which,
reducing the calculations of Eichstadius made for the latitude of
Oranienburgh, to that of London, gives seven hours, fifty-five minutes,
and forty-one seconds----"

"Hold your peace, old soothsayer," said Heriot, who at that instant
entered the room with a calm and steady countenance; "your calculations
are true and undeniable when they regard brass and wire, and mechanical
force; but future events are at the pleasure of Him who bears the hearts
of kings in his hands."

"Ay, but, George," answered the watchmaker, "there was a concurrence
of signs at this gentleman's birth, which showed his course would be
a strange one. Long has it been said of him, he was born at the very
meeting of night and day, and under crossing and contending influences
that may affect both us and him.

    'Full moon and high sea,
     Great man shalt thou be;
     Red dawning, stormy sky,
     Bloody death shalt thou die.'"

"It is not good to speak of such things," said Heriot, "especially of
the great; stone walls have ears, and a bird of the air shall carry the
matter."

Several of the guests seemed to be of their host's opinion. The two
merchants took brief leave, as if under consciousness that something
was wrong. Mistress Margaret, her body-guard of 'prentices being in
readiness, plucked her father by the sleeve, and, rescuing him from a
brown study, (whether referring to the wheels of Time, or to that of
Fortune, is uncertain,) wished good-night to her friend Mrs. Judith, and
received her godfather's blessing, who, at the same time, put upon
her slender finger a ring of much taste and some value; for he seldom
suffered her to leave him without some token of his affection. Thus
honourably dismissed, and accompanied by her escort, she set forth on
her return to Fleet Street.

Sir Mungo had bid adieu to Master Heriot as he came out from the back
compting-room, but such was the interest which he took in the affairs
