injure and blaspheme; down, and praise saints and angels for the grace
they have done thee, in preserving thee from the leprous plague which
cleaves to the house in which thou wert nurtured."

"If, my mother--so I must ever call you" replied Graeme,--"if I am
returned such as thou wouldst wish me, thou must thank the care of the
pious father Ambrose, whose instructions confirmed your early precepts,
and taught me at once to be faithful and to be silent."

"Be he blessed for it," said she; "blessed in the cell and in the field,
in the pulpit and at the altar--the saints rain blessings on him!--they
are just, and employ his pious care to counteract the evils which his
detested brother works against the realm and the church,--but he knew
not of thy lineage?"

"I could not myself tell him that," answered Roland. "I knew but darkly
from your words, that Sir Halbert Glendinning holds mine inheritance,
and that I am of blood as noble as runs in the veins of any Scottish
Baron--these are things not to be forgotten, but for the explanation I
must now look to you."

"And when time suits, thou shalt not look for it in vain. But men say,
my son, that thou art bold and sudden; and those who bear such tempers
are not lightly to be trusted with what will strongly move them."

"Say rather, my mother," returned Roland Graeme, "that I am laggard and
cold-blooded--what patience or endurance can you require of which _he_
is not capable, who for years has heard his religion ridiculed and
insulted, yet failed to plunge his dagger into the blasphemer's bosom!"

"Be contented, my child," replied Magdalen Graeme; "the time, which then
and even now demands patience, will soon ripen to that of effort and
action--great events are on the wing, and thou,--thou shalt have thy
share in advancing them. Thou hast relinquished the service of the Lady
of Avenel?"

"I have been dismissed from it, my mother--I have lived to be dismissed,
as if I were the meanest of the train."

"It is the better, my child," replied she; "thy mind will be the more
hardened to undertake that which must be performed."

"Let it be nothing, then, against the Lady of Avenel," said the page,
"as thy look and words seem to imply. I have eaten her bread--I have
experienced her favour--I will neither injure nor betray her."

"Of that hereafter, my son," said she; "but learn this, that it is not
for thee to capitulate in thy duty, and to say this will I do, and that
will I leave undone--No, Roland! God and man will no longer abide the
wickedness of this generation. Seest thou these fragments--knowest
thou what they represent?--and canst thou think it is for thee to make
distinctions amongst a race so accursed by Heaven, that they renounce,
violate, blaspheme, and destroy, whatsoever we are commanded to believe
in, whatsoever we are commanded to reverence?"

As she spoke, she bent her head towards the broken image, with a
countenance in which strong resentment and zeal were mingled with an
expression of ecstatic devotion; she raised her left hand aloft as
in the act of making a vow, and thus proceeded; "Bear witness for me,
blessed symbol of our salvation, bear witness, holy saint, within whose
violated temple we stand, that as it is not for vengeance of my own
that my hate pursues these people, so neither, for any favour or earthly
affection towards any amongst them, will I withdraw my hand from the
plough, when it shall pass through the devoted furrow! Bear witness,
holy saint, once thyself a wanderer and fugitive as we are now--bear
witness, Mother of Mercy, Queen of Heaven--bear witness, saints and
angels!"

In this high train of enthusiasm, she stood, raising her eyes through
the fractured roof of the vault, to the stars which now began to twinkle
through the pale twilight, while the long gray tresses which hung
down over her shoulders waved in the night-breeze, which the chasm and
fractured windows admitted freely.

Roland Graeme was too much awed by early habits, as well as by the
mysterious import of her words, to ask for farther explanation of the
purpose she obscurely hinted at. Nor did she farther press him on the
subject; for, having concluded her prayer or obtestation, by clasping
her hands together with solemnity, and then signing herself with the
cross, she again addressed her grandson, in a tone more adapted to the
ordinary business of life.

"Thou must hence," she said, "Roland, thou must hence, but not till
morning--And now, how wilt thou shift for thy night's quarters?--thou
hast been more softly bred than when we were companions in the misty
hills of Cumberland and Liddesdale."

"I have at least preserved, my good mother, the habits which I then
learned--can lie hard, feed sparingly, and think it no hardship. Since I
was a wanderer with thee on the hills, I have been a hunter, and fisher,
and fowler, and each of these is accustomed to sleep freely in a worse
shelter than sacrilege has left us here."

"Than sacrilege has left us here!" said the matron, repeating his words,
and pausing on them. "Most true, my son; and God's faithful children are
now worst sheltered, when they lodge in God's own house and the demesne
of his blessed saints. We shall sleep cold here, under the nightwind,
which whistles through the breaches which heresy has made. They shall
lie warmer who made them--ay, and through a long hereafter."

Notwithstanding the wild and singular expression of this female, she
appeared to retain towards Roland Graeme, in a strong degree, that
affectionate and sedulous love which women bear to their nurslings,
and the children dependent on their care. It seemed as if she would not
permit him to do aught for himself which in former days her attention
had been used to do for him, and that she considered the tall stripling
before her as being equally dependent on her careful attention as
when he was the orphan child, who had owed all to her affectionate
solicitude.

"What hast thou to eat now?" she said, as, leaving the chapel, they went
into the deserted habitation of the priest; "or what means of kindling
a fire, to defend thee from this raw and inclement air? Poor child! thou
hast made slight provision for a long journey; nor hast thou skill to
help thyself by wit, when means are scanty. But Our Lady has placed by
thy side one to whom want, in all its forms, is as familiar as plenty
and splendour have formerly been. And with want, Roland, come the arts
of which she is the inventor."

With an active and officious diligence, which strangely contrasted with
her late abstracted and high tone of Catholic devotion, she set about
her domestic arrangements for the evening. A pouch, which was hidden
under her garment, produced a flint and steel, and from the scattered
fragments around (those pertaining to the image of Saint Cuthbert
scrupulously excepted) she obtained splinters sufficient to raise a
sparkling and cheerful fire on the hearth of the deserted cell.

"And now," she said, "for needful food."

"Think not of it, mother," said Roland, "unless you yourself feel
hunger. It is a little thing for me to endure a night's abstinence, and
a small atonement for the necessary transgression of the rules of the
Church upon which I was compelled during my stay in the castle."

"Hunger for myself!" answered the matron--"Know, youth, that a mother
knows not hunger till that of her child is satisfied." And with
affectionate inconsistency, totally different from her usual manner, she
added, "Roland, you must not fast; you have dispensation; you are young,
and to youth food and sleep are necessaries not to be dispensed with.
Husband your strength, my child,--your sovereign, your religion, your
country, require it. Let age macerate by fast and vigil a body which can
only suffer; let youth, in these active times, nourish the limbs and the
strength which action requires."

While she thus spoke, the scrip, which had produced the means of
striking fire, furnished provision for a meal; of which she herself
scarce partook, but anxiously watched her charge, taking a pleasure,
resembling that of an epicure, in each morsel which he swallowed with a
youthful appetite which abstinence had rendered unusually sharp. Roland
readily obeyed her recommendations, and ate the food which she so
affectionately and earnestly placed before him. But she shook her head
when invited by him in return to partake of the refreshment her own
cares had furnished; and when his solicitude became more pressing, she
refused him in a loftier tone of rejection.

"Young man," she said, "you know not to whom or of what you speak. They
to whom Heaven declares its purpose must merit its communication by
mortifying the senses; they have that within which requires not the
superfluity of earthly nutriment, which is necessary to those who are
without the sphere of the Vision. To them the watch spent in prayer is
a refreshing slumber, and the sense of doing the will of Heaven is a
richer banquet than the tables of monarchs can spread before them!--But
do thou sleep soft, my son," she said, relapsing from the tone of
fanaticism into that of maternal affection and tenderness; "do thou
sleep sound while life is but young with thee, and the cares of the day
can be drowned in the slumbers of the evening. Different is thy duty and
mine, and as different the means by which we must qualify and strengthen
ourselves to perform it. From thee is demanded strength of body--from
me, strength of soul."

When she thus spoke, she prepared with ready address a pallet-couch,
composed partly of the dried leaves which had once furnished a bed to
the solitary, and the guests who occasionally received his hospitality,
and which, neglected by the destroyers of his humble cell, had remained
little disturbed in the corner allotted for them. To these her care
added some of the vestures which lay torn and scattered on the floor.
With a zealous hand she selected all such as appeared to have made
any part of the sacerdotal vestments, laying them aside as sacred
from ordinary purposes, and with the rest she made, with dexterous
promptness, such a bed as a weary man might willingly stretch himself
on; and during the time she was preparing it, rejected, even with
acrimony, any attempt which the youth made to assist her, or any
entreaty which he urged, that she would accept of the place of rest for
her own use. "Sleep thou," said she, "Roland Graeme, sleep thou--the
persecuted, the disinherited orphan--the son of an ill-fated
mother--sleep thou! I go to pray in the chapel beside thee."

The manner was too enthusiastically earnest, too obstinately firm, to
permit Roland Graeme to dispute her will any farther. Yet he felt some
shame in giving way to it. It seemed as if she had forgotten the years
that had passed away since their parting; and expected to meet, in the
tall, indulged, and wilful youth, whom she had recovered, the passive
obedience of the child whom she had left in the Castle of Avenel. This
did not fail to hurt her grandson's characteristic and constitutional
pride. He obeyed, indeed, awed into submission by the sudden recurrence
of former subordination, and by feelings of affection and gratitude.
Still, however, he felt the yoke.

"Have I relinquished the hawk and the hound," he said, "to become the
pupil of her pleasure, as if I were still a child?--I, whom even my
envious mates allowed to be superior in those exercises which they took
most pains to acquire, and which came to me naturally, as if a knowledge
of them had been my birthright? This may not, and must not be. I will be
no reclaimed sparrow-hawk, who is carried hooded on a woman's wrist,
and has his quarry only shown to him when his eyes are uncovered for his
flight. I will know her purpose ere it is proposed to me to aid it."

These, and other thoughts, streamed through the mind of Roland Graeme;
and although wearied with the fatigues of the day, it was long ere he
could compose himself to rest.




Chapter the Ninth.


  Kneel with me--swear it--'tis not in words I trust,
  Save when they're fenced with an appeal to Heaven.
                                   OLD PLAY

After passing the night in that sound sleep for which agitation and
fatigue had prepared him, Roland was awakened by the fresh morning
air, and by the beams of the rising sun. His first feeling was that of
surprise; for, instead of looking forth from a turret window on the
Lake of Avenel, which was the prospect his former apartment afforded,
an unlatticed aperture gave him the view of the demolished garden of the
banished anchorite. He sat up on his couch of leaves, and arranged in
his memory, not without wonder, the singular events of the preceding
day, which appeared the more surprising the more he considered them.
He had lost the protectress of his youth, and, in the same day, he
had recovered the guide and guardian of his childhood. The former
deprivation he felt ought to be matter of unceasing regret, and
it seemed as if the latter could hardly be the subject of unmixed
self-congratulation. He remembered this person, who had stood to him in
the relation of a mother, as equally affectionate in her attention, and
absolute in her authority. A singular mixture of love and fear attended
upon his early remembrances as they were connected with her; and the
fear that she might desire to resume the same absolute control over
his motions--a fear which her conduct of yesterday did not tend much to
dissipate--weighed heavily against the joy of this second meeting.

"She cannot mean," said his rising pride, "to lead and direct me as
a pupil, when I am at the age of judging of my own actions?--this she
cannot mean, or meaning it, will feel herself strangely deceived."

A sense of gratitude towards the person against whom his heart thus
rebelled, checked his course of feeling. He resisted the thoughts which
involuntarily arose in his mind, as he would have resisted an actual
instigation of the foul fiend; and, to aid him in his struggle, he felt
for his beads. But, in his hasty departure from the Castle of Avenel, he
had forgotten and left them behind him.

"This is yet worse," he said; "but two things I learned of her under the
most deadly charge of secrecy--to tell my beads, and to conceal that I
did so; and I have kept my word till now; and when she shall ask me
for the rosary, I must say I have forgotten it! Do I deserve she should
believe me when. I say I have kept the secret of my faith, when I set so
light by its symbol?"

He paced the floor in anxious agitation. In fact, his attachment to
his faith was of a nature very different from that which animated the
enthusiastic matron, but which, notwithstanding, it would have been his
last thought to relinquish.

The early charges impressed on him by his grandmother, had been
instilled into a mind and memory of a character peculiarly tenacious.
Child as he was, he was proud of the confidence reposed in his
discretion, and resolved to show that it had not been rashly intrusted
to him. At the same time, his resolution was no more than that of
a child, and must, necessarily, have gradually faded away under the
operation both of precept and example, during his residence at the
Castle of Avenel, but for the exhortations of Father Ambrose, who, in
his lay estate, had been called Edward Glendinning. This zealous
monk had been apprized, by an unsigned letter placed in his hand by
a pilgrim, that a child educated in the Catholic faith was now in the
Castle of Avenel, perilously situated, (so was the scroll expressed,)
as ever the three children who were cast into the fiery furnace of
persecution. The letter threw upon Father Ambrose the fault, should
this solitary lamb, unwillingly left within the demesnes of the prowling
wolf, become his final prey. There needed no farther exhortation to the
monk than the idea that a soul might be endangered, and that a Catholic
might become an apostate; and he made his visits more frequent than
usual to the castle of Avenel, lest, through want of the private
encouragement and instruction which he always found some opportunity of
dispensing, the church should lose a proselyte, and, according to the
Romish creed, the devil acquire a soul.

Still these interviews were rare; and though they encouraged the
solitary boy to keep his secret and hold fast his religion, they were
neither frequent nor long enough to inspire him with any thing beyond
a blind attachment to the observances which the priest recommended. He
adhered to the forms of his religion rather because he felt it would
be dishonourable to change that of his fathers, than from any rational
conviction or sincere belief of its mysterious doctrines. It was a
principal part of the distinction which, in his own opinion, singled him
out from those with whom he lived, and gave him an additional, though an
internal and concealed reason, for contemning those of the household who
showed an undisguised dislike of him, and for hardening himself against
the instructions of the chaplain, Henry Warden.

"The fanatic preacher," he thought within himself, during some one
of the chaplain's frequent discourses against the Church of Rome, "he
little knows whose ears are receiving his profane doctrine, and with
what contempt and abhorrence they hear his blasphemies against the holy
religion by which kings have been crowned, and for which martyrs have
died!"

But in such proud feelings of defiance of heresy, as it was termed, and
of its professors, which associated the Catholic religion with a
sense of generous independence, and that of the Protestants with the
subjugation of his mind and temper to the direction of Mr. Warden, began
and ended the faith of Roland Graeme, who, independently of the pride of
singularity, sought not to understand, and had no one to expound to
him, the peculiarities of the tenets which he professed. His regret,
therefore, at missing the rosary which had been conveyed to him through
the hands of Father Ambrose, was rather the shame of a soldier who has
dropped his cockade, or badge of service, than that of a zealous votary
who had forgotten a visible symbol of his religion.

His thoughts on the subject, however, were mortifying, and the more
so from apprehension that his negligence must reach the ears of
his relative. He felt it could be no one but her who had secretly
transmitted these beads to Father Ambrose for his use, and that his
carelessness was but an indifferent requital of her kindness.

"Nor will she omit to ask me about them," said he to himself; "for hers
is a zeal which age cannot quell; and if she has not quitted her wont,
my answer will not fail to incense her."

While he thus communed with himself, Magdalen Graeme entered the
apartment. "The blessing of the morning on your youthful head, my son,"
she said, with a solemnity of expression which thrilled the youth to the
heart, so sad and earnest did the benediction flow from her lips, in a
tone where devotion was blended with affection. "And thou hast started
thus early from thy couch to catch the first breath of the dawn? But it
is not well, my Roland. Enjoy slumber while thou canst; the time is not
far behind when the waking eye must be thy portion, as well as mine."

She uttered these words with an affectionate and anxious tone, which
showed, that devotional as were the habitual exercises of her mind, the
thoughts of her nursling yet bound her to earth with the cords of human
affection and passion.

But she abode not long in a mood which she probably regarded as a
momentary dereliction of her imaginary high calling--"Come," she said,
"youth, up and be doing--It is time that we leave this place."

"And whither do we go?" said the young man; "or what is the object of
our journey?"

The matron stepped back, and gazed on him with surprise, not unmingled
with displeasure.

"To what purpose such a question?" she said; "is it not enough that I
lead the way? Hast thou lived with heretics till thou hast learned to
instal the vanity of thine own private judgment in place of due honour
and obedience?"

"The time," thought Roland Graeme within himself, "is already come, when
I must establish my freedom, or be a willing thrall for ever--I feel
that I must speedily look to it."

She instantly fulfilled his foreboding, by recurring to the theme by
which her thoughts seemed most constantly engrossed, although, when she
pleased, no one could so perfectly disguise her religion.

"Thy beads, my son--hast thou told thy beads?"

Roland Graeme coloured high; he felt the storm was approaching, but
scorned to avert it by a falsehood.

"I have forgotten my rosary," he said, "at the Castle of Avenel."

"Forgotten thy rosary!" she exclaimed; "false both to religion and to
natural duty, hast thou lost what was sent so far, and at such risk, a
token of the truest affection, that should have been, every bead of it,
as dear to thee as thine eyeballs?"

"I am grieved it should have so chanced, mother," replied the youth,
"and much did I value the token, as coming from you. For what remains,
I trust to win gold enough, when I push my way in the world; and till
then, beads of black oak, or a rosary of nuts, must serve the turn."

"Hear him!" said his grandmother; "young as he is, he hath learned
already the lessons of the devil's school! The rosary, consecrated by
the Holy Father himself, and sanctified by his blessing, is but a few
knobs of gold, whose value may be replaced by the wages of his
profane labour, and whose virtue may be supplied by a string of
hazel-nuts!--This is heresy--So Henry Warden, the wolf who ravages the
flock of the Shepherd, hath taught thee to speak and to think."

"Mother," said Roland Graeme, "I am no heretic; I believe and I pray
according to the rules of our church--This misfortune I regret, but I
cannot amend it."

"Thou canst repent it, though," replied his spiritual directress,
"repent it in dust and ashes, atone for it by fasting, prayer, and
penance, instead of looking on me with a countenance as light as if thou
hadst lost but a button from thy cap."

"Mother," said Roland, "be appeased; I will remember my fault in the
next confession which I have space and opportunity to make, and will
do whatever the priest may require of me in atonement. For the heaviest
fault I can do no more.--But, mother," he added, after a moment's pause,
"let me not incur your farther displeasure, if I ask whither our journey
is bound, and what is its object. I am no longer a child, but a man, and
at my own disposal, with down upon my chin, and a sword by my side--I
will go to the end of the world with you to do your pleasure; but I owe
it to myself to inquire the purpose and direction of our travels."

"You owe it to yourself, ungrateful boy?" replied his relative,
passion rapidly supplying the colour which age had long chased from her
features,--"to yourself you owe nothing--you can owe nothing--to me
you owe every thing--your life when an infant--your support while a
child--the means of instruction, and the hopes of honour--and, sooner
than thou shouldst abandon the noble cause to which I have devoted thee,
would I see thee lie a corpse at my feet!"

Roland was alarmed at the vehement agitation with which she spoke,
and which threatened to overpower her aged frame; and he hastened to
reply,--"I forget nothing of what I owe to you, my dearest mother--show
me how my blood can testify my gratitude, and you shall judge if I spare
it. But blindfold obedience has in it as little merit as reason."

"Saints and angels!" replied Magdalen, "and do I hear these words from
the child of my hopes, the nursling by whose bed I have kneeled, and for
whose weal I have wearied every saint in heaven with prayers? Roland,
by obedience only canst thou show thy affection and thy gratitude. What
avails it that you might perchance adopt the course I propose to thee,
were it to be fully explained? Thou wouldst not then follow my command,
but thine own judgment; thou wouldst not do the will of Heaven,
communicated through thy best friend, to whom thou owest thine all; but
thou wouldst observe the blinded dictates of thine own imperfect reason.
Hear me, Roland! a lot calls thee--solicits thee--demands thee--the
proudest to which man can be destined, and it uses the voice of thine
earliest, thy best, thine only friend--Wilt thou resist it? Then go
thy way--leave me here--my hopes on earth are gone and withered--I will
kneel me down before yonder profaned altar, and when the raging heretics
return, they shall dye it with the blood of a martyr."

"But, my dearest mother," said Roland Graeme, whose early recollections
of her violence were formidably renewed by these wild expressions of
reckless passion, "I will not forsake you--I will abide with you--worlds
shall not force me from your side--I will protect--I will defend you--I
will live with you, and die for you!"

"One word, my son, were worth all these--say only, 'I will obey you.'"

"Doubt it not, mother," replied the youth, "I will, and that with all my
heart; only----"

"Nay, I receive no qualifications of thy promise," said Magdalen Graeme,
catching at the word, "the obedience which I require is absolute; and
a blessing on thee, thou darling memory of my beloved child, that thou
hast power to make a promise so hard to human pride! Trust me well, that
in the design in which thou dost embark, thou hast for thy partners the
mighty and the valiant, the power of the church, and the pride of the
noble. Succeed or fail, live or die, thy name shall be among those
with whom success or failure is alike glorious, death or life alike
desirable. Forward, then, forward! life is short, and our plan is
laborious--Angels, saints, and the whole blessed host of heaven, have
their eyes even now on this barren and blighted land of Scotland--What
say I? on Scotland? their eye is on _us_, Roland--on the frail woman, on
the inexperienced youth, who, amidst the ruins which sacrilege hath made
in the holy place, devote themselves to God's cause, and that of
their lawful Sovereign. Amen, so be it! The blessed eyes of saints and
martyrs, which see our resolve, shall witness the execution; or their
ears, which hear our vow, shall hear our death-groan, drawn in the
sacred cause!"

While thus speaking, she held Roland Graeme firmly with one hand, while
she pointed upward with the other, to leave him, as it were, no means of
protest against the obtestation to which he was thus made a party.
When she had finished her appeal to Heaven, she left him no leisure for
farther hesitation, or for asking any explanation of her purpose; but
passing with the same ready transition as formerly, to the solicitous
attentions of an anxious parent, overwhelmed him with questions
concerning his residence in the Castle of Avenel, and the qualities and
accomplishments he had acquired.

"It is well," she said, when she had exhausted her inquiries, "my gay
goss-hawk

[Footnote: The comparison is taken from some beautiful verses in an old
ballad, entitled Fause Foodrage, published in the "Minstrelsy of the
Scottish Border." A deposed queen, to preserve her infant son from
the traitors who have slain his father, exchanges him with the female
offspring of a faithful friend, and goes on to direct the education of
the children, and the private signals by which the parents are to hear
news each of her own offspring.

 "And you shall learn my gay goss-hawk
  Right well to breast a steed;
  And so will I your turtle dow,
  As well to write and read.

  And ye shall learn my gay goss-hawk
  To wield both bow and brand;
  And so will I your turtle dow,
  To lay gowd with her hand.

  At kirk or market when we meet,
  We'll dare make no avow,
  But, 'Dame, how does my gay goss-hawk?'
  'Madame, how does my dow?'" ]

hath been well trained, and will soar high; but those who bred him will
have cause to fear as well as to wonder at his flight.--Let us now," she
said, "to our morning meal, and care not though it be a scanty one. A
few hours' walk will bring us to more friendly quarters."

They broke their fast accordingly, on such fragments as remained of
their yesterday's provision, and immediately set out on their farther
journey. Magdalen Graeme led the way, with a firm and active step much
beyond her years, and Roland Graeme followed, pensive and anxious, and
far from satisfied with the state of dependence to which he seemed again
to be reduced.

"Am I for ever," he said to himself, "to be devoured with the desire
of independence and free agency, and yet to be for ever led on, by
circumstances, to follow the will of others?"




Chapter the Tenth.


  She dwelt unnoticed and alone,
    Beside the springs of Dove:
  A maid whom there was none to praise,
    And very few to love.
                        WORDSWORTH.

In the course of their journey the travellers spoke little to each
other. Magdalen Graeme chanted, from time to time, in a low voice, a
part of some one of those beautiful old Latin hymns which belong to the
Catholic service, muttered an Ave or a Credo, and so passed on, lost in
devotional contemplation. The meditations of her grandson were more
bent on mundane matters; and many a time, as a moor-fowl arose from the
heath, and shot along the moor, uttering his bold crow of defiance, he
thought of the jolly Adam Woodcock, and his trusty goss-hawk; or, as
they passed a thicket where the low trees and bushes were intermingled
with tall fern, furze, and broom, so as to form a thick and intricate
cover, his dreams were of a roebuck and a brace of gaze-hounds. But
frequently his mind returned to the benevolent and kind mistress whom he
had left behind him, offended justly, and unreconciled by any effort of
his.

"My step would be lighter," he thought, "and so would my heart, could
I but have returned to see her for one instant, and to say, Lady, the
orphan boy was wild, but not ungrateful!"

Travelling in these divers moods, about the hour of noon they reached
a small straggling village, in which, as usual, were seen one or two
of those predominating towers, or peel houses, which, for reasons of
defence elsewhere detailed, were at that time to be found in every
Border hamlet. A brook flowed beside the village, and watered the valley
in which it stood. There was also a mansion at the end of the village,
and a little way separated from it, much dilapidated, and in very
bad order, but appearing to have been the abode of persons of some
consideration. The situation was agreeable, being an angle formed by the
stream, bearing three or four large sycamore trees, which were in full
leaf, and served to relieve the dark appearance of the mansion, which
was built of a deep red stone. The house itself was a large one, but was
now obviously too big for the inmates; several windows were built
up, especially those which opened from the lower story; others were
blockaded in a less substantial manner. The court before the door, which
had once been defended with a species of low outer-wall, now ruinous,
was paved, but the stones were completely covered with long gray
nettles, thistles, and other weeds, which, shooting up betwixt the
flags, had displaced many of them from their level. Even matters
demanding more peremptory attention had been left neglected, in a manner
which argued sloth or poverty in the extreme. The stream, undermining a
part of the bank near an angle of the ruinous wall, had brought it down,
with a corner turret, the ruins of which lay in the bed of the river.
The current, interrupted by the ruins which it had overthrown, and
turned yet nearer to the site of the tower, had greatly enlarged the
breach it had made, and was in the process of undermining the ground
on which the house itself stood, unless it were speedily protected by
sufficient bulwarks.

All this attracted Roland Graeme's observation, as they approached the
dwelling by a winding path, which gave them, at intervals, a view of it
from different points.

"If we go to yonder house," he said to his mother, "I trust it is but
for a short visit. It looks as if two rainy days from the north-west
would send the whole into the brook."

"You see but with the eyes of the body," said the old woman; "God will
defend his own, though it be forsaken and despised of men. Better to
dwell on the sand, under his law, than fly to the rock of human trust."

As she thus spoke, they entered the court before the old mansion, and
Roland could observe that the front of it had formerly been considerably
ornamented with carved work, in the same dark-coloured freestone of
which it was built. But all these ornaments had been broken down and
destroyed, and only the shattered vestiges of niches and entablatures
now strewed the place which they had once occupied. The larger
entrance in front was walled up, but a little footpath, which, from its
appearance, seemed to be rarely trodden, led to a small wicket, defended
by a door well clenched with iron-headed nails, at which Magdalen Graeme
knocked three times, pausing betwixt each knock, until she heard an
answering tap from within. At the last knock, the wicket was opened by a
pale thin female, who said, "_Benedicti qui venient in nomine Domini_."
They entered, and the portress hastily shut behind them the wicket, and
made fast the massive fastenings by which it was secured.

The female led the way through a narrow entrance, into a vestibule of
some extent, paved with stone, and having benches of the same solid
material ranged around. At the upper end was an oriel window, but some
of the intervals formed by the stone shafts and mullions were blocked
up, so that the apartment was very gloomy.

Here they stopped, and the mistress of the mansion, for such she was,
embraced Magdalen Graeme, and greeting her by the title of sister,
kissed her with much solemnity, on either side of the face.

"The blessing of Our Lady be upon you, my sister," were her next words;
and they left no doubt upon Roland's mind respecting the religion of
their hostess, even if he could have suspected his venerable and
zealous guide of resting elsewhere than in the habitation of an orthodox
Catholic. They spoke together a few words in private, during which
he had leisure to remark more particularly the appearance of his
grandmother's friend.

Her age might be betwixt fifty and sixty; her looks had a mixture of
melancholy and unhappiness that bordered on discontent, and obscured the
remains of beauty which age had still left on her features. Her dress
was of the plainest and most ordinary description, of a dark colour,
and, like Magdalen Graeme's, something approaching to a religious habit.
Strict neatness and cleanliness of person, seemed to intimate, that if
poor, she was not reduced to squalid or heart-broken distress, and that
she was still sufficiently attached to life to retain a taste for its
decencies, if not its elegancies. Her manner, as well as her features
and appearance, argued an original condition and education far above the
meanness of her present appearance. In short, the whole figure was
such as to excite the idea, "That female must have had a history worth
knowing." While Roland Graeme was making this very reflection, the
whispers of the two females ceased, and the mistress of the mansion,
approaching him, looked on his face and person with much attention, and,
as it seemed, some interest.

"This, then," she said, addressing his relative, "is the child of thine
unhappy daughter, sister Magdalen; and him, the only shoot from your
ancient tree, you are willing to devote to the Good Cause?"

"Yes, by the rood," answered Magdalen Graeme, in her usual tone of
