Rouen alone was saved.  In the morning, some fishermen saw him floating
in his sheep-skin coat, and got him into their boat--the sole relater of
the dismal tale.

For three days, no one dared to carry the intelligence to the King.  At
length, they sent into his presence a little boy, who, weeping bitterly,
and kneeling at his feet, told him that The White Ship was lost with all
on board.  The King fell to the ground like a dead man, and never, never
afterwards, was seen to smile.

But he plotted again, and promised again, and bribed and bought again, in
his old deceitful way.  Having no son to succeed him, after all his pains
('The Prince will never yoke us to the plough, now!' said the English
people), he took a second wife--ADELAIS or ALICE, a duke's daughter, and
the Pope's niece.  Having no more children, however, he proposed to the
Barons to swear that they would recognise as his successor, his daughter
Matilda, whom, as she was now a widow, he married to the eldest son of
the Count of Anjou, GEOFFREY, surnamed PLANTAGENET, from a custom he had
of wearing a sprig of flowering broom (called Genet in French) in his cap
for a feather.  As one false man usually makes many, and as a false King,
in particular, is pretty certain to make a false Court, the Barons took
the oath about the succession of Matilda (and her children after her),
twice over, without in the least intending to keep it.  The King was now
relieved from any remaining fears of William Fitz-Robert, by his death in
the Monastery of St. Omer, in France, at twenty-six years old, of a pike-
wound in the hand.  And as Matilda gave birth to three sons, he thought
the succession to the throne secure.

He spent most of the latter part of his life, which was troubled by
family quarrels, in Normandy, to be near Matilda.  When he had reigned
upward of thirty-five years, and was sixty-seven years old, he died of an
indigestion and fever, brought on by eating, when he was far from well,
of a fish called Lamprey, against which he had often been cautioned by
his physicians.  His remains were brought over to Reading Abbey to be
buried.

You may perhaps hear the cunning and promise-breaking of King Henry the
First, called 'policy' by some people, and 'diplomacy' by others.  Neither
of these fine words will in the least mean that it was true; and nothing
that is not true can possibly be good.

His greatest merit, that I know of, was his love of learning--I should
have given him greater credit even for that, if it had been strong enough
to induce him to spare the eyes of a certain poet he once took prisoner,
who was a knight besides.  But he ordered the poet's eyes to be torn from
his head, because he had laughed at him in his verses; and the poet, in
the pain of that torture, dashed out his own brains against his prison
wall.  King Henry the First was avaricious, revengeful, and so false,
that I suppose a man never lived whose word was less to be relied upon.




CHAPTER XI--ENGLAND UNDER MATILDA AND STEPHEN


The King was no sooner dead than all the plans and schemes he had
laboured at so long, and lied so much for, crumbled away like a hollow
heap of sand.  STEPHEN, whom he had never mistrusted or suspected,
started up to claim the throne.

Stephen was the son of ADELA, the Conqueror's daughter, married to the
Count of Blois.  To Stephen, and to his brother HENRY, the late King had
been liberal; making Henry Bishop of Winchester, and finding a good
marriage for Stephen, and much enriching him.  This did not prevent
Stephen from hastily producing a false witness, a servant of the late
King, to swear that the King had named him for his heir upon his death-
bed.  On this evidence the Archbishop of Canterbury crowned him.  The new
King, so suddenly made, lost not a moment in seizing the Royal treasure,
and hiring foreign soldiers with some of it to protect his throne.

If the dead King had even done as the false witness said, he would have
had small right to will away the English people, like so many sheep or
oxen, without their consent.  But he had, in fact, bequeathed all his
territory to Matilda; who, supported by ROBERT, Earl of Gloucester, soon
began to dispute the crown.  Some of the powerful barons and priests took
her side; some took Stephen's; all fortified their castles; and again the
miserable English people were involved in war, from which they could
never derive advantage whosoever was victorious, and in which all parties
plundered, tortured, starved, and ruined them.

Five years had passed since the death of Henry the First--and during
those five years there had been two terrible invasions by the people of
Scotland under their King, David, who was at last defeated with all his
army--when Matilda, attended by her brother Robert and a large force,
appeared in England to maintain her claim.  A battle was fought between
her troops and King Stephen's at Lincoln; in which the King himself was
taken prisoner, after bravely fighting until his battle-axe and sword
were broken, and was carried into strict confinement at Gloucester.
Matilda then submitted herself to the Priests, and the Priests crowned
her Queen of England.

She did not long enjoy this dignity.  The people of London had a great
affection for Stephen; many of the Barons considered it degrading to be
ruled by a woman; and the Queen's temper was so haughty that she made
innumerable enemies.  The people of London revolted; and, in alliance
with the troops of Stephen, besieged her at Winchester, where they took
her brother Robert prisoner, whom, as her best soldier and chief general,
she was glad to exchange for Stephen himself, who thus regained his
liberty.  Then, the long war went on afresh.  Once, she was pressed so
hard in the Castle of Oxford, in the winter weather when the snow lay
thick upon the ground, that her only chance of escape was to dress
herself all in white, and, accompanied by no more than three faithful
Knights, dressed in like manner that their figures might not be seen from
Stephen's camp as they passed over the snow, to steal away on foot, cross
the frozen Thames, walk a long distance, and at last gallop away on
horseback.  All this she did, but to no great purpose then; for her
brother dying while the struggle was yet going on, she at last withdrew
to Normandy.

In two or three years after her withdrawal her cause appeared in England,
afresh, in the person of her son Henry, young Plantagenet, who, at only
eighteen years of age, was very powerful: not only on account of his
mother having resigned all Normandy to him, but also from his having
married ELEANOR, the divorced wife of the French King, a bad woman, who
had great possessions in France.  Louis, the French King, not relishing
this arrangement, helped EUSTACE, King Stephen's son, to invade Normandy:
but Henry drove their united forces out of that country, and then
returned here, to assist his partisans, whom the King was then besieging
at Wallingford upon the Thames.  Here, for two days, divided only by the
river, the two armies lay encamped opposite to one another--on the eve,
as it seemed to all men, of another desperate fight, when the EARL OF
ARUNDEL took heart and said 'that it was not reasonable to prolong the
unspeakable miseries of two kingdoms to minister to the ambition of two
princes.'

Many other noblemen repeating and supporting this when it was once
uttered, Stephen and young Plantagenet went down, each to his own bank of
the river, and held a conversation across it, in which they arranged a
truce; very much to the dissatisfaction of Eustace, who swaggered away
with some followers, and laid violent hands on the Abbey of St. Edmund's-
Bury, where he presently died mad.  The truce led to a solemn council at
Winchester, in which it was agreed that Stephen should retain the crown,
on condition of his declaring Henry his successor; that WILLIAM, another
son of the King's, should inherit his father's rightful possessions; and
that all the Crown lands which Stephen had given away should be recalled,
and all the Castles he had permitted to be built demolished.  Thus
terminated the bitter war, which had now lasted fifteen years, and had
again laid England waste.  In the next year STEPHEN died, after a
troubled reign of nineteen years.

Although King Stephen was, for the time in which he lived, a humane and
moderate man, with many excellent qualities; and although nothing worse
is known of him than his usurpation of the Crown, which he probably
excused to himself by the consideration that King Henry the First was a
usurper too--which was no excuse at all; the people of England suffered
more in these dread nineteen years, than at any former period even of
their suffering history.  In the division of the nobility between the two
rival claimants of the Crown, and in the growth of what is called the
Feudal System (which made the peasants the born vassals and mere slaves
of the Barons), every Noble had his strong Castle, where he reigned the
cruel king of all the neighbouring people.  Accordingly, he perpetrated
whatever cruelties he chose.  And never were worse cruelties committed
upon earth than in wretched England in those nineteen years.

The writers who were living then describe them fearfully.  They say that
the castles were filled with devils rather than with men; that the
peasants, men and women, were put into dungeons for their gold and
silver, were tortured with fire and smoke, were hung up by the thumbs,
were hung up by the heels with great weights to their heads, were torn
with jagged irons, killed with hunger, broken to death in narrow chests
filled with sharp-pointed stones, murdered in countless fiendish ways.  In
England there was no corn, no meat, no cheese, no butter, there were no
tilled lands, no harvests.  Ashes of burnt towns, and dreary wastes, were
all that the traveller, fearful of the robbers who prowled abroad at all
hours, would see in a long day's journey; and from sunrise until night,
he would not come upon a home.

The clergy sometimes suffered, and heavily too, from pillage, but many of
them had castles of their own, and fought in helmet and armour like the
barons, and drew lots with other fighting men for their share of booty.
The Pope (or Bishop of Rome), on King Stephen's resisting his ambition,
laid England under an Interdict at one period of this reign; which means
that he allowed no service to be performed in the churches, no couples to
be married, no bells to be rung, no dead bodies to be buried.  Any man
having the power to refuse these things, no matter whether he were called
a Pope or a Poulterer, would, of course, have the power of afflicting
numbers of innocent people.  That nothing might be wanting to the
miseries of King Stephen's time, the Pope threw in this contribution to
the public store--not very like the widow's contribution, as I think,
when Our Saviour sat in Jerusalem over-against the Treasury, 'and she
threw in two mites, which make a farthing.'




CHAPTER XII--ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SECOND


PART THE FIRST


Henry Plantagenet, when he was but twenty-one years old, quietly
succeeded to the throne of England, according to his agreement made with
the late King at Winchester.  Six weeks after Stephen's death, he and his
Queen, Eleanor, were crowned in that city; into which they rode on
horseback in great state, side by side, amidst much shouting and
rejoicing, and clashing of music, and strewing of flowers.

The reign of King Henry the Second began well.  The King had great
possessions, and (what with his own rights, and what with those of his
wife) was lord of one-third part of France.  He was a young man of
vigour, ability, and resolution, and immediately applied himself to
remove some of the evils which had arisen in the last unhappy reign.  He
revoked all the grants of land that had been hastily made, on either
side, during the late struggles; he obliged numbers of disorderly
soldiers to depart from England; he reclaimed all the castles belonging
to the Crown; and he forced the wicked nobles to pull down their own
castles, to the number of eleven hundred, in which such dismal cruelties
had been inflicted on the people.  The King's brother, GEOFFREY, rose
against him in France, while he was so well employed, and rendered it
necessary for him to repair to that country; where, after he had subdued
and made a friendly arrangement with his brother (who did not live long),
his ambition to increase his possessions involved him in a war with the
French King, Louis, with whom he had been on such friendly terms just
before, that to the French King's infant daughter, then a baby in the
cradle, he had promised one of his little sons in marriage, who was a
child of five years old.  However, the war came to nothing at last, and
the Pope made the two Kings friends again.

Now, the clergy, in the troubles of the last reign, had gone on very ill
indeed.  There were all kinds of criminals among them--murderers,
thieves, and vagabonds; and the worst of the matter was, that the good
priests would not give up the bad priests to justice, when they committed
crimes, but persisted in sheltering and defending them.  The King, well
knowing that there could be no peace or rest in England while such things
lasted, resolved to reduce the power of the clergy; and, when he had
reigned seven years, found (as he considered) a good opportunity for
doing so, in the death of the Archbishop of Canterbury.  'I will have for
the new Archbishop,' thought the King, 'a friend in whom I can trust, who
will help me to humble these rebellious priests, and to have them dealt
with, when they do wrong, as other men who do wrong are dealt with.'  So,
he resolved to make his favourite, the new Archbishop; and this favourite
was so extraordinary a man, and his story is so curious, that I must tell
you all about him.

Once upon a time, a worthy merchant of London, named GILBERT A BECKET,
made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and was taken prisoner by a Saracen
lord.  This lord, who treated him kindly and not like a slave, had one
fair daughter, who fell in love with the merchant; and who told him that
she wanted to become a Christian, and was willing to marry him if they
could fly to a Christian country.  The merchant returned her love, until
he found an opportunity to escape, when he did not trouble himself about
the Saracen lady, but escaped with his servant Richard, who had been
taken prisoner along with him, and arrived in England and forgot her.  The
Saracen lady, who was more loving than the merchant, left her father's
house in disguise to follow him, and made her way, under many hardships,
to the sea-shore.  The merchant had taught her only two English words
(for I suppose he must have learnt the Saracen tongue himself, and made
love in that language), of which LONDON was one, and his own name,
GILBERT, the other.  She went among the ships, saying, 'London! London!'
over and over again, until the sailors understood that she wanted to find
an English vessel that would carry her there; so they showed her such a
ship, and she paid for her passage with some of her jewels, and sailed
away.  Well!  The merchant was sitting in his counting-house in London
one day, when he heard a great noise in the street; and presently Richard
came running in from the warehouse, with his eyes wide open and his
breath almost gone, saying, 'Master, master, here is the Saracen lady!'
The merchant thought Richard was mad; but Richard said, 'No, master!  As
I live, the Saracen lady is going up and down the city, calling Gilbert!
Gilbert!'  Then, he took the merchant by the sleeve, and pointed out of
window; and there they saw her among the gables and water-spouts of the
dark, dirty street, in her foreign dress, so forlorn, surrounded by a
wondering crowd, and passing slowly along, calling Gilbert, Gilbert!  When
the merchant saw her, and thought of the tenderness she had shown him in
his captivity, and of her constancy, his heart was moved, and he ran down
into the street; and she saw him coming, and with a great cry fainted in
his arms.  They were married without loss of time, and Richard (who was
an excellent man) danced with joy the whole day of the wedding; and they
all lived happy ever afterwards.

This merchant and this Saracen lady had one son, THOMAS A BECKET.  He it
was who became the Favourite of King Henry the Second.

He had become Chancellor, when the King thought of making him Archbishop.
He was clever, gay, well educated, brave; had fought in several battles
in France; had defeated a French knight in single combat, and brought his
horse away as a token of the victory.  He lived in a noble palace, he was
the tutor of the young Prince Henry, he was served by one hundred and
forty knights, his riches were immense.  The King once sent him as his
ambassador to France; and the French people, beholding in what state he
travelled, cried out in the streets, 'How splendid must the King of
England be, when this is only the Chancellor!'  They had good reason to
wonder at the magnificence of Thomas a Becket, for, when he entered a
French town, his procession was headed by two hundred and fifty singing
boys; then, came his hounds in couples; then, eight waggons, each drawn
by five horses driven by five drivers: two of the waggons filled with
strong ale to be given away to the people; four, with his gold and silver
plate and stately clothes; two, with the dresses of his numerous
servants.  Then, came twelve horses, each with a monkey on his back;
then, a train of people bearing shields and leading fine war-horses
splendidly equipped; then, falconers with hawks upon their wrists; then,
a host of knights, and gentlemen and priests; then, the Chancellor with
his brilliant garments flashing in the sun, and all the people capering
and shouting with delight.

The King was well pleased with all this, thinking that it only made
himself the more magnificent to have so magnificent a favourite; but he
sometimes jested with the Chancellor upon his splendour too.  Once, when
they were riding together through the streets of London in hard winter
weather, they saw a shivering old man in rags.  'Look at the poor
object!' said the King.  'Would it not be a charitable act to give that
aged man a comfortable warm cloak?'  'Undoubtedly it would,' said Thomas
a Becket, 'and you do well, Sir, to think of such Christian duties.'
'Come!' cried the King, 'then give him your cloak!'  It was made of rich
crimson trimmed with ermine.  The King tried to pull it off, the
Chancellor tried to keep it on, both were near rolling from their saddles
in the mud, when the Chancellor submitted, and the King gave the cloak to
the old beggar: much to the beggar's astonishment, and much to the
merriment of all the courtiers in attendance.  For, courtiers are not
only eager to laugh when the King laughs, but they really do enjoy a
laugh against a Favourite.

'I will make,' thought King Henry the second, 'this Chancellor of mine,
Thomas a Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury.  He will then be the head of
the Church, and, being devoted to me, will help me to correct the Church.
He has always upheld my power against the power of the clergy, and once
publicly told some bishops (I remember), that men of the Church were
equally bound to me, with men of the sword.  Thomas a Becket is the man,
of all other men in England, to help me in my great design.'  So the
King, regardless of all objection, either that he was a fighting man, or
a lavish man, or a courtly man, or a man of pleasure, or anything but a
likely man for the office, made him Archbishop accordingly.

Now, Thomas a Becket was proud and loved to be famous.  He was already
famous for the pomp of his life, for his riches, his gold and silver
plate, his waggons, horses, and attendants.  He could do no more in that
way than he had done; and being tired of that kind of fame (which is a
very poor one), he longed to have his name celebrated for something else.
Nothing, he knew, would render him so famous in the world, as the setting
of his utmost power and ability against the utmost power and ability of
the King.  He resolved with the whole strength of his mind to do it.

He may have had some secret grudge against the King besides.  The King
may have offended his proud humour at some time or other, for anything I
know.  I think it likely, because it is a common thing for Kings,
Princes, and other great people, to try the tempers of their favourites
rather severely.  Even the little affair of the crimson cloak must have
been anything but a pleasant one to a haughty man.  Thomas a Becket knew
better than any one in England what the King expected of him.  In all his
sumptuous life, he had never yet been in a position to disappoint the
King.  He could take up that proud stand now, as head of the Church; and
he determined that it should be written in history, either that he
subdued the King, or that the King subdued him.

So, of a sudden, he completely altered the whole manner of his life.  He
turned off all his brilliant followers, ate coarse food, drank bitter
water, wore next his skin sackcloth covered with dirt and vermin (for it
was then thought very religious to be very dirty), flogged his back to
punish himself, lived chiefly in a little cell, washed the feet of
thirteen poor people every day, and looked as miserable as he possibly
could.  If he had put twelve hundred monkeys on horseback instead of
twelve, and had gone in procession with eight thousand waggons instead of
eight, he could not have half astonished the people so much as by this
great change.  It soon caused him to be more talked about as an
Archbishop than he had been as a Chancellor.

The King was very angry; and was made still more so, when the new
Archbishop, claiming various estates from the nobles as being rightfully
Church property, required the King himself, for the same reason, to give
up Rochester Castle, and Rochester City too.  Not satisfied with this, he
declared that no power but himself should appoint a priest to any Church
in the part of England over which he was Archbishop; and when a certain
gentleman of Kent made such an appointment, as he claimed to have the
right to do, Thomas a Becket excommunicated him.

Excommunication was, next to the Interdict I told you of at the close of
the last chapter, the great weapon of the clergy.  It consisted in
declaring the person who was excommunicated, an outcast from the Church
and from all religious offices; and in cursing him all over, from the top
of his head to the sole of his foot, whether he was standing up, lying
down, sitting, kneeling, walking, running, hopping, jumping, gaping,
coughing, sneezing, or whatever else he was doing.  This unchristian
nonsense would of course have made no sort of difference to the person
cursed--who could say his prayers at home if he were shut out of church,
and whom none but GOD could judge--but for the fears and superstitions of
the people, who avoided excommunicated persons, and made their lives
unhappy.  So, the King said to the New Archbishop, 'Take off this
Excommunication from this gentleman of Kent.'  To which the Archbishop
replied, 'I shall do no such thing.'

The quarrel went on.  A priest in Worcestershire committed a most
dreadful murder, that aroused the horror of the whole nation.  The King
demanded to have this wretch delivered up, to be tried in the same court
and in the same way as any other murderer.  The Archbishop refused, and
kept him in the Bishop's prison.  The King, holding a solemn assembly in
Westminster Hall, demanded that in future all priests found guilty before
their Bishops of crimes against the law of the land should be considered
priests no longer, and should be delivered over to the law of the land
for punishment.  The Archbishop again refused.  The King required to know
whether the clergy would obey the ancient customs of the country?  Every
priest there, but one, said, after Thomas a Becket, 'Saving my order.'
This really meant that they would only obey those customs when they did
not interfere with their own claims; and the King went out of the Hall in
great wrath.

Some of the clergy began to be afraid, now, that they were going too far.
Though Thomas a Becket was otherwise as unmoved as Westminster Hall, they
prevailed upon him, for the sake of their fears, to go to the King at
Woodstock, and promise to observe the ancient customs of the country,
without saying anything about his order.  The King received this
submission favourably, and summoned a great council of the clergy to meet
at the Castle of Clarendon, by Salisbury.  But when the council met, the
Archbishop again insisted on the words 'saying my order;' and he still
insisted, though lords entreated him, and priests wept before him and
knelt to him, and an adjoining room was thrown open, filled with armed
soldiers of the King, to threaten him.  At length he gave way, for that
time, and the ancient customs (which included what the King had demanded
in vain) were stated in writing, and were signed and sealed by the chief
of the clergy, and were called the Constitutions of Clarendon.

The quarrel went on, for all that.  The Archbishop tried to see the King.
The King would not see him.  The Archbishop tried to escape from England.
The sailors on the coast would launch no boat to take him away.  Then, he
again resolved to do his worst in opposition to the King, and began
openly to set the ancient customs at defiance.

The King summoned him before a great council at Northampton, where he
accused him of high treason, and made a claim against him, which was not
a just one, for an enormous sum of money.  Thomas a Becket was alone
against the whole assembly, and the very Bishops advised him to resign
his office and abandon his contest with the King.  His great anxiety and
agitation stretched him on a sick-bed for two days, but he was still
undaunted.  He went to the adjourned council, carrying a great cross in
his right hand, and sat down holding it erect before him.  The King
angrily retired into an inner room.  The whole assembly angrily retired
and left him there.  But there he sat.  The Bishops came out again in a
body, and renounced him as a traitor.  He only said, 'I hear!' and sat
there still.  They retired again into the inner room, and his trial
proceeded without him.  By-and-by, the Earl of Leicester, heading the
barons, came out to read his sentence.  He refused to hear it, denied the
power of the court, and said he would refer his cause to the Pope.  As he
walked out of the hall, with the cross in his hand, some of those present
picked up rushes--rushes were strewn upon the floors in those days by way
of carpet--and threw them at him.  He proudly turned his head, and said
that were he not Archbishop, he would chastise those cowards with the
sword he had known how to use in bygone days.  He then mounted his horse,
and rode away, cheered and surrounded by the common people, to whom he
threw open his house that night and gave a supper, supping with them
himself.  That same night he secretly departed from the town; and so,
travelling by night and hiding by day, and calling himself 'Brother
Dearman,' got away, not without difficulty, to Flanders.

The struggle still went on.  The angry King took possession of the
revenues of the archbishopric, and banished all the relations and
servants of Thomas a Becket, to the number of four hundred.  The Pope and
the French King both protected him, and an abbey was assigned for his
residence.  Stimulated by this support, Thomas a Becket, on a great
festival day, formally proceeded to a great church crowded with people,
and going up into the pulpit publicly cursed and excommunicated all who
had supported the Constitutions of Clarendon: mentioning many English
noblemen by name, and not distantly hinting at the King of England
himself.

When intelligence of this new affront was carried to the King in his
chamber, his passion was so furious that he tore his clothes, and rolled
like a madman on his bed of straw and rushes.  But he was soon up and
doing.  He ordered all the ports and coasts of England to be narrowly
watched, that no letters of Interdict might be brought into the kingdom;
and sent messengers and bribes to the Pope's palace at Rome.  Meanwhile,
Thomas a Becket, for his part, was not idle at Rome, but constantly
employed his utmost arts in his own behalf.  Thus the contest stood,
until there was peace between France and England (which had been for some
time at war), and until the two children of the two Kings were married in
celebration of it.  Then, the French King brought about a meeting between
Henry and his old favourite, so long his enemy.

Even then, though Thomas a Becket knelt before the King, he was obstinate
and immovable as to those words about his order.  King Louis of France
was weak enough in his veneration for Thomas a Becket and such men, but
this was a little too much for him.  He said that a Becket 'wanted to be
greater than the saints and better than St. Peter,' and rode away from
him with the King of England.  His poor French Majesty asked a Becket's
pardon for so doing, however, soon afterwards, and cut a very pitiful
figure.

At last, and after a world of trouble, it came to this.  There was
another meeting on French ground between King Henry and Thomas a Becket,
and it was agreed that Thomas a Becket should be Archbishop of
Canterbury, according to the customs of former Archbishops, and that the
King should put him in possession of the revenues of that post.  And now,
indeed, you might suppose the struggle at an end, and Thomas a Becket at
rest.  NO, not even yet.  For Thomas a Becket hearing, by some means,
that King Henry, when he was in dread of his kingdom being placed under
an interdict, had had his eldest son Prince Henry secretly crowned, not
only persuaded the Pope to suspend the Archbishop of York who had
performed that ceremony, and to excommunicate the Bishops who had
assisted at it, but sent a messenger of his own into England, in spite of
all the King's precautions along the coast, who delivered the letters of
excommunication into the Bishops' own hands.  Thomas a Becket then came
over to England himself, after an absence of seven years.  He was
privately warned that it was dangerous to come, and that an ireful
knight, named RANULF DE BROC, had threatened that he should not live to
eat a loaf of bread in England; but he came.

The common people received him well, and marched about with him in a
soldierly way, armed with such rustic weapons as they could get.  He
