"These British slaves must be taught to feel the weight of our arm,"
they said, "and a lesson such as this will be most useful. Is it
for dogs like these to complain because they are whipped? They must
be taught to know that they live but at our pleasure; that this
island and all it contains is ours. They have no rights save those
we choose to give them."

But the older settlers viewed the matter very differently. They
knew well enough that it was only after hard fighting that Vespasian
had subdued the south, and Ostorius crushed Caractacus. They knew,
too, that the Iceni gave but a nominal submission to Rome, and
that the Trinobantes, crushed as they were, had been driven to the
verge of madness by extortion. Moreover the legions were far away;
Camalodunum was well nigh undefended, and lay almost at the mercy
of the Britons should they attack. They, therefore, denounced the
treatment of Boadicea as not only brutal but as impolitic in the
extreme.

The sudden cessation of news from the officials who had gone to
take possession of the estate of Prasutagus caused considerable
uneasiness among this section of the inhabitants of Camalodunum.
Messengers were sent off every day to inquire as to what had taken
place after the return of Boadicea, but none came back. The feeling
of uneasiness was heightened by the attitude of the natives. Reports
came in from all parts of the district that they had changed their
attitude, that they no longer crouched at the sight of a Roman but
bore themselves defiantly, that there were meetings at night in the
forest, and that the women sang chants and performed dances which
had evidently some hidden meaning.

Decianus, conscious perhaps that his action was strongly disapproved
by all the principal inhabitants of the town, and that, perhaps,
Suetonius would also view it in the same light when it was reported
to him, had left the city a few days after the occurrence and had
gone to Verulamium. His absence permitted the general feeling of
apprehension and discontentment more open expression than it would
otherwise have had. Brave as the Romans were, they were deeply
superstitious, and a thrill of horror and apprehension ran through
the city when it was reported one morning that the statute of Victory
in the temple had fallen to the ground, and had turned round as if
it fled towards the sea. This presage of evil created a profound
impression.

"What do you think of it, Cneius?" Berenice asked; "it is terrible,
is it not? Nothing else is spoken of among all the ladies I have
seen today, and all agree it forbodes some terrible evil."

"It may, or it may not," the old scribe said cautiously; "if the
statue has fallen by the action of the gods the omen is surely a
most evil one."

"But how else could it have fallen, Cneius?"

"Well, my dear, there are many Britons in the town, and you know
they are in a very excited state; their women, indeed, seem to
have gone well nigh mad with their midnight singing and wailing.
It is possible--mind, I do not for a moment say that it is so,
for were the suggestion to occur to the citizens it would lead to
fresh oppressions and cruelties against the Britons--but it is
just possible that some of them may have entered the temple at night
and overthrown Victory's image as an act of defiance. You know how
the women nightly shriek out their prophecies of the destruction
of this town."

"But could they destroy it, Cneius? Surely they would never dare
to attack a great Roman city like this!"

"I don't know whether they dare or not, Berenice, but assuredly
Decianus is doing all in his power to excite them to such a pitch
of despair that they might dare do anything; and if they dare,
I see nothing whatever to prevent them from taking the city. The
works erected after Claudius first founded the colony are so vast
that they would require an army to defend them, while there are but
a few hundred soldiers here. What could they do against a horde of
barbarians? I would that your father were back, and also the two
legions who marched away to join Suetonius. Before they went they
ought to have erected a central fort here, to which all could retire
in case of danger, and hold out until Suetonius came back to our
assistance; but you see, when they went away none could have foreseen
what has since taken place. No one could have dreamt that Decianus
would have wantonly stirred up the Iceni to revolt."

"But you don't think they have revolted?"

"I know nothing of it, Berenice, but I can put two and two together.
We have heard nothing for a week from the officials who went to
seize the possessions of Prasutagus. How is it that none of our
messengers have returned? It seems to me almost certain that these
men have paid for their conduct to the daughters of Boadicea with
their lives."

"But Beric is with the Iceni. Surely we should hear from him if
danger threatened."

"He is with them," Cneius said, "but he is a chief, and if the
tribe are in arms he is in arms also, and cannot, without risking
the forfeit of his life for treachery, send hither a message that
would put us on our guard. I believe in the lad. Four years I
taught him, and I think I know his nature. He is honest and true.
He is one of the Iceni and must go with his countrymen; but I am
sure he is grateful for the kindness he received here, and has a
real affection for you, therefore I believe, that should my worst
fears be verified, and the Iceni attack Camalodunum, he will do
his utmost to save you."

"But they will not kill women and girls surely, even if they did
take the city?"

"I fear that they will show slight mercy to any, Berenice; why
should they? We have shown no mercy to them; we have slaughtered
their priests and priestesses, and at the storm of their towns
have put all to death without distinction of age or sex. If we, a
civilized people, thus make war, what can you expect from the men
upon whom we have inflicted such countless injuries?"

The fall of the statue of Victory was succeeded by other occurrences
in which the awestruck inhabitants read augury of evil. It was
reported that strange noises had been heard in the council house
and theatre, while men out in boats brought back the tale that
there was the appearance of a sunken town below the water. It was
currently believed that the sea had assumed the colour of blood,
and that there were, when the tide went out, marks upon the sand
as if dead bodies had been lying there. Even the boldest veterans
were dismayed at this accumulation of hostile auguries. A council
of the principal citizens was held, and an urgent message despatched
to Decianus, praying that he would take instance measures for the
protection of the city. In reply to this he despatched two hundred
soldiers from Verulamium, and these with the small body of troops
already in the city took possession of the Temple of Claudius, and
began to make preparations for putting it into a state of defence.

Still no message had come from Norwich, but night after night the
British women declared that the people of Camalodunum would suffer
the same fate that had already overwhelmed those who had ventured
to insult the daughters of the queen of the Iceni. A strange terror
had now seized the inhabitants of the town. The apprehension of
danger weighted upon all, and the peril seemed all the more terrible
inasmuch as it was so vague. Nothing was known for certain. No
message had come from the Iceni since the queen quitted the town,
and yet it was felt that among the dark woods stretching north a
host of foes was gathering, and might at any moment pour down upon
the city. Orders were issued that at the approach of danger all
who could do so were to betake themselves at once to the temple,
which was to act as a citadel, yet no really effective measures
were taken. There was, indeed, a vague talk of sending the women and
children and valuables away to the legion, commanded by Cerealis,
stationed in a fortified camp to the south, but nothing came of
it; all waited for something definite, some notification that the
Britons had really revolted, and while waiting for this nothing
was done.

One evening a slave brought in a small roll of vellum to Cneius.
It had been given him at the door, he said, by a Briton, who had
at once left after placing it in his hands. The scribe opened it
and read as follows:--

"To Cneius Nepo, greeting--Obtain British garb for yourself and
Berenice. Let her apparel be that of a boy. Should anything unusual
occur by night or day, do you and she disguise yourselves quickly,
and stir not beyond the house. It will be best for you to wait in
the tablinum; lose no time in carrying out this instruction."

There was no signature, nor was any needed.

"So the storm is about to burst," Cneius said thoughtfully when
he had read it. "I thought so. I was sure that if the Britons had
a spark of manhood left in them they would avenge the cruel wrongs
of their queen. I am rejoiced to read Beric's words, and to see
that he has, as I felt sure he had, a grateful heart. He would
save us from the fate that he clearly thinks is about to overwhelm
this place. The omens have not lied then--not that I believe in
them; they are for the most part the offspring of men's fancy, but
at any rate they will come true this time. I care little for myself,
but I must do as he bids me for the sake of the girl. I doubt, though
whether Beric can save her. These people have terrible wrongs to
avenge, and at their first outburst will spare none. Well, I must
do my best, and late as it is I will go out and purchase these
garments. It is not likely that the danger will come tonight, for
he would have given us longer notice. Still he may have had no
opportunity, and may not have known until the last moment when the
attack was to take place. He says 'lose no time.'"

Cneius at once went to one of the traders who dealt with the natives
who came into the town, and procured the garments for himself and
Berenice. The trader, who knew him by sight, remarked, "Have you
been purchasing more slaves?"

"No, but I have need for dresses for two persons who have done me
some service."

"I should have thought," the trader said, "they would have preferred
lighter colours. These cloths are sombre, and the natives, although
their own cloths are for the most part dark, prefer, when they buy
of me, brighter colours."

"These will do very well," Cneius said, "just at present Roman
colours and cloths are not likely to be in demand among them."

"No, the times are bad," the trader said; "there has been scarce
a native in my shop for the last ten days, and even among the
townspeople there has been little buying or selling."

Cneius returned to the house, a slave carrying his purchases behind
him. On reaching home he took the parcel from him, and carried it
to his own cubicule, and then ordered a slave to beg Berenice to
come down from her apartment as he desired to speak with her.



CHAPTER V: THE SACK OF CAMALODUNUM


Upon the morning of the day fixed for the gathering of the Iceni
preparations were begun early at Cardun. Oxen and swine were
slaughtered, great fires made, and the women in the village were
all employed in making and baking oaten cakes upon the hearth. For
some days many of them had been employed in making a great store
of fermented honey and water. Men began to flock in from an early
hour, and by midday every male of the Sarci capable of bearing
arms had come in. Each brought with him a supply of cooked meat and
cakes sufficient to last for three or four days. In the afternoon
the tribes began to pour in, each tribe under its chiefs. There
was no attempt at order or regularity; they came trooping in in
masses, the chiefs sometimes in chariots sometimes on horseback,
riding at their head. Parta welcomed them, and food was served out
to the men while the chiefs were entertained in the hall. Beric,
looking at the wild figures, rough and uncouth but powerful and
massive in frame, was filled with regret that these men knew nothing
of discipline, and that circumstances had forced on the war so
suddenly.

The contrast between these wild figures and the disciplined
veterans of Rome, whom he had so often watched as they performed
their exercises, was striking indeed. Far inferior in height and
muscular power to the tribesmen, the legionaries bore themselves
with a proud consciousness in their fighting power that alone went
a long way towards giving them victory. Each man trusted not only
in himself, but on his fellows, and believed that the legion to
which he belonged was invincible. Their regular arms, their broad
shields and helmets, all added to their appearance, while their
massive formation, as they stood shoulder to shoulder, shield
touching shield, seemed as if it could defy the utmost efforts of
undisciplined valour. However, Beric thought with pride that his own
tribe, the sixteen hundred men he had for six weeks been training
incessantly, would be a match even for the Roman veterans. Their
inferiority in the discipline that was carried to such perfection
among the Romans would be atoned for by their superior strength
and activity. His only fear was, that in the excitement of battle
they would forget their teaching, and, breaking their ranks, fight
every man for himself. He had, however, spared no pains in impressing
upon them that to do this would be to throw away all that they had
learned.

"I have not taught you to fight in Roman fashion," he said, "merely
that you might march in regular order and astonish the other
tribesmen, but that you should be cool and collected, should be
able patiently to stand the shock of the Roman legion, and to fight,
not as scattered units, but as a solid whole. You will do well to
bear this in mind, for to those who disobey orders and break the
line when engaged with the foe I will show no mercy. My orders
will be given to each sergeant of ten men to run a spear through
any man who stirs from his post, whether in advance or in retreat,
whether to slay or to plunder. The time may come when the safety
of the whole army depends upon your standing like a wall between
them and the Romans, and the man who advances from his place in the
ranks will, as much as the man who retreats, endanger the safety
of all."

Over and over again had he impressed this lesson upon them. Sometimes
he had divided them in two parts, and engaged in mimic fight. The
larger half, representing the tribesmen, advanced in their ordinary
fashion with loud shouts and cries, while the smaller section
maintained their solid formation, and with levelled spears, five
deep, waited the attack. Even those who were least impressed with
the advantages of the exercises through which they had been going,
could not but feel how immensely superior was the solid order, and
how impossible would it have been for assailants to burst through
the hedge of pointed weapons.

By sunset well nigh thirty thousand men had arrived, each subtribe
passing through the village and taking up its post on the slopes
around it, where they were at once supplied with food by the women.

With the fighting men were large numbers of women, for these
generally accompanied the Britons on their warlike expeditions.
Just at sunset a shout arose from the tribesmen on the north side
of the village, and Boadicea, with her daughters and chief councillors,
drove into the village. Her mien was proud and lofty. She carried
a spear in her hand and a sword in her girdle. She had resumed
her royal ornaments, and a fillet of gold surrounded her head. Her
garments were belted in with a broad girdle of the same metal, and
she wore heavy gold armlets and bracelets. She looked with pride
upon the tribesmen who thronged shouting to greet her, and exclaimed
as she leapt from her chariot, "The day of vengeance is at hand."

The fires blazed high all that night round Cardun. Numbers of
bards had accompanied the tribes, as not only had those who lived
in the households of the principal chiefs come in, but many had
been attracted from the country lying near their borders. At every
fire, therefore, songs were sung and tales told of the valour and
glory of the heroes of old. Mingled with these were laments over
the evil days that had befallen Britain, and exhortations to their
hearers to avenge the past and prove themselves worthy of their
ancestors.

In similar manner the night was passed in Parta's hall. Here the
chief bards were assembled, with all the tribal leaders, and vied
with each other in their stirring chants. Beric moved about among
the guests, seeing that their wants were supplied, while Parta
herself looked after those who were gathered on the dais. Beric
learned from the old chief Aska, who had first spoken to him on the
day of their arrival at the sacred oak, that all Britain was ripe
for the rising, and that messengers had been received not only from
the Brigantes, but from many of the southern and western tribes,
with assurances that they would rise as soon as they heard that
the Iceni had struck the first blow.

"The Trinobantes will join us at Camalodunum. All goes well.
Suetonius, with the legions, is still in the far west. We shall
make an end of them here before he can return. By that time we shall
have been joined by most of the tribes, and shall have a force that
will be sufficient to destroy utterly the army he is leading. That
done, there will be but the isolated forts to capture and destroy,
and then Britain will be free from the invader. You think this will
be so, Beric?"

"I hope and trust so," Beric replied. "I think that success in
our first undertakings is a certainty, and I trust we may defeat
Suetonius. With such numbers as we shall put in the field we ought
surely to be able to do so. It is not of the present I think so
much as of the future. Rome never submits to defeat, and will send
an army here to which that of Suetonius would be but a handful.
But if we remain united, and utilize the months that must elapse
before the Romans can arrive in preparing for the conflict, we
ought to be victorious."

"You feel sure that the Romans will try to reconquer Britain?"

"Quite sure. In all their history there is not an instance where
they have submitted to defeat. This is one of the main reasons of
their success. I am certain that, at whatever sacrifices, they will
equip and send out an army that they will believe powerful enough
for the purpose."

"But they were many years after their first invasion before they
came again."

"That is true; but in those first two invasions they did not conquer.
In the first they were forced to retire, and therefore came again;
in the second they had success enough to be able to claim a victory
and so to retire with honour. Besides, Rome is vastly stronger and
more powerful now than she was then. Believe me, Aska, the struggle
will be but begun when we have driven the last Roman from the
island."

"We must talk of this again," Aska said, "as it is upon us that the
brunt of this struggle will fall. We shall have the chief voice and
influence after it is over, and Boadicea will stand in the place
that Cunobeline held, of chief king of the island. Then, as you
say, much will depend on the steps we take to prepare to resist the
next invasion; and young as you are, your knowledge of Roman ways
will render your counsels valuable, and give great weight to your
advice."

"I do not wish to put myself in any way in the foreground," Beric
said. "I am still but a boy, and have no wish to raise my voice
in the council of chiefs; but what I have learned of Roman history
and Roman laws I would gladly explain to those who, like yourself,
speak with the voice of authority, and whose wisdom all recognize."

In the morning Boadicea said that reports had been brought to her
of the manner in which Beric had been teaching the Sarci to fight
in Roman fashion, and that she should be glad to see the result.

Accordingly the tribesmen proceeded to the open fields a mile away,
where they had been accustomed to drill, and they were followed by
the whole of those gathered round the village. The queen and Parta
drove out in their chariots. When they reached the spot the chiefs
of the other tribes, at Beric's request, called upon their men to
draw off and leave a space sufficient for the exercises. This left
the Sarci standing in scattered groups over the open space, at one
end of which Boadicea and all the chiefs were gathered.

"They are now in the position, queen," Beric said, "of men unsuspecting
danger. I shall now warn them that they are about to be attacked,
and that they are to gather instantly to repel the enemy."

Taking the conch slung over his shoulder Beric applied it to his
lips and blew three short notes. The tribesmen ran together; there
was, as it seemed to the lookers on, a scene of wild confusion for
a minute, and then they were drawn up in companies, each a hundred
strong, in regular order. A short blast and a long one, and they
moved up together into a mass five deep; a single note, and the
spears fell, and an array of glistening points shone in front of
them.

A shout of surprise and approval rose from the tribesmen looking on.
To them this perfect order and regularity seemed well nigh miraculous.

Beric now advanced to the line. At his order the two rear ranks
stepped backwards a few feet, struck their spears in the ground,
and then discharged their javelins--of which each man carried
six--over the heads of the ranks in front, against the enemy supposed
to be advancing to attack them. Then seizing their spears they
fell into line again, and at another order the whole advanced at a
quick pace with levelled spears to the charge, and keeping on till
within a few paces of where the queen was standing, halted suddenly
and raised their spears. Again a roar of applause came from the
tribesmen.

"It is wonderful," the queen said. "I had not thought that men could
be taught so to move together; and that is how the Romans fight,
Beric?"

"It is, queen," Beric said. "The exercises are exactly similar to
those of the Romans. I learnt them by heart when I was among them,
and the orders are exactly the same as those given in the
legions--only, of course, they are performed by trained soldiers more
perfectly than we can as yet do them. It is but two months since
we began, and the Romans have practised them for years. Had I time
you would have seen them much more perfect than at present."

"You have performed marvels," she said. "I wish that you had had
more time, and that all the Iceni, and not the Sarci only could
have thus learned to meet the enemy. Do you not think so, chiefs?"

"It is wonderful," one of the chiefs said; "but I think that it is
not so terrifying to a foe as the rush of our own men. It is better
for resistance, but not so good for attack. Still it has great
merits; but I think it more suited for men who fight deliberately,
like the Romans, than for our own tribesmen, who are wont to rely
for victory each upon his own strength and valour."

"What say you, Beric?" the queen asked.

"It would be presumptuous for me to give my opinion against that
of a great chief," Beric said quietly; "But, so far, strength and
valour have not in themselves succeeded. The men of Caractacus
had both, but they were unavailing against the solid Roman line.
We have never yet won a great victory over the Romans, and yet we
have fought against them valiantly. None can say that a Briton is
not as brave and as strong as a Roman. In our battles we have always
outnumbered them. If we have been beaten, therefore, it has been
surely because the Roman method of fighting is superior to our
own."

There was a murmur of assent from several of the chiefs.

"Beric's argument is a strong one," the queen said to the one who
had spoken; "and I would that all the Iceni had learnt to fight in
this fashion. However, we shall have opportunities of seeing which
is right before we have finished with the Romans. March your men
back again, Beric."

Beric sounded his horn, and the line, facing half round, became
a column, and marched in regular order back to the village. The
morning meal was now taken, and at midday the march began. Boadicea
with her daughters, Parta and other women of rank, went first in
their chariots; and the Sarci, who, as lying next to the enemy's
country, were allowed the post of honour, followed in column
behind her, while the rest of the tribesmen made their way in a
miscellaneous crowd through the forest. They halted among the trees
at a distance of four miles from Camalodunum, and then rested, for
the attack was not to take place until daybreak on the next morning.

Late that evening two or three women of the Trinobantes came out,
in accordance with a preconcerted arrangement, to tell them that
there was no suspicion at Camalodunum of the impending danger; and
that, although there was great uneasiness among the inhabitants, no
measures for defence had been taken, and that even the precaution
of sending away the women and children had not been adopted.

No fires had been lighted; the men slept in the open air, simply
wrapping themselves in their mantles and lying down under the trees.
Beric had a long talk with Boduoc and ten of the tribesmen of the
latter's company.

"You understand," Beric said at last, "that if, as I expect, the
surprise will be complete and no regular resistance be offered,
I shall sound my horn and give the signal for the tribe to break
ranks and scatter. You ten men will, however, keep together, and
at once follow Boduoc and myself. As soon as we enter the house to
which I shall lead you, you will surround the two persons I shall
place in your charge, and will conduct them to the spot where the
chariot will be waiting. You will defend them, if necessary, with
your lives, should any disobey my order to let you pass through
with them. As soon as they are placed in the chariot you will be
free to join in the sack, and if you should be losers by the delay,
I will myself make up your share to that of your comrades. You are
sure, Boduoc, that all the other arrangements are perfect?"

"Everything is arranged," Boduoc said. "My brother, who drives the
chariot that brought your mother's attendants, quite understands
that he is to follow as soon as we move off, and keeping a short
way behind us is to stop in front of the last house outside the
gate until we come. As soon as he has taken them up he will drive
off and give them into the charge of our mother, who has promised
you to have everything in readiness for them; the skins for beds,
drinking vessels, food, and everything else necessary was taken
there two days ago. My sisters will see to the comfort of the young
lady, and you can rely upon my mother to carry out all the orders
