


CHAPTER LV.

Clar.--How, two letters?--The Lover's Progress.

LETTER FROM CLARENCE LINDEN, ESQ., TO THE DUKE OF HAVERFIELD.

HOTEL ----, CALAIS.

My Dear Duke,--After your kind letter, you will forgive me for not
having called upon you before I left England, for you have led me to
hope that I may dispense with ceremony towards you; and, in sad and
sober earnest, I was in no mood to visit even you during the few days
I was in London, previous to my departure.  Some French philosopher
has said that, 'the best compliment we can pay our friends, when in
sickness or misfortune, is to avoid them.'  I will not say how far I
disagree with this sentiment, but I know that a French philosopher
will be an unanswerable authority with you; and so I will take shelter
even under the battery of an enemy.

I am waiting here for some days in expectation of Lord Aspeden's
arrival.  Sick as I was of England and all that has lately occurred to
me there, I was glad to have an opportunity of leaving it sooner than
my chief could do; and I amuse myself very indifferently in this dull
town, with reading all the morning, plays all the evening, and dreams
of my happier friends all the night.

And so you are sorry that I did not destroy Lord Borodaile.  My dear
duke, you would have been much more sorry if I had!  What could you
then have done for a living Pasquin for your stray lampoons and
vagrant sarcasms?  Had an unfortunate bullet carried away--

    "That peer of England, pillar of the state,"

as you term him, pray on whom could 'Duke Humphrey unfold his
griefs'?--Ah, Duke, better as it is, believe me; and, whenever you are
at a loss for a subject for wit, you will find cause to bless my
forbearance, and congratulate yourself upon the existence of its
object.

Dare I hope that, amidst all the gayeties which court you, you will
find time to write to me?  If so, you shall have in return the
earliest intelligence of every new soprano, and the most elaborate
criticisms on every budding figurante of our court.

Have you met Trollolop lately, and in what new pursuit are his
intellectual energies engaged?  There, you see, I have fairly
entrapped your Grace into a question which common courtesy will oblige
you to answer.

Adieu, ever, my dear Duke.  Most truly yours, etc.

LETTER FROM THE DUKE OF HAVERFIELD TO CLARENCE LINDEN, ESQ.

A thousand thanks, mon cher, for your letter, though it was certainly
less amusing and animated than I could have wished it for your sake,
as well as my own; yet it could not have been more welcomely received,
had it been as witty as your conversation itself.  I heard that you
had accepted the place of secretary to Lord Aspeden, and that you had
passed through London on your way to the Continent, looking (the
amiable Callythorpe, 'who never flatters,' is my authority) more like
a ghost than yourself.  So you may be sure, my dear Linden, that I was
very anxious to be convinced under your own hand of your carnal
existence.

Take care of yourself, my good fellow, and don't imagine, as I am apt
to do, that youth is like my hunter, Fearnought, and will carry you
over everything.  In return for your philosophical maxim, I will give
you another.  "In age we should remember that we have been young, and
in youth that we are to be old."  Ehem!--am I not profound as a
moralist?  I think a few such sentences would become my long face
well; and, to say truth, I am tired of being witty; every one thinks
he can be that: so I will borrow Trollolop's philosophy,--take snuff,
wear a wig out of curl, and grow wise instead of merry.

A propos of Trollolop; let me not forget that you honour him with your
inquiries.  I saw him three days since, and he asked me if I had been
impressed lately with the idea vulgarly called Clarence Linden; and he
then proceeded to inform me that he had heard the atoms which composed
your frame were about to be resolved into a new form.  While I was
knitting my brows very wisely at this intelligence, he passed on to
apprise me that I had neither length, breadth, nor extension, nor
anything but mind.  Flattered by so delicate a compliment to my
understanding, I yielded my assent: and he then shifted his ground,
and told me that there was no such thing as mind; that we were but
modifications of matter; and that, in a word, I was all body.  I took
advantage of this doctrine, and forthwith removed my modification of
matter from his.

Findlater has just lost his younger brother in a duel.  You have no
idea how shocking it was.  Sir Christopher one day heard his brother,
who had just entered the ---- Dragoons, ridiculed for his want of
spirit, by Major Elton, who professed to be the youth's best friend.
The honest heart of our worthy baronet was shocked beyond measure at
this perfidy, and the next time his brother mentioned Elton's name
with praise, out came the story.  You may guess the rest: young
Findlater called out Elton, who shot him through the lungs!  "I did it
for the best," cried Sir Christopher.

La pauvre petite Meronville!  What an Ariadne!  Just as I was thinking
to play the Bacchus to your Theseus, up steps an old gentleman from
Yorkshire, who hears it is fashionable to marry bonas robas, proposes
honourable matrimony, and deprives me and the world of La Meronville!
The wedding took place on Monday last, and the happy pair set out to
their seat in the North.  Verily, we shall have quite a new race in
the next generation; I expect all the babes will skip into the world
with a pas de zephyr, singing in sweet trebles,--

    "Little dancing loves we are!
     Who the deuce is our papa?"

I think you will be surprised to hear that Lord Borodaile is beginning
to thaw; I saw him smile the other day!  Certainly, we are not so near
the North Pole as we were!  He is going, and so am I, in the course of
the autumn, to your old friends the Westboroughs.  Report says that he
is un peu epris de la belle Flore; but, then, Report is such a liar!
For my own part I always contradict her.

I eagerly embrace your offer of correspondence, and assure you that
there are few people by whose friendship I conceive myself so much
honoured as by yours.  You will believe this; for you know that, like
Callythorpe, I never flatter.  Farewell for the present.

Sincerely yours,                                   HAVERFIELD.




CHAPTER LVI.

    Q. Eliz.--Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
    K. Rich.--Ay, if the devil tempt thee to do good.
    Q. Eliz.--Shall I forget myself to be myself?--SHAKSPEARE.

It wanted one hour to midnight, as Crauford walked slowly to the
lonely and humble street where he had appointed his meeting with
Glendower.  It was a stormy and fearful night.  The day had been
uncommonly sultry, and, as it died away, thick masses of cloud came
labouring along the air, which lay heavy and breathless, as if under a
spell,--as if in those dense and haggard vapours the rider of the
storm sat, like an incubus, upon the atmosphere beneath, and paralyzed
the motion and wholesomeness of the sleeping winds.  And about the
hour of twilight, or rather when twilight should have been, instead of
its quiet star, from one obscure corner of the heavens flashed a
solitary gleam of lightning, lingered a moment,--

    "And ere a man had power to say, Behold!
     The jaws of darkness did devour it up."

But then, as if awakened from a torpor by a signal universally
acknowledged, from the courts and quarters of heaven, came, blaze
after blaze, and peal upon peal, the light and voices of the Elements
when they walk abroad.  The rain fell not: all was dry and arid; the
mood of Nature seemed not gentle enough for tears; and the lightning,
livid and forked, flashed from the sullen clouds with a deadly
fierceness, made trebly perilous by the panting drought and stagnation
of the air.  The streets were empty and silent, as if the huge city
had been doomed and delivered to the wrath of the tempest; and ever
and anon the lightnings paused upon the housetops, shook and quivered
as if meditating their stroke, and then, baffled as it were, by some
superior and guardian agency, vanished into their gloomy tents, and
made their next descent from some opposite corner of the skies.

It was a remarkable instance of the force with which a cherished
object occupies the thoughts, and of the all-sufficiency of the human
mind to itself, the slowness and unconsciousness of danger with which
Crauford, a man luxurious as well as naturally timid, moved amidst the
angry fires of heaven and brooded, undisturbed and sullenly serene,
over the project at his heart.

"A rare night for our meeting," thought he; "I suppose he will not
fail me.  Now let me con over my task.  I must not tell him all yet.
Such babes must be led into error before they can walk: just a little
inkling will suffice, a glimpse into the arcana of my scheme.  Well,
it is indeed fortunate that I met him, for verily I am surrounded with
danger, and a very little delay in the assistance I am forced to seek
might exalt me to a higher elevation than the peerage."

Such was the meditation of this man, as with a slow, shufling walk,
characteristic of his mind, he proceeded to the appointed spot.

A cessation of unusual length in the series of the lightnings, and the
consequent darkness, against which the dull and scanty lamps vainly
struggled, prevented Crauford and another figure approaching from the
opposite quarter seeing each other till they almost touched.  Crauford
stopped abruptly.

"Is it you?" said he.

"It is a man who has outlived fortune!" answered Glendower, in the
exaggerated and metaphorical language which the thoughts of men who
imagine warmly, and are excited powerfully, so often assume.

"Then," rejoined Crauford, "you are the more suited for my purpose.  A
little urging of necessity behind is a marvellous whetter of the
appetite to danger before, he! he!"  And as he said this, his low
chuckling laugh jarringly enough contrasted with the character of the
night and his companion.

Glendower replied not: a pause ensued; and the lightning which,
spreading on a sudden from east to west, hung over the city a burning
and ghastly canopy, showed the face of each to the other, working and
almost haggard as it was with the conception of dark thoughts, and
rendered wan and unearthly by the spectral light in which it was
beheld.  "It is an awful night," said Glendower.

"True," answered Crauford, "a very awful night; but we are all safe
under the care of Providence.  Jesus! what a flash!  Think you it is a
favourable opportunity for our conversation?"

"Why not?" said Glendower; "what have the thunders and wrath of Heaven
to do with us?"

"H-e-m! h-e-m!  God sees all things," rejoined Crauford, "and avenges
Himself on the guilty by His storms!"

"Ay; but those are the storms of the heart!  I tell you that even the
innocent may have that within to which the loudest tempests without
are peace!  But guilt, you say; what have we to do with guilt?"

Crauford hesitated, and, avoiding any reply to this question, drew
Glendower's arm within his own, and in a low half-whispered tone
said,--

"Glendower, survey mankind; look with a passionless and unprejudiced
eye upon the scene which moves around us: what do you see anywhere but
the same re-acted and eternal law of Nature,--all, all preying upon
each other?  Or if there be a solitary individual who refrains, he is
as a man without a common badge, without a marriage garment, and the
rest trample him under foot!  Glendower, you are such a man!  Now
hearken, I will deceive you not; I honour you too much to beguile you,
even to your own good.  I own to you, fairly and at once, that in the
scheme I shall unfold to you, there may be something repugnant, to the
factitious and theoretical principles of education,--something hostile
to the prejudices, though not to the reasonings, of the mind; but--"

"Hold!" said Glendower, abruptly, pausing and fixing his bold and
searching eye upon the tempter; "hold! there will be no need of
argument or refinement in this case: tell me at once your scheme, and
at once I will accept or reject it!"

"Gently," said Crauford; "to all deeds of contract there is a
preamble.  Listen to me yet further: when I have ceased, I will listen
to you.  It is in vain that you place man in cities; it is in vain
that you fetter him with laws; it is in vain that you pour into his
mind the light of an imperfect morality, of a glimmering wisdom, of an
ineffectual religion: in all places he is the same,--the same savage
and crafty being, who makes the passions which rule himself the tools
of his conquest over others!  There is in all creation but one evident
law,--self-preservation!  Split it as you like into hairbreadths and
atoms, it is still fundamentally and essentially unaltered.
Glendower, that self-preservation is our bond now.  Of myself I do not
at present speak; I refer only to you: self-preservation commands you
to place implicit confidence in me; it impels you to abjure indigence,
by accepting the proposal I am about to make to you."

"You, as yet, speak enigmas," said Glendower; "but they are
sufficiently clear to tell me their sense is not such as I have heard
you utter."

"You are right.  Truth is not always safe,--safe either to others, or
to ourselves!  But I dare open to you now my real heart: look in it; I
dare to say that you will behold charity, benevolence, piety to God,
love and friendship at this moment to yourself; but I own, also, that
you will behold there a determination--which to me seems courage--not
to be the only idle being in the world, where all are busy; or, worse
still, to be the only one engaged in a perilous and uncertain game,
and yet shunning to employ all the arts of which he is master.  I will
own to you that, long since, had I been foolishly inert, I should have
been, at this moment, more penniless and destitute than yourself.  I
live happy, respected, wealthy!  I enjoy in their widest range the
