                         Resta mai in cielo.'

"And such beautiful ices one gets at M. Louvier's!  Did you taste the
pistachio ice?  What fine rooms, and so well lit up!  I adore light.  And
the ladies so beautifully dressed: one sees the fashions.  Stay at home!
play at Euchre indeed!  Piccola, you cannot be so cruel to yourself: you
are young."

"But, dear Madre, just consider; we are invited because we are considered
professional singers: your reputation as such is of course established,--
mine is not; but still I shall be asked to sing, as I was asked before;
and you know Dr. C. forbids me to do so except to a very small audience;
and it is so ungracious always to say 'No;' and besides, did you not
yourself say, when we came away last time from M. Louvier's, that it was
very dull, that you knew nobody, and that the ladies had such superb
toilets that you felt mortified--and--"

"Zitto! zitto! you talk idly, Piccola,--very idly.  I was mortified then
in my old black Lyons silk; but have I not bought since then my beautiful
Greek jacket,--scarlet and gold lace? and why should I buy it if I am not
to show it?"

"But, dear Madre, the jacket is certainly very handsome, and will make an
effect in a little dinner at the Savarins or Mrs. Morley's; but in a
great formal reception like M. Louvier's will it not look--"

"Splendid!" interrupted the Signora.

"But _singolare_."

"So much the better; did not that great English Lady wear such a jacket,
and did not every one admire her, _piu tosto invidia the compassione_?"

Isaura sighed.  Now the jacket of the Signora was a subject of
disquietude to her friend.  It so happened that a young English lady of
the highest rank and the rarest beauty had appeared at M. Louvier's, and
indeed generally in the _beau monde_ of Paris, in a Greek jacket that
became her very much.  The jacket had fascinated, at M. Louvier's, the
eyes of the Signora.  But of this Isaura was unaware.  The Signora, on
returning home from M. Louvier's, had certainly lamented much over the
_mesquin_ appearance of her old-fashioned Italian habiliments compared
with the brilliant toilette of the gay Parisiennes; and Isaura--quite
woman enough to sympathize with woman in such womanly vanities--proposed
the next day to go with the Signora to one of the principal couturieres
of Paris, and adapt the Signora's costume to the fashions of the place.
But the Signora having predetermined on a Greek jacket, and knowing
by instinct that Isaura would be disposed to thwart that splendid
predilection, had artfully suggested that it would be better to go
to the couturiere with Madame Savarin, as being a more experienced
adviser,--and the coupe only held two.

As Madame Savarin was about the same age as the Signora, and dressed as
became her years and in excellent taste, Isaura thought this an admirable
suggestion; and pressing into her chaperon's hand a _billet de banque_
sufficient to re-equip her _cap-a pie_, dismissed the subject from her
mind.  But the Signora was much too cunning to submit her passion for the
Greek jacket to the discouraging comments of Madame Savarin.
Monopolizing the _coupe_, she became absolute mistress of the situation.
She went to no fashionable couturiere's.  She went to a magasin that she
had seen advertised in the _Petites Afiches_ as supplying superb costumes
for fancy-balls and amateur performers in private theatricals.  She
returned home triumphant, with a jacket still more dazzling to the eye
than that of the English lady.

When Isaura first beheld it, she drew back in a sort of superstitious
terror, as of a comet or other blazing portent.

"_Cosa stupenda_!" (stupendous thing!)  She might well be dismayed when
the Signora proposed to appear thus attired in M. Louvier's salon.  What
might be admired as coquetry of dress in a young beauty of rank so great
that even a vulgarity in her would be called distinguee, was certainly an
audacious challenge of ridicule in the elderly _ci-devant_ music-teacher.

But how could Isaura, how can any one of common humanity, say to a woman
resolved upon wearing a certain dress, "You are not young and handsome
enough for that?" Isaura could only murmur, "For many reasons I would
rather stay at home, dear Madre."

"Ah! I see you are ashamed of me," said the Signora, in softened tones:
"very natural.  When the nightingale sings no more, she is only an ugly
brown bird;" and therewith the Signora Venosta seated herself
submissively, and began to cry.

On this Isaura sprang up, wound her arms round the Signora's neck,
soothed her with coaxing, kissed and petted her, and ended by saying, "Of
course we will go;" and, "but let me choose you another dress,--a dark-
green velvet trimmed with blonde: blonde becomes you so well."

"No, no: I hate green velvet; anybody can wear that.  Piccola, I am not
clever like thee; I cannot amuse myself like thee with books.  I am in a
foreign land.  I have a poor head, but I have a big heart" (another burst
of tears); "and that big heart is set on my beautiful Greek jacket."

"Dearest Madre," said Isaura, half weeping too, "forgive me, you are
right.  The Greek jacket is splendid; I shall be so pleased to see you
wear it: poor Madre!  so pleased to think that in the foreign land you
are not without something that pleases you!"




CHAPTER V.

CONFORMABLY with his engagement to meet M. Louvier, Alain found himself
on the day and at the hour named in M. Gandrin's salon.  On this occasion
Madame Gandrin did not appear.  Her husband was accustomed to give
_diners d'hommes_.  The great man had not yet arrived.  "I think,
Marquis," said M. Gandrin, "that you will not regret having followed my
advice: my representations have disposed Louvier to regard you with much
favour, and he is certainly flattered by being permitted to make your
personal acquaintance."

The _avoue_ had scarcely finished this little speech, when M. Louvier was
announced.  He entered with a beaming smile, which did not detract from
his imposing presence.  His flatterers had told him that he had a look of
Louis Philippe; therefore he had sought to imitate the dress and the
bonhomie of that monarch of the middle class.  He wore a wig, elaborately
piled up, and shaped his whiskers in royal harmony with the royal wig.
Above all, he studied that social frankness of manner with which the
able sovereign dispelled awe of his presence or dread of his astuteness.
Decidedly he was a man very pleasant to converse and to deal with--so
long as there seemed to him something to gain and nothing to lose by
being pleasant.  He returned Alain's bow by a cordial offer of both
expansive hands, into the grasp of which the hands of the aristocrat
utterly disappeared.  "Charmed to make your acquaintance, Marquis; still
more charmed if you will let me be useful during your _sejour_ at Paris.
_Ma foi_, excuse my bluntness, but you are a _fort beau garcon_.
Monsieur your father was a handsome man, but you beat him hollow.
Gandrin, my friend, would not you and I give half our fortunes for one
year of this fine fellow's youth spent at Paris? _Peste_! what love-
letters we should have, with no need to buy them by _billets de banque_!"
Thus he ran on, much to Alain's confusion, till dinner was announced.
Then there was something grandiose in the frank _bourgeois_ style
wherewith he expanded his napkin and twisted one end into his waistcoat;
it was so manly a renunciation of the fashions which a man so _repandu_
in all circles might be supposed to follow,--as if he were both too great
and too much in earnest for such frivolities.  He was evidently a sincere
_bon vivant_, and M. Gandrin had no less evidently taken all requisite
pains to gratify his taste.  The Montrachet served with the oysters was
of precious vintage; that _vin de madere_ which accompanied the _potage a
la bisque_ would have contented an American.  And how radiant became
Louvier's face when amongst the _entrees_ he came upon _laitances de
carpes_!  "The best thing in the world," he cried, "and one gets it so
seldom since the old Rocher de Cancale has lost its renown.  At private
houses, what does one get now? _blanc de poulet_, flavourless trash.
After all, Gandrin, when we lose the love-letters, it is some consolation
that _laitances de carpes_ and _sautes de foie gras_ are still left to
fill up the void in our hearts.  Marquis, heed my counsel; cultivate
betimes the taste for the table,--that and whist are the sole resources
of declining years.  You never met my old friend Talleyrand--ah, no! he
was long before your time.  He cultivated both, but he made two mistakes.
No man's intellect is perfect on all sides.  He confined himself to one
meal a day, and he never learned to play well at whist.  Avoid his
errors, my young friend,--avoid them.  Gandrin, I guess this pineapple is
English,--it is superb."

"You are right,--a present from the Marquis of H-------."

"Ah!  instead of a fee, I wager.  The Marquis gives nothing for nothing,
dear man!  Droll people the English.  You have never visited England, I
presume, _cher_ Rochebriant?"  The affable financier had already made
vast progress in familiarity with his silent fellow-guest.

When the dinner was over and the three men had reentered the salon for
coffee and liqueurs, Gandrin left Louvier and Alain alone, saying he was
going to his cabinet for cigars which he could recommend.  Then Louvier,
lightly patting the Marquis on the shoulder, said with what the French
call effusion, "My dear Rochebriant, your father and I did not quite
understand each other.  He took a tone of grand seigneur that sometimes
wounded me; and I in turn was perhaps too rude in asserting my rights--as
creditor, shall I say?--no, as fellow-citizen; and Frenchmen are so vain,
so over-susceptible; fire up at a word; take offence when none is meant.
We two, my dear boy, should be superior to such national foibles. _Bref_
--I have a mortgage on your lands.  Why should that thought mar our
friendship?  At my age, though I am not yet old, one is flattered if the
young like us, pleased if we can oblige them, and remove from their
career any little obstacle in its way.  Gandrin tells me you wish to
consolidate all the charges on your estate into one on a lower rate of
interest.  Is it so?"

"I am so advised," said the Marquis.

"And very rightly advised; come and talk with me about it some day next
week.  I hope to have a large sum of money set free in a few days.  Of
course, mortgages on land don't pay like speculations at the Bourse; but
I am rich enough to please myself.  We will see, we will see."

Here Gandrin returned with the cigars; but Alain at that time never
smoked, and Louvier excused himself, with a laugh and a sly wink, on the
plea that he was going to pay his respects--as doubtless that _joli
garcon_ was going to do likewise--to a belle dame who did not reckon the
smell of tobacco among the perfumes of Houbigant or Arabia.

"Meanwhile," added Louvier, turning to Gandrin, "I have something to say
to you on business about the contract for that new street of mine.  No
hurry,--after our young friend has gone to his 'assignation.'"

Alain could not misinterpret the hint; and in a few moments took leave of
his host, more surprised than disappointed that the financier had not
invited him, as Graham had assumed he would, to his soiree the following
evening.

When Alain was gone, Louvier's jovial manner disappeared also, and became
bluffly rude rather than bluntly cordial.  "Gandrin, what did you mean by
saying that that young man was no _muscadin_! _Muscadin, aristocrate_,
offensive from top to toe."

"You amaze me; you seemed to take to him so cordially."

"And pray, were you too blind to remark with what cold reserve he
responded to my condescensions; how he winced when I called him
Rochebriant; how he coloured when I called him 'dear boy'?  These
aristocrats think we ought to thank them on our knees when they take our
money, and" here Louvier's face darkened--"seduce our women."  "Monsieur
Louvier, in all France I do not know a greater aristocrat than yourself."

I don't know whether M. Gandrin meant that speech as a compliment, but M.
Louvier took it as such,--laughed complacently and rubbed his hands.
"Ay, ay, _millionnaires_ are the real aristocrats, for they have power,
as my _beau Marquis_ will soon find.  I must bid you good night.  Of
course I shall see Madame Gandrin and yourself to-morrow.  Prepare for a
motley gathering,--lots of democrats and foreigners, with artists and
authors, and such creatures."

"Is that the reason why you did not invite the Marquis?"

"To be sure; I would not shock so pure a Legitimist by contact with the
sons of the people, and make him still colder to myself.  No; when he
comes to my house he shall meet lions and _viveurs_ of the _haut ton_,
who will play into my hands by teaching him how to ruin himself in the
quickest manner and in the _genre Regence_.  _Bon soir, mon vieux._"




CHAPTER VI.

The next night Graham in vain looked round for Alain in M. Louvier's
salons, and missed his high-bred mien and melancholy countenance.
M. Louvier had been for some four years a childless widower, but his
receptions were not the less numerously attended, nor his establishment
less magnificently monde for the absence of a presiding lady: very much
the contrary; it was noticeable how much he had increased his status and
prestige as a social personage since the death of his unlamented spouse.

To say truth, she had been rather a heavy drag on his triumphal car.  She
had been the heiress of a man who had amassed a great deal of money,--not
in the higher walks of commerce, but in a retail trade.

Louvier himself was the son of a rich money-lender; he had entered life
with an ample fortune and an intense desire to be admitted into those
more brilliant circles in which fortune can be dissipated with _eclat_.
He might not have attained this object but for the friendly countenance
of a young noble who was then--

               "The glass of fashion and the mould of form;"

but this young noble, of whom later we shall hear more, came suddenly to
grief, and when the money-lender's son lost that potent protector, the
dandies, previously so civil, showed him a very cold shoulder.

Louvier then became an ardent democrat, and recruited the fortune he had
impaired by the aforesaid marriage, launched into colossal speculations,
and became enormously rich.  His aspirations for social rank now revived,
but his wife sadly interfered with them.  She was thrifty by nature;
sympathized little with her husband's genius for accumulation; always
