
HENRY B. HARRIS

Henry B. Harris, of New York, a theatrical manager, was one of the men
who showed superb courage in the crisis. When the life-boats were first
being filled, and before there was any panic, Mr. Harris went to the
side of his wife before the boat was lowered away.

"Women first," shouted one of the ship's officers. Mr. Harris glanced up
and saw that the remark was addressed to him.

"All right," he replied coolly. "Good-bye, my dear," he said, as he
kissed his wife, pressed her a moment to his breast, and then climbed
back to the Titanic's deck.


THREE EXPLOSIONS

Up to this time there had been no panic; but about one hour before
the ship plunged to the bottom there were three separate explosions of
bulkheads as the vessel filled. These were at intervals of about fifteen
minutes. From that time there was a different scene. The rush for the
remaining boats became a stampede.

The stokers rushed up from below and tried to beat a path through the
steerage men and women and through the sailors and officers, to get into
the boats. They had their iron bars and shovels, and they struck down
all who stood in their way.

The first to come up from the depths of the ship was an engineer. From
what he is reported to have said it is probable that the steam fittings
were broken and many were scalded to death when the Titanic lifted. He
said he had to dash through a narrow place beside a broken pipe and his
back was frightfully scalded.

Right at his heels came the stokers. The officers had pistols, but they
could not use them at first for fear of killing the women and children.
The sailors fought with their fists and many of them took the stoke bars
and shovels from the stokers and used them to beat back the others.

Many of the coal-passers and stokers who had been driven back from
the boats went to the rail, and whenever a boat was filled and lowered
several of them jumped overboard and swam toward it trying to climb
aboard. Several of the survivors said that men who swam to the sides of
their boats were pulled in or climbed in.

Dozens of the cabin passengers were witnesses of some of the frightful
scenes on the steerage deck. The steerage survivors said that ten women
from the upper decks were the only cool passengers in the life-boat, and
they tried to quiet the steerage women, who were nearly all crazed with
fear and grief.


OTHER HEROES

Among the chivalrous young heroes of the Titanic disaster were
Washington A. Roebling, 2d, and Howard Case, London representative of
the Vacuum Oil Company. Both were urged repeatedly to take places in
life-boats, but scorned the opportunity, while working against time to
save the women aboard the ill-fated ship. They went to their death, it
is said by survivors, with smiles on their faces.

Both of these young men aided in the saving of Mrs. William T. Graham,
wife of the president of the American Can Company, and Mrs. Graham's
nineteen-year-old daughter, Margaret.

Afterwards relating some of her experiences Mrs. Graham said:

"There was a rap at the door. It was a passenger whom we had met shortly
after the ship left Liverpool, and his name was Roebling--Washington A.
Roebling, 2d. He was a gentleman and a brave man. He warned us of
the danger and told us that it would be best to be prepared for an
emergency. We heeded his warning, and I looked out of my window and saw
a great big iceberg facing us. Immediately I knew what had happened and
we lost no time after that to get out into the saloon.

"In one of the gangways I met an officer of the ship.

"'What is the matter?' I asked him.

"'We've only burst two pipes,' he said. 'Everything is all right, don't
worry.'

"'But what makes the ship list so?' I asked.

"'Oh, that's nothing,' he replied, and walked away.

"Mr. Case advised us to get into a boat.

"'And what are you going to do?' we asked him.

"'Oh,' he replied, 'I'll take a chance and stay here.'

"Just at that time they were filling up the third life-boat on the port
side of the ship. I thought at the time that it was the third boat which
had been lowered, but I found out later that they had lowered other
boats on the other side, where the people were more excited because they
were sinking on that side.

"Just then Mr. Roebling came up, too, and told us to hurry and get into
the third boat. Mr. Roebling and Mr. Case bustled our party of three
into that boat in less time than it takes to tell it. They were both
working hard to help the women and children. The boat was fairly crowded
when we three were pushed into it, and a few men jumped in at the last
moment, but Mr. Roebling and Mr. Case stood at the rail and made no
attempt to get into the boat.

"They shouted good-bye to us. What do you think Mr. Case did then? He
just calmly lighted a cigarette and waved us good-bye with his hand.
Mr. Roebling stood there, too--I can see him now. I am sure that he knew
that the ship would go to the bottom. But both just stood there."


IN THE FACE OF DEATH

Scenes on the sinking vessel grew more tragic as the remaining
passengers faced the awful certainty that death must be the portion of
the majority, death in the darkness of a wintry sea studded with its ice
monuments like the marble shafts in some vast cemetery.

In that hour, when cherished illusions of possible safety had all
but vanished, manhood and womanhood aboard the Titanic rose to their
sublimest heights. It was in that crisis of the direst extremity that
many brave women deliberately rejected life and chose rather to remain
and die with the men whom they loved.


DEATH FAILS TO PART MR. AND MRS. STRAUS

"I will not leave my husband," said Mrs. Isidor Straus. "We are old; we
can best die together," and she turned from those who would have forced
her into one of the boats and clung to the man who had been the partner
of her joys and sorrows. Thus they stood hand in hand and heart to
heart, comforting each other until the sea claimed them, united in death
as they had been through a long life.

"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends."

Miss Elizabeth Evans fulfilled this final test of affection laid down
by the Divine Master. The girl was the niece of the wife of Magistrate
Cornell, of New York. She was placed in the same boat with many other
women. As it was about to be lowered away it was found that the craft
contained one more than its full quota of passengers.

The grim question arose as to which of them should surrender her place
and her chance of safety. Beside Miss Evans sat Mrs. J. J. Brown, of
Denver, the mother of several children. Miss Evans was the first to
volunteer to yield to another.


GIRL STEPS BACK TO DOOM

"Your need is greater than mine," said she to Mrs. Brown. "You have
children who need you, and I have none."

So saying she arose from the boat and stepped back upon the deck. The
girl found no later refuge and was one of those who went down with the
ship. She was twenty-five years old and was beloved by all who knew her.

Mrs. Brown thereafter showed the spirit which had made her also
volunteer to leave the boat. There were only three men in the boat
and but one of them rowed. Mrs. Brown, who was raised on the water,
immediately picked up one of the heavy sweeps and began to pull.

In the boat which carried Mrs. Cornell and Mrs. Appleton there were
places for seventeen more than were carried. This too was undermanned
and the two women at once took their places at the oars.

The Countess of Rothes was pulling at the oars of her boat, likewise
undermanned because the crew preferred to stay behind.

Miss Bentham, of Rochester, showed splendid courage. She happened to be
in a life-boat which was very much crowded--so much so that one sailor
had to sit with his feet dangling in the icy cold water, and as time
went on the sufferings of the man from the cold were apparent. Miss
Bentham arose from her place and had the man turn around while she took
her place with her feet in the water.

Scarcely any of the life-boats were properly manned. Two, filled with
women and children, capsized immediately, while the collapsible boats
were only temporarily useful. They soon filled with water. In one boat
eighteen or twenty persons sat in water above their knees for six hours.



{illust. caption =

In the darkness and confusion, punctuated by screams, sobs and curses,
the boats were lowered after being filled with women, children and a
few men. The sketch, drawn from description of eye-witnesses, shows the
lofty side of the stricken vessel and the laden boats descending.

THE LIFE-BOATS BEING LOWERED}


{illust. caption = Copyright by Underwood & Underwood, N. Y.

{illust. caption = Copyright by Underwood & Underwood, N. Y. LIFE-BOATS,
AS SEEN FROM THE CARPATHIA

Photographs taken from the rescue ship as she reached the first boats
carrying the Titanic's sufferers.}



heard it, but have forgotten it. But I saw an order for five pounds
which this man gave to each of the crew of his boat after they got
aboard the Carpathia. It was on a piece of ordinary paper addressed to
the Coutts Bank of England.

"We called that boat the 'money boat.' It was lowered from the
starboard side and was one of the first off. Our orders were to load the
life-boats beginning forward on the port side, working aft and then back
on the starboard. This man paid the firemen to lower a starboard boat
before the officers had given the order."

Whiteley's own experience was a hard one. When the uncoiling rope, which
entangled his feet, threw him into the sea, it furrowed the flesh of
his leg, but he did not feel the pain until he was safe aboard the
Carpathia.

"I floated on my life-preserver for several hours," he said, "then I
came across a big oak dresser with two men clinging to it. I hung on to
this till daybreak and the two men dropped off. When the sun came up I
saw the collapsible raft in the distance, just black with men. They were
all standing up, and I swam to it--almost a mile, it seemed to me--and
they would not let me aboard. Mr. Lightoller, the second officer, was
one of them.

"'It's thirty-one lives against yours,, he said, 'you can't come
aboard. There's not room.'"

"I pleaded with him in vain, and then I confess I prayed that somebody
might die, so I could take his place. It was only human. And then some
one did die, and they let me aboard.

"By and by, we saw seven life-boats lashed together, and we were taken
into them."


MEN SHOT DOWN

The officers had to assert their authority by force, and three
foreigners from the steerage who tried to force their way in among the
women and children were shot down without mercy.

Robert Daniel, a Philadelphia passenger, told of terrible scenes at
this period of the disaster. He said men fought and bit and struck one
another like madmen, and exhibited wounds upon his face to prove the
assertion. Mr. Daniel said that he was picked up naked from the ice-cold
water and almost perished from exposure before he was rescued. He and
others told how the Titanic's bow was completely torn away by the impact
with the berg.

K. Whiteman, of Palmyra, N. J., the Titanic's barber, was lowering boats
on deck after the collision, and declared the officers on the bridge,
one of them First Officer Murdock, promptly worked the electrical
apparatus for closing the water-tight compartments. He believed the
machinery was in some way so damaged by the crash that the front
compartments failed to close tightly, although the rear ones were
secure.

Whiteman's manner of escape was unique. He was blown off the deck by the
second of the two explosions of the boilers, and was in the water more
than two hours before he was picked up by a raft.

"The explosions," Whiteman said; "were caused by the rushing in of the
icy water on the boilers. A bundle of deck chairs, roped together, was
blown off the deck with me, and I struck my back, injuring my spine, but
it served as a temporary raft.

"The crew and passengers had faith in the bulkhead system to save the
ship and we were lowering a collapsible boat, all confident the ship
would get through, when she took a terrific dip forward and the water
swept over the deck and into the engine rooms.

"The bow went clean down, and I caught the pile of chairs as I was
washed up against the rim. Then came the explosions which blew me
fifteen feet.

"After the water had filled the forward compartments, the ones at the
stern could not save her, although they did delay the ship's going down.
If it wasn't for the compartments hardly anyone could have got away."


A SAD MESSAGE

One of the Titanic's stewards, Johnson by name, carried this message to
the sorrowing widow of Benjamin Guggenheim:

"When Mr. Guggenheim realized that there was grave danger," said the
room steward, "he advised his secretary, who also died, to dress fully
and he himself did the same. Mr. Guggenheim, who was cool and collected
as he was pulling on his outer garments, said to the steward:--


PREPARED TO DIE BRAVELY

"'I think there is grave doubt that the men will get off safely. I am
willing to remain and play the man's game, if there are not enough boats
for more than the women and children. I won't die here like a beast.
I'll meet my end as man.'

"There was a pause and then Mr. Guggenheim continued:

"'Tell my wife, Johnson, if it should happen that my secretary and I
both go down and you are saved, tell her I played the game out straight
and to the end. No woman shall be left aboard this ship because Ben
Guggenheim was a coward.

"'Tell her that my last thoughts will be of her and of our girls, but
that my duty now is to these unfortunate women and children on this
ship. Tell her I will meet whatever fate is in store for me, knowing she
will approve of what I do.'"

In telling the story the room steward said the last he saw of Mr.
Guggenheim was when he stood fully dressed upon the upper deck talking
calmly with Colonel Astor and Major Butt.

Before the last of the boats got away, according to some of the
passengers' narratives, there were more than fifty shots fired upon the
decks by officers or others in the effort to maintain the discipline
that until then had been well preserved.


THE SINKING VESSEL

Richard Norris Williams, Jr., one of the survivors of the Titanic, saw
his father killed by being crushed by one of the tremendous funnels of
the sinking vessel.

