would be our kinsman on the father's side. For Cretheus and Athamas were
both sons of Aeolus; and Phrixus was the son of Athamas, son of Aeolus.
And here, if thou hast heard at all of the seed of Helios, thou dost
behold Augeias; and this is Telamon sprung from famous Aeacus; and Zeus
himself begat Aeacus. And so all the rest, all the comrades that follow
him, are the sons or grandsons of the immortals."

(ll. 367-371) Such was the tale of Argus; but the king at his words was
filled with rage as he heard; and his heart was lifted high in wrath.
And he spake in heavy displeasure; and was angered most of all with the
son of Chalciope; for he deemed that on their account the strangers had
come; and in his fury his eyes flashed forth beneath his brows:

(ll. 372-381) "Begone from my sight, felons, straightway, ye and your
tricks, from the land, ere someone see a fleece and a Phrixus to his
sorrow. Banded together with your friends from Hellas, not for the
fleece, but to seize my sceptre and royal power have ye come hither.
Had ye not first tasted of my table, surely would I have cut out your
tongues and hewn off both hands and sent you forth with your feet alone,
so that ye might be stayed from starting hereafter. And what lies have
ye uttered against the blessed gods!"

(ll. 382-385) Thus he spake in his wrath; and mightily from its depths
swelled the heart of Aeacus' son, and his soul within longed to speak
a deadly word in defiance, but Aeson's son checked him, for he himself
first made gentle answer:

(ll. 386-395) "Aeetes, bear with this armed band, I pray. For not in the
way thou deemest have we come to thy city and palace, no, nor yet with
such desires. For who would of his own will dare to cross so wide a
sea for the goods of a stranger? But fate and the ruthless command of a
presumptuous king urged me. Grant a favour to thy suppliants, and to all
Hellas will I publish a glorious fame of thee; yea, we are ready now to
pay thee a swift recompense in war, whether it be the Sauromatae or some
other people that thou art eager to subdue to thy sway."

(ll. 396-400) He spake, flattering him with gentle utterance; but the
king's soul brooded a twofold purpose within him, whether he should
attack and slay them on the spot or should make trial of their might.
And this, as he pondered, seemed the better way, and he addressed Jason
in answer:

(ll. 401-421) "Stranger, why needest thou go through thy tale to the
end? For if ye are in truth of heavenly race, or have come in no wise
inferior to me, to win the goods of strangers, I will give thee the
fleece to bear away, if thou dost wish, when I have tried thee. For
against brave men I bear no grudge, such as ye yourselves tell me of him
who bears sway in Hellas. And the trial of your courage and might shall
be a contest which I myself can compass with my hands, deadly though it
be. Two bulls with feet of bronze I have that pasture on the plain of
Ares, breathing forth flame from their jaws; them do I yoke and drive
over the stubborn field of Ares, four plough-gates; and quickly cleaving
it with the share up to the headland, I cast into the furrows the seed,
not the corn of Demeter, but the teeth of a dread serpent that grow up
into the fashion of armed men; them I slay at once, cutting them down
beneath my spear as they rise against me on all sides. In the morning do
I yoke the oxen, and at eventide I cease from the harvesting. And thou,
if thou wilt accomplish such deeds as these, on that very day shalt
carry off the fleece to the king's palace; ere that time comes I will
not give it, expect it not. For indeed it is unseemly that a brave man
should yield to a coward."

(ll. 422-426) Thus he spake; and Jason, fixing his eyes on the ground,
sat just as he was, speechless, helpless in his evil plight. For a long
time he turned the matter this way and that, and could in no way take on
him the task with courage, for a mighty task it seemed; and at last he
made reply with crafty words:

(ll. 427-431) "With thy plea of right, Aeetes, thou dost shut me in
overmuch. Wherefore also I will dare that contest, monstrous as it is,
though it be my doom to die. For nothing will fall upon men more dread
than dire necessity, which indeed constrained me to come hither at a
king's command."

(ll. 432-438) Thus he spake, smitten by his helpless plight; and the
king with grim words addressed him, sore troubled as he was: "Go forth
now to the gathering, since thou art eager for the toil; but if thou
shouldst fear to lift the yoke upon the oxen or shrink from the deadly
harvesting, then all this shall be my care, so that another too may
shudder to come to a man that is better than he."

(ll. 439-463) He spake outright; and Jason rose from his seat, and
Augeias and Telamon at once; and Argus followed alone, for he signed to
his brothers to stay there on the spot meantime; and so they went forth
from the hall. And wonderfully among them all shone the son of Aeson
for beauty and grace; and the maiden looked at him with stealthy glance,
holding her bright veil aside, her heart smouldering with pain; and
her soul creeping like a dream flitted in his track as he went. So they
passed forth from the palace sorely troubled. And Chalciope, shielding
herself from the wrath of Aeetes, had gone quickly to her chamber with
her sons. And Medea likewise followed, and much she brooded in her soul
all the cares that the Loves awaken. And before her eyes the vision
still appeared--himself what like he was, with what vesture he was clad,
what things he spake, how he sat on his seat, how he moved forth to the
door--and as she pondered she deemed there never was such another man;
and ever in her ears rung his voice and the honey-sweet words which he
uttered. And she feared for him, lest the oxen or Aeetes with his
own hand should slay him; and she mourned him as though already slain
outright, and in her affliction a round tear through very grievous
pity coursed down her cheek; and gently weeping she lifted up her voice
aloud:

(ll. 464-470) "Why does this grief come upon me, poor wretch? Whether he
be the best of heroes now about to perish, or the worst, let him go to
his doom. Yet I would that he had escaped unharmed; yea, may this be so,
revered goddess, daughter of Perses, may he avoid death and return home;
but if it be his lot to be o'ermastered by the oxen, may he first learn
this, that I at least do not rejoice in his cruel calamity."

(ll. 471-474) Thus then was the maiden's heart racked by love-cares. But
when the others had gone forth from the people and the city, along the
path by which at the first they had come from the plain, then Argus
addressed Jason with these words:

(ll. 475-483) "Son of Aeson, thou wilt despise the counsel which I will
tell thee, but, though in evil plight, it is not fitting to forbear from
the trial. Ere now thou hast heard me tell of a maiden that uses sorcery
under the guidance of Hecate, Perses' daughter. If we could win her
aid there will be no dread, methinks, of thy defeat in the contest;
but terribly do I fear that my mother will not take this task upon
her. Nevertheless I will go back again to entreat her, for a common
destruction overhangs us all."

(ll. 383-491) He spake with goodwill, and Jason answered with these
words: "Good friend, if this is good in thy sight, I say not nay. Go and
move thy mother, beseeching her aid with prudent words; pitiful indeed
is our hope when we have put our return in the keeping of women." So
he spake, and quickly they reached the back-water. And their comrades
joyfully questioned them, when they saw them close at hand; and to them
spoke Aeson's son grieved at heart:

(ll. 492-501) "My friends, the heart of ruthless Aeetes is utterly
filled with wrath against us, for not at all can the goal be reached
either by me or by you who question me. He said that two bulls with feet
of bronze pasture on the plain of Ares, breathing forth flame from their
jaws. And with these he bade me plough the field, four plough-gates; and
said that he would give me from a serpent's jaws seed which will raise
up earthborn men in armour of bronze; and on the same day I must slay
them. This task--for there was nothing better to devise--I took on
myself outright."

(ll. 502-514) Thus he spake; and to all the contest seemed one that
none could accomplish, and long, quiet and silent, they looked at one
another, bowed down with the calamity and their despair; but at last
Peleus spake with courageous words among all the chiefs: "It is time
to be counselling what we shall do. Yet there is not so much profit, I
trow, in counsel as in the might of our hands. If thou then, hero son
of Aeson, art minded to yoke Aeetes' oxen, and art eager for the toil,
surely thou wilt keep thy promise and make thyself ready. But if thy
soul trusts not her prowess utterly, then neither bestir thyself nor sit
still and look round for some one else of these men. For it is not I who
will flinch, since the bitterest pain will be but death."

(ll. 515-522) So spake the son of Aeacus; and Telamon's soul was
stirred, and quickly he started up in eagerness; and Idas rose up
the third in his pride; and the twin sons of Tyndareus; and with them
Oeneus' son who was numbered among strong men, though even the soft down
on his cheek showed not yet; with such courage was his soul uplifted.
But the others gave way to these in silence. And straightway Argus spake
these words to those that longed for the contest:

(ll. 523-539) "My friends, this indeed is left us at the last. But
I deem that there will come to you some timely aid from my mother.
Wherefore, eager though ye be, refrain and abide in your ship a little
longer as before, for it is better to forbear than recklessly to choose
an evil fate. There is a maiden, nurtured in the halls of Aeetes, whom
the goddess Hecate taught to handle magic herbs with exceeding skill
all that the land and flowing waters produce. With them is quenched the
blast of unwearied flame, and at once she stays the course of rivers as
they rush roaring on, and checks the stars and the paths of the sacred
moon. Of her we bethought us as we came hither along the path from the
palace, if haply my mother, her own sister, might persuade her to aid us
in the venture. And if this is pleasing to you as well, surely on
this very day will I return to the palace of Aeetes to make trial; and
perchance with some god's help shall I make the trial."

(ll. 540-544) Thus he spake, and the gods in their goodwill gave them
a sign. A trembling dove in her flight from a mighty hawk fell from on
high, terrified, into the lap of Aeson's son, and the hawk fell impaled
on the stern-ornament. And quickly Mopsus with prophetic words spake
among them all:

(ll. 545-554) "For you, friends, this sign has been wrought by the
will of heaven; in no other way is it possible to interpret its meaning
better, than to seek out the maiden and entreat her with manifold skill.
And I think she will not reject our prayer, if in truth Phineus said
that our return should be with the help of the Cyprian goddess. It was
her gentle bird that escaped death; and as my heart within me foresees
according to this omen, so may it prove! But, my friends, let us call on
Cytherea to aid us, and now at once obey the counsels of Argus."

(ll. 555-563) He spake, and the warriors approved, remembering the
injunctions of Phineus; but all alone leapt up Apharcian Idas and
shouted loudly in terrible wrath: "Shame on us, have we come here fellow
voyagers with women, calling on Cypris for help and not on the mighty
strength of Enyalius? And do ye look to doves and hawks to save
yourselves from contests? Away with you, take thought not for deeds of
war, but by supplication to beguile weakling girls."

(ll. 564-571) Such were his eager words; and of his comrades many
murmured low, but none uttered a word of answer back. And he sat down in
wrath; and at once Jason roused them and uttered his own thought: "Let
Argus set forth from the ship, since this pleases all; but we will now
move from the river and openly fasten our hawsers to the shore. For
surely it is not fitting for us to hide any longer cowering from the
battle-cry."

(ll. 572-575) So he spake, and straightway sent Argus to return in
haste to the city; and they drew the anchors on board at the command of
Aeson's son, and rowed the ship close to the shore, a little away from
the back-water.

(ll. 576-608) But straightway Aeetes held an assembly of the Colchians
far aloof from his palace at a spot where they sat in times before, to
devise against the Minyae grim treachery and troubles. And he threatened
that when first the oxen should have torn in pieces the man who had
taken upon him to perform the heavy task, he would hew down the oak
grove above the wooded hill, and burn the ship and her crew, that so
they might vent forth in ruin their grievous insolence, for all their
haughty schemes. For never would he have welcomed the Aeolid Phrixus as
a guest in his halls, in spite of his sore need, Phrixus, who surpassed
all strangers in gentleness and fear of the gods, had not Zeus himself
sent Hermes his messenger down from heaven, so that he might meet with
a friendly host; much less would pirates coming to his land be let go
scatheless for long, men whose care it was to lift their hands and seize
the goods of others, and to weave secret webs of guile, and harry the
steadings of herdsmen with ill-sounding forays. And he said that besides
all that the sons of Phrixus should pay a fitting penalty to himself for
returning in consort with evildoers, that they might recklessly drive
him from his honour and his throne; for once he had heard a baleful
prophecy from his father Helios, that he must avoid the secret treachery
and schemes of his own offspring and their crafty mischief. Wherefore he
was sending them, as they desired, to the Achaean land at the bidding
of their father--a long journey. Nor had he ever so slight a fear of
his daughters, that they would form some hateful scheme, nor of his
son Apsyrtus; but this curse was being fulfilled in the children of
Chalciope. And he proclaimed terrible things in his rage against the
strangers, and loudly threatened to keep watch over the ship and its
crew, so that no one might escape calamity.

(ll. 609-615) Meantime Argus, going to Aeetes' palace, with manifold
pleading besought his mother to pray Medea's aid; and Chalciope herself
already had the same thoughts, but fear checked her soul lest haply
either fate should withstand and she should entreat her in vain, all
distraught as she would be at her father's deadly wrath, or, if Medea
yielded to her prayers, her deeds should be laid bare and open to view.

(ll. 616-635) Now a deep slumber had relieved the maiden from her
love-pains as she lay upon her couch. But straightway fearful dreams,
deceitful, such as trouble one in grief, assailed her. And she thought
that the stranger had taken on him the contest, not because he longed
to win the ram's fleece, and that he had not come on that account to
Aeetes' city, but to lead her away, his wedded wife, to his own home;
and she dreamed that herself contended with the oxen and wrought the
task with exceeding ease; and that her own parents set at naught their
promise, for it was not the maiden they had challenged to yoke the oxen
but the stranger himself; from that arose a contention of doubtful issue
between her father and the strangers; and both laid the decision
upon her, to be as she should direct in her mind. But she suddenly,
neglecting her parents, chose the stranger. And measureless anguish
seized them and they shouted out in their wrath; and with the cry sleep
released its hold upon her. Quivering with fear she started up, and
stared round the walls of her chamber, and with difficulty did she
gather her spirit within her as before, and lifted her voice aloud:

(ll. 636-644) "Poor wretch, how have gloomy dreams affrighted me! I fear
that this voyage of the heroes will bring some great evil. My heart is
trembling for the stranger. Let him woo some Achaean girl far away among
his own folk; let maidenhood be mine and the home of my parents. Yet,
taking to myself a reckless heart, I will no more keep aloof but will
make trial of my sister to see if she will entreat me to aid in the
contest, through grief for her own sons; this would quench the bitter
pain in my heart."

(ll. 645-673) She spake, and rising from her bed opened the door of her
chamber, bare-footed, clad in one robe; and verily she desired to go to
her sister, and crossed the threshold. And for long she stayed there
at the entrance of her chamber, held back by shame; and she turned back
once more; and again she came forth from within, and again stole back;
and idly did her feet bear her this way and that; yea, as oft as she
went straight on, shame held her within the chamber, and though held
back by shame, bold desire kept urging her on. Thrice she made the
attempt and thrice she checked herself, the fourth time she fell on her
bed face downward, writhing in pain. And as when a bride in her chamber
bewails her youthful husband, to whom her brothers and parents have
given her, nor yet does she hold converse with all her attendants for
shame and for thinking of him; but she sits apart in her grief; and some
doom has destroyed him, before they have had pleasure of each other's
charms; and she with heart on fire silently weeps, beholding her widowed
couch, in fear lest the women should mock and revile her; like to her
did Medea lament. And suddenly as she was in the midst of her tears, one
of the handmaids came forth and noticed her, one who was her youthful
attendant; and straightway she told Chalciope, who sat in the midst of
her sons devising how to win over her sister. And when Chalciope heard
the strange tale from the handmaid, not even so did she disregard it.
And she rushed in dismay from her chamber right on to the chamber where
the maiden lay in her anguish, having torn her cheeks on each side; and
when Chalciope saw her eyes all dimmed with tears, she thus addressed
her:

(ll. 674-680) "Ah me, Medea, why dost thou weep so? What hath befallen
thee? What terrible grief has entered thy heart? Has some heaven-sent
disease enwrapt thy frame, or hast thou heard from our father some
deadly threat concerning me and my sons? Would that I did not behold
this home of my parents, or the city, but dwelt at the ends of the
earth, where not even the name of Colchians is known!"

(ll. 681-687) Thus she spake, and her sister's cheeks flushed; and
though she was eager to reply, long did maiden shame restrain her.
At one moment the word rose on the end of her tongue, at another it
fluttered back deep within her breast. And often through her lovely lips
it strove for utterance; but no sound came forth; till at last she spoke
with guileful words; for the bold Loves were pressing her hard:

(ll. 688-692) "Chalciope, my heart is all trembling for thy sons, lest
my father forthwith destroy them together with the strangers. Slumbering
just now in a short-lived sleep such a ghastly dream did I see--may some
god forbid its fulfilment and never mayst thou win for thyself bitter
care on thy sons' account."

(ll. 693-704) She spake, making trial of her sister to see if she first
would entreat help for her sons. And utterly unbearable grief surged
over Chalciope's soul for fear at what she heard; and then she replied:
"Yea, I myself too have come to thee in eager furtherance of this
purpose, if thou wouldst haply devise with me and prepare some help. But
swear by Earth and Heaven that thou wilt keep secret in thy heart what
I shall tell thee, and be fellow-worker with me. I implore thee by the
blessed gods, by thyself and by thy parents, not to see them destroyed
by an evil doom piteously; or else may I die with my dear sons and come
back hereafter from Hades an avenging Fury to haunt thee."

(ll. 705-710) Thus she spake, and straightway a torrent of tears gushed
forth and low down she clasped her sister's knees with both hands
and let her head sink on to her breast. Then they both made piteous
lamentation over each other, and through the halls rose the faint sound
of women weeping in anguish. Medea, sore troubled, first addressed her
sister:

(ll. 711-717) "God help thee, what healing can I bring thee for what
thou speakest of, horrible curses and Furies? Would that it were
firmly in my power to save thy sons! Be witness that mighty oath of the
Colchians by which thou urgest me to swear, the great Heaven, and Earth
beneath, mother of the gods, that as far as strength lies in me, never
shalt thou fail of help, if only thy prayers can be accomplished."

(ll. 718-723) She spake, and Chalciope thus replied: "Couldst thou not
then, for the stranger--who himself craves thy aid--devise some trick or
some wise thought to win the contest, for the sake of my sons? And from
him has come Argus urging me to try to win thy help; I left him in the
palace meantime while I came hither."

(ll. 724-739) Thus she spake, and Medea's heart bounded with joy within
her, and at once her fair cheeks flushed, and a mist swam before her
melting eyes, and she spake as follows: "Chalciope, as is dear and
delightful to thee and thy sons, even so will I do. Never may the dawn
appear again to my eyes, never mayst thou see me living any longer, if I
should take thought for anything before thy life or thy sons' lives, for
they are my brothers, my dear kinsmen and youthful companions. So do I
declare myself to be thy sister, and thy daughter too, for thou didst
lift me to thy breast when an infant equally with them, as I ever heard
from my mother in past days. But go, bury my kindness in silence, so
that I may carry out my promise unknown to my parents; and at dawn I
will bring to Hecate's temple charms to cast a spell upon the bulls."

(ll. 740-743) Thus Chalciope went back from the chamber, and made
known to her sons the help given by her sister. And again did shame and
hateful fear seize Medea thus left alone, that she should devise such
deeds for a man in her father's despite.

(ll. 744-771) Then did night draw darkness over the earth; and on the
sea sailors from their ships looked towards the Bear and the stars of
Orion; and now the wayfarer and the warder longed for sleep, and the
pall of slumber wrapped round the mother whose children were dead; nor
was there any more the barking of dogs through the city, nor sound of
men's voices; but silence held the blackening gloom. But not indeed upon
Medea came sweet sleep. For in her love for Aeson's son many cares kept
her wakeful, and she dreaded the mighty strength of the bulls, beneath
whose fury he was like to perish by an unseemly fate in the field of
Ares. And fast did her heart throb within her breast, as a sunbeam
quivers upon the walls of a house when flung up from water, which is
just poured forth in a caldron or a pail may be; and hither and thither
on the swift eddy does it dart and dance along; even so the maiden's
heart quivered in her breast. And the tear of pity flowed from her eyes,
and ever within anguish tortured her, a smouldering fire through her
frame, and about her fine nerves and deep down beneath the nape of the
neck where the pain enters keenest, whenever the unwearied Loves direct
against the heart their shafts of agony. And she thought now that she
would give him the charms to cast a spell on the bulls, now that she
would not, and that she herself would perish; and again that she would
not perish and would not give the charms, but just as she was would
endure her fate in silence. Then sitting down she wavered in mind and
said:

(ll. 772-801) "Poor wretch, must I toss hither and thither in woe? On
every side my heart is in despair; nor is there any help for my pain;
but it burneth ever thus. Would that I had been slain by the swift
shafts of Artemis before I had set eyes on him, before Chalciope's sons
reached the Achaean land. Some god or some Fury brought them hither for
our grief, a cause of many tears. Let him perish in the contest if it be
his lot to die in the field. For how could I prepare the charms without
my parents' knowledge? What story call I tell them? What trick, what
cunning device for aid can I find? If I see him alone, apart from his
comrades, shall I greet him? Ill-starred that I am! I cannot hope that I
should rest from my sorrows even though he perished; then will evil come
to me when he is bereft of life. Perish all shame, perish all glow; may
he, saved by my effort, go scatheless wherever his heart desires. But
as for me, on the day when he bides the contest in triumph, may I die
either straining my neck in the noose from the roof-tree or tasting
drugs destructive of life. But even so, when I am dead, they will fling
out taunts against me; and every city far away will ring with my
doom, and the Colchian women, tossing my name on their lips hither and
thither, will revile me with unseemly mocking--the maid who cared so
much for a stranger that she died, the maid who disgraced her home and
her parents, yielding to a mad passion. And what disgrace will not be
mine? Alas for my infatuation! Far better would it be for me to forsake
life this very night in my chamber by some mysterious fate, escaping all
slanderous reproach, before I complete such nameless dishonour."

(ll. 802-824) She spake, and brought a casket wherein lay many drugs,
some for healing, others for killing, and placing it upon her knees she
wept. And she drenched her bosom with ceaseless tears, which flowed in
torrents as she sat, bitterly bewailing her own fate. And she longed to
choose a murderous drug to taste it, and now she was loosening the
bands of the casket eager to take it forth, unhappy maid! But suddenly a
deadly fear of hateful Hades came upon her heart. And long she held
back in speechless horror, and all around her thronged visions of the
pleasing cares of life. She thought of all the delightful things that
are among the living, she thought of her joyous playmates, as a maiden
will; and the sun grew sweeter than ever to behold, seeing that in truth
her soul yearned for all. And she put the casket again from off her
knees, all changed by the prompting of Hera, and no more did she waver
in purpose; but longed for the rising dawn to appear quickly, that she
might give him the charms to work the spell as she had promised, and
meet him face to face. And often did she loosen the bolts of her door,
to watch for the faint gleam: and welcome to her did the dayspring shed
its light, and folk began to stir throughout the city.

(ll. 825-827) Then Argus bade his brothers remain there to learn the
maiden's mind and plans, but himself turned back and went to the ship.

(ll. 828-890) Now soon as ever the maiden saw the light of dawn, with
her hands she gathered up her golden tresses which were floating round
her shoulders in careless disarray, and bathed her tear-stained cheeks,
and made her skin shine with ointment sweet as nectar; and she donned
a beautiful robe, fitted with well-bent clasps, and above on her head,
divinely fair, she threw a veil gleaming like silver. And there,
moving to and fro in the palace, she trod the ground forgetful of the
heaven-sent woes thronging round her and of others that were destined
to follow. And she called to her maids. Twelve they were, who lay during
the night in the vestibule of her fragrant chamber, young as herself,
not yet sharing the bridal couch, and she bade them hastily yoke the
mules to the chariot to bear her to the beauteous shrine of Hecate.
Thereupon the handmaids were making ready the chariot; and Medea
meanwhile took from the hollow casket a charm which men say is called
the charm of Prometheus. If a man should anoint his body therewithal,
having first appeased the Maiden, the only-begotten, with sacrifice by
night, surely that man could not be wounded by the stroke of bronze
nor would he flinch from blazing fire; but for that day he would prove
superior both in prowess and in might. It shot up first-born when the
ravening eagle on the rugged flanks of Caucasus let drip to the earth
the blood-like ichor of tortured Prometheus. And its flower appeared a
cubit above ground in colour like the Corycian crocus, rising on twin
stalks; but in the earth the root was like newly-cut flesh. The dark
juice of it, like the sap of a mountain-oak, she had gathered in a
Caspian shell to make the charm withal, when she had first bathed in
seven ever-flowing streams, and had called seven times on Brimo, nurse
of youth, night-wandering Brimo, of the underworld, queen among the
dead,--in the gloom of night, clad in dusky garments. And beneath, the
dark earth shook and bellowed when the Titanian root was cut; and the
son of Iapetus himself groaned, his soul distraught with pain. And
she brought the charm forth and placed it in the fragrant band which
engirdled her, just beneath her bosom, divinely fair. And going forth
she mounted the swift chariot, and with her went two handmaidens on
each side. And she herself took the reins and in her right hand the
well-fashioned whip, and drove through the city; and the rest, the
handmaids, laid their hands on the chariot behind and ran along the
broad highway; and they kilted up their light robes above their white
knees. And even as by the mild waters of Parthenius, or after bathing
in the river Amnisus, Leto's daughter stands upon her golden chariot and
courses over the hills with her swift-footed roes, to greet from
afar some richly-steaming hecatomb; and with her come the nymphs in
attendance, gathering, some at the spring of Amnisus itself, others by
the glens and many-fountained peaks; and round her whine and fawn the
beasts cowering as she moves along: thus they sped through the city;
and on both sides the people gave way, shunning the eyes of the royal
maiden. But when she had left the city's well paved streets, and was
approaching the shrine as she drove over the plains, then she alighted
eagerly from the smooth-running chariot and spake as follows among her
maidens:

(ll. 891-911) "Friends, verily have I sinned greatly and took no heed
not to go among the stranger-folk 1 who roam over our land. The whole
city is smitten with dismay; wherefore no one of the women who formerly
gathered here day by day has now come hither. But since we have come
and no one else draws near, come, let us satisfy our souls without stint
with soothing song, and when we have plucked the fair flowers amid the
tender grass, that very hour will we return. And with many a gift shall
ye reach home this very day, if ye will gladden me with this desire of
mine. For Argus pleads with me, also Chalciope herself; but this that
ye hear from me keep silently in your hearts, lest the tale reach my
father's ears. As for yon stranger who took on him the task with the
oxen, they bid me receive his gifts and rescue him from the deadly
contest. And I approved their counsel, and I have summoned him to come
to my presence apart from his comrades, so that we may divide the gifts
among ourselves if he bring them in his hands, and in return may give
him a baleful charm. But when he comes, do ye stand aloof."

(ll. 912-918) So she spake, and the crafty counsel pleased them all. And
straightway Argus drew Aeson's son apart from his comrades as soon as
he heard from his brothers that Medea had gone at daybreak to the holy
shrine of Hecate, and led him over the plain; and with them went Mopsus,
son of Ampycus, skilled to utter oracles from the appearance of birds,
and skilled to give good counsel to those who set out on a journey.

(ll. 919-926) Never yet had there been such a man in the days of old,
neither of all the heroes of the lineage of Zeus himself, nor of those
who sprung from the blood of the other gods, as on that day the bride of
Zeus made Jason, both to look upon and to hold converse with. Even his
comrades wondered as they gazed upon him, radiant with manifold graces;
and the son of Ampycus rejoiced in their journey, already foreboding how
all would end.

(ll. 927-931) Now by the path along the plain there stands near the
shrine a poplar with its crown of countless leaves, whereon often
chattering crows would roost. One of them meantime as she clapped her
wings aloft in the branches uttered the counsels of Hera:

(ll. 932-937) "What a pitiful seer is this, that has not the wit to
conceive even what children know, how that no maiden will say a word
of sweetness or love to a youth when strangers be near. Begone, sorry
prophet, witless one; on thee neither Cypris nor the gentle Loves
breathe in their kindness."

(ll. 938-946) She spake chiding, and Mopsus smiled to hear the god-sent
voice of the bird, and thus addressed them: "Do thou, son of Aeson, pass
on to the temple, where thou wilt find the maiden; and very kind will
her greeting be to thee through the prompting of Cypris, who will be thy
helpmate in the contest, even as Phineus, Agenor's son, foretold. But
we two, Argus and I, will await thy return, apart in this very spot; do
thou all alone be a suppliant and win her over with prudent words."

(ll. 947-974) He spake wisely, and both at once gave approval. Nor was
Medea's heart turned to other thoughts, for all her singing, and never
a song that she essayed pleased her long in her sport. But in confusion
she ever faltered, nor did she keep her eyes resting quietly upon the
throng of her handmaids; but to the paths far off she strained her gaze,
turning her face aside. Oft did her heart sink fainting within her bosom
whenever she fancied she heard passing by the sound of a footfall or
of the wind. But soon he appeared to her longing eyes, striding along
loftily, like Sirius coming from ocean, which rises fair and clear to
see, but brings unspeakable mischief to flocks; thus then did Aeson's
son come to her, fair to see, but the sight of him brought love-sick
care. Her heart fell from out her bosom, and a dark mist came over her
eyes, and a hot blush covered her cheeks. And she had no strength to
lift her knees backwards or forwards, but her feet beneath were rooted
to the ground; and meantime all her handmaidens had drawn aside. So they
two stood face to face without a word, without a sound, like oaks or
lofty pines, which stand quietly side by side on the mountains when the
wind is still; then again, when stirred by the breath of the wind, they
murmur ceaselessly; so they two were destined to tell out all their
tale, stirred by the breath of Love. And Aeson's son saw that she had
fallen into some heaven-sent calamity, and with soothing words thus
addressed her:

(ll. 975-1007) "Why, pray, maiden, dost thou fear me so much, all
alone as I am? Never was I one of these idle boasters such as other
men are--not even aforetime, when I dwelt in my own country. Wherefore,
maiden, be not too much abashed before me, either to enquire whatever
thou wilt or to speak thy mind. But since we have met one another with
friendly hearts, in a hallowed spot, where it is wrong to sin, speak
openly and ask questions, and beguile me not with pleasing words, for at
the first thou didst promise thy sister to give me the charms my heart
desires. I implore thee by Hecate herself, by thy parents, and by Zeus
who holds his guardian hand over strangers and suppliants; I come here
to thee both a suppliant and a stranger, bending the knee in my sore
need. For without thee and thy sister never shall I prevail in the
grievous contest. And to thee will I render thanks hereafter for thy
aid, as is right and fitting for men who dwell far oft, making glorious
thy name and fame; and the rest of the heroes, returning to Hellas, will
spread thy renown and so will the heroes' wives and mothers, who now
perhaps are sitting on the shore and making moan for us; their painful
affliction thou mightest scatter to the winds. In days past the maiden
Ariadne, daughter of Minos, with kindly intent rescued Theseus from grim
contests--the maiden whom Pasiphae daughter of Helios bare. But she,
when Minos had lulled his wrath to rest, went aboard the ship with him
and left her fatherland; and her even the immortal gods loved, and, as a
sign in mid-sky, a crown of stars, which men call Ariadne's crown, rolls
along all night among the heavenly constellations. So to thee too
shall be thanks from the gods, if thou wilt save so mighty an array of
chieftains. For surely from thy lovely form thou art like to excel in
gentle courtest."

(ll. 1008-1025) Thus he spake, honouring her; and she cast her eyes down
with a smile divinely sweet; and her soul melted within her, uplifted by
his praise, and she gazed upon him face to face; nor did she know what
word to utter first, but was eager to pour out everything at once. And
forth from her fragrant girdle ungrudgingly she brought out the charm;
and he at once received it in his hands with joy. And she would even
