"C'est pour vos peches--pour vos peches," they droned, looking at the
travellers with sad lack-lustre eyes, and then bent to their bloody
work once more without heed to the prayers and persuasions which were
addressed to them. Finding all remonstrance useless, the three comrades
hastened on their way, leaving these strange travellers to their dreary
task.

"Mort Dieu!" cried the bowman, "there is a bucketful or more of my blood
over in France, but it was all spilled in hot fight, and I should think
twice before I drew it drop by drop as these friars are doing. By my
hilt! our young one here is as white as a Picardy cheese. What is amiss
then, mon cher?"

"It is nothing," Alleyne answered. "My life has been too quiet, I am not
used to such sights."

"Ma foi!" the other cried, "I have never yet seen a man who was so stout
of speech and yet so weak of heart."

"Not so, friend," quoth big John; "it is not weakness of heart for I
know the lad well. His heart is as good as thine or mine but he hath
more in his pate than ever you will carry under that tin pot of thine,
and as a consequence he can see farther into things, so that they weigh
upon him more."

"Surely to any man it is a sad sight," said Alleyne, "to see these
holy men, who have done no sin themselves, suffering so for the sins of
others. Saints are they, if in this age any may merit so high a name."

"I count them not a fly," cried Hordle John; "for who is the better for
all their whipping and yowling? They are like other friars, I trow, when
all is done. Let them leave their backs alone, and beat the pride out of
their hearts."

"By the three kings! there is sooth in what you say," remarked the
archer. "Besides, methinks if I were le bon Dieu, it would bring me
little joy to see a poor devil cutting the flesh off his bones; and I
should think that he had but a small opinion of me, that he should hope
to please me by such provost-marshal work. No, by my hilt! I should look
with a more loving eye upon a jolly archer who never harmed a fallen foe
and never feared a hale one."

"Doubtless you mean no sin," said Alleyne. "If your words are wild, it
is not for me to judge them. Can you not see that there are other foes
in this world besides Frenchmen, and as much glory to be gained in
conquering them? Would it not be a proud day for knight or squire if he
could overthrow seven adversaries in the lists? Yet here are we in the
lists of life, and there come the seven black champions against us Sir
Pride, Sir Covetousness, Sir Lust, Sir Anger, Sir Gluttony, Sir Envy,
and Sir Sloth. Let a man lay those seven low, and he shall have the
prize of the day, from the hands of the fairest queen of beauty, even
from the Virgin-Mother herself. It is for this that these men mortify
their flesh, and to set us an example, who would pamper ourselves
overmuch. I say again that they are God's own saints, and I bow my head
to them."

"And so you shall, mon petit," replied the archer. "I have not heard
a man speak better since old Dom Bertrand died, who was at one time
chaplain to the White Company. He was a very valiant man, but at
the battle of Brignais he was spitted through the body by a Hainault
man-at-arms. For this we had an excommunication read against the man,
when next we saw our holy father at Avignon; but as we had not his name,
and knew nothing of him, save that he rode a dapple-gray roussin, I have
feared sometimes that the blight may have settled upon the wrong man."

"Your Company has been, then, to bow knee before our holy father, the
Pope Urban, the prop and centre of Christendom?" asked Alleyne, much
interested. "Perchance you have yourself set eyes upon his august face?"

"Twice I saw him," said the archer. "He was a lean little rat of a man,
with a scab on his chin. The first time we had five thousand crowns out
of him, though he made much ado about it. The second time we asked ten
thousand, but it was three days before we could come to terms, and I
am of opinion myself that we might have done better by plundering the
palace. His chamberlain and cardinals came forth, as I remember, to
ask whether we would take seven thousand crowns with his blessing and
a plenary absolution, or the ten thousand with his solemn ban by bell,
book and candle. We were all of one mind that it was best to have the
ten thousand with the curse; but in some way they prevailed upon Sir
John, so that we were blest and shriven against our will. Perchance it
is as well, for the Company were in need of it about that time."

The pious Alleyne was deeply shocked by this reminiscence. Involuntarily
he glanced up and around to see if there were any trace of those
opportune levin-flashes and thunderbolts which, in the "Acta Sanctorum,"
were wont so often to cut short the loose talk of the scoffer. The
autumn sun streamed down as brightly as ever, and the peaceful red path
still wound in front of them through the rustling, yellow-tinted forest,
Nature seemed to be too busy with her own concerns to heed the dignity
of an outraged pontiff. Yet he felt a sense of weight and reproach
within his breast, as though he had sinned himself in giving ear to such
words. The teachings of twenty years cried out against such license. It
was not until he had thrown himself down before one of the many wayside
crosses, and had prayed from his heart both for the archer and for
himself, that the dark cloud rolled back again from his spirit.



CHAPTER VIII. THE THREE FRIENDS.


His companions had passed on whilst he was at his orisons; but his young
blood and the fresh morning air both invited him to a scamper. His staff
in one hand and his scrip in the other, with springy step and floating
locks, he raced along the forest path, as active and as graceful as a
young deer. He had not far to go, however; for, on turning a corner,
he came on a roadside cottage with a wooden fence-work around it, where
stood big John and Aylward the bowman, staring at something within. As
he came up with them, he saw that two little lads, the one about nine
years of age and the other somewhat older, were standing on the plot
in front of the cottage, each holding out a round stick in their left
hands, with their arms stiff and straight from the shoulder, as
silent and still as two small statues. They were pretty, blue-eyed,
yellow-haired lads, well made and sturdy, with bronzed skins, which
spoke of a woodland life.

"Here are young chips from an old bow stave!" cried the soldier in great
delight. "This is the proper way to raise children. By my hilt! I could
not have trained them better had I the ordering of it myself."

"What is it then?" asked Hordle John. "They stand very stiff, and I
trust that they have not been struck so."

"Nay, they are training their left arms, that they may have a steady
grasp of the bow. So my own father trained me, and six days a week I
held out his walking-staff till my arm was heavy as lead. Hola, mes
enfants! how long will you hold out?"

"Until the sun is over the great lime-tree, good master," the elder
answered.

"What would ye be, then? Woodmen? Verderers?"

"Nay, soldiers," they cried both together.

"By the beard of my father! but ye are whelps of the true breed. Why so
keen, then, to be soldiers?"

"That we may fight the Scots," they answered. "Daddy will send us to
fight the Scots."

"And why the Scots, my pretty lads? We have seen French and Spanish
galleys no further away than Southampton, but I doubt that it will be
some time before the Scots find their way to these parts."

"Our business is with the Scots," quoth the elder; "for it was the Scots
who cut off daddy's string fingers and his thumbs."

"Aye, lads, it was that," said a deep voice from behind Alleyne's
shoulder. Looking round, the wayfarers saw a gaunt, big-boned man, with
sunken cheeks and a sallow face, who had come up behind them. He held
up his two hands as he spoke, and showed that the thumbs and two first
fingers had been torn away from each of them.

"Ma foi, camarade!" cried Aylward. "Who hath served thee in so shameful
a fashion?"

"It is easy to see, friend, that you were born far from the marches of
Scotland," quoth the stranger, with a bitter smile. "North of Humber
there is no man who would not know the handiwork of Devil Douglas, the
black Lord James."

"And how fell you into his hands?" asked John.

"I am a man of the north country, from the town of Beverley and the
wapentake of Holderness," he answered. "There was a day when, from Trent
to Tweed, there was no better marksman than Robin Heathcot. Yet, as you
see, he hath left me, as he hath left many another poor border archer,
with no grip for bill or bow. Yet the king hath given me a living here
in the southlands, and please God these two lads of mine will pay off
a debt that hath been owing over long. What is the price of daddy's
thumbs, boys?"

"Twenty Scottish lives," they answered together.

"And for the fingers?"

"Half a score."

"When they can bend my war-bow, and bring down a squirrel at a hundred
paces, I send them to take service under Johnny Copeland, the Lord of
the Marches and Governor of Carlisle. By my soul! I would give the rest
of my fingers to see the Douglas within arrow-flight of them."

"May you live to see it," quoth the bowman. "And hark ye, mes enfants,
take an old soldier's rede and lay your bodies to the bow, drawing from
hip and thigh as much as from arm. Learn also, I pray you, to shoot with
a dropping shaft; for though a bowman may at times be called upon to
shoot straight and fast, yet it is more often that he has to do with a
town-guard behind a wall, or an arbalestier with his mantlet raised when
you cannot hope to do him scathe unless your shaft fall straight upon
him from the clouds. I have not drawn string for two weeks, but I may
be able to show ye how such shots should be made." He loosened his
long-bow, slung his quiver round to the front, and then glanced keenly
round for a fitting mark. There was a yellow and withered stump some
way off, seen under the drooping branches of a lofty oak. The archer
measured the distance with his eye; and then, drawing three shafts, he
shot them off with such speed that the first had not reached the mark
ere the last was on the string. Each arrow passed high over the oak;
and, of the three, two stuck fair into the stump; while the third,
caught in some wandering puff of wind, was driven a foot or two to one
side.

"Good!" cried the north countryman. "Hearken to him lads! He is a master
bowman. Your dad says amen to every word he says."

"By my hilt!" said Aylward, "if I am to preach on bowmanship, the whole
long day would scarce give me time for my sermon. We have marksmen in
the Company who will notch with a shaft every crevice and joint of a
man-at-arm's harness, from the clasp of his bassinet to the hinge of his
greave. But, with your favor, friend, I must gather my arrows again, for
while a shaft costs a penny a poor man can scarce leave them sticking
in wayside stumps. We must, then, on our road again, and I hope from my
heart that you may train these two young goshawks here until they are
ready for a cast even at such a quarry as you speak of."

Leaving the thumbless archer and his brood, the wayfarers struck through
the scattered huts of Emery Down, and out on to the broad rolling heath
covered deep in ferns and in heather, where droves of the half-wild
black forest pigs were rooting about amongst the hillocks. The woods
about this point fall away to the left and the right, while the road
curves upwards and the wind sweeps keenly over the swelling uplands. The
broad strips of bracken glowed red and yellow against the black peaty
soil, and a queenly doe who grazed among them turned her white front
and her great questioning eyes towards the wayfarers. Alleyne gazed
in admiration at the supple beauty of the creature; but the archer's
fingers played with his quiver, and his eyes glistened with the fell
instinct which urges a man to slaughter.

"Tete Dieu!" he growled, "were this France, or even Guienne, we should
have a fresh haunch for our none-meat. Law or no law, I have a mind to
loose a bolt at her."

"I would break your stave across my knee first," cried John, laying his
great hand upon the bow. "What! man, I am forest-born, and I know what
comes of it. In our own township of Hordle two have lost their eyes and
one his skin for this very thing. On my troth, I felt no great love when
I first saw you, but since then I have conceived over much regard for
you to wish to see the verderer's flayer at work upon you."

"It is my trade to risk my skin," growled the archer; but none the less
he thrust his quiver over his hip again and turned his face for the
west.

As they advanced, the path still tended upwards, running from heath into
copses of holly and yew, and so back into heath again. It was joyful to
hear the merry whistle of blackbirds as they darted from one clump
of greenery to the other. Now and again a peaty amber colored stream
rippled across their way, with ferny over-grown banks, where the blue
kingfisher flitted busily from side to side, or the gray and pensive
heron, swollen with trout and dignity, stood ankle-deep among the
sedges. Chattering jays and loud wood-pigeons flapped thickly overhead,
while ever and anon the measured tapping of Nature's carpenter, the
great green woodpecker, sounded from each wayside grove. On either side,
as the path mounted, the long sweep of country broadened and expanded,
sloping down on the one side through yellow forest and brown moor to
the distant smoke of Lymington and the blue misty channel which lay
alongside the sky-line, while to the north the woods rolled away, grove
topping grove, to where in the furthest distance the white spire of
Salisbury stood out hard and clear against the cloudless sky. To Alleyne
whose days had been spent in the low-lying coastland, the eager upland
air and the wide free country-side gave a sense of life and of the joy
of living which made his young blood tingle in his veins. Even the
heavy John was not unmoved by the beauty of their road, while the bowman
whistled lustily or sang snatches of French love songs in a voice which
might have scared the most stout-hearted maiden that ever hearkened to
serenade.

"I have a liking for that north countryman," he remarked presently. "He
hath good power of hatred. Couldst see by his cheek and eye that he is
as bitter as verjuice. I warm to a man who hath some gall in his liver."

"Ah me!" sighed Alleyne. "Would it not be better if he had some love in
his heart?"

"I would not say nay to that. By my hilt! I shall never be said to be
traitor to the little king. Let a man love the sex. Pasques Dieu! they
are made to be loved, les petites, from whimple down to shoe-string! I
am right glad, mon garcon, to see that the good monks have trained thee
so wisely and so well."

"Nay, I meant not worldly love, but rather that his heart should soften
towards those who have wronged him."

The archer shook his head. "A man should love those of his own breed,"
said he. "But it is not nature that an English-born man should love
a Scot or a Frenchman. Ma foi! you have not seen a drove of Nithsdale
raiders on their Galloway nags, or you would not speak of loving them. I
would as soon take Beelzebub himself to my arms. I fear, mon gar., that
they have taught thee but badly at Beaulieu, for surely a bishop knows
more of what is right and what is ill than an abbot can do, and I myself
with these very eyes saw the Bishop of Lincoln hew into a Scottish
hobeler with a battle-axe, which was a passing strange way of showing
him that he loved him."

Alleyne scarce saw his way to argue in the face of so decided an opinion
on the part of a high dignitary of the Church. "You have borne arms
against the Scots, then?" he asked.

"Why, man, I first loosed string in battle when I was but a lad, younger
by two years than you, at Neville's Cross, under the Lord Mowbray.
Later, I served under the Warden of Berwick, that very John Copeland of
whom our friend spake, the same who held the King of Scots to ransom. Ma
foi! it is rough soldiering, and a good school for one who would learn
to be hardy and war-wise."

"I have heard that the Scots are good men of war," said Hordle John.

"For axemen and for spearmen I have not seen their match," the archer
answered. "They can travel, too, with bag of meal and gridiron slung
to their sword-belt, so that it is ill to follow them. There are scant
crops and few beeves in the borderland, where a man must reap his grain
with sickle in one fist and brown bill in the other. On the other hand,
they are the sorriest archers that I have ever seen, and cannot so much
as aim with the arbalest, to say nought of the long-bow. Again, they are
mostly poor folk, even the nobles among them, so that there are few who
can buy as good a brigandine of chain-mail as that which I am wearing,
and it is ill for them to stand up against our own knights, who carry
the price of five Scotch farms upon their chest and shoulders. Man for
man, with equal weapons, they are as worthy and valiant men as could be
found in the whole of Christendom."

"And the French?" asked Alleyne, to whom the archer's light gossip had
all the relish that the words of the man of action have for the recluse.

"The French are also very worthy men. We have had great good fortune in
France, and it hath led to much bobance and camp-fire talk, but I have
ever noticed that those who know the most have the least to say about
it. I have seen Frenchmen fight both in open field, in the intaking and
the defending of towns or castlewicks, in escalados, camisades, night
forays, bushments, sallies, outfalls, and knightly spear-runnings. Their
knights and squires, lad, are every whit as good as ours, and I could
pick out a score of those who ride behind Du Guesclin who would hold the
lists with sharpened lances against the best men in the army of England.
On the other hand, their common folk are so crushed down with gabelle,
and poll-tax, and every manner of cursed tallage, that the spirit has
passed right out of them. It is a fool's plan to teach a man to be a
cur in peace, and think that he will be a lion in war. Fleece them like
sheep and sheep they will remain. If the nobles had not conquered
the poor folk it is like enough that we should not have conquered the
nobles."

"But they must be sorry folk to bow down to the rich in such a fashion,"
said big John. "I am but a poor commoner of England myself, and yet I
know something of charters, liberties, franchises, usages, privileges,
customs, and the like. If these be broken, then all men know that it is
time to buy arrow-heads."

"Aye, but the men of the law are strong in France as well as the men
of war. By my hilt! I hold that a man has more to fear there from the
ink-pot of the one than from the iron of the other. There is ever some
cursed sheepskin in their strong boxes to prove that the rich man should
be richer and the poor man poorer. It would scarce pass in England, but
they are quiet folk over the water."

"And what other nations have you seen in your travels, good sir?" asked
Alleyne Edricson. His young mind hungered for plain facts of life, after
the long course of speculation and of mysticism on which he had been
trained.

"I have seen the low countryman in arms, and I have nought to say
against him. Heavy and slow is he by nature, and is not to be brought
into battle for the sake of a lady's eyelash or the twang of a
minstrel's string, like the hotter blood of the south. But ma foi! lay
hand on his wool-bales, or trifle with his velvet of Bruges, and out
buzzes every stout burgher, like bees from the tee-hole, ready to lay on
as though it were his one business in life. By our lady! they have shown
the French at Courtrai and elsewhere that they are as deft in wielding
steel as in welding it."

"And the men of Spain?"

"They too are very hardy soldiers, the more so as for many hundred years
they have had to fight hard against the cursed followers of the black
Mahound, who have pressed upon them from the south, and still, as I
understand, hold the fairer half of the country. I had a turn with them
upon the sea when they came over to Winchelsea and the good queen with
her ladies sat upon the cliffs looking down at us, as if it had been
joust or tourney. By my hilt! it was a sight that was worth the seeing,
for all that was best in England was out on the water that day. We went
forth in little ships and came back in great galleys--for of fifty tall
ships of Spain, over two score flew the Cross of St. George ere the sun
had set. But now, youngster, I have answered you freely, and I trow it
is time that you answered me. Let things be plat and plain between us. I
am a man who shoots straight at his mark. You saw the things I had
with me at yonder hostel: name which you will, save only the box of
rose-colored sugar which I take to the Lady Loring, and you shall have
it if you will but come with me to France."

"Nay," said Alleyne, "I would gladly come with ye to France or where
else ye will, just to list to your talk, and because ye are the only two
friends that I have in the whole wide world outside of the cloisters;
but, indeed, it may not be, for my duty is towards my brother, seeing
that father and mother are dead, and he my elder. Besides, when ye talk
of taking me to France, ye do not conceive how useless I should be to
you, seeing that neither by training nor by nature am I fitted for the
wars, and there seems to be nought but strife in those parts."

"That comes from my fool's talk," cried the archer; "for being a man of
no learning myself, my tongue turns to blades and targets, even as
my hand does. Know then that for every parchment in England there are
twenty in France. For every statue, cut gem, shrine, carven screen,
or what else might please the eye of a learned clerk, there are a good
hundred to our one. At the spoiling of Carcasonne I have seen chambers
stored with writing, though not one man in our Company could read them.
Again, in Arles and Nimes, and other towns that I could name, there are
the great arches and fortalices still standing which were built of old
by giant men who came from the south. Can I not see by your brightened
eye how you would love to look upon these things? Come then with me,
and, by these ten finger-bones! there is not one of them which you shall
not see."

"I should indeed love to look upon them," Alleyne answered; "but I have
come from Beaulieu for a purpose, and I must be true to my service, even
as thou art true to thine."

"Bethink you again, mon ami," quoth Aylward, "that you might do much
good yonder, since there are three hundred men in the Company, and none
who has ever a word of grace for them, and yet the Virgin knows that
there was never a set of men who were in more need of it. Sickerly the
one duty may balance the other. Your brother hath done without you this
many a year, and, as I gather, he hath never walked as far as Beaulieu
to see you during all that time, so he cannot be in any great need of
you."

"Besides," said John, "the Socman of Minstead is a by-word through the
forest, from Bramshaw Hill to Holmesley Walk. He is a drunken, brawling,
perilous churl, as you may find to your cost."

"The more reason that I should strive to mend him," quoth Alleyne.
"There is no need to urge me, friends, for my own wishes would draw
me to France, and it would be a joy to me if I could go with you. But
indeed and indeed it cannot be, so here I take my leave of you, for
yonder square tower amongst the trees upon the right must surely be the
church of Minstead, and I may reach it by this path through the woods."

"Well, God be with thee, lad!" cried the archer, pressing Alleyne to his
heart. "I am quick to love, and quick to hate and 'fore God I am loth to
part."

"Would it not be well," said John, "that we should wait here, and see
what manner of greeting you have from your brother. You may prove to be
as welcome as the king's purveyor to the village dame."

"Nay, nay," he answered; "ye must not bide for me, for where I go I
stay."

"Yet it may be as well that you should know whither we go," said the
archer. "We shall now journey south through the woods until we come out
upon the Christchurch road, and so onwards, hoping to-night to reach the
castle of Sir William Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, of which Sir Nigel
Loring is constable. There we shall bide, and it is like enough that for
a month or more you may find us there, ere we are ready for our viage
back to France."

It was hard indeed for Alleyne to break away from these two new but
hearty friends, and so strong was the combat between his conscience
and his inclinations that he dared not look round, lest his resolution
should slip away from him. It was not until he was deep among the tree
trunks that he cast a glance backwards, when he found that he could
still see them through the branches on the road above him. The archer
was standing with folded arms, his bow jutting from over his shoulder,
and the sun gleaming brightly upon his head-piece and the links of
his chain-mail. Beside him stood his giant recruit, still clad in the
home-spun and ill-fitting garments of the fuller of Lymington, with arms
and legs shooting out of his scanty garb. Even as Alleyne watched them
they turned upon their heels and plodded off together upon their way.



CHAPTER IX. HOW STRANGE THINGS BEFELL IN MINSTEAD WOOD.


The path which the young clerk had now to follow lay through a
magnificent forest of the very heaviest timber, where the giant bowls
of oak and of beech formed long aisles in every direction, shooting
up their huge branches to build the majestic arches of Nature's own
cathedral. Beneath lay a broad carpet of the softest and greenest moss,
flecked over with fallen leaves, but yielding pleasantly to the foot of
the traveller. The track which guided him was one so seldom used that in
places it lost itself entirely among the grass, to reappear as a reddish
rut between the distant tree trunks. It was very still here in the heart
of the woodlands. The gentle rustle of the branches and the distant
cooing of pigeons were the only sounds which broke in upon the silence,
save that once Alleyne heard afar off a merry call upon a hunting bugle
and the shrill yapping of the hounds.

It was not without some emotion that he looked upon the scene around
him, for, in spite of his secluded life, he knew enough of the ancient
greatness of his own family to be aware that the time had been when they
had held undisputed and paramount sway over all that tract of country.
His father could trace his pure Saxon lineage back to that Godfrey Malf
who had held the manors of Bisterne and of Minstead at the time when the
Norman first set mailed foot upon English soil. The afforestation of the
district, however, and its conversion into a royal demesne had
clipped off a large section of his estate, while other parts had been
confiscated as a punishment for his supposed complicity in an abortive
Saxon rising. The fate of the ancestor had been typical of that of his
descendants. During three hundred years their domains had gradually
contracted, sometimes through royal or feudal encroachment, and
sometimes through such gifts to the Church as that with which Alleyne's
father had opened the doors of Beaulieu Abbey to his younger son. The
importance of the family had thus dwindled, but they still retained the
old Saxon manor-house, with a couple of farms and a grove large enough
to afford pannage to a hundred pigs--"sylva de centum porcis," as the
old family parchments describe it. Above all, the owner of the soil
could still hold his head high as the veritable Socman of Minstead--that
is, as holding the land in free socage, with no feudal superior, and
answerable to no man lower than the king. Knowing this, Alleyne felt
some little glow of worldly pride as he looked for the first time
upon the land with which so many generations of his ancestors had been
associated. He pushed on the quicker, twirling his staff merrily, and
looking out at every turn of the path for some sign of the old Saxon
residence. He was suddenly arrested, however, by the appearance of a
wild-looking fellow armed with a club, who sprang out from behind a tree
and barred his passage. He was a rough, powerful peasant, with cap and
tunic of untanned sheepskin, leather breeches, and galligaskins round
legs and feet.

"Stand!" he shouted, raising his heavy cudgel to enforce the order. "Who
are you who walk so freely through the wood? Whither would you go, and
what is your errand?"

"Why should I answer your questions, my friend?" said Alleyne, standing
