result--make your way over the river and keep well hidden in old Grim
Ormson's hut. There you will be safe from all discovery until after the
vikings have departed."

Now Olaf had no notion of hiding himself thus. He was not personally
afraid of Klerkon, neither did he believe that the viking would go to
much trouble to secure his prize even if his horse should be
successful. Olaf had heard that that horse had been brought from
England, and he did not believe that anything good could come from a
country so far away. His uncle's horse, on the other hand, was
celebrated all through Gardarike, and it had never been beaten either
in the race or in the fight. Why, then, should there be any fear for
the result of the coming contest?

But Sigurd Erikson was wiser, and knew better that his steed was at
last to meet its equal. Never before had he seen an animal so strong
and fierce as the stallion that Klerkon the Viking had matched against
Sleipner.

Many horses were led forth into the circle, and they were taken in
pairs to the middle, where they fought one against the other. Each
horse was followed by its owner or the trainer, who supported and urged
it on, inciting it with his stick. The crowd of onlookers was very
large, for among the Northmen no amusement was more popular than the
horse fight, unless it were the combat between men. But at first there
was not much excitement, because many of the horses would not fight,
and others were too easily beaten. At last Sleipner and the English
horse were led forth into the centre. When they were let loose they
came together fiercely, and there followed a splendid fight, both
severe and long. Little need was there for the men to urge them or to
use the sticks. The two horses rose high on their hind legs, biting at
each other savagely until their manes and necks and shoulders were torn
and bloody. Often the animals were parted, but only to renew the fight
with greater fierceness. The combat went on until eleven rounds had
passed. Then Klerkon's stallion took hold of the jawbone of Sleipner,
and held on until it seemed that he would never yield his hold. Two of
the men then rushed forward, each to his own horse, and beat and pushed
them asunder, when Sleipner fell down from exhaustion and hard
fighting. At which the vikings set up a loud cheer.

King Valdemar was the umpire, and he said now that the fight must
cease, for that Klerkon's horse had proved himself the victor in eight
rounds, and that it could easily be seen that the steward's horse was
no longer fit. Then the king asked Sigurd what prize he had staked, and
Sigurd answered:

"The prize was staked many months ago when I met Klerkon over in
Esthonia, and it was arranged that if the viking's horse should
overcome mine he was to take the young thrall Ole."

"Let the boy be given up to him, then," said the king; "for he has won
him very fairly."

"I will take the boy tonight," said Klerkon, who stood near, "for my
business in Holmgard is now over, and at sunrise I go back to the
coast."

Now Sigurd believed that Olaf had surely taken his advice, and gone at
once across the river to hide himself in Grim Ormson's hut, so he was
not in any way anxious.

"Take the lad wheresoever you can find him," said he to the viking.
"And if you cannot find him before the sunrise, then I will pay you his
just value in gold."

"Though you offered me all the gold you are worth," returned Klerkon,
"I would not take it in place of the boy. No thrall born lad is he, but
of noble descent, and I intend to make a viking of him and take him
with me west over sea to England. It is not well that a youth so clever
as he should waste his years in an inland town. He was meant by his
nature for the sea, and I think that he will some day prove to be a
very great warrior."

At this Sigurd Erikson grew sick at heart, for he knew that the viking
was a man of very strong will, and that no half measures would serve to
turn him from his purpose. Also, he felt that it was now useless to
attempt any deception concerning Olaf. The vikings had recognized the
boy, and none other could be passed off in his stead.

With a gloomy cloud on his brow, Sigurd left the tent and made his way
back to the king's hall in search of his nephew. Olaf was not there.
The hours went by, and still there was no sign of him. Neither did
Klerkon come to make claim to his prize.

It was in the evening time. Sigurd sat alone in his room at the back of
the great hall. He was thinking that Olaf had become strangely restless
and unruly of late. Many times the lad had disappointed him and caused
him trouble, but never so much as today, when his wilfulness threatened
to bring about very serious consequences. Had Olaf taken the advice
that had been given him in the morning, the coming of Klerkon might
have been a matter of small moment; but the thoughtless boy had boldly
shown himself before the tent, and had never striven to hide himself
from the quick eyes of the shipmen. He had been recognized--as how
would one so distinguished from all other youths fail to be?--and now
Klerkon would not rest until he had safely secured his coveted prize.

Very different now was Olaf from what he had seemed on that day when he
stood near the viking ship in the guise of a poor slave. In the year
that had passed Sigurd had grown to love the lad with the love of a
father, had taught him many useful arts and handicrafts, had given him
fine clothes to wear, and had so improved his bodily condition and
moulded his mind that no king's son could ever hope to excel him either
in physical beauty or in skill of arms, in manly prowess or moral
goodness. Never once had Olaf done anything that was mean or unworthy;
never once had he told an untruth or gone back from his promise. At any
time when Sigurd had told him to do what was not to his liking the boy
had simply shaken his golden curls and said, "I will not promise"; but
always when he had given his word he held to it firmly and faithfully.
He could be trusted in all things. But for all this he had lately
become most wilful, and the trouble he was now causing made his uncle
very anxious.

Sigurd knew full well that Olaf loved him, and that all the possible
glory of being a viking would not lead him away from Holmgard of his
own free will. But in the present case he might not be able to help
himself, despite his having so positively said that Klerkon should
never carry him off alive. So in his heart Sigurd feared that Olaf
would take some mischievous and unwise measure of his own to evade the
vikings. It might be, indeed, that he had already gone across the river
to the security of Grim Ormson's hut; but it was greatly to be feared
that he had fallen into the hands of Klerkon Flatface.

Suddenly, as Sigurd sat there in moody thought, the door of the room
was flung open, and Olaf rushed in. He was strangely agitated. His hair
was rough and his clothing was torn; his large blue eyes flashed in
anger, and his breathing was heavy and uneven.

Sigurd sprang up from his seat. He saw that something ill had happened.

"Why are you here?" he cried. "Why are you not in hiding? Have I not
warned you enough that you are running into danger by letting yourself
be seen? Klerkon has won you from me, and he may be here at any moment
to claim you and carry you away!"

Olaf did not reply for a long time. He only bent down and took a
handful of rushes up from the floor, and began to quietly clean the
blade of his axe that he held under his arm.

"Speak!" cried Sigurd, driven to anger by the boy's silence.

Then at last Olaf said in a steady, boyish voice:

"Klerkon will never claim me from you, my kinsman; for he is dead."

"Dead?" echoed Sigurd in alarm.

"Yes," answered Olaf, "I met him in the gate. He tried to take me. I
raised my axe and buried it in his head. Well have you taught me the
use of my axe, Hersir Sigurd."

As he spoke there came a loud hum of angry voices from without. They
were the voices of the vikings calling aloud for the blood of him who
had slain their chief.

Without a word Sigurd Erikson crossed the room, and drew the heavy bar
athwart the door. Then he turned upon Olaf.

"Well do I discern," said he, "that you are of King Harald's race. It
was ever so with your forefathers; thoughtless, fearless, ruthless! And
so all my teaching of you has gone for nothing! Oh, foolish boy! To
think that you, who might have lived to be the king of all Norway, have
ended in being no more than a common murderer!"

"Murderer?" repeated Olaf. "Not so. It is but justice that I have done.
Klerkon was the slayer of my dear foster father. He slew him cruelly
and in cold blood, and for no other reason than that poor Thoralf was
old and infirm. I have done no murder. I have but taken just and lawful
vengeance."

"Just and lawful it may be in our own birthland, Olaf," returned Sigurd
gravely; "but in this kingdom wherein we now live the peace is held
holy, and it is ordained by law that he who kills another man in anger
shall himself lose his life. I cannot save you. You have broken the
peace; you have taken the life of one of the king's own guests, and you
have insulted the king's hospitality. I fear that you must die."

He broke off, listening to the furious cries of the crowd outside.
"Hark!" he went on. "Those wild sea wolves are calling for blood
vengeance. Come! come with me quickly. There is but one hope left, and
in that hope lies my own despair and my own undoing."

So, while yet the people were clamouring for the young peace breaker's
life, Sigurd took Olaf through the back part of the house and by many
secret passages into the queen's garth. Here, in a large hall that was
most splendidly adorned with carved wood and hung with tapestry, sat
Queen Allogia with two of her handmaids working with their needles upon
a beautiful robe of embroidered silk.

Sigurd passed the armed sentinel at the door and strode into the
apartment, followed closely by the boy. The queen looked up in surprise
at the unexpected visitors.

"I crave your help, O queen," cried the steward excitedly.

The queen stood up in alarm. She had heard the turmoil of voices from
without.

"What means all this shouting?" she inquired.

Then Sigurd told her how Olaf had killed the viking, and implored her
to help the boy out of his trouble.

"Alas!" said she, when she had heard the tale. "Little power have I to
meddle in such affairs. The penalty of murder is death, and I cannot
hinder the law." She looked at Olaf as she spoke, and saw the pleading
in his eyes. "And yet," she added with quick pity, "such a handsome boy
must not be slain. I will save him if I can."

She then bade Sigurd call in her bodyguard fully armed to protect the
lad, while she went out into the king's chamber and pleaded with
Valdemar to prevent the shedding of blood.

Now, by this time, the enraged vikings and many men of the town had
gained entrance to the outer court, and they rushed forward to claim
the life of the offender according to their custom and laws. Long they
waited, hammering noisily at the oaken doors of the hall wherein Olaf
was now known to have taken refuge. But at last the door was flung
open, and King Valdemar appeared on the threshold, guarded by many
armed men. The crowd drew back, leaving only the chief of the vikings
to speak for them and ask for justice. He told the king how Klerkon,
standing within the gate, had been attacked by young Ole of the golden
hair, and how without word or warning the boy had suddenly raised his
axe and driven it into Klerkon's head, so that the blade stood right
down into the brain of him.

The king then declared that he could not believe a boy so young as Ole
could have either the skill or the boldness to attack so powerful a man
as Klerkon Flatface. But the viking turned and called upon some of his
shipmates to bring forward the dead body of their chief, which they
laid down before the king. Valdemar looked upon it and examined the
death wound. The skull was cloven with one clean blow from the crown
right down to the red bearded chin.

"A wondrous strong blow!" murmured Valdemar. "But I see that it was
struck from the front. How came it that Klerkon could not defend
himself?"

"Little time had he for that," answered the viking, "for the lad fell
upon him with the quickness of an eagle's swoop, and although my master
was well armed, yet he could not raise his sword ere he fell dead at
our feet, and then Ole turned and fled with such speed that none could
follow him."

"Such an act as this," said the king, "cannot have been without some
cause. What reason of enmity was there between this boy and Klerkon?"

"No reason but wanton mischief," answered the warrior. "It was a
causeless murder, and we claim the full and lawful punishment."

"Justice shall be done," returned the king. "But I must first know what
the peace breaker may have to say in his own defence. I beg you,
therefore, to keep truce until the sunrise, when the penalty shall be
adjudged."

At hearing this promise the crowd dispersed in peace. Many grumbled
that the customary sentence of death had not been instantly pronounced.
But in causing this delay King Valdemar was but yielding to the
pleadings of the queen, who had implored him to spare the life of the
handsome young murderer, or at the least to save him from the fury of
the vikings.

When the crowd had gone from the courtyard Allogia returned to the hall
in which the steward and Olaf had been kept under the protection of the
guards. Dismissing the men, she turned to Sigurd Erikson.

"You have asked me to save the boy's life, hersir," said she, "but,
alas! I cannot do it. All that the king will do is to give a few hours'
respite. At sunrise the law is to take its course, and much do I fear
that its course will be death."

Olaf heard her words, but did not show any fear of the expected
punishment. It seemed, indeed, that he had become suddenly hard of
heart and dauntless, as though he thought that the killing of a man was
a matter to be proud of. Certainly, in his own mind, he did not look
upon the taking of Klerkon's life as an act of guilt deserving
punishment. He recalled what he had seen on the viking ship years
before. The old man Thoralf had fallen to Klerkon's share in the
dividing of booty. Thoralf had held little Olaf by the hand as they
stood apart on the ship's deck, and Klerkon had come up to them and
roughly separated them, flinging Olaf across to where young Thorgils
stood. Then, tearing off Thoralf's cloak, the viking had said: "Little
use is there in an old toothless hound, but his flesh may serve as food
for the fishes;" and, drawing his sword, he had given the aged man his
death blow and tilted him over into the sea. So Olaf and Thorgils had
sworn to take vengeance upon this viking, and Olaf had now fulfilled
his vow.

The queen came nearer to Olaf, and looked at him tenderly. "It is a
great pity," said she, "that one so fair should be doomed to die before
he has grown to manhood. It might be that with good training he would
become a very famous warrior, and I would gladly see him enlisted in
the service of the king."

She broke off and turned to Sigurd. "Hersir Sigurd," she said, looking
keenly into the steward's face, "I have noticed many times that you
take a more than common interest in this boy. Even now, when he has
broken the law of the land, it is you who take it upon yourself to
plead his cause. It must surely be that you have powerful reasons for
keeping him from harm. Whose son is he? Of what kin is he? It is but
right that I should know."

Sigurd demurred, remembering that it was forbidden by the law of the
land that any king born person should live in Gardarike, except with
the king's permission. He thought that it would go very ill with
himself if Olaf's kingly birth should be known.

"Lady, I cannot tell you," he murmured.
