career. The Moor was not clad, as was the common custom of the Paynim
nobles, in the heavy Christian armour. He wore the light flexile mail of
the ancient heroes of Araby or Fez. His turban, which was protected by
chains of the finest steel interwoven with the folds, was of the most
dazzling white--white, also, were his tunic and short mantle; on his
left arm hung a short circular shield, in his right hand was poised
a long and slender lance. As this Moor, mounted on a charger in whose
raven hue not a white hair could be detected, dashed forward against
Pacheco, both Christian and Moor breathed hard, and remained passive.
Either nation felt it as a sacrilege to thwart the encounter of
champions so renowned.

"God save my brave brother!" muttered Villena, anxiously. "Amen," said
those around him; for all who had ever witnessed the wildest valour in
that war, trembled as they recognised the dazzling robe and coal-black
charger of Muza Ben Abil Gazan. Nor was that renowned infidel mated with
an unworthy foe. "Pride of the tournament, and terror of the war," was
the favourite title which the knights and ladies of Castile had bestowed
on Don Alonzo de Pacheco.

When the Spaniard saw the redoubted Moor approach, he halted abruptly
for a moment, and then, wheeling his horse around, took a wider circuit,
to give additional impetus to his charge. The Moor, aware of his
purpose, halted also, and awaited the moment of his rush; when once
more he darted forward, and the combatants met with a skill which called
forth a cry of involuntary applause from the Christians themselves.
Muza received on the small surface of his shield the ponderous spear
of Alonzo, while his own light lance struck upon the helmet of the
Christian, and by the exactness of the aim rather than the weight of the
blow, made Alonzo reel in his saddle.

The lances were thrown aside--the long broad falchion of the Christian,
the curved Damascus cimiter of the Moor, gleamed in the air. They reined
their chargers opposite each other in grave and deliberate silence.

"Yield thee, sir knight!" at length cried the fierce Moor, "for the
motto on my cimiter declares that if thou meetest its stroke, thy
days are numbered. The sword of the believer is the Key of Heaven and
Hell."--[Such, says Sale, is the poetical phrase of the Mohammedan
divines.]

"False Paynim," answered Alonzo, in a voice that rung hollow through his
helmet, "a Christian knight is the equal of a Moorish army!"

Muza made no reply, but left the rein of his charger on his neck; the
noble animal understood the signal, and with a short impatient cry
rushed forward at full speed. Alonzo met the charge with his falchion
upraised, and his whole body covered with his shield; the Moor bent--the
Spaniards raised a shout--Muza seemed stricken from his horse. But the
blow of the heavy falchion had not touched him: and, seemingly without
an effort, the curved blade of his own cimiter, gliding by that part
of his antagonist's throat where the helmet joins the cuirass, passed
unresistingly and silently through the joints; and Alonzo fell at once,
and without a groan, from his horse--his armour, to all appearance,
unpenetrated, while the blood oozed slow and gurgling from a mortal
wound.

"Allah il Allah!" shouted Muza, as he joined his friends; "Lelilies!
Lelilies!" echoed the Moors; and ere the Christians recovered their
dismay, they were engaged hand to hand with their ferocious and swarming
foes. It was, indeed, fearful odds; and it was a marvel to the Spaniards
how the Moors had been enabled to harbour and conceal their numbers in
so small a space. Horse and foot alike beset the company of Villena,
already sadly reduced; and while the infantry, with desperate and savage
fierceness, thrust themselves under the very bellies of the chargers,
encountering both the hoofs of the steed and the deadly lance of the
rider, in the hope of finding a vulnerable place for the sharp Moorish
knife,--the horsemen, avoiding the stern grapple of the Spaniard
warriors, harrassed them by the shaft and lance,--now advancing, now
retreating, and performing, with incredible rapidity, the evolutions of
Oriental cavalry. But the life and soul of his party was the indomitable
Muza. With a rashness which seemed to the superstitious Spaniards like
the safety of a man protected by magic, he spurred his ominous
black barb into the very midst of the serried phalanx which Villena
endeavoured to form around him, breaking the order by his single charge,
and from time to time bringing to the dust some champion of the troop by
the noiseless and scarce-seen edge of his fatal cimiter.

Villena, in despair alike of fame and life, and gnawed with grief for
his brother's loss, at length resolved to put the last hope of the
battle on his single arm. He gave the signal for retreat; and to protect
his troop, remained himself, alone and motionless, on his horse, like
a statue of iron. Though not of large frame, he was esteemed the best
swordsman, next only to Hernando del Pulgar and Gonsalvo de Cordova, in
the army; practised alike in the heavy assault of the Christian warfare,
and the rapid and dexterous exercise of the Moorish cavalry. There
he remained, alone and grim--a lion at bay--while his troops slowly
retreated down the Vega, and their trumpets sounded loud signals of
distress, and demands for succour, to such of their companions as might
be within bearing. Villena's armour defied the shafts of the Moors; and
as one after one darted towards him, with whirling cimiter and momentary
assault, few escaped with impunity from an eye equally quick and a
weapon more than equally formidable. Suddenly, a cloud of dust swept
towards him; and Muza, a moment before at the further end of the field,
came glittering through that cloud, with his white robe waving and his
right arm bare. Villena recognised him, set his teeth hard, and putting
spurs to his charger, met the rush. Muza swerved aside, just as the
heavy falchion swung over his head, and by a back stroke of his own
cimiter, shore through the cuirass just above the hip-joint, and the
blood followed the blade. The brave cavaliers saw the danger of their
chief; three of their number darted forward, and came in time to
separate the combatants.

Muza stayed not to encounter the new reinforcement; but speeding across
the plain, was soon seen rallying his own scattered cavalry, and
pouring them down, in one general body, upon the scanty remnant of the
Spaniards.

"Our day is come!" said the good knight Villena, with bitter
resignation. "Nothing is left for us, my friends, but to give up our
lives--an example how Spanish warriors should live and die. May God and
the Holy Mother forgive our sins and shorten our purgatory!"

Just as he spoke, a clarion was heard at a distance and the sharpened
senses of the knights caught the ring of advancing hoofs.

"We are saved!" cried Estevon de Suzon, rising on his stirrups. While
he spoke, the dashing stream of the Moorish horse broke over the little
band; and Estevon beheld bent upon himself the dark eyes and quivering
lip of Muza Ben Abil Gazan. That noble knight had never, perhaps, till
then known fear; but he felt his heart stand still, as he now stood
opposed to that irresistible foe.

"The dark fiend guides his blade!" thought De Suzon; "but I was shriven
but yestermorn." The thought restored his wonted courage; and he spurred
on to meet the cimiter of the Moor.

His assault took Muza by surprise. The Moor's horse stumbled over the
ground, cumbered with the dead and slippery with blood, and his uplifted
cimiter could not do more than break the force of the gigantic arm of De
Suzon; as the knight's falchion bearing down the cimiter, and alighting
on the turban of the Mohammedan, clove midway through its folds,
arrested only by the admirable temper of the links of steel which
protected it. The shock hurled the Moor to the ground. He rolled under
the saddle-girths of his antagonist.

"Victory and St. Jago!" cried the knight, "Muza is--"

The sentence was left eternally unfinished. The blade of the fallen Moor
had already pierced De Suzoii's horse through a mortal but undefended
part. It fell, bearing his rider with him. A moment, and the two
champions lay together grappling in the dust; in the next, the short
knife which the Moor wore in his girdle had penetrated the Christian's
visor, passing through the brain.

To remount his steed, that remained at band, humbled and motionless,
to appear again amongst the thickest of the fray, was a work no less
rapidly accomplished than had been the slaughter of the unhappy Estevon
de Suzon. But now the fortune of the day was stopped in a progress
hitherto so triumphant to the Moors.

Pricking fast over the plain were seen the glittering horsemen of the
Christian reinforcements; and, at the remoter distance, the royal banner
of Spain, indistinctly descried through volumes of dust, denoted that
Ferdinand himself was advancing to the support of his cavaliers.

The Moors, however, who had themselves received many and mysterious
reinforcements, which seemed to spring up like magic from the bosom of
the earth--so suddenly and unexpectedly had they emerged from copse
and cleft in that mountainous and entangled neighbourhood--were not
unprepared for a fresh foe. At the command of the vigilant Muza, they
drew off, fell into order, and, seizing, while yet there was time, the
vantage-ground which inequalities of the soil and the shelter of the
trees gave to their darts and agile horse, they presented an array which
Ponce de Leon himself, who now arrived, deemed it more prudent not to
assault. While Villena, in accents almost inarticulate with rage, was
urging the Marquess of Cadiz to advance, Ferdinand, surrounded by the
flower of his court, arrived at the rear of the troops and after a few
words interchanged with Ponce de Leon, gave the signal to retreat.

When the Moors beheld that noble soldiery slowly breaking ground, and
retiring towards the camp, even Muza could not control their ardour.
They rushed forward, harassing the retreat of the Christians, and
delaying the battle by various skirmishes.

It was at this time that the headlong valour of Hernando del Pulgar, who
had arrived with Ponce de Leon, distinguished itself in feats which yet
live in the songs of Spain. Mounted upon an immense steed, and himself
of colossal strength, he was seen charging alone upon the assailants,
and scattering numbers to the ground with the sweep of his enormous
two-handed falchion. With a loud voice, he called on Muza to oppose him;
but the Moor, fatigued with slaughter, and scarcely recovered from the
shock of his encounter with De Suzon, reserved so formidable a foe for a
future contest.

It was at this juncture, while the field was covered with straggling
skirmishers, that a small party of Spaniards, in cutting their way to
the main body of their countrymen through one of the numerous copses
held by the enemy, fell in at the outskirt with an equal number of
Moors, and engaged them in a desperate conflict, hand to hand. Amidst
the infidels was one man who took no part in the affray: at a little
distance, he gazed for a few moments upon the fierce and relentless
slaughter of Moor and Christian with a smile of stern and complacent
delight; and then taking advantage of the general confusion, rode
gently, and, as he hoped, unobserved, away from the scene. But he was
not destined so quietly to escape. A Spaniard perceived him, and, from
something strange and unusual in his garb, judged him one of the Moorish
leaders; and presently Almamen, for it was he, beheld before him the
uplifted falchion of a foe neither disposed to give quarter nor to
hear parley. Brave though the Israelite was, many reasons concurred to
prevent his taking a personal part against the soldier of Spain; and
seeing he should have no chance of explanation, he fairly puts spurs to
his horse, and galloped across the plain. The Spaniard followed, gained
upon him, and Almamen at length turned, in despair and the wrath of his
haughty nature.

"Have thy will, fool!" said he, between his grinded teeth, as he griped
his dagger and prepared for the conflict. It was long and obstinate, for
the Spaniard was skilful; and the Hebrew wearing no mail, and without
any weapon more formidable than a sharp and well-tempered dagger, was
forced to act cautiously on the defensive. At length the combatants
grappled, and, by a dexterous thrust, the short blade of Almamen pierced
the throat of his antagonist, who fell prostrate to the ground.

"I am safe," he thought, as he wheeled round his horse; when lo!
the Spaniards he had just left behind, and who had now routed their
antagonists, were upon him.

"Yield, or die!" cried the leader of the troop.

Almamen glared round; no succour was at hand. "I am not your enemy,"
said he, sullenly, throwing down his weapon--"bear me to your camp."

A trooper seized his rein, and, scouring along, the Spaniards soon
reached the retreating army.

Meanwhile the evening darkened, the shout and the roar grew gradually
less loud and loud---the battle had ceased--the stragglers had joined
their several standards and, by the light of the first star, the
Moorish force, bearing their wounded brethren, and elated with success,
re-entered the gates of Granada, as the black charger of the hero of
the day, closing the rear of the cavalry, disappeared within the gloomy
portals.




CHAPTER III. THE HERO IN THE POWER OF THE DREAMER.

It was in the same chamber, and nearly at the same hour, in which
we first presented to the reader Boabdil el Chico, that we are again
admitted to the presence of that ill-starred monarch. He was not alone.
His favourite slave, Amine, reclined upon the ottomans, gazing with
anxious love upon his thoughtful countenance, as he leant against the
glittering wall by the side of the casement, gazing abstractedly on the
scene below.

From afar he heard the shouts of the populace at the return of Muza, and
bursts of artillery confirmed the tidings of triumph which had already
been borne to his ear.

"May the king live for ever!" said Amine, timidly; "his armies have gone
forth to conquer."

"But without their king," replied Boabdil, bitterly, "and headed by a
traitor and a foe. I am meshed in the nets of an inextricable fate!"

"Oh!" said the slave, with sudden energy, as, clasping her hands, she
rose from her couch,--"oh, my lord, would that these humble lips dared
utter other words than those of love!"

"And what wise counsel would they give me?" asked Boabdil with a faint
smile. "Speak on."

"I will obey thee, then, even if it displease," cried Amine; and
she rose, her cheek glowing, her eyes spark ling, her beautiful form
dilated. "I am a daughter of Granada; I am the beloved of a king; I will
be true to my birth and to my fortunes. Boabdil el Chico, the last of
a line of heroes, shake off these gloomy fantasies--these doubts and
dreams that smother the fire of a great nature and a kingly soul!
Awake--arise--rob Granada of her Muza--be thyself her Muza! Trustest
thou to magic and to spells? then grave them on they breastplate, write
them on thy sword, and live no longer the Dreamer of the Alhambra;
become the saviour of thy people!"

Boabdil turned, and gazed on the inspired and beautiful form before him
with mingled emotions of surprise and shame. "Out of the mouth of woman
cometh my rebuke!" said he sadly. "It is well!"

"Pardon me, pardon me!" said the slave, falling humbly at his knees;
"but blame me not that I would have thee worthy of thyself. Wert thou
not happier, was not thy heart more light and thy hope more strong when,
at the head of thine armies, thine own cimiter slew thine own foes, and
the terror of the Hero-king spread, in flame and slaughter, from the
mountains to the seas. Boabdil! dear as thou art to me-equally as I
would have loved thee hadst thou been born a lowly fisherman of the
Darro, since thou art a king, I would have thee die a king; even if my
own heart broke as I armed thee for thy latest battle!"

"Thou knowest not what thou sayest, Amine," said Boabdil, "nor canst
thou tell what spirits that are not of earth dictate to the actions and
watch over the destinies, of the rulers of nations. If I delay, if I
linger, it is not from terror, but from wisdom. The cloud must gather
on, dark and slow, ere the moment for the thunderbolt arrives."

"On thine own house will the thunderbolt fall, since over thine own
house thou sufferest the cloud to gather," said a calm and stern voice.

Boabdil started; and in the chamber stood a third person, in the shape
of a woman, past middle age, and of commanding port and stature. Upon
her long-descending robes of embroidered purple were thickly woven
jewels of royal price, and her dark hair, slightly tinged with grey,
parted over a majestic brow while a small diadem surmounted the folds of
the turban.

"My mother!" said Boabdil, with some haughty reserve in his tone; "your
presence is unexpected."

"Ay," answered Ayxa la Horra, for it was indeed that celebrated, and
haughty, and high-souled queen, "and unwelcome; so is ever that of your
true friends. But not thus unwelcome was the presence of your mother,
when her brain and her hand delivered you from the dungeon in which your
stern father had cast your youth, and the dagger and the bowl seemed the
only keys that would unlock the cell."

"And better hadst thou left the ill-omened son that thy womb conceived,
to die thus in youth, honoured and lamented, than to live to manhood,
wrestling against an evil star and a relentless fate."

"Son," said the queen, gazing upon him with lofty and half disdainful
compassion, "men's conduct shapes out their own fortunes, and the
unlucky are never the valiant and the wise."

"Madam," said Boabdil, colouring with passion, "I am still a king, nor
will I be thus bearded--withdraw!"

Ere the queen could reply, a eunuch entered, and whispered Boabdil.

"Ha!" said he, joyfully, stamping his foot, "comes he then to brave the
lion in his den? Let the rebel look to it. Is he alone?"

"Alone, great king."

"Bid my guards wait without; let the slightest signal summon them.
Amine, retire! Madam--"

"Son!" interrupted Ayxa la Horra in visible agitation, "do I guess
aright? is the brave Muza--the sole bulwark and hope of Granada--whom
unjustly thou wouldst last night have placed in chains--(chains! Great
Prophet! is it thus a king should reward his heroes)--is, I say, Muza
here? and wilt thou make him the victim of his own generous trust?"

