
The Sons of Leda

    The pair I sing, that AEgis-armed Zeus
    Gave unto Leda; Castor and the dread
    Of bruisers Polydeuces, whensoe'er
    His harnessed hands were lifted for the fray.
    Twice and again I sing the manly sons
    Of Leda, those Twin Brethren, Sparta's own:
    Who shield the soldier on the deadly scarp,
    The horse wild-plunging o'er the crimson field,
    The ship that, disregarding in her pride
    Star-set and star-rise, meets disastrous gales:--
    Such gales as pile the billows mountain-high,
    E'en at their own wild will, round stem or stern:
    Dash o'er the hold, the timbers rive in twain,
    Till mast and tackle dangle in mid-air
    Shivered like toys, and, as the night wears on,
    The rain of heaven falls fast, and, lashed by wind
    And iron hail, broad ocean rings again.
    Then can they draw from out the nether abyss
    Both craft and crew, each deeming he must die:
    Lo the winds cease, and o'er the burnished deep
    Comes stillness; this way flee the clouds and that;
    And shine out clear the Great Bear and the Less,
    And, 'twixt the Asses dimly seen, the Crib
    Foretells fair voyage to the mariner.
    O saviours, O companions of mankind,
    Matchless on horse or harp, in lists or lay;
    Which of ye twain demands my earliest song?
    Of both I sing; of Polydeuces first.

      Argo, escaped the two inrushing rocks,
    And snow-clad Pontus with his baleful jaws,
    Came to Bebrycia with her heaven-sprung freight;
    There by one ladder disembarked a host
    Of Heroes from the decks of Jason's ship.
    On the low beach, to leeward of the cliff,
    They leapt, and piled their beds, and lit their fires:
    Castor meanwhile, the bridler of the steed,
    And Polydeuces of the nut-brown face,
    Had wandered from their mates; and, wildered both,
    Searched through the boskage of the hill, and found
    Hard by a slab of rock a bubbling spring
    Brimful of purest water. In the depths
    Below, like crystal or like silver gleamed
    The pebbles: high above it pine and plane
    And poplar rose, and cypress tipt with green;
    With all rich flowers that throng the mead, when wanes
    The Spring, sweet workshops of the furry bee.
    There sat and sunned him one of giant bulk
    And grisly mien: hard knocks had stov'n his ears:
    Broad were his shoulders, vast his orbed chest;
    Like a wrought statue rose his iron frame:
    And nigh the shoulder on each brawny arm
    Stood out the muscles, huge as rolling stones
    Caught by some rain-swoln river and shapen smooth
    By its wild eddyings: and o'er nape and spine
    Hung, balanced by the claws, a lion's skin.
    Him Leda's conquering son accosted first:--

    POLYDEUCES.
    Luck to thee, friend unknown! Who own this shore?

    AMYCUS.
    Luck, quotha, to see men ne'er seen before!

    POLYDEUCES.
    Fear not, no base or base-born herd are we.

    AMYCUS.
    Nothing I fear, nor need learn this from thee.

    POLYDEUCES.
    What art thou? brutish churl, or o'erproud king?

    AMYCUS.
    E'en what thou see'st: and I am not trespassing.

    POLYDEUCES.
    Visit our land, take gifts from us, and go.

    AMYCUS.
    I seek naught from thee and can naught bestow.

    POLYDEUCES.
    Not e'en such grace as from yon spring to sip?

    AMYCUS.
    Try, if parched thirst sits languid on thy lip.

    POLYDEUCES.
    Can silver move thee? or if not, what can?

    AMYCUS.
    Stand up and fight me singly, man with man.

    POLYDEUCES.
    With fists? or fist and foot, eye covering eye?

    AMYCUS.
    Fall to with fists; and all thy cunning try.

    POLYDEUCES.
    This arm, these gauntlets, who shall dare withstand?

    AMYCUS.
    I: and "the Bruiser" lifts no woman's-hand.

    POLYDEUCES.
    Wilt thou, to crown our strife, some meed assign?

    AMYCUS.
    Thou shalt be called my master, or I thine.

    POLYDEUCES.
    By crimson-crested cocks such games are won.

    AMYCUS.
    Lions or cocks, we'll play this game or none.

      He spoke, and clutched a hollow shell, and blew
    His clarion. Straightway to the shadowy pine
    Clustering they came, as loud it pealed and long,
    Bebrycia's bearded sons; and Castor too,
    The peerless in the lists, went forth and called
    From the Magnesian ship the Heroes all.

      Then either warrior armed with coils of hide
    His hands, and round his limbs bound ponderous bands,
    And, breathing bloodshed, stept into the ring.
    First there was much manoeuvring, who should catch
    The sunlight on his rear: but thou didst foil,
    O Polydeuces, valour by address;
    And full on Amycus' face the hot noon smote.
    He in hot wrath strode forward, threatening war;
    Straightway the Tyndarid smote him, as he closed,
    Full on the chin: more furious waxed he still,
    And, earthward bent, dealt blindly random blows.
    Bebrycia shouted loud, the Greeks too cheered
    Their champion: fearing lest in that scant space
    This Tityus by sheer weight should bear him down.
    But, shifting yet still there, the son of Zeus
    Scored him with swift exchange of left and right,
    And checked the onrush of the sea-god's child
    Parlous albeit: till, reeling with his wounds,
    He stood, and from his lips spat crimson blood.
    Cheered yet again the princes, when they saw
    The lips and jowl all seamed with piteous scars,
    And the swoln visage and the half-closed eyes.
    Still the prince teased him, feinting here or there
    A thrust; and when he saw him helpless all,
    Let drive beneath his eyelids at his nose,
    And laid it bare to the bone. The stricken man
    Measured his length supine amid the fern.
    Keen was the fighting when he rose again,
    Deadly the blows their sturdy gauntlets dealt.
    But while Bebrycia's chieftain sparred round chest
    And utmost shoulder, the resistless foe
    Made his whole face one mass of hideous wounds.
    While the one sweated all his bulk away,
    And, late a giant, seemed a pigmy now,
    The other's limbs waxed ever as he fought
    In semblance and in size. But in what wise
    The child of Zeus brought low that man of greed,
    Tell, Muse, for thine is knowledge: I unfold
    A secret not mine own; at thy behest
    Speak or am dumb, nor speak but as thou wilt.

      Amycus, athirst to do some doughty deed,
    Stooping aslant from Polydeuces' lunge
    Locked their left hands; and, stepping out, upheaved
    From his right hip his ponderous other-arm.
    And hit and harmed had been Amyclae's king;
    But, ducking low, he smote with one stout fist
    The foe's left temple--fast the life-blood streamed
    From the grim rift--and on his shoulder fell.
    While with his left he reached the mouth, and made
    The set teeth tingle; and, redoubling aye
    His plashing blows, made havoc of his face
    And crashed into his cheeks, till all abroad
    He lay, and throwing up his arms disclaimed
    The strife, for he was even at death's door.
    No wrong the vanquished suffered at thy hands,
    O Polydeuces; but he sware an oath,
    Calling his sire Poseidon from the depths,
    Ne'er to do violence to a stranger more.

      Thy tale, O prince, is told. Now sing I thee,
    Castor the Tyndarid, lord of rushing horse
    And shaking javelin, corsleted in brass.


    PART II.

    The sons of Zeus had borne two maids away,
    Leucippus' daughters. Straight in hot pursuit
    Went the two brethren, sons of Aphareus,
    Lynceus and Idas bold, their plighted lords.
    And when the tomb of Aphareus was gained,
    All leapt from out their cars, and front to front
    Stood, with their ponderous spears and orbed shields.
    First Lynceus shouted loud from 'neath his helm:

    "Whence, sirs, this lust for strife? Why, sword in hand,
    Raise ye this coil about your neighbours' wives?
    To us Leucippus these his daughters gave,
    Long ere ye saw them: they are ours on oath.
    Ye, coveting (to your shame) your neighbour's bed
    And kine and asses and whatever is his,
    Suborned the man and stole our wives by bribes.
    How often spake I thus before your face,
    Yea I myself, though scant I am of phrase:
    'Not thus, fair sirs, do honourable men
    Seek to woo wives whose troth is given elsewhere.
    Lo, broad is Sparta, broad the hunting-grounds
    Of Elis: fleecy Arcady is broad,
    And Argos and Messene and the towns
    To westward, and the long Sisyphian reach.
    There 'neath her parents' roof dwells many a maid
    Second to none in godliness or wit:
    Wed of all these, and welcome, whom ye will,
    For all men court the kinship of the brave;
    And ye are as your sires, and they whose blood
    Runs in your mother's veins, the flower of war.
    Nay, sirs, but let us bring this thing to pass;
    Then, taking counsel, choose meet brides for you.'
    So I ran on; but o'er the shifting seas
    The wind's breath blew my words, that found no grace
    With you, for ye defied the charmer's voice.
    Yet listen to me now if ne'er before:
    Lo! we are kinsmen by the father's side.
    But if ye lust for war, if strife must break
    Forth among kin, and bloodshed quench our feud,
    Bold Polydeuces then shall hold his hands
    And his cousin Idas from the abhorred fray:
    While I and Castor, the two younger-born,
    Try war's arbitrament; so spare our sires
    Sorrow exceeding. In one house one dead
    Sufficeth: let the others glad their mates,
    To the bride-chamber passing, not the grave,
    And o'er yon maids sing jubilee. Well it were
    At cost so small to lay so huge a strife."

      He spoke--his words heaven gave not to the winds.
    They, the two first-born, disarrayed and piled
    Their arms, while Lynceus stept into the ring,
    And at his shield's rim shook his stalwart spear.
    And Castor likewise poised his quivering lance;
    High waved the plume on either warrior's helm.
    First each at other thrust with busy spear
    Where'er he spied an inch of flesh exposed:
    But lo! both spearpoints in their wicker shields
    Lodged ere a blow was struck, and snapt in twain.
    Then they unsheathed their swords, and framed new modes
    Of slaughter: pause or respite there was none.
    Oft Castor on broad shield and plumed helm
    Lit, and oft keen-eyed Lynceus pierced his shield,
    Or grazed his crest of crimson. But anon,
    As Lynceus aimed his blade at Castor's knee,
    Back with the left sprang Castor and struck off
    His fingers: from the maimed limb dropped the sword.
    And, flying straightway, for his father's tomb
    He made, where gallant Idas sat and saw
    The battle of the brethren. But the child
    Of Zeus rushed in, and with his broadsword drave
    Through flank and navel, sundering with swift stroke
    His vitals: Lynceus tottered and he fell,
    And o'er his eyelids rushed the dreamless sleep.
    Nor did their mother see her elder son
    Come a fair bridegroom to his Cretan home.
    For Idas wrenched from off the dead man's tomb
    A jutting slab, to hurl it at the man
    Who had slain his brother. Then did Zeus bring aid,
    And struck the marble fabric from his grasp,
    And with red lightning burned his frame to dust.
    So doth he fight with odds who dares provoke
    The Tyndarids, mighty sons of mighty sire.
    Now farewell, Leda's children: prosper aye
    The songs I sing. What minstrel loves not well
    The Tyndarids, and Helen, and the chiefs
    That trod Troy down for Menelaeus' sake?
    The bard of Chios wrought your royal deeds
    Into his lays, who sang of Priam's state,
    And fights 'neath Ilion's walls; of sailor Greeks,
    And of Achilles towering in the strife.
    Yet take from me whate'er of clear sweet song
    The Muse accords me, even all my store!
    The gods' most precious gift is minstrelsy.




IDYLL XXIII.


Love Avenged

    A lad deep-dipt in passion pined for one
      Whose mood was froward as her face was fair.
    Lovers she loathed, for tenderness she had none:
      Ne'er knew what Love was like, nor how he bare
    A bow, and arrows to make young maids smart:
    Proof to all speech, all access, seemed her heart.

    So he found naught his furnace to allay;
      No quiver of lips, no lighting of kind eyes,
    Nor rose-flushed cheek; no talk, no lover's play
      Was deigned him: but as forest-beasts are shy
    Of hound and hunter, with this wight dealt she;
    Fierce was her lip, her eyes gleamed ominously.

    Her tyrant's-heart was imaged in her face,
      That flushed, then altering put on blank disdain.
    Yet, even then, her anger had its grace,
      And made her lover fall in love again.
    At last, unable to endure his flame,
    To the fell threshold all in tears he came:

    Kissed it, and lifted up his voice and said:
      "O heart of stone, O curst and cruel maid
    Unworthy of all love, by lions bred,
      See, my last offering at thy feet is laid,
    The halter that shall hang me! So no more
    For my sake, lady, need thy heart be sore.

    Whither thou doom'st me, thither must I fare.
      There is a path, that whoso treads hath ease
    (Men say) from love; Forgetfulness is there.
      But if I drain that chalice to the lees,
    I may not quench the love I have for you;
    Now at your gates I cast my long adieu.

    Your future I foresee. The rose is gay,
      And passing-sweet the violet of the spring:
    Yet time despoils them, and they soon decay.
      The lily droops and dies, that lustrous thing;
    The solid-seeming snowdrift melts full fast;
    And maiden's bloom is rare, but may not last.

    The time shall come, when you shall feel as I;
      And, with seared heart, weep many a bitter tear.
    But, maiden, grant one farewell courtesy.
      When you come forth, and see me hanging here,
    E'en at your door, forget not my hard case;
    But pause and weep me for a moment's space.

    And drop one tear, and cut me down, and spread
      O'er me some garment, for a funeral pall,
    That wrapped thy limbs: and kiss me--let the dead
      Be privileged thus highly--last of all.
    You need not fear me: not if your disdain
    Changed into fondness could I live again.

    And scoop a grave, to hide my loves and me:
      And thrice, at parting, say, 'My friend's no more:'
    Add if you list, 'a faithful friend was he;'
      And write this epitaph, scratched upon your door:
    _Stranger, Love slew him. Pass not by, until
    Thou hast paused and said, 'His mistress used him ill_.'"

    This said, he grasped a stone: that ghastly stone
      At the mid threshold 'neath the wall he laid,
    And o'er the beam the light cord soon was thrown,
      And his neck noosed. In air the body swayed,
    Its footstool spurned away. Forth came once more
    The maid, and saw him hanging at her door.

    No struggle of heart it cost her, ne'er a tear
      She wept o'er that young life, nor shunned to soil,
    By contact with the corpse, her woman's-gear.
      But on she went to watch the athletes' toil,
    Then made for her loved haunt, the riverside:
    And there she met the god she had defied.

    For on a marble pedestal Eros stood
      Fronting the pool: the statue leaped, and smote
    And slew that miscreant. All the stream ran blood;
      And to the top a girl's cry seemed to float.
    Rejoice, O lovers, since the scorner fell;
    And, maids, be kind; for Love deals justice well.




IDYLL XXIV.


The Infant Heracles.

      Alcmena once had washed and given the breast
    To Heracles, a babe of ten months old,
    And Iphicles his junior by a night;
    And cradled both within a brazen shield,
    A gorgeous trophy, which Amphitryon erst
    Had stript from Pterelaeus fall'n in fight.
    She stroked their baby brows, and thus she said:

      "Sleep, children mine, a light luxurious sleep,
    Brother with brother: sleep, my boys, my life:
    Blest in your slumber, in your waking blest!"

      She spake and rocked the shield; and in his arms
    Sleep took them. But at midnight, when the Bear
    Wheels to his setting, in Orion's front
    Whose shoulder then beams broadest; Hera sent,
    Mistress of wiles, two huge and hideous things,
    Snakes with their scales of azure all on end,
    To the broad portal of the chamber-door,
    All to devour the infant Heracles.
    They, all their length uncoiled upon the floor,
    Writhed on to their blood-feast; a baleful light
    Gleamed in their eyes, rank venom they spat forth.
    But when with lambent tongues they neared the cot,
    Alcmena's babes (for Zeus was watching all)
    Woke, and throughout the chamber there was light.
    Then Iphicles--so soon as he descried
    The fell brutes peering o'er the hollow shield,
    And saw their merciless fangs--cried lustily,
    And kicked away his coverlet of down,
    Fain to escape. But Heracles, he clung
    Round them with warlike hands, in iron grasp
    Prisoning the two: his clutch upon their throat,
    The deadly snake's laboratory, where
    He brews such poisons as e'en heaven abhors.
    They twined and twisted round the babe that, born
    After long travail, ne'er had shed a tear
    E'en in his nursery; soon to quit their hold,
    For powerless seemed their spines. Alcmena heard,
    While her lord slept, the crying, and awoke.

      "Amphitryon, up: chill fears take hold on me.
    Up: stay not to put sandals on thy feet.
    Hear'st thou our child, our younger, how he cries?
    Seest thou yon walls illumed at dead of night,
    But not by morn's pure beam? I know, I know,
    Sweet lord, that some strange thing is happening here."

      She spake; and he, upleaping at her call,
    Made swiftly for the sword of quaint device
    That aye hung dangling o'er his cedarn couch:
    And he was reaching at his span-new belt,
    The scabbard (one huge piece of lotus-wood)
    Poised on his arm; when suddenly the night
    Spread out her hands, and all was dark again.
    Then cried he to his slaves, whose sleep was deep:
    "Quick, slaves of mine; fetch fire from yonder hearth:
    And force with all your strength the doorbolts back!
    Up, loyal-hearted slaves: the master calls."

      Forth came at once the slaves with lighted lamps.
    The house was all astir with hurrying feet.
    But when they saw the suckling Heracles
    With the two brutes grasped firm in his soft hands,
    They shouted with one voice. But he must show
    The reptiles to Amphitryon; held aloft
    His hands in childish glee, and laughed and laid
    At his sire's feet the monsters still in death.

      Then did Alcmena to her bosom take
    The terror-blanched and passionate Iphicles:
    Cradling the other in a lambswool quilt,
    Her lord once more bethought him of his rest.

      Now cocks had thrice sung out that night was e'er.
    Then went Alcmena forth and told the thing
    To Teiresias the seer, whose words were truth,
    And bade him rede her what the end should be:--
    'And if the gods bode mischief, hide it not,
    Pitying, from me: man shall not thus avoid
    The doom that Fate upon her distaff spins.
    Son of Eueres, thou hast ears to hear.'

      Thus spake the queen, and thus he made reply:
    "Mother of monarchs, Perseus' child, take heart;
    And look but on the fairer side of things.
    For by the precious light that long ago
    Left tenantless these eyes, I swear that oft
    Achaia's maidens, as when eve is high
    They mould the silken yarn upon their lap,
    Shall tell Alcmena's story: blest art thou
    Of women. Such a man in this thy son
    Shall one day scale the star-encumbered heaven:
    His amplitude of chest bespeaks him lord
    Of all the forest beasts and all mankind.
    Twelve tasks accomplished he must dwell with Zeus;
    His flesh given over to Trachinian fires;
    And son-in-law be hailed of those same gods
    Who sent yon skulking brutes to slay thy babe.
    Lo! the day cometh when the fawn shall couch
    In the wolfs lair, nor fear the spiky teeth
    That would not harm him. But, O lady, keep
    Yon smouldering fire alive; prepare you piles
    Of fuel, bramble-sprays or fern or furze
    Or pear-boughs dried with swinging in the wind:
    And let the kindled wild-wood burn those snakes
    At midnight, when they looked to slay thy babe.
    And let at dawn some handmaid gather up
    The ashes of the fire, and diligently
    Convey and cast each remnant o'er the stream
    Faced by clov'n rocks, our boundary: then return
    Nor look behind. And purify your home
