the blue tiger has been reported the evidence hardly warrants the
assumption that it represents a distinct species.

We hunted the animal for five weeks. The brute ranged in the vicinity of
two or three villages about seven miles apart, but was seen most frequently
near Lung-tao. He was as elusive as a will o' the wisp, killing a dog or
goat in one village and by the time we had hurried across the mountains
appearing in another spot a few miles away, leaving a trail of terrified
natives who flocked to our camp to recount his depredations. He was in
truth the "Great Invisible" and it seemed impossible that we should not get
him sooner or later, but we never did.

Once we missed him by a hair's breadth through sheer bad luck, and it was
only by exercising almost superhuman restraint that we prevented ourselves
from doing bodily harm to the three Chinese who ruined our hunt. Every
evening for a week we had faithfully taken a goat into the "Long Ravine,"
for the blue tiger had been seen several times near this lair. On the
eighth afternoon we were in the "blind" at three o'clock as usual. We had
tied a goat to a tree nearby and her two kids were but a few feet away.

The grass-filled lair lay shimmering in the breathless heat, silent save
for the echoes of the bleating goats. Crouched behind the screen of
branches, for three long hours we sat in the patchwork shade,--motionless,
dripping with perspiration, hardly breathing,--and watched the shadows
steal slowly down the narrow ravine.

It was a wild place which seemed to have been cut out of the mountain side
with two strokes of a mighty ax and was choked with a tangle of thorny
vines and sword grass. Impenetrable as a wall of steel, the only entrance
was by the tiger tunnels which drove their twisting way through the
murderous growth far in toward its gloomy heart.

The shadows had passed over us and just reached a lone palm tree on the
opposite hillside. By that I knew it was six o'clock and in half an hour
another day of disappointment would be ended. Suddenly at the left and just
below us there came the faintest crunching sound as a loose stone shifted
under a heavy weight; then a rustling in the grass. Instantly the captive
goat gave a shrill bleat of terror and tugged frantically at the rope which
held it to the tree.

At the first sound Harry had breathed in my ear "Get ready, he's coming." I
was half kneeling with my heavy .405 Winchester pushed forward and the
hammer up. The blood drummed in my ears and my neck muscles ached with the
strain but I thanked Heaven that my hands were steady.

Caldwell sat like a graven image, the stock of his little 22 caliber high
power Savage nestling against his cheek. Our eyes met for an instant and I
knew in that glance that the blue tiger would never make another charge,
for if I missed him, Harry wouldn't. For ten minutes we waited and my heart
lost a beat when twenty feet away the grass began to move again--but
rapidly and _up the ravine_.

I saw Harry watching the lair with a puzzled look which changed to one of
disgust as a chorus of yells sounded across the ravine and three Chinese
wood cutters appeared on the opposite slope. They were taking a short cut
home, shouting to drive away the tigers--and they had succeeded only too
well, for the blue tiger had slipped back to the heart of the lair from
whence he had come.

He had been nearly ours and again we had lost him! I felt so badly that I
could not even swear and it wasn't the fact that Harry was a missionary
which kept me from it, either. Caldwell exclaimed just once, for his
disappointment was even more bitter than mine; he had been hunting this
same tiger off and on for six years.

It was useless for us to wait longer that evening and we pushed our way
through the sword grass to the entrance of the tunnel down which the tiger
had come. There in the soft earth were the great footprints where he had
crouched at the entrance to take a cautious survey before charging into the
open.

As we looked, Harry suddenly turned to me and said: "Roy, let's go into the
lair. There is just one chance in a thousand that we may get a shot." Now I
must admit that I was not very enthusiastic about that little excursion,
but in we went, crawling on our hands and knees up the narrow passage.
Every few feet we passed side branches from the main tunnel in any one of
which the tiger might easily have been lying in wait and could have killed
us as we passed. It was a foolhardy thing to do and I am free to admit that
I was scared. It was not long before Harry twisted about and said: "Roy, I
haven't lost any tigers in here; let's get out." And out we came faster
than we went in.

This was only one of the times when the "Great Invisible" was almost in our
hands. A few days later a Chinese found the blue tiger asleep under a rice
bank early in the afternoon. Frightened almost to death he ran a mile and a
half to our camp only to find that we had left half an hour before for
another village where the brute had killed two wild cats early in the
morning.

Again, the tiger pushed open the door of a house at daybreak just as the
members of the family were getting up, stole a dog from the "heaven's
well," dragged it to a hillside and partly devoured it. We were in camp
only a mile away and our Chinese hunters found the carcass on a narrow
ledge in the sword grass high up on the mountain side. The spot was an
impossible one to watch and we set a huge grizzly bear trap which had been
carried with us from New York.

It seemed out of the question for any animal to return to the carcass of
the dog without getting caught and yet the tiger did it. With his hind
quarters on the upper terrace he dropped down, stretched his long neck
across the trap, seized the dog which had been wired to a tree and pulled
it away. It was evident that he was quite unconscious of the trap for his
fore feet had actually been placed upon one of the jaws only two inches
from the pan which would have sprung it.

One afternoon we responded to a call from Bui-tao, a village seven miles
beyond Lung-tao, where the blue tiger had been seen that day. The natives
assured us that the animal continually crossed a hill, thickly clothed with
pines and sword grass just above the village and even though it was late
when we arrived Harry thought it wise to set the trap that night.

It was pitch dark before we reached the ridge carrying the trap, two
lanterns, an electric flash-lamp and a wretched little dog for bait. We had
been engaged for about fifteen minutes making a pen for the dog, and
Caldwell and I were on our knees over the trap when suddenly a low rumbling
growl came from the grass not twenty feet away. We jumped to our feet just
as it sounded again, this time ending in a snarl. The tiger had arrived a
few moments too early and we were in the rather uncomfortable position of
having to return to the village by way of a narrow trail through the
jungle. With our rifles ready and the electric lamp cutting a brilliant
path in the darkness we walked slowly toward the edge of the sword grass
hoping to see the flash of the tiger's eyes, but the beast backed off
beyond the range of the light into an impenetrable tangle where we could
not follow. Apparently he was frightened by the lantern, for we did not
hear him again.

After nearly a month of disappointments such as these Mr. Heller joined us
at Bui-tao with Mr. Kellogg. Caldwell thought it advisable to shift camp to
the Ling-suik monastery, about twelve miles away, where he had once spent a
summer with his family and had killed several tigers. This was within the
blue tiger's range and, moreover, had the advantage of offering a better
general collecting ground than Bui-tao; thus with Heller to look after the
small mammals we could begin to make our time count for something if we did
not get the tiger.

Ling-suik is a beautiful temple, or rather series of temples, built into a
hillside at the end of a long narrow valley which swells out like a great
bowl between bamboo clothed mountains, two thousand feet in height. On his
former visit Mr. Caldwell had made friends with the head priest and we were
allowed to establish ourselves upon the broad porch of the third and
highest building. It was an ideal place for a collecting camp and would
have been delightful except for the terrible heat which was rendered doubly
disagreeable by the almost continual rain.

The priests who shuffled about the temples were a hard lot. Most of them
were fugitives from justice and certainly looked the part, for a more
disreputable, diseased and generally undesirable body of men I have never
seen.

Our stay at Ling-suik was productive and the temple life interesting. We
slept on the porch and each morning, about half an hour before daylight,
the measured strokes of a great gong sounded from the temple just below us.
_Boom--boom--boom--boom_ it went, then rapidly _bang, bang, bang_. It was a
religious alarm clock to rouse the world.

A little later when the upturned gables and twisted dolphins on the roof
had begun to take definite shape in the gray light of the new day, the gong
boomed out again, doors creaked, and from their cell-like rooms shuffled
the priests to yawn and stretch themselves before the early service. The
droning chorus of hoarse voices, swelling in a meaningless half-wild chant,
harmonized strangely with the romantic surroundings of the temple and
become our daily _matin_ and evensong.

At the first gong we slipped from beneath our mosquito nets and dressed to
be ready for the bats which fluttered into the building to hide themselves
beneath the tiles and rafters. When daylight had fully come we scattered to
the four winds of heaven to inspect traps, hunt barking deer, or collect
birds, but gathered again at nine o'clock for breakfast and to deposit our
spoil. Caldwell and I always spent the afternoon at the blue tiger's lair
but the animal had suddenly shifted his operations back to Lung-tao and did
not appear at Ling-suik while we were there.

Our work in Fukien taught us much that may be of help to other naturalists
who contemplate a visit to this province. We satisfied ourselves that
summer collecting is impracticable, for the heat is so intense and the
vegetation so heavy that only meager results can be obtained for the
efforts expended. Continual tramping over the mountains in the blazing sun
necessarily must have its effect upon the strongest constitution, and even
a man like Mr. Caldwell, who has become thoroughly acclimated, is not
immune.

Both Caldwell and I lost from fifteen to twenty pounds in weight during the
time we hunted the blue tiger and each of us had serious trouble from
abscesses. I have never worked in a more trying climate--even that of
Borneo and the Dutch East Indies where I collected in 1909-10, was much
less debilitating than Fukien in the summer. The average temperature was
about 95 degrees in the shade, but the humidity was so high that one felt
as though one were wrapped in a wet blanket and even during a six weeks'
rainless period the air was saturated with moisture from the sea-winds.

In winter the weather is raw and damp, but collecting then would be vastly
easier than in summer, not only on account of climatic conditions, but
because much of the vegetation disappears and there is an opportunity for
"still hunting."

Trapping for small mammal is especially difficult because of the dense
population. The mud dykes and the rice fields usually are covered with
tracks of civets, mongooses, and cats which come to hunt frogs or fish, but
if a trap is set it either catches a Chinaman or promptly is stolen.
Moreover, the small mammals are neither abundant nor varied in number of
species, and the larger forms, such as tiger, leopard, wild pig and serow
are exceedingly difficult to kill.

While our work in the province was done during an unfavorable season and in
only two localities, yet enough was seen of the general conditions to make
it certain that a thorough zooelogical study of the region would require
considerable time and hard work and that the results, so far as a large
collection of mammals is concerned, would not be highly satisfactory. Work
in the western part of the province among the Bohea Hills undoubtedly would
be more profitable, but even there it would be hardly worth while for an
expedition with limited time and money.

Bird life is on a much better footing, but the ornithology of Fukien
already has received considerable attention through the collections of
Swinhoe, La Touche, Styan, Ricketts, Caldwell and others, and probably not
a great number of species remain to be described.

Much work could still be done upon the herpetology of the region, however,
and I believe that this branch of zooelogy would be well worth investigation
for reptiles and batrachians are fairly abundant and the natives would
rather assist than retard one's efforts.

The language of Fukien is a greater annoyance than in any other of the
Chinese coast provinces. The Foochow dialect (which is one of the most
difficult to learn) is spoken only within fifty or one hundred miles of the
city. At Yen-ping Mr. Caldwell, who speaks "Foochow" perfectly, could not
understand a word of the "southern mandarin" which is the language of that
region, and near Futsing, where a colony of natives from Amoy have settled,
the dialect is unintelligible to one who knows only "Foochow."

Travel in Fukien is an unceasing trial, for transport is entirely by
coolies who carry from eighty to one hundred pounds. The men are paid by
distance or weight; therefore, when coolies finally have been obtained
there is the inevitable wrangling over loads so that from one to two hours
are consumed before the party can start.

But the worst of it is that one can never be certain when one's entire
outfit will arrive at its new destination. Some men walk much faster than
others, some will delay a long time for tea, or may give out altogether if
the day be hot, with the result that the last load will arrive perhaps five
or six hours after the first one.

As horses are not to be had, if one does not walk the only alternative is
to be carried in a mountain chair, which is an uncomfortable, trapeze-like
affair and only to be found along the main highways. On the whole,
transport by man-power in China is so uncertain and expensive that for a
large expedition it forms a grave obstacle to successful work, if time and
funds be limited.

On the other hand, servants are cheap and usually good. We employed a very
fair cook who received monthly seven dollars Mexican (then about three and
one-half dollars gold), and "boys" were hired at from five to seven dollars
(Mexican). As none of the servants knew English they could be obtained at
much lower wages, but English-speaking cooks usually receive from fifteen
to twenty dollars (Mexican) a month.

It was hard to leave Fukien without the blue tiger but we had hunted him
unsuccessfully for five weeks and there was other and more important work
awaiting us in Yuen-nan. It required thirty porters to transport our baggage
from the Ling-suik monastery to Daing-nei, twenty-one miles away, where two
houseboats were to meet us, and by ten o'clock in the evening we were lying
off Pagoda Anchorage awaiting the flood tide to take us to Foochow. We made
our beds on the deck house and in the morning opened our eyes to find the
boat tied to the wharf at the Custom House on the Bund, and ourselves in
full view of all Foochow had it been awake at that hour.

The week of packing and repacking that followed was made easy for us by
Claude Kellogg, who acted as our ministering angel. I think there must be a
special Providence that watches over wandering naturalists and directs them
to such men as Kellogg, for without divine aid they could never be found.
When we last saw him, he stood on the stone steps of the water front waving
his hat as we slipped away on the tide, to board the S.S. _Haitan_ for
Hongkong.




CHAPTER VIII


THE WOMEN OF CHINA

_Y.B.A._

The schools for native girls at Foochow and Yen-ping interested us greatly,
even when we first came to China, but we could not appreciate then as we
did later the epoch-making step toward civilization of these institutions.

How much the missionaries are able to accomplish from a religious
standpoint is a question which we do not wish to discuss, but no one who
has ever lived among them can deny that the opening of schools and the
diffusing of western knowledge are potent factors in the development of the
people. The Chinese were not slow even in the beginning to see the
advantages of a foreign education for their boys and now, along the coast
at least, some are beginning to make sacrifices for their daughters as
well. The Woman's College, which was opened recently in Foochow, is one of
the finest buildings of the Republic, and when one sees its bright-faced
girls dressed in their quaint little pajama-like garments, it is difficult
to realize that outside such schools they are still slaves in mind and body
to those iron rules of Confucius which have molded the entire structure of
Chinese society for over 2400 years.

The position of women in China today, and the rules which govern the
household of every orthodox Chinese, are the direct heritage of
Confucianism. The following translation by Professor J. Legge from the
_Narratives of the Confucian School_, chapter 26, is illuminating:

    Confucius said: "Man is the representative of heaven and is supreme
    over all things. Woman yields obedience to the instructions of man and
    helps to carry out his principles. On this account she can determine
    nothing of herself and is subject to the rule of the three obediences.

    "(1) When young she must obey her father and her elder brother;

    "(2) When married, she must obey her husband;

    "(3) When her husband is dead she must obey her son.

    "She may not think of marrying a second time. No instructions or orders
    must issue from the harem. Women's business is simply the preparation
    and supplying of drink and food. Beyond the threshold of her apartments
    she shall not be known for evil or for good. She may not cross the
    boundaries of a state to attend a funeral. She may take no steps on her
    own motive and may come to no conclusion on her own deliberation."

    The grounds for divorce as stated by Confucius are:

    "(1) Disobedience to her husband's parents;

    "(2) Not giving birth to a son;

    "(3) Dissolute conduct;

    "(4) Jealousy of her husband's attentions (to the other inmates at his
    harem);

    "(5) Talkativeness, and

    "(6) Thieving."

A Chinese bride owes implicit obedience to her mother-in-law, and as she is
often reared by her husband's family, or else married to him as a mere
child, and is under the complete control of his mother for a considerable
period of her existence, her life in many instances is one of intolerable
misery. There is generally little or no consideration for a girl under the
best of circumstances until she becomes the mother of a male child; her
condition then improves but she approaches happiness only when she in turn
occupies the enviable position of mother-in-law.

It is difficult to imagine a life of greater dreariness and vacuity than
