an excellent character; but, I grieve to say, you have greatly changed
for the worse. Are you not aware of it?"

"No, father. What have I done?"

Dunstan sighed at the tone of the reply, and continued--"It is not any
particular action of which I wish to accuse you, but of the general
tenor of your conduct. I do not speak harshly, my boy; but if truth be
told, you are as idle as you were once diligent, as sullen and reserved
as once candid and open: and, my son, your face tells a tale of even
worse things, and, but that I am puzzled to know where you could obtain the
means of self indulgence, I should attribute more serious vices to you."

"Who has accused me, father?"

"Yourself--that is, your own face and manner. Did you ever contemplate
yourself in a mirror when at home? There is a steel one against that
wall, go and look at yourself now."

Elfric blushed deeply.

"My face is still the same," he said.

"It is the same, and yet not the same. Innocence once took her place at
its portals, and had sealed it as her own; the expression is all
changed; my boy, I am absolutely certain that all is not well with you.
For your own sake, delay no longer to avoid the danger of losing your
salvation, for the habits you form now will perhaps cling to you through
life. Turn now to your own self; confess your sin, and be at peace."

"I came to confession at Shrovetide; I am not required to come now, am I?"

"Required? No, my boy, it is your own sense of guilt, alone, which
should draw you. The Church, since there has been no public scandal,
leaves you to your own judgment at such a time as this. Have you never
felt such remorse of conscience as would tell you your duty?"

"Never."

He thought of Good Friday, and blushed.

"Your tone and words belie each other, my boy. God grant you repentance;
you will not accept my help now, but the time may come when you will
seek help in vain."

Elfric bowed, without reply, and at a sign left the chamber.

A few weeks later, at the beginning of November, Edred left London for a
tour in the west, and quitted his nephews with more than his usual
affection, although his goodbye to Elfric was more constrained, for the
good old king, not knowing the whole truth, was beginning to fear that
Elfric was a dangerous companion. He little thought that he was rather
sinned against than sinning.

Dunstan was to follow him in a week, and only remained behind to
discharge necessary business.

The heart of the amorous Edwy beat with delight as he saw his uncle
depart, and he made arrangements at once to spend the night after
Dunstan's departure in mirth and jollity at the house of Ethelgiva and
her fair daughter.

He came back after an interview with Redwald on the subject, and found
Elfric in their common study. There was an alcove in the room, and it
was covered by a curtain.

"O Elfric," said the prince, "is it not delightful? The two tyrants, the
king and the monk, will soon be gone. I wish the Evil One would fly off
with them both, and when the cat is away will not the mice play? I have
made all the arrangements; we shall have such a night at the lady
Ethelgiva's."

"How is the fair Elgiva?"

It was now Edwy's turn to blush and look confused.

"I wish I had the power of teasing you, Elfric. But if you have a secret
you keep it close. Remember old Dunstan vanishes on the fifteenth, and
the same evening, oh, won't it be joyful? But I am tired of work. Come
and let us take some fresh air."

They left the room, when the curtain parted, and the astonished
countenance of Father Benedict, who had been quietly reading in the deep
embrasure of the window, presently appeared. He looked like a man at
whose feet a thunderbolt had fallen, and hastily left the room.

The week passed rapidly away, and at its close Dunstan took his
departure. A train of horses awaited him, and he bade the young princes
Edwy and Edgar farewell, with the usual charge to work diligently and
obey Father Benedict.

That same night, after the clerks had sung compline in the chapel, and
the chamberlain had seen to the safety of the palace, Edwy came quietly
to the room of his page, and the two left as on the first occasion.
Redwald attended them, and just before the boat left the bank he spoke a
word of caution.

"I fear," he said, in a low tone, "that all is not quite right. That old
fox Dunstan is up to some trick; he has not really left town."

"Perhaps he has a similar appointment tonight," said Edwy,
sarcastically. "I should keep mine though he and all his monks from
Glastonbury barred the way."

They reached the castellated mansion of Ethelgiva in due course, and the
programme of the former evening was repeated, save that, if there was
any change, the conversation was more licentious, and the wine cup
passed more freely.

It was midnight, and one of the company was favouring them with a song
of questionable propriety, when a heavy knock was heard at the door. The
servants went to answer it, and all the company awaited the issue in
suspense.

One of the principal domestics returned with haste, and whispered some
words into the ear of Ethelgiva--which seemed to discompose her.

"What can this mean?" she said. "A guard of soldiers demand admittance
in the king's name?"

A louder knocking attested the fact.

"You must admit them, or they will batter the door down. Edwy, Elfric!
here, hide yourselves behind that curtain, it veils a deep recess."

They had scarcely concealed themselves when Dunstan entered, attended by
a guard of the royal hus-carles.

"What means this insolence?" said Ethelgiva.

"No insolence is intended, royal lady, nor could be offered to the widow
of the Etheling, by me," replied Dunstan, "but I seek to discharge a
sacred trust committed to me. Where are my pupils, the Prince Edwy and
his companion?"

"In their beds, at the palace, I should suppose."

"Nay, be not so perfidious; they are here, lady, and probably within
hearing; they must come forth, or I must order the guard to search the
house, which I should regret."

"By whose authority?"

"By that of the king, whose signet is on my hand."

"They are not here; they left half-an-hour ago."

"Pardon me, madam, if I observe that we have watched the house for an hour.

"Had not this scene better terminate?" he added, with icy coldness.

At this moment a favourite dog, which Edwy had often petted, and which
had entered with the guard, found him out behind the curtain, and in its
vociferous joy betrayed the whole secret.

Confusion or smiles sat on every face save that of the imperturbable
Dunstan.

"Your dog, madam, is more truthful than its mistress," he said, bluntly
yet quietly; and then, advancing to the recess, he drew aside the
curtain and gazed upon the discovered couple.

"Will you kindly return to the palace with me?"

"How dare you, insolent monk, intrude upon the pleasures of your future
king?"

"I dare by the orders of the present king, your royal uncle, who has
committed the whole matter into my hands; and, Prince Edwy, in the
discharge of my duty 'dare' is a superfluous word. Will you, as I said
before, both follow me, if you are sufficiently masters of yourselves to
do so?"

The import of all this was seen at a glance, but there was no course but
submission, and Edwy well knew how utterly indefensible his conduct was;
so, with crestfallen gait, he and Elfric followed their captor to the
river, where was another large boat by the side of their own. They
entered it, and returned to the palace stairs much more sober than on
previous occasions.


    CHAPTER VII. "THE KING IS DEAD!--LONG LIVE THE KING!"

The unhappy Elfric passed the night in a most unenviable frame of mind.
He felt distinctly how utterly he was in the power of Dunstan, and that
he could only expect to return home in disgrace; yet there was no real
repentance in all this: he had sinned and suffered, but although he
dreaded punishment he no longer hated sin.

He scarcely slept at all, and early in the morning he rose to seek an
interview with Edwy, when he found that he was a prisoner. One of the
hus-carles posted at his door forbade all communication.

Early in the morning the bell sounded for the early service, still he
was not released, and later his breakfast was brought to him, after
which he heard a heavy step approaching, and Dunstan appeared at the
door of the sleeping chamber.

He entered, and gazed at Elfric for a moment without speaking, as if he
would read his very heart by his face; it was hardly comfortable.

"Elfric," he said at last, "do you remember the warning I gave you six
months ago?"

"No," said Elfric, determined, in desperation, to deny everything.

"I fear you are hardly telling me the truth; you must remember it,
unhappy boy! Why were you not warned in time? Why did you refuse the
advice which might have saved you from all this?"

"Because it was my fate, I suppose."

"Men make their own fates, and as they make their beds so must they lie
upon them; however, I have not come here to reproach you, but to bid you
prepare to return home."

"Home?--so soon?" said Elfric.

"Yes, you must leave tomorrow, when a messenger will be prepared to
accompany you, and to explain the cause of your dismissal from court to
your father, whom I most sincerely pity; and let me hope that you will
find leisure to repent of your grievous sin in the solitude of your
native home."

"Must my father be told everything?"

"I fear he must: you have left us no choice; and it is the better thing,
both for him and for you; he will understand better what steps are
necessary for your reformation--a reformation, I trust, which will be
accomplished in good time, whereat no one will rejoice more than I."

A pert answer rose to Elfric's lips, but he dared not give utterance to
it; the speaker was too great in his wrath to be defied with impunity.

"Farewell," said Dunstan, "would that I could say the word with brighter
hopes; but should you ever repent of your sin, as I trust you may, it
will gladden me to hear of it. I fear you may have done great harm to
England in the person of her future king, but God forgive you in that
case."

Elfric felt the injustice of the last accusation; he coloured, and an
indignant denial had almost risen to his lips, but he repressed it for
Edwy's sake--faithful, even in his vice, to his friend.

"Am I to consider myself a prisoner? you have posted a sentinel, as if I
were a criminal."

"You must be confined to your apartment, but you may have books and
anything else you desire. The prince is forbidden to see you again. Your
confinement will only be for one day; tomorrow you will be free enough;
let me beg you to use the occasion for calm reflection, and, I hope,
penitence."

Dunstan left the room, and Elfric heard his retreating steps go heavily
down the stairs, when a sudden and almost unaccountable feeling came
over him--a feeling that he had thrown himself away, and that he was
committed to evil, perhaps never to be able to retrace his course, never
to all eternity; the retreating steps sounded as if his sentence were
passed and the door of mercy shut. He shook off the strange feeling;
yet, could he have seen the future which lay undiscovered before him, and
which must intervene before he should see that face again, or hear those
steps, he might have been unable thus to shake off the nameless dread.

The day wore away, night drew on; he laid himself down and tried to
sleep, when he heard voices conversing outside, and recognised Edwy's
tones; immediately after the prince entered.

"What a shame, Elfric," he said, "to make you a prisoner like this, and
to send you away--for they say you are to go tomorrow--you shall not
be forgotten if ever I become king, and I don't think it will be long
first. The first thing I shall do will be to send for you; you will
come; won't you?"

"I will be yours for life or death."

"I knew it, and this is the faithful friend from whom they would
separate me; well, we will have this last evening together in peace; old
Dunstan has gone out, and Redwald has put a man as your guard who never
sees anything he is not wanted to see."

"What a convenient thing!"

"But you seem very dull; is anything on your mind which I do not know?
What did Dunstan say to you?"

"He is going to write home to my father all particulars. It will make
home miserable."

"Perhaps we may find a remedy for that," said Edwy, and left the room
hastily.

Shortly he returned in company with Redwald.

"Come with us, Elfric," said the prince "there is no one in the palace
to interfere with us. Old Dunstan received a sudden message, and has
gone out hastily; we will go and see what he has written."

Somewhat startled at the audacity of the proposal, Elfric followed the
prince, and Redwald accompanied them. After passing through a few
passages, they arrived at the cell, or rather study, usually occupied by
Dunstan when at court, and entered it, not without a slight feeling of
dread, or rather of reluctance.

"Here it is," said Edwy, and held up a parchment, folded, sealed, and
directed to "Ella, Thane of Aescendune."

"I should like to know what he has written," said the prince. "Redwald,
you understand these things; can you open the letter without breaking
the seal?"

"There is no need of that," replied the captain of the hus-carles, "I
can easily seal it again; see, there is the signet, and here the wax."

So he broke the letter open and extended it to the prince, whose liberal
education had given him the faculty of reading the monkish Latin, in
which Dunstan wrote, at a glance, and he read aloud:

"TO MY BROTHER IN CHRIST,
