of such a thing?"

Wendot's wide-open eyes gave answer enough. Lord Montacute smiled
slightly as he said:

"Ah, thou art full young for such thoughts; and thou livest not in the
atmosphere of courts, where babes are given in marriage almost from
their cradles. But listen, Res Wendot; I speak not in jest, I am a man
of my word. Thou hast risked thy life to save my little maid. Thou art a
noble youth, and I honour both thee and thy parents. The maid has told
me that she loves thee well, and would be well pleased to wed thee when
she is of the age to do so. These are but childish words, yet they may
prove themselves true in days to come. It is in the interests of all
those who have the peace and prosperity of this land at heart to
strengthen themselves in every way they can. My little daughter will
have an ample dower to bring her husband; and I will keep her for thee
if thou wilt be willing to claim her in days to come. I should like well
to see her ruling in these fair halls; and thou hast proved already that
thou art a knightly youth, whose hand she may well take with confidence
and pride.

"Thy parents are willing; it waits only for thee to say. What thinkest
thou of a troth plight with the little maid?"

Wendot's face glowed with a sort of boyish shame, not unmingled with
pride; but the idea was altogether too strange and new to him to be
readily grasped.

"I have never thought of such things," he said shyly, "and I am too
young to wed. Perchance I may grow into some rough, uncouth fellow, who
may please not the maiden when she reaches years of discretion. Methinks
it would scarce be fair to plight her now, at least not with such a
plight as might not be broken. If our nations meet in fierce conflict,
as they yet may, it would be a cruel thing to have linked her hand with
that of a rebel, for such we are called by the English monarch, they
say, when we rise to fight for our liberties bequeathed by our ancestors.

"Nay, noble lord, frown not on me. There be moments when methinks two
spirits strive within me, and I am fearful of trusting even myself. I
would not that grief or sorrow should touch her through me. Let me come
and claim her anon, when I have grown to man's estate, and can bring her
lands and revenues. But bind her not to one whose fate may be beset with
perils and shadows. There be those amongst our bards who see into the
future; and they tell us that a dark fate hangs over the house of
Dynevor, and that we four shall be the last to bear the name."

Lord Montacute was looking grave and earnest. There was something in his
face which indicated disappointment, but also something that spoke of
relief. Possibly he himself had offered this troth plight with something
of hesitation, offered it out of gratitude to the noble lad, and out of
respect to his parents, who, as he saw, would prove valuable allies to
the English cause, could they but be induced to give their allegiance to
it. Yet there was another side to the picture, too; and Wendot was too
young for any one to predict with certainty what would be his course in
the future. The hot blood of his race ran in his veins; and though his
judgment was cool, and he saw things in a reasonable and manly light, it
would be rash to predict what the future might have in store for him.

"Well, lad, thou hast spoken bravely and well," said the Englishman,
after a pause for thought. "Perchance thy words are right; perchance it
will be well to let matters rest as they are for the present. We will
have no solemn troth plight betwixt ye twain; but the maid shall be
promised to none other these next four years, so that if thou carest to
claim her ere she reaches woman's estate, thou shalt find her waiting
for thee. And now I must say thee farewell, for tomorrow we ride away
the way we came. I trust to see thee at the king's court one of these
days, and to make known to his royal majesty the noble youth of Dynevor."

Wendot was left alone then for some time, pondering the strange offer
made to him, and wondering whether he had been foolish to refuse the
promised reward. He had never seriously thought of marriage, although in
those days wedlock was entered upon very young if there were any
advantage to be gained from it. A lad of fifteen is seldom sentimental;
but Wendot was conscious of a very warm spot in his heart for little
Gertrude, and he knew that he should miss her sorely when she went, and
think of her much. Would it have been a sweet or a bitter thing to have
felt himself pledged to a daughter of England? He felt that he could not
tell; but at least the decision was made now, and his words could not be
recalled.

Just ere the sun set that summer's day there came down the stone
corridor which led to his room the patter of little feet, and he leaned
up on his elbow with brightening eyes as the door opened and little
Gertrude came dancing in.

"I thought I was to have been married to you, Wendot, before we went
away," she said, looking into his face with the most trusting expression
in her soft dark eyes; "but father says you will come to marry me some
day at the king's court. Perhaps that will be better, for I should like
Eleanor and Joanna to see you. They would like you so, and you would
like them. But do come soon, Wendot. I do so like you; and I shall want
to show you to them all. And I have broken my gold coin in two -- the
one the king gave me once. I got the armourer to do it, and to make a
hole in each half. You must wear one half round your neck, and I will
wear the other. And that will be almost the same as being married, will
it not? And you will never forget me, will you?"

Wendot let her hang the half of the coin round his neck by a silken
thread, strange new thoughts crowding into his mind as he felt her soft
little hands about him. Suddenly he clasped them in both of his and
pressed warm kisses upon them. Gertrude threw her arms about his neck in
a childish paroxysm of affection, saying as she did so between her kisses:

"Now, it's just like being husband and wife; and we shall never forget
one another -- never."



    CHAPTER V. THE KING'S CHILDREN.


"Dynevor --did you say Dynevor? O Eleanor, it must be he!"

A tall, slim, fair-faced maiden, with a very regal mien, looked up
quickly from an embroidery frame over which she was bending, and glanced
from the eager, flushed face of the younger girl who stood beside her to
that of a tall and stalwart English youth, who appeared to be the bearer
of a piece of news, and asked in her unconsciously queenly way:

"What is it, Sir Godfrey, that you have told this impetuous child, to
have set her in such a quiver of excitement?"

"Only this, gracious lady, that certain youthful chieftains from the
south have come hither to Rhuddlan to pay their homage to your royal
father. In his absence at Chester they have been lodged within the
castle walls, as becomes their station. It has been told me that amongst
them are four sons of one Res Vychan, lately dead, and that he was Lord
of Dynevor, which honour has descended to his eldest son. I was telling
what I knew to Lady Gertrude when she broke away to speak to you."

"Eleanor, it must be he -- it must be they!" cried Gertrude, with
flushing cheek and kindling eye -- "Res Vychan, Lord of Dynevor, and his
four sons. It could be none else than they. O Eleanor, sweet Eleanor,
bid them be brought hither to see us! Thou hast heard the story of how
we went thither, my father and I, two years agone now, and of what
befell me there. I have never heard a word of Wendot since, and I have
thought of him so oft. Thou art mistress here now; they all heed thy
lightest word. Bid that the brothers be brought hither to us. I do so
long to see them again!"

Gertrude was fairly trembling with excitement; but that was no unusual
thing for her, as she was an ardent, excitable little mortal, and ever
in a fever of some kind or another. The young knight who had brought the
news looked at her with unmistakable admiration and pleasure, and seemed
as though he would gladly have obeyed any behest of hers; but he was
fain to wait for the decision of the stately Eleanor, the king's eldest
and much-beloved child, who in the temporary absence of her parents
occupied a position of no little importance in the household, and whose
will, in the royal apartments at any rate, was law.

But there were other listeners to Gertrude's eager words. At the far end
of the long gallery, which was occupied by the royal children as their
private apartment, a group of three young things had been at play, but
the urgency of Gertrude's tones had arrested their attention, and they
had drawn near to hear her last words. One of these younger children was
a black-eyed girl, with a very handsome face and an imperious manner,
which gave to onlookers the idea that she was older than her years.
Quick tempered, generous, hasty, and self willed was the Lady Joanna,
the second daughter of the king; but her warm affections caused all who
knew her to love her; and her romantic temperament was always stirred to
its depths by any story that savoured of chivalry or heroism.

"What!" she cried; "is Wendot here -- Wendot of Dynevor, who held the
Eagle's Crag against half a hundred foemen to save thee, sweetest
Gertrude, from captivity or death? -- Eleanor, thou knowest the story;
thou must bid him hither at once! Why, I would thank him with my own
lips for his heroism. For is not Gertrude as our own sister in love?"

"Ay, Eleanor, bid him come," pleaded Alphonso, a fragile-looking boy a
year younger than Joanna, whose violet-blue eyes and fair skin were in
marked contrast to her gipsy-like darkness of complexion; and this
request was echoed eagerly by another boy, a fine, bold-looking lad,
somewhat older than Alphonso, by name Britten, who was brought up with
the king's children, and treated in every way like them, as the wardrobe
rolls of the period show, though what his rank and parentage were cannot
now be established, as no mention of him occurs in any other documents
of that time.

The Princess Eleanor, as she would now be called, although in those
far-back days the title of Lady was generally all that was bestowed upon
the children of the king, did not attempt to resist the combined
entreaties of her younger playfellows. Indeed, although somewhat mature
both in mind and appearance for her years, she was by no means devoid of
childish or feminine curiosity, and was as willing to see the hero of
Gertrude's oft-told tale as her more youthful companions could be.
Moreover, it was her father's policy and pleasure to be generous and
gracious towards all those who submitted themselves to his feudal
sovereignty; and to the young he ever showed himself friendly and even
paternal. The stern soldier-king was a particularly tender and loving
father, and his wife the best of mothers, so that the family tie in
their household was a very strong and beautiful thing. When the monarch
was called away from his own royal residences to quell sedition or
rebellion in this turbulent country of Wales, his wife and children
accompanied him thither; and so it happened that in this rather gloomy
fastness in North Wales, when the rebellion of the warlike Llewelyn had
but just been crushed, the king's children were to be found assembled
within its walls, by their bright presence and laughter-loving ways
making the place gay and bright, and bringing even into political
matters something of the leniency and good fellowship which seems to be
the prerogative of childhood.

Thus it was that one powerful and turbulent noble, Einon ap Cadwalader,
had left as hostage of his good faith his only child, the Lady Arthyn,
to be the companion of the king's daughters. She had been received with
open arms by the warm-hearted Joanna, and the two were fast friends
already, although the Welsh girl was several years the elder of the
pair. But Joanna, who had been educated in Spain by her grandmother and
namesake, and who had only recently come to be with her own parents, had
enjoyed abroad a liberty and importance which had developed her rapidly,
and her mind was as quick and forward as her body was active and energetic.

Intercourse with Arthyn, too, had given to the younger princess a great
sympathy with the vanquished Welsh, and she was generously eager that
those who came to pay homage to her father should not feel themselves in
a position that was humiliating or galling. The gentle Eleanor shared
this feeling to the full, and was glad to give to the young knight Sir
Godfrey Challoner, who was one of her own gentlemen-in-waiting, a
gracious message for the young Lord of Dynevor to the effect that she
would be glad to receive him and his brothers in her father's absence,
and to give them places at the royal table for the evening meal shortly
to be served.

Great was the delight of Gertrude when the message was despatched. Her
companions crowded round her to hear again the story of her adventure on
the Eagle's Crag. Gertrude never knew how she had been betrayed by
Wendot's brothers. She believed that they had been accidentally hindered
from coming to her rescue by the difficulties of the climb after the
eagle's nest. There was a faint, uncomfortable misgiving in her mind
with regard to the black-browed twins, but it did not amount to actual
suspicion, far less to any certainty of their enmity; and although
Eleanor had heard the whole story from her parents, she had not
explained the matter more fully to Gertrude.

An invitation from royalty was equal to a command, and the eager
children were not kept waiting long. The double doors at the end of the
long gallery, which had closed behind the retiring form of Godfrey,
opened once again to admit him, and closely in his wake there followed
two manly youths -- two, not four -- upon whose faces every eye was
instantly fixed in frank and kindly scrutiny.

Wendot had developed rapidly during these two last years, although he
retained all his old marked characteristics. The waving hair was still
bright and sunny, the open face, with its rather square features, was
resolute, alert, manly, and strong. The fearless blue eyes had not lost
their far-away dreaminess, as though the possessor were looking onward
and outward beyond the surroundings visible to others; and beneath the
calm determination of the expression was an underlying sweetness, which
shone out from time to time in the sunny smile which always won the
heart of the beholder. The figure was rather that of a man than a lad --
tall, strongly knit, full of grace and power; and a faint yellow
moustache upon the upper lip showed the dawn of manhood in the youth.
There was something in his look which seemed to tell that he had known
sorrow, trial, and anxiety; but this in no way detracted from the power
or attractiveness of the countenance, but rather gave it an added charm.

Griffeth retained his marked likeness to his brother, and was almost his
equal in height; but his cheek was pale and hollow, while Wendot's was
brown and healthy, his hands were slim and white, and there was an air
of languor and ill-health about him which could not fail to make itself
observed. He looked much younger than his brother, despite his tall
stature, and he blushed like a boy as he saw the eyes of the ladies
fixed upon them as they came forward, bowing with no ungraceful deference.

"Wendot, Wendot. don't you know me?"

The young man started and raised his eyes towards the speaker. So far,
he had only been aware that there were a number of persons collected at
the upper end of the long gallery. Now he found himself confronted by a
pair of eager, dancing eyes, as soft and dark as those of a forest deer,
whilst two slim hands were held out to him, and a silvery voice cried
softly and playfully:

"O Wendot, Wendot, to think you have forgotten!"

"Lady Gertrude!"

"Ah, I am glad you have not forgotten, though methinks I have changed
more than you these past years. I should have known you anywhere. But
come, Wendot; I would present you to my friends and companions, who
would fain be acquainted with you. They know how you saved my life that
day, I have told the tale so oft.

"Let me present you first to our sweetest Lady Eleanor, our great king's
eldest daughter. You will love her, I know -- none can help it. And she
lets me call myself her sister."

Young things have a wonderful faculty of growing intimate in a very
brief space, and the formalities of those simpler times were not
excessive, especially away from the trammels of the court. In ten
minutes' time Wendot and his brother had grasped the names and rank of
all those to whom they had been presented, and were joining in the eager
talk with ease and with enjoyment. Joanna stood beside Wendot,
listening, with unfeigned interest, to his answers respecting himself
and those near and dear to him; whilst Alphonso had drawn Griffeth to
the embrasure of a window, and was looking up into his face as they
compared notes and exchanged ideas. It seemed from the first as though a
strong link formed itself between those two.

"Your brothers would not come. Was that fear or shame or pride?" asked
Joanna, with a laughing look into Wendot's flushed face. "Nay, think not
that we would compel any to visit us who do it not willingly. Gertrude
has prepared us to find your brothers different from you. Methinks she
marvelled somewhat that they had come hither at all with their submission."

Wendot hesitated, and the flush deepened on his face; but he was too
young to have learned the lesson of reticence, and there was something
