but crawled on. Again the crossbow twanged, and the bear snarled, and
came nearer. Again the cross bow twanged; and the next moment the bear
was close upon Gerard, where he sat, with hair standing stiff on end and
eyes starting from their sockets, palsied. The bear opened her jaws like
a grave, and hot blood spouted from them upon Gerard as from a pump. The
bough rocked. The wounded monster was reeling; it clung, it stuck its
sickles of claws deep into the wood; it toppled, its claws held firm,
but its body rolled off, and the sudden shock to the branch shook Gerard
forward on his stomach with his face upon one of the bear's straining
paws. At this, by a convulsive effort, she raised her head up, up, till
he felt her hot fetid breath. Then huge teeth snapped together loudly
close below him in the air, with a last effort of baffled hate. The
ponderous carcass rent the claws out of the bough, then pounded the
earth with a tremendous thump. There was a shout of triumph below,
and the very next instant a cry of dismay, for Gerard had swooned, and
without an attempt to save himself, rolled headlong from the perilous
height.



CHAPTER XXV

Denys caught at Gerard, and somewhat checked his fall; but it may be
doubted whether this alone would have saved him from breaking his
neck, or a limb. His best friend now was the dying bear, on whose hairy
carcass his head and shoulders descended. Denys tore him off her. It was
needless. She panted still, and her limbs quivered, but a hare was not
so harmless; and soon she breathed her last; and the judicious Denys
propped Gerard up against her, being soft, and fanned him. He came to
by degrees, but confused, and feeling the bear around him, rolled away,
yelling.

"Courage," cried Denys, "le diable est mort."

"Is it dead? quite dead?" inquired Gerard from behind a tree; for his
courage was feverish, and the cold fit was on him just now, and had been
for some time.

"Behold," said Denys, and pulled the brute's ear playfully, and opened
her jaws and put in his head, with other insulting antics; in the midst
of which Gerard was violently sick.

Denys laughed at him.

"What is the matter now?" said he, "also, why tumble off your perch just
when we had won the day?"

"I swooned, I trow."

"But why?"

Not receiving an answer, he continued, "Green girls faint as soon
as look at you, but then they choose time and place. What woman ever
fainted up a tree?"

"She sent her nasty blood all over me. I think the smell must have
overpowered me! Faugh! I hate blood."

"I do believe it potently."

"See what a mess she has made me

"But with her blood, not yours. I pity the enemy that strives to satisfy
you."'

"You need not to brag, Maitre Denys; I saw you under the tree, the
colour of your shirt."

"Let us distinguish," said Denys, colouring; "it is permitted to tremble
for a friend."

Gerard, for answer, flung his arms round Denys's neck in silence.

"Look here," whined the stout soldier, affected by this little gush of
nature and youth, "was ever aught so like a woman? I love thee, little
milksop--go to. Good! behold him on his knees now. What new caprice is
this?"

"Oh, Denys, ought we not to return thanks to Him who has saved both our
lives against such fearful odds?" And Gerard kneeled, and prayed aloud.
And presently he found Denys kneeling quiet beside him, with his hands
across his bosom after the custom of his nation, and a face as long as
his arm. When they rose, Gerard's countenance was beaming.

"Good Denys," said he, "Heaven will reward thy piety."

"Ah, bah! I did it out of politeness," said the Frenchman. "It was to
please thee, little one. C'est egal, 'twas well and orderly prayed, and
edified me to the core while it lasted. A bishop had scarce handled the
matter better; so now our evensong being sung, and the saints enlisted
with us--marchons."

Ere they had taken two steps, he stopped. "By-the-by, the cub!"

"Oh, no, no!" cried Gerard.

"You are right. It is late. We have lost time climbing trees, and
tumbling off 'em, and swooning, and vomiting, and praying; and the brute
is heavy to carry. And now I think on't, we shall have papa after it
next; these bears make such a coil about an odd cub. What is this? you
are wounded! you are wounded!"

"Not I."

"He is wounded; miserable that I am!"

"Be calm, Denys. I am not touched; I feel no pain anywhere."

"You? you only feel when another is hurt," cried Denys, with great
emotion; and throwing himself on his knees, he examined Gerard's leg
with glistening eyes.

"Quick! quick! before it stiffens," he cried, and hurried him on.

"Who makes the coil about nothing now?" inquired Gerard composedly.

Denys's reply was a very indirect one.

"Be pleased to note," said he, "that I have a bad heart. You were man
enough to save my life, yet I must sneer at you, a novice in war. Was
not I a novice once myself? Then you fainted from a wound, and I thought
you swooned for fear, and called you a milksop. Briefly, I have a bad
tongue and a bad heart."

"Denys!"

"Plait-il?"

"You lie."

"You are very good to say so, little one, and I am eternally obliged to
you," mumbled the remorseful Denys.

Ere they had walked many furlongs, the muscles of the wounded leg
contracted and stiffened, till presently Gerard could only just put his
toe to the ground, and that with great pain.

At last he could bear it no longer.

"Let me lie down and die," he groaned, "for this is intolerable."

Denys represented that it was afternoon, and the nights were now frosty;
and cold and hunger ill companions; and that it would be unreasonable
to lose heart, a certain great personage being notoriously defunct. So
Gerard leaned upon his axe, and hobbled on; but presently he gave in,
all of a sudden, and sank helpless in the road.

Denys drew him aside into the wood, and to his surprise gave him his
crossbow and bolts, enjoining him strictly to lie quiet, and if any
ill-looking fellows should find him out and come to him, to bid them
keep aloof; and should they refuse, to shoot them dead at twenty paces.
"Honest men keep the path; and, knaves in a wood, none but fools do
parley with them." With this he snatched up Gerard's axe, and set off
running--not, as Gerard expected, towards Dusseldorf, but on the road
they had come.

Gerard lay aching and smarting; and to him Rome, that seemed so near at
starting, looked far, far off, now that he was two hundred miles nearer
it. But soon all his thoughts turned Sevenbergen-wards. How sweet it
would be one day to hold Margaret's hand, and tell her all he had gone
through for her! The very thought of it, and her, soothed him; and in
the midst of pain and irritation of the nerves be lay resigned, and
sweetly, though faintly, smiling.

He had lain thus more than two hours, when suddenly there were shouts;
and the next moment something struck a tree hard by, and quivered in it.

He looked, it was an arrow.

He started to his feet. Several missiles rattled among the boughs, and
the wood echoed with battle-cries. Whence they came he could not tell,
for noises in these huge woods are so reverberated, that a stranger
is always at fault as to their whereabout; but they seemed to fill
the whole air. Presently there was a lull; then he heard the fierce
galloping of hoofs; and still louder shouts and cries arose, mingled
with shrieks and groans; and above all, strange and terrible sounds,
like fierce claps of thunder, bellowing loud, and then dying off in
cracking echoes; and red tongues of flame shot out ever and anon among
the trees, and clouds of sulphurous smoke came drifting over his head.
And all was still.

Gerard was struck with awe. "What will become of Denys?" he cried. "Oh,
why did you leave me? Oh, Denys, my friend! my friend!"

Just before sunset Denys returned, almost sinking under a hairy bundle.
It was the bear's skin.

Gerard welcomed him with a burst of joy that astonished him.

"I thought never to see you again, dear Denys. Were you in the battle?"

"No. What battle?"

"The bloody battle of men, or fiends, that raged in the wood a while
agone;" and with this he described it to the life, and more fully than I
have done.

Denys patted him indulgently on the back.

"It is well," said he; "thou art a good limner; and fever is a great
spur to the imagination. One day I lay in a cart-shed with a cracked
skull, and saw two hosts manoeuvre and fight a good hour on eight feet
square, the which I did fairly describe to my comrade in due order, only
not so gorgeously as thou, for want of book learning.

"What, then, you believe me not? when I tell you the arrows whizzed over
my head, and the combatants shouted, and--"

"May the foul fiends fly away with me if I believe a word of it."

Gerard took his arm, and quietly pointed to a tree close by.

"Why, it looks like--it is-a broad arrow, as I live!" And he went close,
and looked up at it.

"It came out of the battle. I heard it, and saw it."

"An English arrow."

"How know you that?"

"Marry, by its length. The English bowmen draw the bow to the ear,
others only to the right breast. Hence the English loose a three-foot
shaft, and this is one of them, perdition seize them! Well, if this is
not glamour, there has been a trifle of a battle. And if there has been
a battle in so ridiculous a place for a battle as this, why then 'tis
no business of mine, for my Duke hath no quarrel hereabouts. So let's to
bed," said the professional. And with this he scraped together a heap of
leaves, and made Gerard lie on it, his axe by his side. He then lay down
beside him, with one hand on his arbalest, and drew the bear-skin over
them, hair inward. They were soon as warm as toast, and fast asleep.

But long before the dawn Gerard woke his comrade.

"What shall I do, Denys, I die of famine?"

"Do? why, go to sleep again incontinent: qui dort dine."

"But I tell you I am too hungry to sleep," snapped Gerard.

"Let us march, then," replied Denys, with paternal indulgence.

He had a brief paroxysm of yawns; then made a small bundle of bears'
ears, rolling them up in a strip of the skin, cut for the purpose; and
they took the road.

Gerard leaned on his axe, and propped by Denys on the other side,
hobbled along, not without sighs.

"I hate pain." said Gerard viciously.

"Therein you show judgment," replied papa smoothly.

It was a clear starlight night; and soon the moon rising revealed the
end of the wood at no great distance: a pleasant sight, since Dusseldorf
they knew was but a short league further.

At the edge of the wood they came upon something so mysterious that they
stopped to gaze at it, before going up to it. Two white pillars rose
in the air, distant a few paces from each other; and between them stood
many figures, that looked like human forms.

"I go no farther till I know what this is," said Gerard, in an agitated
whisper. "Are they effigies of the saints, for men to pray to on the
road? or live robbers waiting to shoot down honest travellers? Nay,
living men they cannot be, for they stand on nothing that I see. Oh!
Denys, let us turn back till daybreak; this is no mortal sight."

Denys halted, and peered long and keenly. "They are men," said he, at
last. Gerard was for turning back all the more. "But men that will never
hurt us, nor we them. Look not to their feet, for that they stand on!"

"Where, then, i' the name of all the saints?"

"Look over their heads," said Denys gravely.

Following this direction, Gerard presently discerned the outline of
a dark wooden beam passing from pillar to pillar; and as the pair got
nearer, walking now on tiptoe, one by one dark snake-like cords came out
in the moonlight, each pendent from the beam to a dead man, and tight as
wire.

Now as they came under this awful monument of crime and wholesale
vengeance a light air swept by, and several of the corpses swung, or
gently gyrated, and every rope creaked. Gerard shuddered at this ghastly
salute. So thoroughly had the gibbet, with its sickening load, seized
and held their eyes, that it was but now they perceived a fire right
underneath, and a living figure sitting huddled over it. His axe lay
beside him, the bright blade shining red in the glow. He was asleep.

Gerard started, but Denys only whispered, "courage, comrade, here is a
fire."

"Ay! but there is a man at it."

"There will soon be three;" and he began to heap some wood on it that
the watcher had prepared; during which the prudent Gerard seized the
man's axe, and sat down tight on it, grasping his own, and examining the
sleeper. There was nothing outwardly distinctive in the man. He wore the
dress of the country folk, and the hat of the district, a three-cornered
hat called a Brunswicker, stiff enough to turn a sword cut, and with a
thick brass hat-band. The weight of the whole thing had turned his ears
entirely down, like a fancy rabbit's in our century; but even this,
though it spoiled him as a man, was nothing remarkable. They had of late
met scores of these dog's-eared rustics. The peculiarity was, this clown
watching under a laden gallows. What for?

Denys, if he felt curious, would not show it; he took out two bears'
ears from his bundle, and running sticks through them, began to toast
them. "'Twill be eating coined money," said he; "for the burgomaster
of Dusseldorf had given us a rix-dollar for these ears, as proving the
death of their owners; but better a lean purse than a lere stomach."

"Unhappy man!" cried Gerard, "could you eat food here?"

"Where the fire is lighted there must the meat roast, and where it
roasts there must it be eaten; for nought travels worse than your
roasted meat."

"Well, eat thou, Denys, an thou canst! but I am cold and sick; there is
no room for hunger in my heart after what mine eyes have seen," and he
shuddered over the fire. "Oh! how they creak! and who is this man, I
wonder? what an ill-favoured churl!"

Denys examined him like a connoisseur looking at a picture, and in
due course delivered judgment. "I take him to be of the refuse of that
company, whereof these (pointing carelessly upward) were the cream, and
so ran their heads into danger.

"At that rate, why not stun him before he wakes?" and Gerard fidgeted
where he sat.

Denys opened his eyes with humorous surprise. "For one who sets up for
a milksop you have the readiest hand. Why should two stun one? tush! he
wakes: note now what he says at waking, and tell me."

These last words were hardly whispered when the watcher opened his eyes.
At sight of the fire made up, and two strangers eyeing him keenly, he
stared, and there was a severe and pretty successful effort to be calm;
still a perceptible tremor ran all over him. Soon he manned himself,
and said gruffly. "Good morrow. But at the very moment of saying it he
missed his axe, and saw how Gerard was sitting upon it, with his own
laid ready to his hand. He lost countenance again directly. Denys smiled
grimly at this bit of byplay.

"Good morrow!" said Gerard quietly, keeping his eye on him.

The watcher was now too ill at ease to be silent. "You make free with
my fire," said he; but he added in a somewhat faltering voice, "you are
welcome."

Denys whispered Gerard. The watcher eyed them askant.

"My comrade says, sith we share your fire, you shall share his meat."

"So be it," said the man warmly. "I have half a kid hanging on a bush
hard by, I'll go fetch it;" and he arose with a cheerful and obliging
countenance, and was retiring.

Denys caught up his crossbow, and levelled it at his head. The man fell
on his knees.

Denys lowered his weapon, and pointed him back to his place. He rose and
went back slowly and unsteadily, like one disjointed; and sick at heart
as the mouse, that the cat lets go a little way, and then darts and
replaces.

"Sit down, friend," said Denys grimly, in French.

The man obeyed finger and tone, though he knew not a word of French.

"Tell him the fire is not big enough for more than thee. He will take my
meaning."

This being communicated by Gerard, the man grinned; ever since Denys
spoke he had seemed greatly relieved. "I wist not ye were strangers,"
said he to Gerard.

Denys cut a piece of bear's ear, and offered it with grace to him he had
just levelled crossbow at.

He took it calmly, and drew a piece of bread from his wallet, and
divided it with the pair. Nay, more, he winked and thrust his hand into
the heap of leaves he sat on (Gerard grasped his axe ready to brain him)
and produced a leathern bottle holding full two gallons. He put it to
his mouth, and drank their healths, then handed it to Gerard; he passed
it untouched to Denys.

"Mort de ma vie!" cried the soldier, "it is Rhenish wine, and fit
for the gullet of an archbishop. Here's to thee, thou prince of good
fellows, wishing thee a short life and a merry one! Come, Gerard, sup!
sup! Pshaw, never heed them, man! they heed not thee. Natheless, did I
hang over such a skin of Rhenish as this, and three churls sat beneath a
drinking it and offered me not a drop, I'd soon be down among them."

"Denys! Denys!"

"My spirit would cut the cord, and womp would come my body amongst ye,
with a hand on the bottle, and one eye winking, t'other."

Gerard started up with a cry of horror and his fingers to his ears, and
was running from the place, when his eye fell on the watcher's axe. The
tangible danger brought him back. He sat down again on the axe with his
fingers in his ears.

"Courage, l'ami, le diable est mort!" shouted Denys gaily, and offered
him a piece of bear's ear, put it right under his nose as he stopped his
ears. Gerard turned his head away with loathing.

"Wine!" he gasped. "Heaven knows I have much need of it, with such
companions as thee and--"

He took a long draught of the Rhenish wine: it ran glowing through his
veins, and warmed and strengthened his heart, but could not check his
tremors whenever a gust of wind came. As for Denys and the other, they
feasted recklessly, and plied the bottle unceasingly, and drank healths
and caroused beneath that creaking sepulchre and its ghastly tenants.

"Ask him how they came here," said Denys, with his mouth full, and
pointing up without looking.

On this question being interpreted to the watcher, he replied that
treason had been their end, diabolical treason and priest-craft. He
then, being rendered communicative by drink, delivered a long prosy
narrative, the purport of which was as follows. These honest gentlemen
who now dangled here so miserably were all stout men and true, and
lived in the forest by their wits. Their independence and thriving state
excited the jealousy and hatred of a large portion of mankind, and many
attempts were made on their lives and liberties; these the Virgin and
their patron saints, coupled with their individual skill and courage
constantly baffled. But yester eve a party of merchants came slowly on
their mules from Dusseldorf. The honest men saw them crawling, and let
them penetrate near a league into the forest, then set upon them to
make them disgorge a portion of their ill-gotten gains. But alas!
the merchants were no merchants at all, but soldiers of more than one
nation, in the pay of the Archbishop of Cologne; haubergeons had they
beneath their gowns, and weapons of all sorts at hand; natheless, the
honest men fought stoutly, and pressed the traitors hard, when lo!
horsemen, that had been planted in ambush many hours before, galloped
up, and with these new diabolical engines of war, shot leaden bullets,
and laid many an honest fellow low, and so quelled the courage of others
that they yielded them prisoners. These being taken red-handed, the
victors, who with malice inconceivable had brought cords knotted round
their waists, did speedily hang, and by their side the dead ones, to
make the gallanter show. "That one at the end was the captain. He never
felt the cord. He was riddled with broad arrows and leaden balls or ever
they could take him: a worthy man as ever cried, 'Stand and deliver!'
but a little hasty, not much: stay! I forgot; he is dead. Very hasty,
and obstinate as a pig. That one in the--buff jerkin is the lieutenant,
as good a soul as ever lived: he was hanged alive. This one here, I
never could abide; no (not that one; that is Conrad, my bosom friend); I
mean this one right overhead in the chicken-toed shoon; you were always
carrying tales, ye thief, and making mischief; you know you were; and,
sirs, I am a man that would rather live united in a coppice than in a
forest with backbiters and tale-bearers: strangers, I drink to you."
And so he went down the whole string, indicating with the neck of the
bottle, like a showman with his pole, and giving a neat description of
each, which though pithy was invariably false; for the showman had no
real eye for character, and had misunderstood every one of these people.

"Enough palaver!" cried Denys. "Marchons! Give me his axe: now tell him
he must help you along."

The man's countenance fell, but he saw in Denys's eye that resistance
would be dangerous; he submitted. Gerard it was who objected. He said,
"Y pensez-vous? to put my hand on a thief, it maketh my flesh creep."

"Childishness! all trades must live. Besides, I have my reasons. Be not
you wiser than your elder."

"No. Only if I am to lean on him I must have my hand in my bosom, still
grasping the haft of my knife."

"It is a new attitude to walk in; but please thyself."

And in that strange and mixed attitude of tender offices and deadly
suspicion the trio did walk. I wish I could draw them--I would not trust
to the pen.

The light of the watch-tower at Dusseldorf was visible as soon as they
cleared the wood, and cheered Gerard. When, after an hour's march, the
black outline of the tower itself and other buildings stood out clear to
the eye, their companion halted and said gloomily, "You may as well slay
me out of hand as take me any nearer the gates of Dusseldorf town."

On this being communicated to Denys, he said at once, "Let him go then,
for in sooth his neck will be in jeopardy if he wends much further with
us." Gerard acquiesced as a matter of course. His horror of a criminal
did not in the least dispose him to active co-operation with the law.
But the fact is, that at this epoch no private citizen in any part
of Europe ever meddled with criminals but in self-defence, except,
by-the-by, in England, which, behind other nations in some things, was
centuries before them all in this.

The man's personal liberty being restored, he asked for his axe. It was
given him. To the friends' surprise he still lingered. Was he to have
nothing for coming so far out of his way with them?

"Here are two batzen, friend.

"Add the wine, the good Rhenish?"

"Did you give aught for it?"

"Ay! the peril of my life."

"Hum! what say you, Denys?"

"I say it was worth its weight in gold. Here, lad, here be silver
groshen, one for every acorn on that gallows tree; and here is one more
for thee, who wilt doubtless be there in due season."

The man took the coins, but still lingered.

"Well! what now?" cried Gerard, who thought him shamefully overpaid
already. "Dost seek the hide off our bones?"

"Nay, good sirs, but you have seen to-night how parlous a life is mine.
Ye be true men, and your prayers avail; give me then a small trifle of a
prayer, an't please you; for I know not one."

Gerard's choler began to rise at the egotistical rogue; moreover, ever
since his wound he had felt gusts of irritability. However, he bit his
lip and said, "There go two words to that bargain; tell me first, is it
true what men say of you Rhenish thieves, that ye do murder innocent and
unresisting travellers as well as rob them?"

The other answered sulkily, "They you call thieves are not to blame for
that; the fault lies with the law."

"Gramercy! so 'tis the law's fault that ill men break it?"

"I mean not so; but the law in this land slays an honest man an if he
do but steal. What follows? he would be pitiful, but is discouraged
herefrom; pity gains him no pity, and doubles his peril: an he but cut
a purse his life is forfeit; therefore cutteth he the throat to boot, to
save his own neck: dead men tell no tales. Pray then for the poor soul
who by bloody laws is driven to kill or else be slaughtered; were there
less of this unreasonable gibbeting on the highroad, there should be
less enforced cutting of throats in dark woods, my masters."

"Fewer words had served," replied Gerard coldly. "I asked a question, I
am answered," and suddenly doffing his bonnet--

"'Obsecro Deum omnipotentem, ut, qua cruce jam pendent isti quindecim
latrones fures et homicidae, in ea homicida fur et latro tu pependeris
quam citissime, pro publica salute, in honorem justi Dei cui sit gloria,
in aeternum, Amen.'"

"And so good day."

The greedy outlaw was satisfied last. "That is Latin," he muttered, "and
more than I bargained for." So indeed it was.

And he returned to his business with a mind at ease. The friends
pondered in silence the many events of the last few hours.

At last Gerard said thoughtfully, "That she-bear saved both our lives-by
God's will."

"Like enough," replied Denys; "and talking of that, it was lucky we did
not dawdle over our supper."

"What mean you?"

"I mean they are not all hanged; I saw a refuse of seven or eight as
black as ink around our fire."

"When? when?"

"Ere we had left it five minutes."

"Good heavens! and you said not a word."

"It would but have worried you, and had set our friend a looking back,
and mayhap tempted him to get his skull split. All other danger was
over; they could not see us, we were out of the moonshine, and indeed,
just turning a corner. Ah! there is the sun; and here are the gates of
Dusseldorf. Courage, l'ami, le diable est mort!"

"My head! my head!" was all poor Gerard could reply.

So many shocks, emotions, perils, horrors, added to the wound, his
first, had tried his youthful body and sensitive nature too severely.


It was noon of the same day.

In a bedroom of "The Silver Lion" the rugged Denys sat anxious, watching
his young friend.

And he lay raging with fever, delirious at intervals, and one word for
ever on his lips.

"Margaret!--Margaret Margaret!"



CHAPTER XXVI

It was the afternoon of the next day. Gerard was no longer lightheaded,
but very irritable and full of fancies; and in one of these he begged
Denys to get him a lemon to suck. Denys, who from a rough soldier had
been turned by tender friendship into a kind of grandfather, got up
hastily, and bidding him set his mind at ease, "lemons he should have in
the twinkling of a quart pot," went and ransacked the shops for them.

They were not so common in the North as they are now, and he was absent
a long while, and Gerard getting very impatient, when at last the door
opened. But it was not Denys. Entered softly an imposing figure; an old
gentleman in a long sober gown trimmed with rich fur, cherry-coloured
hose, and pointed shoes, with a sword by his side in a morocco scabbard,
a ruff round his neck not only starched severely, but treacherously
stiffened in furrows by rebatoes, or a little hidden framework of wood;
and on his head a four-cornered cap with a fur border; on his chin and
bosom a majestic white beard. Gerard was in no doubt as to the vocation
of his visitor, for, the sword excepted, this was familiar to him as the
full dress of a physician. Moreover, a boy followed at his heels with
a basket, where phials, lint, and surgical tools rather courted than
shunned observation. The old gentleman came softly to the bedside, and
said mildly and sotto voce, "How is't with thee, my son?"

Gerard answered gratefully that his wound gave him little pain now; but
his throat was parched, and his head heavy.

"A wound! they told me not of that. Let me see it. Ay, ay, a good clean
bite. The mastiff had sound teeth that took this out, I warrant me;"
and the good doctor's sympathy seemed to run off to the quadruped he had
conjured, his jackal.

"This must be cauterized forthwith, or we shall have you starting back
from water, and turning somersaults in bed under our hands. 'Tis the
year for raving curs, and one hath done your business; but we will
baffle him yet. Urchin, go heat thine iron."

"But, sir," edged in Gerard, "'twas no dog, but a bear."

"A bear! Young man," remonstrated the senior severely, "think what you
say; 'tis ill jesting with the man of art who brings his grey hairs and
long study to heal you. A bear, quotha! Had you dissected as many bears
as I, or the tithe, and drawn their teeth to keep your hand in, you
would know that no bear's jaw ever made this foolish trifling wound. I
tell you 'twas a dog, and since you put me to it, I even deny that it
was a dog of magnitude, but neither more nor less than one of these
little furious curs that are so rife, and run devious, biting each manly
leg, and laying its wearer low, but for me and my learned brethren, who
still stay the mischief with knife and cautery."

"Alas, sir! when said I 'twas a bear's jaw? I said, 'A bear:' it was his
paw, now."

"And why didst not tell me that at once?"

"Because you kept telling me instead."

"Never conceal aught from your leech, young man," continued the senior,
who was a good talker, but one of the worst listeners in Europe. "Well,
it is an ill business. All the horny excrescences of animals, to wit,
claws of tigers, panthers, badgers, cats, bears, and the like, and
horn of deer, and nails of humans, especially children, are imbued with
direst poison. Y'had better have been bitten by a cur, whatever you may
say, than gored by bull or stag, or scratched by bear. However, shalt
have a good biting cataplasm for thy leg; meantime keep we the
body cool: put out thy tongue!-good!-fever. Let me feel thy pulse:
good!--fever. I ordain flebotomy, and on the instant."

"Flebotomy! that is bloodletting: humph! Well, no matter, if 'tis sure
to cure me, for I will not lie idle here." The doctor let him know that
flebotomy was infallible, especially in this case.

"Hans, go fetch the things needful, and I will entertain the patient
meantime with reasons."

The man of art then explained to Gerard that in disease the blood
becomes hot and distempered and more or less poisonous; but a portion of
this unhealthy liquid removed, Nature is fain to create a purer fluid to
fill its place. Bleeding, therefore, being both a cooler and a purifier,
was a specific in all diseases, for all diseases were febrile, whatever
empirics might say.

"But think not," said he warmly, "that it suffices to bleed; any paltry
barber can open a vein (though not all can close it again). The art is
to know what vein to empty for what disease. T'other day they brought me
one tormented with earache. I let him blood in the right thigh, and away
flew his earache. By-the-by, he has died since then. Another came with
the toothache. I bled him behind the ear, and relieved him in a jiffy.
He is also since dead as it happens. I bled our bailiff between the
thumb and forefinger for rheumatism. Presently he comes to me with
a headache and drumming in the ears, and holds out his hand over the
basin; but I smiled at his folly, and bled him in the left ankle sore
against his will, and made his head as light as a nut."

Diverging then from the immediate theme after the manner of enthusiasts,
the reverend teacher proceeded thus:

"Know, young man, that two schools of art contend at this moment
throughout Europe. The Arabian, whose ancient oracles are Avicenna,
Rhazes, Albucazis; and its revivers are Chauliac and Lanfranc; and
the Greek school, whose modern champions are Bessarion, Platinus, and
Marsilius Ficinus, but whose pristine doctors were medicine's very
oracles, Phoebus, Chiron, Aesculapius, and his sons Podalinus and
Machaon, Pythagoras, Democritus, Praxagoras, who invented the arteries,
and Dioctes, 'qui primus urinae animum dedit.' All these taught orally.
Then came Hippocrates, the eighteenth from Aesculapius, and of him we
have manuscripts; to him we owe 'the vital principle.' He also invented
the bandage, and tapped for water on the chest; and above all he
dissected; yet only quadrupeds, for the brutal prejudices of the pagan
vulgar withheld the human body from the knife of science. Him followed
Aristotle, who gave us the aorta, the largest blood-vessel in the human
body."

"Surely, sir, the Almighty gave us all that is in our bodies, and not
Aristotle, nor any Grecian man," objected Gerard humbly.

"Child! of course He gave us the thing; but Aristotle did more, he gave
us the name of the thing. But young men will still be talking. The
next great light was Galen; he studied at Alexandria, then the home
of science. He, justly malcontent with quadrupeds, dissected apes, as
coming nearer to man, and bled like a Trojan. Then came Theophilus, who
gave us the nerves, the lacteal vessels, and the pia mater."

This worried Gerard. "I cannot lie still and hear it said that mortal
man bestowed the parts which Adam our father took from Him, who made him
of the clay, and us his sons."

"Was ever such perversity?" said the doctor, his colour rising. "Who is
the real donor of a thing to man? he who plants it secretly in the
dark recesses of man's body, or the learned wight who reveals it to
his intelligence, and so enriches his mind with the knowledge of it?
Comprehension is your only true possession. Are you answered?"

"I am put to silence, sir."

"And that is better still; for garrulous patients are ill to cure,
especially in fever; I say, then, that Eristratus gave us the cerebral
nerves and the milk vessels; nay, more, he was the inventor of
lithotomy, whatever you may say. Then came another whom I forget; you do
somewhat perturb me with your petty exceptions. Then came Ammonius, the
author of lithotrity, and here comes Hans with the basin-to stay your
volubility. Blow thy chafer, boy, and hand me the basin; 'tis well.
Arabians, quotha! What are they but a sect of yesterday who about the
year 1000 did fall in with the writings of those very Greeks, and read
them awry, having no concurrent light of their own? for their demigod,
and camel-driver, Mahound, impostor in science as in religion, had
strictly forbidden them anatomy, even of the lower animals, the which he
who severeth from medicine, 'tollit solem e mundo,' as Tully quoth. Nay,
wonder not at my fervour, good youth; where the general weal stands in
jeopardy, a little warmth is civic, humane, and honourable. Now there is
settled of late in this town a pestilent Arabist, a mere empiric,
who, despising anatomy, and scarce knowing Greek from Hebrew, hath yet
spirited away half my patients; and I tremble for the rest. Put forth
thine ankle; and thou, Hans, breathe on the chafer."

Whilst matters were in this posture, in came Denys with the lemons, and
stood surprised. "What sport is toward?" said he, raising his brows.

Gerard coloured a little, and told him the learned doctor was going to
flebotomize him and cauterize him; that was all.

"Ay! indeed; and yon imp, what bloweth he hot coals for?"

"What should it be for," said the doctor to Gerard, "but to cauterize
the vein when opened and the poisonous blood let free? 'Tis the only
safe way. Avicenna indeed recommends a ligature of the vein; but how
'tis to be done he saith not, nor knew he himself I wot, nor any of the
spawn of Ishmael. For me, I have no faith in such tricksy expedients;
and take this with you for a safe principle: 'Whatever an Arab or
Arabist says is right, must be wrong.'"

"Oh, I see now what 'tis for," said Denys; "and art thou so simple as
to let him put hot iron to thy living flesh? didst ever keep thy little
finger but ten moments in a candle? and this will be as many minutes.
Art not content to burn in purgatory after thy death? must thou needs
buy a foretaste on't here?"

"I never thought of that," said Gerard gravely; "the good doctor spake
not of burning, but of cautery; to be sure 'tis all one, but cautery
sounds not so fearful as burning."

"Imbecile! That is their art; to confound a plain man with dark words,
till his hissing flesh lets him know their meaning. Now listen to what
I have seen. When a soldier bleeds from a wound in battle, these leeches
say, 'Fever. Blood him!' and so they burn the wick at t'other end too.
They bleed the bled. Now at fever's heels comes desperate weakness; then
the man needs all his blood to live; but these prickers and burners,
having no forethought, recking nought of what is sure to come in a few
hours, and seeing like brute beasts only what is under their noses,
having meantime robbed him of the very blood his hurt had spared him to
battle that weakness withal; and so he dies exhausted. Hundreds have I
seen so scratched and pricked out of the world, Gerard, and tall fellows
too; but lo! if they have the luck to be wounded where no doctor can
be had, then they live; this too have I seen. Had I ever outlived that
field in Brabant but for my most lucky mischance, lack of chirurgery?
The frost chocked all my bleeding wounds, and so I lived. A chirurgeon
had pricked yet one more hole in this my body with his lance, and
drained my last drop out, and my spirit with it. Seeing them thus
distraught in bleeding of the bleeding soldier, I place no trust in
them; for what slays a veteran may well lay a milk-and-water bourgeois
low."

"This sounds like common sense," sighed Gerard languidly, "but no
need to raise your voice so; I was not born deaf, and just now I hear
acutely."

"Common sense! very common sense indeed," shouted the bad listener;
"why, this is a soldier; a brute whose business is to kill men, not cure
them." He added in very tolerable French, "Woe be to you, unlearned
man, if you come between a physician and his patient; and woe be to you,
misguided youth, if you listen to that man of blood."

"Much obliged," said Denys, with mock politeness; "but I am a true man,
and would rob no man of his name. I do somewhat in the way of blood, but
not worth mention in this presence. For one I slay, you slay a score;
and for one spoonful of blood I draw, you spill a tubful. The world is
still gulled by shows. We soldiers vapour with long swords, and even in
war be-get two foes for every one we kill; but you smooth gownsmen, with
soft phrases and bare bodkins, 'tis you that thin mankind."

"A sick chamber is no place for jesting," cried the physician.

"No, doctor, nor for bawling," said the patient peevishly.

"Come, young man," said the senior kindly, "be reasonable. Cuilibet
in sua arte credendum est. My whole life has been given to this art. I
studied at Montpelier; the first school in France, and by consequence in
Europe. There learned I Dririmancy, Scatomancy, Pathology, Therapeusis,
and, greater than them all, Anatomy. For there we disciples of
Hippocrates and Galen had opportunities those great ancients never knew.
Goodbye, quadrupeds and apes, and paganism, and Mohammedanism; we bought
of the churchwardens, we shook the gallows; we undid the sexton's work
of dark nights, penetrated with love of science and our kind; all the
authorities had their orders from Paris to wink; and they winked. Gods
of Olympus, how they winked! The gracious king assisted us: he sent us
twice a year a living criminal condemned to die, and said, 'Deal ye with
him as science asks; dissect him alive, if ye think fit.'"

"By the liver of Herod, and Nero's bowels, he'll make me blush for the
land that bore me, an' if he praises it any more," shouted Denys at the
top of his voice.

Gerard gave a little squawk, and put his fingers in his ears; but
speedily drew them out and shouted angrily, and as loudly, "you great
roaring, blaspheming bull of Basan, hold your noisy tongue!"

Denys summoned a contrite look.

"Tush, slight man," said the doctor, with calm contempt, and vibrated
a hand over him as in this age men make a pointer dog down charge; then
flowed majestic on. "We seldom or never dissected the living criminal,
except in part. We mostly inoculated them with such diseases as the
barren time afforded, selecting of course the more interesting ones."

"That means the foulest," whispered Denys meekly.

"These we watched through all their stages to maturity."

"Meaning the death of the poor rogue," whispered Denys meekly.

"And now, my poor sufferer, who best merits your confidence, this
honest soldier with his youth, his ignorance, and his prejudices, or a
greybeard laden with the gathered wisdom of ages?"

"That is," cried Denys impatiently, "will you believe what a jackdaw in
a long gown has heard from a starling in a long gown, who heard it from
a jay-pie, who heard it from a magpie, who heard it from a popinjay; or
will you believe what I, a man with nought to gain by looking awry, nor
speaking false, have seen; nor heard with the ears which are given us
to gull us, but seen with these sentinels mine eye, seen, seen; to wit,
that fevered and blooded men die, that fevered men not blooded live?
stay, who sent for this sang-sue? Did you?"

"Not I. I thought you had."

"Nay," explained the doctor, "the good landlord told me one was 'down'
in his house; so I said to myself, 'A stranger, and in need of my art,'
and came incontinently."

"It was the act of a good Christian, sir."

"Of a good bloodhound," cried Denys contemptuously. "What, art thou so
green as not to know that all these landlords are in league with certain
of their fellow-citizens, who pay them toll on each booty? Whatever
you pay this ancient for stealing your life blood, of that the landlord
takes his third for betraying you to him. Nay, more, as soon as ever
your blood goes down the stair in that basin there, the landlord will
see it or smell it, and send swiftly to his undertaker and get his third
out of that job. For if he waited till the doctor got downstairs, the
doctor would be beforehand and bespeak his undertaker, and then he would
get the black thirds. Say I sooth, old Rouge et Noir? dites!"

"Denys, Denys, who taught you to think so ill of man?"

"Mine eyes, that are not to be gulled by what men say, seeing this many
a year what they do, in all the lands I travel."

The doctor with some address made use of these last words to escape
the personal question. "I too have eyes as well as thou, and go not by
tradition only, but by what I have seen, and not only seen, but done.
I have healed as many men by bleeding as that interloping Arabist has
killed for want of it. 'Twas but t'other day I healed one threatened
with leprosy; I but bled him at the tip of the nose. I cured last year
a quartan ague: how? bled its forefinger. Our cure lost his memory. I
brought it him back on the point of my lance; I bled him behind the
ear. I bled a dolt of a boy, and now he is the only one who can tell his
right hand from his left in a whole family of idiots. When the plague
was here years ago, no sham plague, such as empyrics proclaim every six
years or so, but the good honest Byzantine pest, I blooded an alderman
freely, and cauterized the symptomatic buboes, and so pulled him out
of the grave; whereas our then chirurgeon, a most pernicious Arabist,
caught it himself, and died of it, aha, calling on Rhazes, Avicenna,
and Mahound, who, could they have come, had all perished as miserably as
himself."

"Oh, my poor ears," sighed Gerard.

"And am I fallen so low that one of your presence and speech rejects my
art and listens to a rude soldier, so far behind even his own miserable
trade as to bear an arbalest, a worn-out invention, that German
children shoot at pigeons with, but German soldiers mock at since ever
arquebusses came and put them down?"

"You foul-mouthed old charlatan," cried Denys, "the arbalest is
shouldered by taller men than ever stood in Rhenish hose, and even now
it kills as many more than your noisy, stinking arquebus, as the lancet
does than all our toys together. Go to! He was no fool who first called
you 'leeches.' Sang-sues! va!"

Gerard groaned. "By the holy virgin, I wish you were both at Jericho,
bellowing.'

"Thank you comrade. Then I'll bark no more, but at need I'll bite. If
he has a lance, I have a sword; if he bleeds you, I'll bleed him. The
moment his lance pricks your skin, little one, my sword-hilt knocks
against his ribs; I have said it."

And Denys turned pale, folded his arms, and looked gloomy and dangerous.

Gerard sighed wearily. "Now, as all this is about me, give me leave to
say a word."

"Ay! let the young man choose life or death for himself."

Gerard then indirectly rebuked his noisy counsellors by contrast and
example. He spoke with unparalleled calmness, sweetness, and gentleness.
And these were the words of Gerard the son of Eli. "I doubt not you both
mean me well; but you assassinate me between you. Calmness and quiet are
everything to me; but you are like two dogs growling over a bone. And
in sooth, bone I should be, did this uproar last long."

There was a dead silence, broken only by the silvery voice of Gerard,
as he lay tranquil, and gazed calmly at the ceiling, and trickled into
words.

"First, venerable sir, I thank you for coming to see me, whether from
humanity, or in the way of honest gain; all trades must live.

"Your learning, reverend sir, seems great, to me at least, and for your
experience, your age voucheth it.

"You say you have bled many, and of these many, many have not died
thereafter, but lived, and done well. I must needs believe you."

The physician bowed; Denys grunted.

"Others, you say, you have bled, and-they are dead. I must needs believe
you.

"Denys knows few things compared with you, but he knows them well. He is
a man not given to conjecture. This I myself have noted. He says he has
seen the fevered and blooded for the most part die; the fevered and not
blooded live. I must needs believe him.

"Here, then, all is doubt.

"But thus much is certain; if I be bled, I must pay you a fee, and be
burnt and excruciated with a hot iron, who am no felon.

"Pay a certain price in money and anguish for a doubtful remedy, that
will I never.

"Next to money and ease, peace and quiet are certain goods, above all in
a sick-room; but 'twould seem men cannot argue medicine without heat and
raised voices; therefore, sir, I will essay a little sleep, and Denys
will go forth and gaze on the females of the place, and I will keep
you no longer from those who can afford to lay out blood and money in
flebotomy and cautery."

The old physician had naturally a hot temper; he had often during this
battle of words mastered it with difficulty, and now it mastered him.
The most dignified course was silence; he saw this, and drew himself up,
and made loftily for the door, followed close by his little boy and big
basket.

But at the door he choked, he swelled, he burst. He whirled and came
back open-mouthed, and the little boy and big basket had to
whisk semicircularly not to be run down, for de minimis non curat
Medicina-even when not in a rage.

"Ah! you reject my skill, you scorn my art. My revenge shall be to leave
you to yourself; lost idiot, take your last look at me, and at the sun.
Your blood be on your head!" And away he stamped.

But on reaching the door he whirled and came back; his wicker tail
twirling round after him like a cat's.

"In twelve hours at furthest you will be in the secondary stage of
fever. Your head will split. Your carotids will thump. Aha! And let but
a pin fall, you will jump to the ceiling. Then send for me; and I'll not
come." He departed. But at the door-handle gathered fury, wheeled and
came flying, with pale, terror-stricken boy and wicker tail whisking
after him. "Next will come--CRAMPS of the STOMACH. Aha!

"Then--BILIOUS VOMIT. Aha!

"Then--COLD SWEAT, and DEADLY STUPOR.

"Then--CONFUSION OF ALL THE SENSES.

"Then--BLOODY VOMIT.

"And after that nothing can save you, not even I; and if I could I would
not, and so farewell!"

Even Denys changed colour at threats so fervent and precise; but Gerard
only gnashed his teeth with rage at the noise, and seized his hard
bolster with kindling eye.

This added fuel to the fire, and brought the insulted ancient back from
the impassable door, with his whisking train.

"And after that--MADNESS!

"And after that--BLACK VOMIT

"And then--CONVULSIONS!

"And then--THAT CESSATION OF ALL VITAL FUNCTIONS THE VULGAR CALL
'DEATH,' for which thank your own Satanic folly and insolence.
Farewell." He went. He came. He roared, "And think not to be buried in
any Christian church-yard; for the bailiff is my good friend, and I
shall tell him how and why you died: felo de se! felo de se! Farewell."

Gerard sprang to his feet on the bed by some supernatural gymnastic
power excitement lent him, and seeing him so moved, the vindictive
orator came back at him fiercer than ever, to launch some master-threat
the world has unhappily lost; for as he came with his whisking train,
and shaking his fist, Gerard hurled the bolster furiously in his face
and knocked him down like a shot, the boy's head cracked under his
falling master's, and crash went the dumb-stricken orator into the
basket, and there sat wedged in an inverted angle, crushing phial
after phial. The boy, being light, was strewed afar, but in a squatting
posture; so that they sat in a sequence, like graduated specimens, the
smaller howling. But soon the doctor's face filled with horror, and he
uttered a far louder and unearthly screech, and kicked and struggled
with wonderful agility for one of his age.

He was sitting on the hot coals.

They had singed the cloth and were now biting the man. Struggling wildly
but vainly to get out of the basket, he rolled yelling over with it
sideways, and lo! a great hissing; then the humane Gerard ran and
wrenched off the tight basket not without a struggle. The doctor lay on
his face groaning, handsomely singed with his own chafer, and slaked a
moment too late by his own villainous compounds, which, however, being
as various and even beautiful in colour as they were odious in taste,
had strangely diversified his grey robe, and painted it more gaudy than
neat.

Gerard and Denys raised him up and consoled him. "Courage, man, 'tis
but cautery; balm of Gilead, why, you recommend it but now to my comrade
here."

The physician replied only by a look of concentrated spite, and went out
in dead silence, thrusting his stomach forth before him in the drollest
way. The boy followed him next moment but in that slight interval he
left off whining, burst into a grin, and conveyed to the culprits by an
unrefined gesture his accurate comprehension of, and rapturous though
compressed joy at, his master's disaster.



CHAPTER XXVII

THE worthy physician went home and told his housekeeper he was in agony
from "a bad burn." Those were the words. For in phlogistic as in other
things, we cauterize our neighbour's digits, but burn our own fingers.
His housekeeper applied some old women's remedy mild as milk. He
submitted like a lamb to her experience: his sole object in the case
of this patient being cure: meantime he made out his bill for broken
phials, and took measures to have the travellers imprisoned at once. He
made oath before a magistrate that they, being strangers and indebted to
him, meditated instant flight from the township.

Alas! it was his unlucky day. His sincere desire and honest endeavour to
perjure himself were baffled by a circumstance he had never foreseen nor
indeed thought possible.

He had spoken the truth.

And IN AN AFFIDAVIT!

The officers, on reaching "The Silver Lion", found the birds were flown.
