more to think of than the sickness that comes of heaving planks
that will by no means keep steady for a moment."

He laughed heartily at himself, and then added:

"Good King Alfred thought not at all of that matter. Now I can
shift the whole credit of this victory to your shoulders, and then
he will not believe that I am the born sea captain that he would
have me think myself."

"I will not have that," I said, "for I have not deserved it."

"Ay; but, I pray you, let me put it from myself, else shall I be
sent to sea again without any one to look to for advice," he said
earnestly, and half laughing at the same time. "I did but take
command of this fleet because the king could find no one else at a
pinch. Heaven defend me from such a charge again!"

"Now you have only the Exeter Danes to deal with," I said.

"How many men might these ships have held?" he asked.

"Maybe five thousand," I answered.

Thereat his face changed, and he rose up from his seat at the high
table, and said that he would go down to see that the ships were
safe, for the gale was blowing heavily as the night fell.

So we went outside the house, and called a man, telling him to find
one of the Poole fishermen and bring him to speak to us.

"There were twelve thousand Danes in Wareham," he said, "for more
have come lately. I thought they would all have been in the ships."

"If that had been possible, not one would have seen the morning's
light," I answered, "for their ships are lost in this gale
certainly."

Now I will say that I was right. The wrecks strewed the shore of
Dorset and Hants next morning; and if any men won to land, there
waited for them the fishers and churls, who hated them. No Danish
fleet was left in the channel after that gale was spent.

When the fisher came, he told us that as many more Danes were left
in Wareham, and that those from Poole had fled thither when they
saw what had happened to the fleet.

"Shall you march on Wareham and scatter them, or will they fall on
us here?" I asked; for we had no more than two thousand men at
most.

"I would that I knew what they thought of this business," he
answered; "but I shall not move tonight. It is far by land, and I
suppose we could not get the ships up in the dark."

So he posted pickets along the road to Wareham, and we went back to
the house for a while. And presently, as it grew dark, a wild
thought came into my mind. I would go to Wareham with a guide, and
see what I could find out of the Danish plans. Maybe there were
fewer men than was thought, or they might be panic-stricken at our
coming in this wise; or, again, they might march on us, and if so,
we should have to get to sea again, to escape from double our
numbers.

Now the more I thought of this, the more I grew bent on going, for
I was sure that we must know what was going on. And at last I took
Odda aside while Harek sang among the men, and told him what I
would do.

At first he was against my running the risk; but I told him that a
Norseman might go safely where a Saxon could not among the Danes,
and at last I persuaded him. Then I called Kolgrim, and we went out
together into the moonlight and the wind, to find the fisherman we
had spoken with already and get him to act as guide. I think that
Odda did not expect to see either of us again; and when I came to
know more of Saxons, I learned that he trusted me most fully, for
many thanes would have thought it likely that I went on some
treacherous errand.



Chapter IV. Jarl Osmund's Daughter.


To my mind, no gale seems so wild as one that comes at the time of
full moon, when the clouds break up and fly in great masses of
black and silver against the deeper sky beyond, while bright light
and deepest shadow chase each other across land and sea beneath
them. Kolgrim and I stood under the lee of a shed, waiting for the
fisher to get his boat afloat, and looked out on bending trees and
whitened water, while beyond the harbour we could see the great
downs, clear cut and dark, almost as well as by day, so bright it
was.

It was low water now, which was good for us, for the winding
channels that lead up to Wareham were sheltered under their bare
banks. We could hear the thunder of the surf along the rocky coast
outside, when the wind ceased its howling for a moment; and at high
water the haven had been well nigh too stormy for a small boat. Now
we should do best to go by water, for wind was with us; though,
unless the gale dropped very quickly, we could not return in her,
for there would be a heavy sea and tide against us if we could get
away before it turned, while if we were long wind against tide
would be worse yet.

The fisherman was eager to help us against the Danes, who had made
him work for nought; and so in half an hour we were flying up the
haven on the first rise of tide, and the lights of Wareham town
grew plainer every moment. From the number of twinkling sparks that
flitted here and there, it would seem that many folk were waking,
even if some movement were not on hand.

Presently we turned into the channel that bends to the southwest
from the more open water, and the town was before us. The fisher
took to his oars now, lowering the scrap of sail that had been
enough to drive us very swiftly before the gale so far.

Wareham stands on the tongue of land between two rivers' mouths,
and the tide was setting us into the northward of these. That was
the river one would have to cross in coming to or from Poole, and
maybe we should learn as much there as anywhere.

There were three ships on the mud, but even in the moonlight it was
plain that they were not seaworthy. There were wide gaps in their
bulwarks, which none had tried to mend, and the stem head of one
was gone.

"These ships were hurt in the storm of lest week," the fisher said,
as we drifted past them; "there was hardly one that came in unhurt.
But the Danes were eager to go, and mended them as they could."

Perhaps that was partly the reason why we gained so easy a victory,
I thought at the time, and afterwards knew that I was right. They
had suffered very much, while we lay across channel in safety.

There loomed before us the timbers of a strong bridge that had been
over the north river, when we were fairly in it and under the
nearer houses of the town. But now it was broken down, and the gap
in its middle was too wide for hasty repair.

"When was this done?" I asked the fisherman.

"Since yesterday," he answered.

Now this seemed to me to indicate that the Danes meant to guard
against attack by land from Poole; also that they overrated our
numbers, which was probable in any case, seeing that a fleet had
fled from before us.

There were wharves on the seaward side of the bridge, but none were
beyond; and the houses stood back from the water, so that there was
a sort of open green between it and them. There were no people
about, but we could hear shouts from the town now and then.

"Let us go ashore and speak with some one," I said; "it is of no
use our biding here on the water."

Kolgrim and I were fully armed, and had boat cloaks with us which
covered us well, and we thought none would question who we were if
we mixed among the men in some inn or other gathering place. So we
bade the fisher wait for us, and found the stairs, and went to the
wide green along the waterside, and across it to the houses, which
were mostly poor enough here.

Many of them stood open, and in one a fire burned on the hearth,
but all were empty. So we turned into a street that led seemingly
from one bridge to the other across the town. Here men were going
hither and thither with torches, and groups were outside some of
the houses. To the nearest of these I went, as if I had all right
to be in the place.

They were bringing goods out of the house, and loading a cart with
them.

"Here is a flitting," said Kolgrim, "and another or two are on hand
yonder."

I stayed a man who came past me from out of a house.

"I have fled from Poole," I said. "What is in the wind here? Are we
to leave Wareham also?"

"If you come from Poole, you should know that it is time we did
so," he answered shortly. "I suppose you saw the whole business."

"So I did," I answered. "What are the orders?"

"Pack up and quit with all haste," said he. "You had better get to
work if you have aught to save."

"Shall we go to Exeter, or back to Mercia?" I said.

"Exeter they say; but I know not. Why not go and ask Jarl Osmund
himself--or follow the crowd and hinder no one with questions?"

He hurried on; but then some men began to question us about the
doings off Swanage, and Kolgrim told them such tales that they
shivered, and soon we had a crowd round us listening. Nor did I
like to hurry away, for I heard a man say that we were Northmen, by
our voices. But there were plenty of our folk among the Danes.

Then came a patrol of horsemen down the street, and they bade the
loiterers hurry. I drew Kolgrim into an open doorway, and stood
there till they passed, hearing them rate their fellows for delay.

"Wareham will be empty tomorrow," I said. "Now we can go; we have
learned enough."

Still I would see more, for there seemed no danger. Every man was
thinking of himself. So we went across the town, and as we came
near the western bridge the crowd grew very thick.

We heard before long that the army was as great as Odda had
thought, and that they were going to Exeter. Already the advance
guard had gone forward, but this train of followers would hardly
get clear of the town before daylight. They had heard great
accounts of our numbers, and I wished we had brought the ships up
here at once. There would have been a rout of the Danes.

But the place was strange to me, and to Odda also, so that we could
not be blamed.

We got back by the way we came, and then knew that we could in no
way take the boat to Poole. The gale was raging at its highest, and
thatch was flying from the exposed roofs. It would be dead against
us; and the sea was white with foam, even in the haven. So we must
go by road, and that was a long way. But we must get back to Odda,
for he should be in Wareham before the Danes learned, maybe, that
their flight was too hurried.

Now it seemed to me that to leave Wareham was not so safe as to
come into it, for no Dane would be going away from the place.
However, the bridge was down; and if it had not been done in too
great haste, any fugitives from the country would have come in. So
that maybe we should meet no one on the road that goes along the
shore of the great haven.

The fisherman ferried us over to the opposite shore, and then tied
his boat to the staging of the landing place, saying that he was
well known and in no danger. He would sleep now, and bring his boat
back when the wind fell. So we left him, thanking him for his
goodwill.

Grumbling, as men will, we set out on our long walk in the gale. We
could not miss the road, for it never left the curves of the shore,
and all we had to do was to be heedful of any meetings. There might
be outposts even yet, watching against surprise.

However, we saw no man in the first mile, and then were feeling
more secure, when we came to a large farmstead which stood a short
bowshot back from the road, with a lane of its own leading to the
great door. What buildings there were seemed to be behind it, and
no man was about; but there was light shining from one of the high
windows, as if some one were inside, and plain to be seen in the
moonlight were two horses tied by the stone mounting block at the
doorway.

"Here is a chance for us, master," said my comrade, coming to a
stand in the roadway. "I must try to steal these horses for
ourselves. If Danes are in the place, they have doubtless stolen
them; and if Saxons, they will get them back."

"There will be no Saxon dwelling so near the Danes," I said. "Maybe
the place is full of Danes--some outpost that is careless."

"Careless enough," said Kolgrim. "If they are careless for three
minutes more, they have lost their horses."

Then we loosened our swords in their sheaths, and drew our seaxes,
and went swiftly up the grassy lane. The wind howled round the
house so that none would hear the clank of mail, which we could not
altogether prevent. But the horses heard us, and one shifted about
and whinnied as if glad to welcome us.

At that we ran and each took the bridle of that next him, and cut
the halter that was tied to the rings in the wall, looking to see
the doors thrown open at any moment. Then we leaped to the saddles
and turned to go. The hoofs made a great noise on the paving stones
before the doorway, yet there was no sound from inside the house.

That seemed strange to me, and I sat still, looking back with the
horse's head turned towards the main road.

"Stay not, master," Kolgrim said. "'Tis some outpost, and the men
have slept over the farmhouse ale. Maybe the stables behind are
full of horses. Have a care, master; the door opens!"

He was going; but I waited for a moment, half expecting to see a
spear point come first, and my hand was on my sword hilt. But the
great heavy door swung slowly, as if the one who opened it had
trouble with its weight. So I must needs see who came. Maybe it was
some old man or woman whose terror I could quiet in a few words.

Then the red firelight from within shone out on me, and in the
doorway, with arms raised to post and door on either hand, stood a
tall maiden, white robed, with gold on neck and arm. The moonlight
on her seemed weird with the glow of the fire shining through the
edges of her hood and sleeves. I could see her face plainly, and it
was fair and troubled, but there was no fear in her looks.

"Father, is this you?" she said quietly.

I could make no answer to that, and she looked intently at me; for
the moon was beyond me, and both Kolgrim and I would seem black
against it, as she came from the light within, while the wind, keen
with salt spray, was blowing in her face.

"Who is it?" she said again. "I can scarcely see for moon and wind
in my eyes."

"Friends, lady," I said, for that at least was true in a way.

"Where are my horses? Have you seen aught of our thralls, who
should have left them?" she asked, looking to whence we had just
taken the beasts.
