landlord, in the gentle semi-roar of an insulted tiger; 'my wine is good
enough for a carcass which shall so soon soak the dust of the
spoliarium.'

'Croakest thou thus, old raven!' returned the gladiator, laughing
scornfully; 'thou shalt live to hang thyself with despite when thou
seest me win the palm crown; and when I get the purse at the
amphitheatre, as I certainly shall, my first vow to Hercules shall be to
forswear thee and thy vile potations evermore.'

'Hear to him--hear to this modest Pyrgopolinices!  He has certainly
served under Bombochides Cluninstaridysarchides,' cried the host.
'Sporus, Niger, Tetraides, he declares he shall win the purse from you.
Why, by the gods! each of your muscles is strong enough to stifle all
his body, or I know nothing of the arena!'

'Ha!' said the gladiator, coloring with rising fury, 'our lanista would
tell a different story.'

'What story could he tell against me, vain Lydon?' said Tetraides,
frowning.

'Or me, who have conquered in fifteen fights?' said the gigantic Niger,
stalking up to the gladiator.

'Or me?' grunted Sporus, with eyes of fire.

'Tush!' said Lydon, folding his arms, and regarding his rivals with a
reckless air of defiance.  'The time of trial will soon come; keep your
valor till then.'

'Ay, do,' said the surly host; 'and if I press down my thumb to save
you, may the Fates cut my thread!'

'Your rope, you mean,' said Lydon, sneeringly: 'here is a sesterce to
buy one.'

The Titan wine-vender seized the hand extended to him, and griped it in
so stern a vice that the blood spirted from the fingers' ends over the
garments of the bystanders.

They set up a savage laugh.

'I will teach thee, young braggart, to play the Macedonian with me!  I
am no puny Persian, I warrant thee!  What, man!  have I not fought
twenty years in the ring, and never lowered my arms once?  And have I
not received the rod from the editor's own hand as a sign of victory,
and as a grace to retirement on my laurels?  And am I now to be lectured
by a boy?' So saying, he flung the hand from him in scorn.

Without changing a muscle, but with the same smiling face with which he
had previously taunted mine host, did the gladiator brave the painful
grasp he had undergone.  But no sooner was his hand released, than,
crouching for one moment as a wild cat crouches, you might see his hair
bristle on his head and beard, and with a fierce and shrill yell he
sprang on the throat of the giant, with an impetus that threw him, vast
and sturdy as he was, from his balance--and down, with the crash of a
falling rock, he fell--while over him fell also his ferocious foe.

Our host, perhaps, had had no need of the rope so kindly recommended to
him by Lydon, had he remained three minutes longer in that position.
But, summoned to his assistance by the noise of his fall, a woman, who
had hitherto kept in an inner apartment, rushed to the scene of battle.
This new ally was in herself a match for the gladiator; she was tall,
lean, and with arms that could give other than soft embraces.  In fact,
the gentle helpmate of Burbo the wine-seller had, like himself, fought
in the lists--nay under the emperor's eye.  And Burbo himself--Burbo,
the unconquered in the field, according to report, now and then yielded
the palm to his soft Stratonice.  This sweet creature no sooner saw the
imminent peril that awaited her worse half, than without other weapons
than those with which Nature had provided her, she darted upon the
incumbent gladiator, and, clasping him round the waist with her long and
snakelike arms, lifted him by a sudden wrench from the body of her
husband, leaving only his hands still clinging to the throat of his foe.
So have we seen a dog snatched by the hind legs from the strife with a
fallen rival in the arms of some envious groom; so have we seen one half
of him high in air--passive and offenceless--while the other half, head,
teeth, eyes, claws, seemed buried and engulfed in the mangled and
prostrate enemy.  Meanwhile, the gladiators, lapped, and pampered, and
glutted upon blood, crowded delightedly round the combatants--their
nostrils distended--their lips grinning--their eyes gloatingly fixed on
the bloody throat of the one and the indented talons of the other.

'Habet! (he has got it!) habet!' cried they, with a sort of yell,
rubbing their nervous hands.

'Non habeo, ye liars; I have not got it!' shouted the host, as with a
mighty effort he wrenched himself from those deadly hands, and rose to
his feet, breathless, panting, lacerated, bloody; and fronting, with
reeling eyes, the glaring look and grinning teeth of his baffled foe,
now struggling (but struggling with disdain) in the gripe of the sturdy
amazon.

'Fair play!' cried the gladiators: 'one to one'; and, crowding round
Lydon and the woman, they separated our pleasing host from his courteous
guest.

But Lydon, feeling ashamed at his present position, and endeavoring in
vain to shake off the grasp of the virago, slipped his hand into his
girdle, and drew forth a short knife.  So menacing was his look, so
brightly gleamed the blade, that Stratonice, who was used only to that
fashion of battle which we moderns call the pugilistic, started back in
alarm.

'O gods!' cried she, 'the ruffian!--he has concealed weapons!  Is that
fair? Is that like a gentleman and a gladiator?  No, indeed, I scorn
such fellows.' With that she contemptuously turned her back on the
gladiator, and hastened to examine the condition of her husband.

But he, as much inured to the constitutional exercises as an English
bull-dog is to a contest with a more gentle antagonist, had already
recovered himself.  The purple hues receded from the crimson surface of
his cheek, the veins of the forehead retired into their wonted size.  He
shook himself with a complacent grunt, satisfied that he was still
alive, and then looking at his foe from head to foot with an air of more
approbation than he had ever bestowed upon him before:

'By Castor!' said he, 'thou art a stronger fellow than I took thee for!
I see thou art a man of merit and virtue; give me thy hand, my hero!'

'Jolly old Burbo!' cried the gladiators, applauding, 'staunch to the
backbone.  Give him thy hand, Lydon.'

'Oh, to be sure,' said the gladiator: 'but now I have tasted his blood,
I long to lap the whole.'

'By Hercules!' returned the host, quite unmoved, 'that is the true
gladiator feeling.  Pollux! to think what good training may make a man;
why, a beast could not be fiercer!'

'A beast!  O dullard! we beat the beasts hollow!' cried Tetraides.

'Well, well said Stratonice, who was now employed in smoothing her hair
and adjusting her dress, 'if ye are all good friends again, I recommend
you to be quiet and orderly; for some young noblemen, your patrons and
backers, have sent to say they will come here to pay you a visit: they
wish to see you more at their ease than at the schools, before they make
up their bets on the great fight at the amphitheatre. So they always
come to my house for that purpose: they know we only receive the best
gladiators in Pompeii--our society is very select--praised be the gods!'

'Yes,' continued Burbo, drinking off a bowl, or rather a pail of wine,
'a man who has won my laurels can only encourage the brave. Lydon,
drink, my boy; may you have an honorable old age like mine!'

'Come here,' said Stratonice, drawing her husband to her affectionately
by the ears, in that caress which Tibullus has so prettily
described--'Come here!'

'Not so hard, she-wolf! thou art worse than the gladiator,' murmured the
huge jaws of Burbo.

'Hist!' said she, whispering him; 'Calenus has just stole in, disguised,
by the back way.  I hope he has brought the sesterces.'

'Ho! ho! I will join him, said Burbo; 'meanwhile, I say, keep a sharp
eye on the cups--attend to the score.  Let them not cheat thee, wife;
they are heroes, to be sure, but then they are arrant rogues: Cacus was
nothing to them.'

'Never fear me, fool!' was the conjugal reply; and Burbo, satisfied with
the dear assurance, strode through the apartment, and sought the
penetralia of his house.

'So those soft patrons are coming to look at our muscles,' said Niger.
'Who sent to previse thee of it, my mistress?'

'Lepidus.  He brings with him Clodius, the surest better in Pompeii, and
the young Greek, Glaucus.'

'A wager on a wager,' cried Tetraides; 'Clodius bets on me, for twenty
sesterces!  What say you, Lydon?'

'He bets on me!' said Lydon.

'No, on me!' grunted Sporus.

'Dolts! do you think he would prefer any of you to Niger?' said the
athletic, thus modestly naming himself.

'Well, well,' said Stratonice, as she pierced a huge amphora for her
guests, who had now seated themselves before one of the tables, 'great
men and brave, as ye all think yourselves, which of you will fight the
Numidian lion in case no malefactor should be found to deprive you of
the option?'

'I who have escaped your arms, stout Stratonice,' said Lydon, 'might
safely, I think, encounter the lion.'

'But tell me,' said Tetraides, 'where is that pretty young slave of
yours--the blind girl, with bright eyes?  I have not seen her a long
time.'

'Oh! she is too delicate for you, my son of Neptune,' said the hostess,
'and too nice even for us, I think.  We send her into the town to sell
flowers and sing to the ladies: she makes us more money so than she
would by waiting on you.  Besides, she has often other employments which
lie under the rose.'

'Other employments!' said Niger; 'why, she is too young for them.'

'Silence, beast!' said Stratonice; 'you think there is no play but the
Corinthian.  If Nydia were twice the age she is at present, she would be
equally fit for Vesta--poor girl!'

'But, hark ye, Stratonice,' said Lydon; 'how didst thou come by so
gentle and delicate a slave?  She were more meet for the handmaid of
some rich matron of Rome than for thee.'

'That is true,' returned Stratonice; 'and some day or other I shall make
my fortune by selling her.  How came I by Nydia, thou askest.'

'Ay!'

'Why, thou seest, my slave Staphyla--thou rememberest Staphyla, Niger?'

'Ay, a large-handed wench, with a face like a comic mask.  How should I
forget her, by Pluto, whose handmaid she doubtless is at this moment!'

'Tush, brute!--Well, Staphyla died one day, and a great loss she was to
me, and I went into the market to buy me another slave.  But, by the
gods! they were all grown so dear since I had bought poor Staphyla, and
money was so scarce, that I was about to leave the place in despair,
when a merchant plucked me by the robe.  "Mistress," said he, "dost thou
want a slave cheap I have a child to sell--a bargain. She is but little,
and almost an infant, it is true; but she is quick and quiet, docile and
clever, sings well, and is of good blood, I assure you." "Of what
country?" said I.  "Thessalian." Now I knew the Thessalians were acute
and gentle; so I said I would see the girl.  I found her just as you see
her now, scarcely smaller and scarcely younger in appearance.  She
looked patient and resigned enough, with her hands crossed on her bosom,
and her eyes downcast. I asked the merchant his price: it was moderate,
and I bought her at once.  The merchant brought her to my house, and
disappeared in an instant.  Well, my friends, guess my astonishment when
I found she was blind!  Ha! ha! a clever fellow that merchant!  I ran at
once to the magistrates, but the rogue was already gone from Pompeii. So
I was forced to go home in a very ill humor, I assure you; and the poor
girl felt the effects of it too.  But it was not her fault that she was
blind, for she had been so from her birth.  By degrees, we got
reconciled to our purchase.  True, she had not the strength of Staphyla,
and was of very little use in the house, but she could soon find her way
about the town, as well as if she had the eyes of Argus; and when one
morning she brought us home a handful of sesterces, which she said she
had got from selling some flowers she had gathered in our poor little
garden, we thought the gods had sent her to us.  So from that time we
let her go out as she likes, filling her basket with flowers, which she
wreathes into garlands after the Thessalian fashion, which pleases the
gallants; and the great people seem to take a fancy to her, for they
always pay her more than they do any other flower-girl, and she brings
all of it home to us, which is more than any other slave would do.  So I
work for myself, but I shall soon afford from her earnings to buy me a
second Staphyla; doubtless, the Thessalian kidnapper had stolen the
blind girl from gentle parents.  Besides her skill in the garlands, she
sings and plays on the cithara, which also brings money, and lately--but
that is a secret.'

'That is a secret! What!' cried Lydon, 'art thou turned sphinx?'

'Sphinx, no!--why sphinx?'

'Cease thy gabble, good mistress, and bring us our meat--I am hungry,'
said Sporus, impatiently.

'And I, too,' echoed the grim Niger, whetting his knife on the palm of
his hand.

The amazon stalked away to the kitchen, and soon returned with a tray
laden with large pieces of meat half-raw: for so, as now, did the heroes
of the prize-fight imagine they best sustained their hardihood and
ferocity: they drew round the table with the eyes of famished
wolves--the meat vanished, the wine flowed.  So leave we those important
personages of classic life to follow the steps of Burbo.



Chapter II

TWO WORTHIES.

IN the earlier times of Rome the priesthood was a profession, not of
lucre but of honour.  It was embraced by the noblest citizens--it was
forbidden to the plebeians.  Afterwards, and long previous to the
present date, it was equally open to all ranks; at least, that part of
the profession which embraced the flamens, or priests--not of religion
generally but of peculiar gods.  Even the priest of Jupiter (the Flamen
Dialis) preceded by a lictor, and entitled by his office to the entrance
of the senate, at first the especial dignitary of the patricians, was
subsequently the choice of the people.  The less national and less
honored deities were usually served by plebeian ministers; and many
embraced the profession, as now the Roman Catholic Christians enter the
monastic fraternity, less from the impulse of devotion than the
suggestions of a calculating poverty.  Thus Calenus, the priest of Isis,
was of the lowest origin.  His relations, though not his parents, were
freedmen.  He had received from them a liberal education, and from his
father a small patrimony, which he had soon exhausted.  He embraced the
priesthood as a last resource from distress.  Whatever the state
emoluments of the sacred profession, which at that time were probably
small, the officers of a popular temple could never complain of the
profits of their calling.  There is no profession so lucrative as that
which practises on the superstition of the multitude.

Calenus had but one surviving relative at Pompeii, and that was Burbo.
Various dark and disreputable ties, stronger than those of blood, united
together their hearts and interests; and often the minister of Isis
stole disguised and furtively from the supposed austerity of his
devotions; and gliding through the back door of the retired gladiator, a
man infamous alike by vices and by profession, rejoiced to throw off the
last rag of an hypocrisy which, but for the dictates of avarice, his
ruling passion, would at all time have sat clumsily upon a nature too
brutal for even the mimicry of virtue.

Wrapped in one of those large mantles which came in use among the Romans
in proportion as they dismissed the toga, whose ample folds well
concealed the form, and in which a sort of hood (attached to it)
afforded no less a security to the features, Calenus now sat in the
small and private chamber of the wine-cellar, whence a small passage ran
at once to that back entrance, with which nearly all the houses of
Pompeii were furnished.

Opposite to him sat the sturdy Burbo, carefully counting on a table
between them a little pile of coins which the priest had just poured
from his purse--for purses were as common then as now, with this
difference--they were usually better furnished!

'You see,' said Calenus, that we pay you handsomely, and you ought to
thank me for recommending you to so advantageous a market.'

'I do, my cousin, I do,' replied Burbo, affectionately, as he swept the
coins into a leathern receptacle, which he then deposited in his girdle,
drawing the buckle round his capacious waist more closely than he was
wont to do in the lax hours of his domestic avocations.  'And by Isis,
Pisis, and Nisis, or whatever other gods there may be in Egypt, my
little Nydia is a very Hesperides--a garden of gold to me.'

'She sings well, and plays like a muse,' returned Calenus; 'those are
virtues that he who employs me always pays liberally.'

'He is a god,' cried Burbo, enthusiastically; 'every rich man who is
generous deserves to be worshipped.  But come, a cup of wine, old
friend: tell me more about it.  What does she do? she is frightened,
talks of her oath, and reveals nothing.'

'Nor will I, by my right hand!  I, too, have taken that terrible oath of
secrecy.'

'Oath! what are oaths to men like us?'

'True oaths of a common fashion; but this!'--and the stalwart priest
shuddered as he spoke.  'Yet,' he continued, in emptying a huge cup of
unmixed wine, 'I own to thee, that it is not so much the oath that I
dread as the vengeance of him who proposed it.  By the gods! he is a
mighty sorcerer, and could draw my confession from the moon, did I dare
to make it to her.  Talk no more of this.  By Pollux! wild as those
banquets are which I enjoy with him, I am never quite at my ease there.
I love, my boy, one jolly hour with thee, and one of the plain,
unsophisticated, laughing girls that I meet in this chamber, all
smoke-dried though it be, better than whole nights of those magnificent
debauches.'

'Ho! sayest thou so!  To-morrow night, please the gods, we will have
then a snug carousal.'

'With all my heart,' said the priest, rubbing his hands, and drawing
himself nearer to the table.

At this moment they heard a slight noise at the door, as of one feeling
the handle.  The priest lowered the hood over his head.

'Tush!' whispered the host, 'it is but the blind girl,' as Nydia opened
the door, and entered the apartment.

'Ho! girl, and how durst thou? thou lookest pale--thou hast kept late
revels?  No matter, the young must be always the young,' said Burbo,
encouragingly.

The girl made no answer, but she dropped on one of the seats with an air
of lassitude.  Her color went and came rapidly: she beat the floor
impatiently with her small feet, then she suddenly raised her face, and
said with a determined voice:

'Master, you may starve me if you will--you may beat me--you may
threaten me with death--but I will go no more to that unholy place!'

'How, fool!' said Burbo, in a savage voice, and his heavy brows met
darkly over his fierce and bloodshot eyes; 'how, rebellious! Take care.'

'I have said it,' said the poor girl, crossing her hands on her breast.

'What! my modest one, sweet vestal, thou wilt go no more!  Very well,
thou shalt be carried.'

'I will raise the city with my cries,' said she, passionately; and the
color mounted to her brow.

'We will take care of that too; thou shalt go gagged.'

'Then may the gods help me!' said Nydia, rising; 'I will appeal to the
magistrates.'

'Thine oath remember!' said a hollow voice, as for the first time
Calenus joined in the dialogue.

At these words a trembling shook the frame of the unfortunate girl; she
clasped her hands imploringly.  'Wretch that I am!' she cried, and burst
violently into sobs.

Whether or not it was the sound of that vehement sorrow which brought
the gentle Stratonice to the spot, her grisly form at this moment
appeared in the chamber.

'How now? what hast thou been doing with my slave, brute?' said she,
angrily, to Burbo.

'Be quiet, wife,' said he, in a tone half-sullen, half-timid; 'you want
new girdles and fine clothes, do you?  Well then, take care of your
slave, or you may want them long.  Voe capiti tuo--vengeance on thy
head, wretched one!'

'What is this?' said the hag, looking from one to the other.

Nydia started as by a sudden impulse from the wall against which she had
leaned: she threw herself at the feet of Stratonice; she embraced her
knees, and looking up at her with those sightless but touching eyes:

'O my mistress!' sobbed she, 'you are a woman--you have had sisters--you
have been young like me, feel for me--save me!  I will go to those
horrible feasts no more!'

'Stuff!' said the hag, dragging her up rudely by one of those delicate
hands, fit for no harsher labor than that of weaving the flowers which
made her pleasure or her trade; 'stuff! these fine scruples are not for
slaves.'

'Hark ye,' said Burbo, drawing forth his purse, and chinking its
contents: 'you hear this music, wife; by Pollux! if you do not break in
yon colt with a tight rein, you will hear it no more.'

'The girl is tired,' said Stratonice, nodding to Calenus; 'she will be
more docile when you next want her.'

'You! you! who is here?' cried Nydia, casting her eyes round the
apartment with so fearful and straining a survey, that Calenus rose in
alarm from his seat.

'She must see with those eyes!' muttered he.

'Who is here!  Speak, in heaven's name!  Ah, if you were blind like me,
you would be less cruel,' said she; and she again burst into tears.

'Take her away,' said Burbo, impatiently; 'I hate these whimperings.'

'Come!' said Stratonice, pushing the poor child by the shoulders.  Nydia
drew herself aside, with an air to which resolution gave dignity.

'Hear me,' she said; 'I have served you faithfully--I who was brought
up--Ah! my mother, my poor mother! didst thou dream I should come to
this?' She dashed the tear from her eyes, and proceeded: 'Command me in
aught else, and I will obey; but I tell you now, hard, stern, inexorable
as you are--I tell you that I will go there no more; or, if I am forced
there, that I will implore the mercy of the praetor himself--I have said
it.  Hear me, ye gods, I swear!'

The hag's eyes glowed with fire; she seized the child by the hair with
one hand, and raised on high the other--that formidable right hand, the
least blow of which seemed capable to crush the frail and delicate form
that trembled in her grasp.  That thought itself appeared to strike her,
for she suspended the blow, changed her purpose, and dragging Nydia to
the wall, seized from a hook a rope, often, alas! applied to a similar
purpose, and the next moment the shrill, the agonized shrieks of the
blind girl, rang piercingly through the house.



Chapter III

GLAUCUS MAKES A PURCHASE THAT AFTERWARDS COSTS HIM DEAR.

'HOLLA, my brave fellows!' said Lepidus, stooping his head as he entered
the low doorway of the house of Burbo.  'We have come to see which of
you most honors your lanista.' The gladiators rose from the table in
respect to three gallants known to be among the gayest and richest
youths of Pompeii, and whose voices were therefore the dispensers of
amphitheatrical reputation.

'What fine animals!' said Clodius to Glaucus: 'worthy to be gladiators!'

'It is a pity they are not warriors,' returned Glaucus.

A singular thing it was to see the dainty and fastidious Lepidus, whom
in a banquet a ray of daylight seemed to blind--whom in the bath a
breeze of air seemed to blast--in whom Nature seemed twisted and
perverted from every natural impulse, and curdled into one dubious thing
of effeminacy and art--a singular thing was it to see this Lepidus, now
all eagerness, and energy, and life, patting the vast shoulders of the
gladiators with a blanched and girlish hand, feeling with a mincing
gripe their great brawn and iron muscles, all lost in calculating
admiration at that manhood which he had spent his life in carefully
banishing from himself.

So have we seen at this day the beardless flutterers of the saloons of
London thronging round the heroes of the Fives-court--so have we seen
them admire, and gaze, and calculate a bet--so have we seen them meet
together, in ludicrous yet in melancholy assemblage, the two extremes of
civilized society--the patrons of pleasure and its slaves--vilest of all
slaves--at once ferocious and mercenary; male prostitutes, who sell
their strength as women their beauty; beasts in act, but baser than
beasts in motive, for the last, at least, do not mangle themselves for
money!

'Ha! Niger, how will you fight?' said Lepidus: 'and with whom?'

'Sporus challenges me,' said the grim giant; 'we shall fight to the
death, I hope.'

'Ah! to be sure,' grunted Sporus, with a twinkle of his small eye.

'He takes the sword, I the net and the trident: it will be rare sport. I
hope the survivor will have enough to keep up the dignity of the crown.'

'Never fear, we'll fill the purse, my Hector,' said Clodius:

'let me see--you fight against Niger?  Glaucus, a bet--I back Niger.'

'I told you so,' cried Niger exultingly.  'The noble Clodius knows me;
count yourself dead already, my Sporus.'

Clodius took out his tablet.  'A bet--ten sestertia.  What say you?'

'So be it,' said Glaucus.  'But whom have we here?  I never saw this
hero before'; and he glanced at Lydon, whose limbs were slighter than
those of his companions, and who had something of grace, and something
even of nobleness, in his face, which his profession had not yet wholly
destroyed.

'It is Lydon, a youngster, practised only with the wooden sword as yet,'
answered Niger, condescendingly.  'But he has the true blood in him, and
has challenged Tetraides.'

'He challenged me,' said Lydon: 'I accept the offer.'

'And how do you fight?' asked Lepidus.  'Chut, my boy, wait a while
before you contend with Tetraides.' Lydon smiled disdainfully.

'Is he a citizen or a slave?' said Clodius.

'A citizen--we are all citizens here,' quoth Niger.

'Stretch out your arm, my Lydon,' said Lepidus, with the air of a
connoisseur.

The gladiator, with a significant glance at his companions, extended an
arm which, if not so huge in its girth as those of his comrades, was so
firm in its muscles, so beautifully symmetrical in its proportions, that
the three visitors uttered simultaneously an admiring exclamation.

'Well, man, what is your weapon?' said Clodius, tablet in hand.

'We are to fight first with the cestus; afterwards, if both survive,
with swords,' returned Tetraides, sharply, and with an envious scowl.

'With the cestus!' cried Glaucus; 'there you are wrong, Lydon; the
cestus is the Greek fashion: I know it well.  You should have encouraged
flesh for that contest: you are far too thin for it--avoid the cestus.'

'I cannot,' said Lydon.

'And why?'

'I have said--because he has challenged me.'

'But he will not hold you to the precise weapon.'

'My honour holds me!' returned Lydon, proudly.

'I bet on Tetraides, two to one, at the cestus,' said Clodius; shall it
be, Lepidus?--even betting, with swords.'

'If you give me three to one, I will not take the odds, said Lepidus:
'Lydon will never come to the swords.  You are mighty courteous.'

'What say you, Glaucus?' said Clodius.

'I will take the odds three to one.'

'Ten sestertia to thirty.'
