
There was a pause, then: "We are beginning to pack up our instruments."

"Instruments are all packed up, and we are ready to run," was another
message. It was evident that just one instrument had been left connected
with the world outside. In about ten minutes it began to click. Those
who knew the telegraphers' language caught the word "Good-bye," and then
the ticks stopped.

At the end of an hour the instrument in the office began to click again.
It was from an electrician by the name of Swain.

"I'm back in the building, but they are dynamiting the building next
door, and I've got to get out," was the way his message was translated.
Dynamite ended the story, and the Postal's domicile in San Francisco
ceased to exist.



CHAPTER VI.

Facing Famine and Praying for Relief.


Frightful was the emergency of the vast host of fugitives who fled
in terror from the blazing city of San Francisco to the open gates of
Golden Gate Park and the military reservation of the Presidio. Food was
wanting, scarcely any water was to be had, death by hunger and thirst
threatened more than a quarter million of souls thus driven without
warning from their comfortable and happy homes and left without food
or shelter. Provisions, shelter tents, means of relief of various kinds
were being hurried forward in all haste, but for several days the host
of fugitives had no beds but the bare ground, no shelter but the open
heavens, scarcely a crumb of bread to eat, scarcely a gill of water to
drink. Those first days that followed the disaster were days of horror
and dread. Rich and poor were mingled together, the delicately reared
with the rough sons of toil to whom privation was no new experience.

Those who had food to sell sought to take advantage of the necessities
of the suffering by charging famine prices for their supplies, but the
soldiers put a quick stop to this. When Thursday morning broke, lines
of buyers formed before the stores whose supplies had not been
commandeered. In one of these, the first man was charged 75 cents for a
loaf of bread. The corporal in charge at that point brought his gun down
with a slam.

"Bread is 10 cents a loaf in this shop," he said.

It went. The soldier fixed the schedule of prices a little higher than
in ordinary times, and to make up for that he forced the storekeeper to
give free food to several hungry people in line who had no money to pay.
In several other places the soldiers used the same brand of horse sense.

A man with a loaf of bread in his hand ran up to a policeman on
Washington Street. "Here," he said, "this man is trying to charge me a
dollar for this loaf of bread. Is that fair?"

"Give it to me," said the policeman. He broke off one end of it and
stuck it in his mouth. "I am hungry myself," he said when he had his
mouth clear. "Take the rest of it. It's appropriated."

As an example of the prices charged for food and service by the
unscrupulous, we may quote the experience of a Los Angeles millionaire
named John Singleton, who had been staying a day or two at the Palace
Hotel. On Wednesday he had to pay $25 for an express wagon to carry
himself, his wife and her sister to the Casino, near Golden Gate Park,
and on Thursday was charged a dollar apiece for eggs and a dollar for a
loaf of bread. Others tell of having to pay $50 for a ride to the ferry.

One of the refugees on the shores of Lake Herced Thursday morning spied
a flock of ducks and swans which the city maintained there for the
decoration of the lake. He plunged into the lake, swam out to them and
captured a fat drake. Other men and boys saw the point and followed. The
municipal ducks were all cooking in five minutes.

The soldiers were prompt to take charge of the famine situation, acting
on their own responsibility in clearing out the supplies of the little
grocery stores left standing and distributing them among the people in
need. The principal food of those who remained in the city was composed
of canned goods and crackers. The refugees who succeeded in getting out
of San Francisco were met as soon as they entered the neighboring towns
by representatives of bakers who had made large supplies of bread, and
who immediately dealt them out to the hungry people.


THE FOOD QUESTION URGENT.


But the needs of the three hundred thousand homeless and hungry people
in the city could not be met in this way, and immediate supplies in
large quantities were necessary to prevent a reign of famine from
succeeding the ravages of the fire. Danger from thirst was still more
insistent than that from hunger. There was some food to be had, bakeries
were quickly built within the military reservation there, and General
Funston announced that rations would soon reach the city and the people
would be supplied from the Presidio. But there was scarcely any water to
relieve the thirst of the suffering. Water became the incessant cry
of firemen and people alike, the one wanting it to fight the fire, the
other to drink, but even for the latter the supply was very scant.
There was water in plenty in the reservoirs, but they were distant and
difficult to reach, and all night of the day succeeding the earth shock
wagons mounted with barrels and guarded by soldiers drove through the
park doling out water. There was a steady crush around these wagons, but
only one drink was allowed to a person.

Toward midnight a black, staggering body of men began to weave through
the entrance. They were volunteer fire-fighters, looking for a place
to throw themselves down and sleep. These men dropped out all along the
line, and were rolled out of the driveways by the troops. There was much
splendid unselfishness here. Women gave up their blankets and sat up or
walked about all night to cover the exhausted men who had fought fire
until there was no more fight in them.

The common destitution and suffering had, as we have said, wiped out all
social, financial and racial distinctions. The man who last Tuesday was
a prosperous merchant was obliged to occupy with his family a little
plot of ground that adjoined the open-air home of a laborer. The
white man of California forgot his antipathy to the Asiatic race,
and maintained friendly relations with his new Chinese and Japanese
neighbors. The society belle who Tuesday night was a butterfly of
fashion at the grand opera performance now assisted some factory girl
in the preparation of humble daily meals. Money had little value. The
family that had had foresight to lay in the largest stock of foodstuffs
on the first day of disaster was rated highest in the scale of wealth.

A few of the families that could secure wagons were possessors of cook
stoves, but over 95 per cent. of the refugees did their cooking on
little campfires made of brick or stone. Battered kitchen utensils that
the week before would have been regarded as useless had become articles
of high value. In fact, man had come back to nature and all lines
of caste had been obliterated, while the very thought of luxury had
disappeared. It was, in the exigency of the moment, considered good
fortune to have a scant supply of the barest necessaries of life.

As for clothing, it was in many cases of the scantiest, while numbers of
the people had brought comfortable clothing and bedding. Many others had
fled in their night garbs, and comparatively few of these had had the
self-possession to return and don their daytime clothes. As a result
there had been much improvisation of garments suitable for life in the
open air, and as the days went on many of the women arrayed themselves
in home-made bloomer costumes, a sensible innovation under the
circumstances and in view of the active outdoor work they were obliged
to perform.

The grave question to be faced at this early stage was: How soon would
an adequate supply of food arrive from outside points to avert famine?
Little remained in San Francisco beyond the area swept by the fire, and
the available supply could not last more than a few days. Fresh meat
disappeared early on Wednesday and only canned foods and breadstuffs
were left. All the foodstuffs coming in on the cars were at once seized
by order of the Mayor and added to the scanty supply, the names of the
consignees being taken that this material might eventually be paid for.
The bakers agreed to work their plants to their utmost capacity and to
send all their surplus output to the relief committee. By working night
and day thousands of loaves could be provided daily. A big bakery in
the saved district started its ovens and arranged to bake 50,000 loaves
before night. The provisions were taken charge of by a committee
and sent to the various depots from which the people were being fed.
Instructions were issued by Mayor Schmitz on Thursday to break open
every store containing provisions and to distribute them to the
thousands under police supervision. A policeman reported that two
grocery stores in the neighborhood were closed, although the clerks were
present. "Smash the stores open," ordered the Mayor, "and guard them."
In towns across the bay the master bakers have met and fixed the price
of bread at 5 cents the loaf, with the understanding that they will
refuse to sell to retailers who attempt to charge famine prices. The
committee of citizens in charge of the situation in the stricken city
proposed to use every effort to keep food down to the ordinary price and
check the efforts of speculators, who in one instance charged as much as
$3.50 for two loaves of bread and a can of sardines. Orders were issued
by the War Department to army officers to purchase at Los Angeles
immediately 200,000 rations and at Seattle 300,000 rations and hurry
them to San Francisco. The department was informed that there were
120,000 rations at the Presidio, that thousands of refugees were being
sheltered there and that the army was feeding them. One million rations
already had been started to San Francisco by the department. But in
view of the fact that there were 300,000 fugitives to be fed the supply
available was likely to be soon exhausted.


FOOD FOR THE HUNGRY.


Such was the state of affairs at the end of the second day of the great
disaster. But meanwhile the entire country had been aroused by the
tidings of the awful calamity, the sympathetic instinct of Americans
everywhere was awakened, and it was quickly made evident that the people
of the stricken city would not be allowed to suffer for the necessaries
of life. On all sides money was contributed in large sums, the United
States Government setting the example by an immediate appropriation of
$1,000,000, and in the briefest possible interval relief trains were
speeding toward the stricken city from all quarters, carrying supplies
of food, shelter tents and other necessaries of a kind that could not
await deliberate action.

Shelter was needed almost as badly as food, for a host of the refugees
had nothing but their thin clothing to cover them, and, though the
weather at first was fine and mild, a storm might come at any time.
In fact, a rain did come, a severe one, early in the week after the
disaster, pouring nearly all night long on the shivering campers in
the parks, wetting them to the skin and soaking through the rudely
improvised shelters which many of the refugees had put up. A few days
afterward came a second shower, rendering still more evident the need of
haste in providing suitable shelter.

All this was foreseen by those in charge, and the most strenuous efforts
were made to provide the absolute necessities of life. Huge quantities
of supplies were poured into the city. From all parts of California
trainloads of food were rushed there in all haste. A steamer from the
Orient laden with food reached the city in its hour of need; another was
dispatched in all haste from Tacoma bearing $25,000 worth of food and
medical supplies, ordered by Mayor Weaver, of Philadelphia, as a first
installment of that city's contribution. Money was telegraphed from
all quarters to the Governor of California, to be expended for food and
other supplies, and so prompt was the response to the insistent demand
that by Saturday all danger of famine was at an end; the people were
being fed.


WATER FOR THE THIRSTY.


The broken waterpipes were also repaired with all possible haste, the
Spring Valley Water Company putting about one thousand men at work upon
their shattered mains, and in a very brief time water began to flow
freely in many parts of the residence section and the great difficulty
of obtaining food and water was practically at an end. Never in
the history of the country has there been a more rapid and complete
demonstration of the resourcefulness of Americans than in the way this
frightful disaster was met.

Food, water and shelter were not the only urgent needs. At first there
was absolutely no sanitary provision, and the danger of an epidemic
was great. This was a peril which the Board of Health addressed itself
vigorously to meet, and steps for improving the sanitary conditions were
hastily taken. Quick provision for sheltering the unfortunates was also
made. Eight temporary structures, 150 feet in length by 28 feet wide
and 13 feet high, were erected in Golden Gate Park, and in these
sheds thousands found reasonably comfortable quarters. This was but a
beginning. More of these buildings were rapidly erected, and by their
aid the question of shelter was in part solved. The buildings were
divided into compartments large enough to house a family, each
compartment having an entrance from the outside. This work was done
under the control of the engineering department of the United States
army, which had taken steps to obtain a full supply of lumber and had
put 135 carpenters to work. Those of the refugees who were without tents
were the first to be provided for in these temporary buildings.


THE CAMPS IN THE PARKS.


To those who made an inspection of the situation a few days after
the earthquake, the hills and beaches of San Francisco looked like an
immense tented city. For miles through the park and along the beaches
from Ingleside to the sea wall at North Beach the homeless were camped
in tents--makeshifts rigged up from a few sticks of wood and a blanket
or sheet. Some few of the more fortunate secured vehicles on which they
loaded regulation tents and were, therefore, more comfortably housed
than the great majority. Golden Gate Park and the Panhandle looked like
one vast campaign ground. It is said that fully 100,000 persons, rich
and poor alike, sought refuge in Golden Gate Park alone, and 200,000
more homeless ones located at the other places of refuge.

At the Presidio military reservation, where probably 50,000 persons
were camped, affairs were conducted with military precision. Water was
plentiful and rations were dealt out all day long. The refugees stood
patiently in line and there was not a murmur. This characteristic was
observable all over the city. The people were brave and patient, and the
wonderful order preserved by them proved of great assistance. In Golden
Gate Park a huge supply station had been established and provisions were
dealt out.

Six hundred men from the Ocean Shore Railway arrived on Saturday night
with wagons and implements to work on the sewer system. Inspectors were
kept going from house to house, examining chimneys and issuing permits
to build fires. In fact, activity manifested itself in all quarters in
the attempt to bring order out of confusion, and in an astonishingly
short time the tented city was converted from a scene of wretched
disorder into one of order and system.

At Jefferson Park were camped thousands of people of every class in
life. On the western edge of this park is the old Scott house, where
Mrs. McKinley lay sick for two weeks in 1901. Three times a day the
people all gathered in line before the provision wagons for their little
handouts. "Yesterday," says an observer, "I saw, in order before the
wagons, a Lascar sailor in his turban, about as low a Chinatown bum as I
ever set eyes on, a woman of refined appearance, a barefooted child, two
Chinamen, and a pretty girl. They were squeezed up together by the line,
which extended for a quarter of a mile. It is civilization in the bare
bones.

"The great and rich are on a level with the poor in the struggle for
bare existence, and over them all is the perfect, unbroken discipline
of the soldiery. They came into the city and took charge on an hour's
notice, they saved the city from itself in the three days of hell, and
but for them the city, even with enough provisions to feed them in the
stores and warehouses, must have gone hungry for lack of distributive
organization."


COMEDY AND PATHOS IN THE BREAD LINE.


At one of the parks on Tuesday morning a handsomely dressed woman
with two children at her skirts stood in a line of many hundreds where
supplies were being given out. She took some uncooked bacon, and as she
reached for it jewels sparkled on her fingers. One of the tots took a
can of condensed milk, the other a bag of cakes.

"I have money," she said, "'if I could get it and use it. I have
property, if I could realize on it. I have friends, if I could get to
them. Meantime I am going to cook this piece of bacon on bricks and be
happy."

She was only one of thousands like her.

In a walk through the city this note of cheerfulness of the people in
the face of an almost incredible week of horror was to a correspondent
the mitigating element to the awfulness of disaster.

In the streets of the residential district in the western addition,
which the fire did not reach, women of the houses were cooking meals on
the pavement. In most cases they had moved out the family ranges,
and were preparing the food which they had secured from the Relief
Committee.

Out on Broderick street, near the Panhandle, a piano sounded. It was
nigh ten o'clock and the stars were shining after the rain. Fires
gleamed up and down through the shrubbery and the refugees sat huddled
together about the flames, with their blankets about their heads,
Apache-like, in an effort to dry out after the wetting of the afternoon.
The piano, dripping with moisture, stood on the curb, near the front of
a cottage which had been wrecked by the earthquake.

A youth with a shock of red hair sat on a cracker box and pecked at the
ivories. "Home Ain't Nothing Like This" was thrummed from the rusting
wires with true vaudeville dash and syncopation. "Bill Bailey," "Good
Old Summer Time," "Dixie" and "In Toyland" followed. Three young men
with handkerchiefs wrapped about their throats in lieu of collars stood
near the pianist and with him lifted up their voices in melody. The
harmony was execrable, the time without excuse, but the songs ran
through the trees of the Panhandle, and the crows, forgetting their
misery for a time, joined the strange chorus.

The people had their tales of comedy, one being that on the morning of
the fire a richly dressed woman who lived in one of the aristocratic
Sutter Street apartments came hurrying down the street, faultlessly
gowned as to silks and sables, save that one dainty foot was shod with
a high-heeled French slipper and the other was incased in a laborer's
brogan. They say that as she walked she careened like a bark-rigged ship
before a typhoon.

An hour spent behind the counter of the food supply depot in the park
tennis court yielded rich reward to the seeker after the outlandish. The
tennis court was piled high with the plunder of several grocery stores
and the cargoes of many relief cars. A square cut in the wire screen
permitted of the insertion of a counter, behind which stood members
of the militia acting as food dispensers. Before the improvised window
passed the line of refugees, a line which stretched back fully 300 yards
to Speedway track.

"I want a can of condensed cream, so I can feed my baby and my dog,"
said a large, florid-faced woman in a gaudy kimono, "and I don't care
for crackers, but you can throw in some potted chicken if you have it."

"What's in that bottle over there?" queried the next applicant. "Tomato
ketchup? Well, of all the luck! Say, young man, just give me three."

A little gray-haired woman in an India shawl peered timorously through
the window. "Just a little bit of anything you may have handy, please,"
she whispered, and she cast a careful eye about to see of any of her
neighbors had recognized her standing there in the "bread line."

"Yesterday, at the Western Union office," says one writer, "I saw a
woman drive up in a large motor car and beg that the telegram on which a
boy had asked a delivery fee of twenty-five cents be handed to her. She
said she had not a penny and did not know when she would have any money,
but that as soon as she had any she would pay for the message. It
was given to her, and the manager told me that there were hundreds of
similar cases."

Many weddings resulted from the disaster. Women driven out of their
homes and left destitute, appealed to the men to whom they were engaged,
and immediate marriages took place. After the first day of the disaster
an increase in the marriage licenses issued was noticed by County Clerk
Cook. This increase grew until seven marriage licenses were issued in an
hour.

"I don't live anywhere," was the answer given in many cases when the
applicant for a license was asked the locality of his residence. "I used
to live in San Francisco."

Births seem to have been about as common as marriages, in one night
five children being born in Golden Gate Park. In Buena Vista Park eight
births were recorded and others elsewhere, the population being thus
increased at a rate hardly in accordance with the exigencies of the
situation.


THE EXODUS FROM SAN FRANCISCO.


We have spoken only of the camps of refugees within the municipal
limits of San Francisco. But in addition to these was the multitude of
fugitives who made all haste to escape from that city. This was with the
full consent of the authorities, who felt that every one gone lessened
the immediate weight upon themselves, and who issued a strict edict that
those who went must stay, that there could be no return until a counter
edict should be made public.

From the start this was one of the features of the situation. Down
Market Street, once San Francisco's pride, now leading through piles of
tottering walls, piles of still hot bricks and twisted iron and heaps
of smouldering debris, poured a huge stream of pedestrians. Men bending
under the weight of great bundles pushed baby carriages loaded with
bric-a-brac and children. Women toiled along with their arms full, but
a large proportion were able to ride, for the relief corps had been
thoroughly organized and wagons were being pressed into service from all
sides.

In constant procession they moved toward the ferry, whence the Southern
Pacific was transporting them with baggage free wherever they wished to
go. Automobiles meanwhile shot in all directions, carrying the Red Cross
flag and usually with a soldier carrying a rifle in the front seat. They
had the right of way everywhere, carrying messages and transporting the
ill to temporary hospitals and bearing succor to those in distress.

Oakland, the nearest place of resort, on the bay shore opposite San
Francisco, soon became a great city of refuge, fugitives gathering there
until 50,000 or more were sheltered within its charitable limits. Having
suffered very slightly from the earthquake that had wrecked the great
city across the bay, it was in condition to offer shelter to the
unfortunate. All day Wednesday and Thursday a stream of humanity poured
from the ferries, every one carrying personal baggage and articles saved
from the conflagration. Hundreds of Chinese men, women and children, all
carrying baggage to the limit of their strength, made their way into the
limited Chinatown of Oakland.

Multitudes of persons besieged the telegraph offices, and the crush
became so great that soldiers were stationed at the doors to keep them
in line and allow as many as possible to find standing room at the
counters. Messages were stacked yards high in the offices waiting to
be sent throughout the world. Every boat from San Francisco brought
hundreds of refugees, carrying luggage and bedding in large quantities.
Many women were bareheaded and all showed fatigue as the result of
sleeplessness and exposure to the chill air. Hundreds of these persons
lined the streets of Oakland, waiting for some one to provide them with
shelter, for which the utmost possible provision was quickly made. No
one was allowed to go hungry in Oakland and few lacked shelter. At the
