Wales; but Paul remembered how he had called it out when appealing
to his friend the farmer for help, and it was possible that it
might be remembered against him. Certainly, in his present crippled
state, it seemed advisable to remain in hiding at the farm, as he
was so hospitably pressed to do; and after a short debate with
himself upon his position, he gratefully consented to do so.

"That is right, that is right," cried the farmer, when he came in
at midday for the dinner that family and servants all shared
together; and presently, when the meal was over, and the women had
retired to wash up the platters in an adjoining room, whilst the
labourers had started forth for their labours, the master drew his
guest into the warm inglenook again, and said to him in a low
voice:

"I'll be right glad to have a good Lancastrian abiding beneath my
roof for awhile. The good brothers of Leighs are our best
customers, and one or another of them is always coming across on
some errand, and 'twill do us no harm in their eyes to find a
follower of King Henry under our roof. I know not how it is, but of
late they have been somewhat changed toward us;" and the farmer
looked uneasily round, as if hardly knowing who might be listening.
"We go to mass as regular as any; and my little girl there has
worked a robe for the reverend prior himself as cost me a pretty
penny in materials, and half blinded her pretty eyes, she sat at it
so close. They have no need to look askance at us; but there,
there, I suppose they have had a deal of trouble with the heretic
books and such like as have been getting about the country of late.
They say they found a Wycliffe's Bible hidden under the hearth
stone of a poor woman's cottage in Little Waltham, nigh at hand
here; and if King Henry had been on the throne, she might have been
sent up to Smithfield to be burned, as an example and warning to
others. But King Edward was on the throne then, and he cares not to
burn his subjects for heresy--God bless him for that! But if King
Henry is coming back to reign, it behoves all good persons to be
careful and walk warily. So, young sir, if you can speak a good
word for us to the holy brothers, I will thank you with all my
heart. It's a bad thing when they get the notion that a house is
corrupted by heresy."

The palpable uneasiness of the farmer betrayed to Paul full well
that he was very much afraid of the orthodoxy of his wife, and it
was not impossible that he himself might not be secretly favouring
the new religion whilst conforming outwardly in all things. Such
cases were by no means rare, and this village appeared Yorkist
enough in its sentiments to suggest suspicions as to its orthodoxy.

But Paul was young and impressionable and generous; he liked these
good folks, and knew nothing whatever to their discredit. He was
sure that, whatever they might privately believe, they were good
and trustworthy folks, and he gave his word to do all that he
could, if chance offered, with an emphasis that won him the hearty
thanks of the farmer.

Nor was the chance very long in coming: for only on the afternoon
of the next day a portly monk jogged up to the farm on his sleek
palfrey; and Paul, who was seated near to the door, rose and bent
his knee, asking the customary blessing; after which the monk
dismounted, and made his way into the kitchen to give some order to
the good mistress of the house.

The monks of those days were regular gossips, and loved a chat, as
they sat in the chimney corner enjoying a cup of the best wine the
house afforded, or a substantial meal of the choicest products of
the larder. Brother Lawrence was no exception to this rule; and the
farmer's wife bestirred herself to get him everything he could
fancy, whilst he sat and questioned Paul as to his history and the
adventure which had brought him to this homestead. Very much did he
enjoy hearing of the discomfiture of the robbers, and laughed quite
merrily to think how they had been overcome by the handsome
stripling before him.

Presently, when Mistress Devenish had gone away to make some
inquiries respecting the flitches of bacon required for the Priory,
Brother Lawrence beckoned Paul somewhat nearer, and said, in a low
voice, in his ear:

"Be in no haste to depart from hence, my son. It may be that there
is work for you here for the Holy Church. It is whispered by one
and another that yon good woman, as I would fain believe her to be,
is somewhat tainted with the damnable heresy they call Lollardism,
and that she has in her possession one of those Bibles which that
arch-heretic Wycliffe translated into the vulgar tongue for the
undoing of the unlearned, who think that they can thus judge for
themselves on matters too high for them. You, my son, as a true son
of the Church, may do us great service by keeping open both ears
and eyes, and telling if you see or hear ought amiss. I would fain
learn that no such evil is done among these good folks; but if it
be that the leaven is working, it will be your duty to tell us
thereof, and we will see if the evil may not be stamped out ere it
has spread to others, or much corrupted even them that are tainted.
We trust that the days are dawning now when Holy Church will have
her ancient powers restored, and will be able to deal with heretics
even as they merit. But however that may be, be it your work to
watch and listen with all the powers you have. I trust that there
will be nought you will hear save what is to the credit of these
worthy folks."

Paul secretly in his heart vowed that no syllable which should hurt
his hosts should ever pass his lips; but he bent his head with due
reverence before the monk, who smiled and nodded cheerily to him
before he went his way. It seemed strange that so jovial and kindly
a man should so lightly speak of burning to death fellow creatures
whom he had regarded for years with kindly goodwill. But there were
strange anomalies in those days, even as there are in our own, and
Paul saw nothing strange in this, nor in his own conduct, which
made him appear submissive to the dictates of the Holy Church, as
he ever called her in his thoughts, whilst all the time he was
resolved neither to hear nor to see any of the things which would,
if made known, injure his hosts in the eyes of the spiritual
authorities. The very teaching of those spiritual pastors
inculcated a certain amount of deceit and double dealing. What
wonder if the weapon so freely used by themselves sometimes turned
its double edge against them in its turn?

Paul accompanied the monk to the gate which led to the so-called
road by which Figeon's was approached. It was nothing but a rude
cart track; and although well-tilled fields lay on one side of this
track, the forest lay upon the other, stretching away black and dim
into immeasurable distance.

Paul lingered a little while beside the gate, watching the friar
descend the sloping path; and he might have remained longer than he
knew, for he was aroused from his day dream by the growl of one of
the farm dogs, who stood at his side. Looking quickly round him, he
fancied he detected amid the shadows of the trees across the road a
dark figure almost concealed behind a solid trunk, the face alone
visible--a dark, saturnine face, with a pair of eyes that gleamed
like those of some wild beast.

The moment those eyes met Paul's the head was withdrawn, and the
youth stood asking himself if it were not all a dream; but if it
had been one, it was remarkably clear and vivid, and he walked to
the house with a look of deep thought upon his face.



Chapter 3: A Strange Encounter.


"Let me go," said Paul; "I should like the walk through the wood. I
am quite strong again now, and I am weary of doing nothing from
morning to night."

"Well, I don't know why you should not if it pleases your fancy,"
said the farmer. "You will be welcome at the Priory, as all guests
are who come with news for the holy brothers from the world
without. 'Tis less than four miles away, and you have got the use
of your legs. Go, and welcome, if you will."

"I would go with you, were I not bound to go to Chelmsford myself,"
quoth Jack, the farmer's ruddy-faced son, of whom mention has not
yet been made.

Paul had indeed seen but little of him so far, as his time was
mainly spent in the fields, and he had been absent from home on his
first arrival there, buying some fat sheep to be killed and salted
down for consumption in the winter.

"I like well enough a visit to the Priory. There is always good
cheer there enough and to spare. They know what good living means,
those holy men. If all other trades failed, I would not mind
turning friar myself."

"Nay, brother, jest not upon the holy men," quoth his sister in a
tone of gentle reproof. Then turning to Paul, she added, with
something of pleading in her tones, "But, sir, why peril yourself
by venturing into the forest alone? You have still but the use of
one arm, and were the robbers to be on the watch for you, you would
fall an easy prey into their hands."

But Paul laughed, as also did Jack.

"I trow the robbers have something else to do than to play the spy
continually on me and my movements," he said. "They cannot always
be on the watch, and the wood is dark and full of hiding places.
Were I to hear the sound of pursuit, I warrant me I could hide
myself so that none should find me. I have done the like many a
time before now. In this part of the country one must needs go into
the forest if one is ever to leave the shelter of the house at all.
Have no fear for me; I will take care not to run into danger."

Joan looked as if hardly satisfied, though she was unable to uphold
her case by argument; for it was very true that if their guest was
to be anything but a close prisoner, he must adventure himself from
time to time in the forest. Jack, however, broke into one of his
hearty laughs, as he looked at Paul, and said:

"Those same robbers are not such bad fellows, after all, as some of
our good folks would make out. True, they help themselves to our
goods from time to time; but they are capital company if you chance
to fall upon their haunts, and they make you welcome. I've spent
more than one night amongst them, and never a bit the worse. Men
must live; and if the folks in authority will outlaw them, why,
they must jog along then as best they may. I don't think they do
more harm than they can well help."

Mistress Devenish shook her head in silence over the rather wild
talk of her son, but she said nothing. She was used to Jack's ways,
and she was proud of his spirit, though afraid sometimes that it
would lead him into trouble. She had noted of late that he had been
unwontedly absent from home during the long evenings of the summer
just gone by, and had wondered what took him off, for he seldom
gave account of himself. She noted, too, that he spoke in a very
different fashion from others of the robber band that was such a
terror to the village folks. She did not know whether or not to put
these two facts together as connected with each other; but she
listened eagerly to all he said on the subject, trying to discover
what might be the meaning of this strange leniency of opinion.
"It is different for you, brother--they owe you no grudge," said
Joan, with a slight shiver; whilst the farmer broke in roughly:

"Tut, tut, Jack! what mean you by trying to make common cause with
the ruffians who would have carried your sister off as a prey of
that graceless scamp well-called Devil's Own? I marvel to hear such
words from you. You should know better."

"They are not all brutes like Devil's Own," muttered Jack in a low
tone; but he did not speak aloud, for the fashion of the day
forbade the young to argue with the old, or children to answer back
when their parents spoke to them in reproof.

But Paul was still resolved that he would be the messenger to carry
to the Priory that day the two fat capons the worthy mistress had
in readiness for the prior's table. They had been bespoken some
time, and could be no longer delayed. Paul was weary of an idle
life, and eager to see something of the country in which he found
himself. He was in comfortable quarters enough at the farm; but he
was growing stronger each day, and was beginning to fret against
the fetters which held him from straying far from the farm.

He did not much believe in the lasting anger of the robber band. He
knew that those gentlemen would have other matters on hand than
that of revenging themselves upon him for his frustration of their
captain's design. He was content to rest yet awhile beneath the
hospitable roof of the Figeons, so long as he knew that his
presence there might be something of a protection and gain to its
inmates; but he had no intention of being a prisoner. His young
blood stirred within him, and he longed to be out in the free air
of heaven again. His strength had all come back, and even the
broken arm was mending so fast that he felt it would not be long
before he should gain its full use again. The love of adventure,
strong within him, made him fearless even of a second encounter
with the robbers. He felt certain he could hold his own against one
or two, and a whole band would never take him unawares. He should
hear or see them in plenty of time to hide away in some tree or
thicket. It was absurd to be chained within doors any longer.

Paul was looking now a very different object from the battered and
way-worn traveller who had rescued Joan from the robbers. A couple
of weeks' rest and good feeding had given a healthy glow to his
cheek, had brightened his eye, and brought back the native
boyishness and brightness to his face. He was stronger, gayer,
blither than he had been since the never-to-be-forgotten day when
he had closed his dead mother's eyes, and been obliged to fly for
his life from his ancestral halls, ere the rapacious scions of the
House of York fell upon him there, to take into their own
possession all that should have been his. For his father and
brothers lay in a bloody grave, killed in one of those many risings
and insurrections scarce mentioned in history, whereby the
adherents of the Red Rose sought to disturb Edward's rule in
England, and incite the people to bring back him they called their
rightful king.

Those days had changed Paul, a mere lad of seventeen, into a grave
and sad-faced man; but the impression had gradually worn somewhat
faint during the three years in which he had been a wanderer and an
outcast from his home. Of late it had seemed to him that his lost
youth was returning, and certainly there was that in his bright
glance and erect and noble bearing which won for him universal
admiration and affection.

He was, in truth, a right goodly youth. His features were very
fine, and the dark-gray eyes with their delicately-pencilled brows
were full of fire and brilliance. The lips readily curved to a
bright smile, though they could set themselves in lines of resolute
determination when occasion demanded. The golden curls clustered
round the noble head in classic fashion, but were not suffered to
grow long enough to reach the shoulders, as in childhood's day; and
the active, graceful, well-knit figure gave indication of great
strength as well as of great agility.

Paul's dress, too, was improved since we saw him last; for one of
the travelling peddlers or hawkers who roamed the country with
their wares, and supplied the remote villages with the greater part
of those articles not made at home, had recently visited Figeon's
Farm, and Paul had been able to supply himself with a new and
serviceable suit of clothes, in which his tall figure was set off
to the best advantage.

It was made of crimson cloth and the best Spanish leather, and was
cut after one of the most recent but least extravagant fashions of
the day. Paul had been able to purchase it without difficulty, for
he had by no means exhausted the funds he had in his possession,
and the leather belt he wore next his person was still heavy with
broad gold pieces.

Lady Stukely had seemed to have a prevision of coming trouble for
her youngest-born son for many long years before the troubles
actually came, and she had been making preparation for the same
with the patience and completeness that only a mother's heart would
have prompted. She had made with her own hands a stout leather
belt, constructed of a number of small pouches, each one of which
could contain a score of broad gold pieces. She knew full well that
lands might be confiscated, valuables forfeited, houses taken in
possession by foes, but the owner of the current gold of the land
would never be utterly destitute; so for years before her death she
bad been filling this ingeniously contrived belt, and had stored
within its many receptacles gold enough to be a small fortune in
itself. This belt had been in Paul's possession ever since the sad
day when she had kissed him for the last time and had commended him
to the care of Heaven. He had by no means yet exhausted its
contents, for he had often won wages for himself by following one
or another great noble in his private enterprises against some
lawless retainer or an encroaching neighbour.

A little money went a long way in those days, when open house was
kept by almost all the great of the land, and free quarters and
food were always to be had at any monastery or abbey to which
chance might guide the wanderer's feet. So Paul had not been forced
to draw largely upon his own resources, and was a man of some
substance still, although his compact little fortune was so well
hidden away that none suspected its presence.

