full, toast still untasted, by another missive.

    "Tuesday morning.

    "SIR:--I wish to see you this morning. Will you call upon me, or
    appoint a time and place where I may meet you?

    "Yours, JEDEDIAH WENTWORTH."

    "Send word by the bearer."

"Tell Mr. Wentworth I will call at his house at eleven o'clock."

The cat was certainly out; Mrs. Barry had told, or some one else had,
who I did not know and hardly cared. The scene was to come now, and I
was almost glad of it. Poor Julia! what a time she must have had with
the old bear!

       *       *       *       *       *

At eleven o'clock I was ushered into Mr. Wentworth's sitting-room. Julia
was there, but before I had even spoken to her the old gentleman came
bustling across the room, with his "Mr. Hackmatack, I suppose"; and
then followed a formal introduction between me and her, which both of us
bore with the most praiseworthy fortitude and composure, neither
evincing, even by a glance, that we had ever seen or heard of each other
before. Here was another weight off my mind and Julia's. I had wronged
poor Mrs. Barry. The secret was not out--what could he want? It very
soon appeared.

After a minute's discussion of the weather, the snow, and the
thermometer, the old gentleman drew up his chair to mine, with "I think,
sir, you are connected with the Argus office?"

"Yes, sir; I am its South American editor.'

"Yes!" roared the old man, in a sudden rage. "Sir, I wish South America
was sunk in the depths of the sea!"

"I am sure I do, sir," replied I, glancing at Julia, who did not,
however, understand me. I had not fully passed out of my last night's
distress.

My sympathizing zeal soothed the old gentleman a little, and he said
more coolly, in an undertone: "Well, sir, you are well informed, no
doubt; tell me, in strict secrecy, sir, between you and me, do you--do
you place full credit--entire confidence in the intelligence in this
morning's paper?"

"Excuse me, sir; what paper do you allude to? Ah! the Argus, I see.
Certainly, sir; I have not the least doubt that it is perfectly
correct."

"No doubt, sir! Do you mean to insult me?--Julia, I told you so; he
says there is no doubt it is true. Tell me again there is some mistake,
will you?" The poor girl had been trying to soothe him with the constant
remark of uninformed people, that the newspapers are always in the
wrong. He turned from her, and rose from his chair in a positive rage.
She was half crying. I never saw her more distressed. What did all this
mean? Were one, two, or all of us crazy?

It soon appeared. After pacing the length of the room once or twice,
Wentworth came up to me again, and, attempting to appear cool, said
between his closed lips: "Do you say you have no doubt that Rio Janeiro
is strictly blockaded?"

"Not the slightest in the world," said I, trying to seem unconcerned.

"Not the slightest, sir? What are you so impudent and cool about it for?
Do you think you are talking of the opening of a rose-bud or the death
of a mosquito? Have you no sympathy with the sufferings of a
fellow-creature? Why, sir!" and the old man's teeth chattered as he
spoke, "I have five cargoes of flour on their way to Rio, and their
captains will--Damn it, sir, I shall lose the whole venture."

The secret was out. The old fool had been sending flour to Rio, knowing
as little of the state of affairs there as a child.

"And do you really mean, sir," continued the old man, "that there is an
embargo in force in Monte Video?"

"Certainly, sir; but I'm very sorry for it."

"Sorry for it! of course you are;--and that all foreigners are sent out
of Buenos Ayres?"

"Undoubtedly, sir. I wish--"

"Who does not wish so? Why, sir, my corresponding friends there are half
across the sea by this time. I wish Rosas was in--and that the Indians
have risen near Maranham?"

"Undoubtedly, sir."

"Undoubtedly! I tell you, sir, I have two vessels waiting for cargoes of
India-rubbers there, under a blunder-headed captain, who will do nothing
he has not been bidden to,--obey his orders if he breaks his owners. You
smile, sir? Why, I should have made thirty thousand dollars this winter,
sir, by my India-rubbers, if we had not had this devilish mild, open
weather, you and Miss Julia there have been praising so. But next winter
must be a severe one, and with those India-rubbers I should have
made--But now those Indians,--pshaw! And a revolution in Chili?"

"Yes, sir."

"No trade there! And in Venezuela?"

"Yes, sir"

"Yes, sir; yes, sir; yes, sir; yes, sir! Sir, I am ruined. Say 'Yes,
sir,' to that. I have thirteen vessels at this moment in the South
American trade, sir; say 'Yes, sir,' to that. Half of them will be
taken by the piratical scoundrels; say 'Yes, sir,' to that. Their
insurance will not cover them; say 'Yes, sir,' to that. The other half
will forfeit their cargoes, or sell them for next to nothing; say 'Yes,
sir,' to that. I tell you I am a ruined man, and I wish the South
America, and your daily Argus, and you--"

Here the old gentleman's old-school breeding got the better of his rage,
and he sank down in his arm-chair, and, bursting into tears, said:
"Excuse me, sir,--excuse me, sir,--I am too warm."

We all sat for a few moments in silence, but then I took my share of the
conversation. I wish you could have seen the old man's face light up
little by little, as I showed him that to a person who understood the
politics and condition of the mercurial country with which he had
ignorantly attempted to trade, his condition was not near so bad as he
thought it; that though one port was blockaded, another was opened; that
though one revolution thwarted him, a few weeks would show another which
would favor him; that the goods which, as he saw, would be worthless at
the port to which he had sent them, would be valuable elsewhere; that
the vessels which would fail in securing the cargoes he had ordered
could secure others; that the very revolutions and wars which troubled
him would require in some instances large government purchases, perhaps
large contracts for freight, possibly even for passage,--his vessels
might be used for transports; that the very excitement of some
districts might be made to turn to our advantage; that, in short, there
were a thousand chances open to him which skilful agents could readily
improve. I reminded him that a quick run in a clipper schooner could
carry directions to half these skippers of his, to whom, with an
infatuation which I could not and cannot conceive, he had left no
discretion, and who indeed were to be pardoned if they could use none,
seeing the tumult as they did with only half an eye. I talked to him for
half an hour, and went into details to show that my plans were not
impracticable. The old gentleman grew brighter and brighter, and Julia,
as I saw, whenever I stole a glance across the room, felt happier and
happier. The poor girl had had a hard time since he had first heard this
news whispered the evening before.

His difficulties were not over, however; for when I talked to him of the
necessity of sending out one or two skilful agents immediately to take
the personal superintendence of his complicated affairs, the old man
sighed, and said he had no skilful agents to send.

With his customary suspicion, he had no partners, and had never
intrusted his clerks with any general insight into his business.
Besides, he considered them all, like his captains, blunder-headed to
the last degree. I believe it was an idea of Julia's, communicated to me
in an eager, entreating glance, which induced me to propose myself as
one of these confidential agents, and to be responsible for the other.
I thought, as I spoke, of Singleton, to whom I knew I could explain my
plans in full, and whose mercantile experience would make him a valuable
coadjutor. The old gentleman accepted my offer eagerly. I told him that
twenty-four hours were all I wanted to prepare myself. He immediately
took measures for the charter of two little clipper schooners which lay
in port then; and before two days were past, Singleton and I were on our
voyage to South America. Imagine, if you can, how these two days were
spent. Then, as now, I could prepare for any journey in twenty minutes,
and of course I had no little time at my disposal for last words with
Mr. and--Miss Wentworth. How I won on the old gentleman's heart in those
two days! How he praised me to Julia, and then, in as natural affection,
how he praised her to me! And how Julia and I smiled through our tears,
when, in the last good-bys, he said he was too old to write or read any
but business letters, and charged me and her to keep up a close
correspondence, which on one side should tell all that I saw and did,
and on the other hand remind me of all at home.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have neither time nor room to give the details of that South American
expedition. I have no right to. There were revolutions accomplished in
those days without any object in the world's eyes; and, even in mine,
only serving to sell certain cargoes of long cloths and flour. The
details of those outbreaks now told would make some patriotic presidents
tremble in their seats; and I have no right to betray confidence at
whatever rate I purchased it. Usually, indeed, my feats and Singleton's
were only obtaining the best information and communicating the most
speedy instructions to Mr. Wentworth's vessels, which were made to move
from port to port with a rapidity and intricacy of movement which none
besides us two understood in the least. It was in that expedition that I
travelled almost alone across the continent. I was, I think, the first
white man who ever passed through the mountain path of Xamaulipas, now
so famous in all the Chilian picturesque annuals. I was carrying
directions for some vessels which had gone round the Cape; and what a
time Burrows and Wheatland and I had a week after, when we rode into the
public square of Valparaiso shouting, "Muera la Constitucion,--Viva
Libertad!" by our own unassisted lungs actually raising a rebellion,
and, which was of more importance, a prohibition on foreign flour, while
Bahamarra and his army were within a hundred miles of us. How those
vessels came up the harbor, and how we unloaded them, knowing that at
best our revolution could only last five days! But as I said, I must be
careful, or I shall be telling other people's secrets.

The result of that expedition was that those thirteen vessels all made
good outward voyages, and all but one or two eventually made profitable
home voyages. When I returned home, the old gentleman received me with
open arms. I had rescued, as he said, a large share of that fortune
which he valued so highly. To say the truth, I felt and feel that he had
planned his voyages so blindly, that, without some wiser head than his,
they would never have resulted in anything. They were his last, as they
were almost his first, South American ventures. He returned to his old
course of more methodical trading for the few remaining years of his
life. They were, thank Heaven, the only taste of mercantile business
which I ever had. Living as I did, in the very sunshine of Mr. Went
worth's favor, I went through the amusing farce of paying my addresses
to Julia in approved form, and in due time received the old gentleman's
cordial assent to our union, and his blessing upon it. In six months
after my return, we were married; the old man as happy as a king. He
would have preferred a little that the ceremony should have been
performed by Mr. B----, his friend and pastor, but readily assented to
my wishes to call upon a dear and early friend of my own.

Harry Barry came from Topsham and performed the ceremony, "assisted by
Rev. Mr. B."

G.H.

ARGUS COTTAGE, April 1, 1842.




THE OLD AND THE NEW, FACE TO FACE.

A THUMB-NAIL SKETCH.


[This essay was published in Sartain's Magazine, in 1852, as "A
Thumb-nail Sketch," having received one of ten premiums which Mr.
Sartain offered to encourage young writers. It had been written a few
years earlier, some time before the studies of St. Paul's life by
Conybeare and Howson, now so well known, were made public. The
chronology of my essay does not precisely agree with that of these
distinguished scholars. But I make no attempt now either to recast the
essay or to discuss the delicate and complicated questions which belong
to the chronology of Paul's life or to that of Nero; for there is no
question with regard to the leading facts. At the end of twenty years I
may again express the wish that some master competent to the greatest
themes might take the trial of Paul as the subject of a picture.]

       *       *       *       *       *

In a Roman audience-chamber, the old civilization and the new
civilization brought out, at the very birth of the new, their chosen
champions.

In that little scene, as in one of Rembrandt's thumb-nail studies for a
great picture, the lights and shades are as distinct as they will ever
be in the largest scene of history. The champions were perfect
representatives of the parties. And any man, with the soul of a man,
looking on, could have prophesied the issue of the great battle from the
issue of that contest.

The old civilization of the Roman Empire, just at that time, had reached
a point which, in all those outward forms which strike the eye, would
regard our times as mean indeed. It had palaces of marble, where even
modern kings would build of brick with a marble front to catch the eye;
it counted its armies by thousands, where we count ours by hundreds; it
surmounted long colonnades with its exquisite statues, for which modern
labor digs deep in ruined cities, because it cannot equal them from its
own genius; it had roads, which are almost eternal, and which, for their
purposes, show a luxury of wealth and labor that our boasted locomotion
cannot rival. These are its works of a larger scale. And if you enter
the palaces, you find pictures of matchless worth, rich dresses which
modern looms cannot rival, and sumptuous furniture at which modern times
can only wonder. The outside of the ancient civilization is unequalled
by the outside of ours, and for centuries will be unequalled by it. We
have not surpassed it there. And we see how it attained this
distinction, such as it was. It came by the constant concentration of
power. Power in few hands is the secret of its display and glory. And
thus that form of civilization attained its very climax in the moment of
the greatest unity of the Roman Empire. When the Empire nestled into
rest, after the convulsions in which it was born; when a generation had
passed away of those who had been Roman citizens; when a generation
arose, which, excepting one man, the emperor, was a nation of Roman
subjects,--then the Empire was at its height of power, its
centralization was complete, the system of its civilization was at the
zenith of its success.

At that moment it was that there dawned at Rome the first gray
morning-light of the new civilization.

At that moment it was that that short scene, in that one chamber,
contrasted the two as clearly as they can be contrasted even in long
centuries.

There is one man, the emperor, who is a precise type, an exact
representative, of the old. That man is brought face to face with
another who is a precise type, an exact representative, of the new.

Only look at them as they stand there! The man who best illustrates the
old civilization owes to it the most careful nurture. From his childhood
he has been its petted darling. Its principal is concentration under one
head. He is that head. When he is a child, men know he will be emperor
of the world. The wise men of the world teach him; the poets of the
world flatter him; the princes of the world bow to him. He is trained in
all elegant accomplishments; he is led forward through a graceful,
luxurious society. His bearing is that of an emperor; his face is the
face of fine physical beauty. Imagine for yourself the sensual
countenance of a young Bacchus, beautiful as Milton's devils; imagine
him clad in splendor before which even English luxury is mean; arrayed
in jewels, to which even Eastern pomp is tinsel; imagine an expression
of tired hate, of low, brutal lust, hanging on those exquisite
licentious features, and you have before you the type of Roman
civilization. It is the boy just budding into manhood, whom later times
will name as the lowest embodiment of meanness and cruelty! You are
looking upon Nero!

Not only is this man an exact type of the ancient civilization, its
central power, its outside beauty, but the precise time of this sketch
of ours is the exact climax of the _moral_ results of the ancient
civilization. We are to look at Nero just when he has returned to Rome
from a Southern journey.[I] That journey had one object, which
succeeded. To his after-life it gives one memory, which never dies. He
has travelled to his beautiful country palace, that he might kill his
mother!

We can picture to ourselves Agrippina, by knowing that she was Nero's
mother, and our picture will not fail in one feature. She has all the
beauty of sense, all the attraction of passion. Indeed, she is the
Empress of Rome, because she is queen of beauty--and of lust. She is
most beautiful among the beautiful of Rome; but what is that beauty of
feature in a state of whose matrons not one is virtuous, of whose
daughters not one is chaste? It is the beauty of sense alone, fit
adornment of that external grandeur, of that old society.

In the infancy of her son, this beautiful Agrippina consulted a troop of
fortune-tellers as to his fate; and they told her that he would live to
be Emperor of Rome, and to kill his mother. With all the ecstasy of a
mother's pride fused so strangely with all the excess of an ambitious
woman's love of power, she cried in answer, "He may kill me, if only he
rules Rome!"[J]

She spoke her own fate in these words.

Here is the account of it by Tacitus. Nero had made all the
preparations; had arranged a barge, that of a sudden its deck might fall
heavily upon those in the cabin, and crush them in an instant. He meant
thus to give to the murder which he planned the aspect of an accident.
To this fatal vessel he led Agrippina. He talked with her affectionately
and gravely on the way; "and when they parted at the lakeside, with his
old boyish familiarity he pressed her closely to his heart, either to
conceal his purpose, or because the last sight of a mother, on the eve
of death, touched even his cruel nature, and then bade her farewell."

Just at the point upon the lake where he had directed, as the Empress
sat in her cabin talking with her attendants, the treacherous deck was
let fall upon them all. But the plot failed. She saw dead at her feet
one of her favorites, crushed by the sudden blow. But she had escaped
it. She saw that death awaited them all upon the vessel. The men around
sprang forward, ready to do their master's bidding in a less clumsy and
more certain way. But the Empress, with one of her attendants, sprang
from the treacherous vessel into the less treacherous waves. And there,
this faithful friend of hers, with a woman's wit and a woman's devotion,
drew on her own head the blows and stabs of the murderers above, by
crying, as if in drowning, "Save me, I am Nero's mother!" Uttering those
words of self-devotion, she was killed by the murderers above, while the
Empress, in safer silence, buoyed up by fragments of the wreck, floated
to the shore.

Nero had failed thus in secret crime, and yet he knew that he could not
stop here. And the next day after his mother's deliverance, he sent a
soldier to her palace, with a guard; and there, where she was deserted
even by her last attendant, without pretence of secrecy, they put to
death the daughter and the mother of a Caesar. And Nero only waits to
look with a laugh upon the beauty of the corpse, before he returns to
resume his government at Rome.

That moment was the culminating moment of the ancient civilization. It
is complete in its centralizing power; it is complete in its external
beauty; it is complete in its crime. Beautiful as Eden to the eye, with
luxury, with comfort, with easy indolence to all; but dust and ashes
beneath the surface! It is corrupted at the head! It is corrupted at
the heart! There is nothing firm!

This is the moment which I take for our little picture. At this very
moment there is announced the first germ of the new civilization. In the
very midst of this falsehood, there sounds one voice of truth; in the
very arms of this giant, there plays the baby boy who is to cleave him
to the ground. This Nero slowly returns to the city. He meets the
congratulations of a senate, which thank him and the gods that he has
murdered his own mother. With the agony of an undying conscience
torturing him, he strives to avert care by amusement. He hopes to turn
the mob from despising him by the grandeur of their public
entertainments. He enlarges for them the circus. He calls unheard-of
beasts to be baited and killed for their enjoyment. The finest actors
rant, the sweetest musicians sing, that Nero may forget his mother, and
that his people may forget him.

At that period, the statesmen who direct the machinery of affairs inform
