of bustle which it had not exhibited for two reigns. Officers of the
Earl's household, liverymen and retainers, went and came with all the
insolent fracas which attaches to their profession. The neigh of horses
and the baying of hounds were heard; for my lord, in his occupation of
inspecting and surveying the manor and demesne, was of course provided
with the means of following his pleasure in the chase or park, said to
have been the earliest that was enclosed in England, and which was well
stocked with deer that had long roamed there unmolested. Several of the
inhabitants of the village, in anxious hope of a favourable result from
this unwonted visit, loitered about the courtyard, and awaited the great
man's coming forth. Their attention was excited by the hasty arrival of
Varney, and a murmur ran amongst them, "The Earl's master of the
horse!" while they hurried to bespeak favour by hastily unbonneting, and
proffering to hold the bridle and stirrup of the favoured retainer and
his attendant.

"Stand somewhat aloof, my masters!" said Varney haughtily, "and let the
domestics do their office."

The mortified citizens and peasants fell back at the signal; while
Lambourne, who had his eye upon his superior's deportment, repelled
the services of those who offered to assist him, with yet more
discourtesy--"Stand back, Jack peasant, with a murrain to you, and let
these knave footmen do their duty!"

While they gave their nags to the attendants of the household, and
walked into the mansion with an air of superiority which long practice
and consciousness of birth rendered natural to Varney, and which
Lambourne endeavoured to imitate as well as he could, the poor
inhabitants of Woodstock whispered to each other, "Well-a-day! God save
us from all such misproud princoxes! An the master be like the men, why,
the fiend may take all, and yet have no more than his due."

"Silence, good neighbours!" said the bailiff, "keep tongue betwixt
teeth; we shall know more by-and-by. But never will a lord come to
Woodstock so welcome as bluff old King Harry! He would horsewhip a
fellow one day with his own royal hand, and then fling him an handful
of silver groats, with his own broad face on them, to 'noint the sore
withal."

"Ay, rest be with him!" echoed the auditors; "it will be long ere this
Lady Elizabeth horsewhip any of us."

"There is no saying," answered the bailiff. "Meanwhile, patience, good
neighbours, and let us comfort ourselves by thinking that we deserve
such notice at her Grace's hands."

Meanwhile, Varney, closely followed by his new dependant, made his way
to the hall, where men of more note and consequence than those left in
the courtyard awaited the appearance of the Earl, who as yet kept his
chamber. All paid court to Varney, with more or less deference, as
suited their own rank, or the urgency of the business which brought them
to his lord's levee. To the general question of, "When comes my lord
forth, Master Varney?" he gave brief answers, as, "See you not my boots?
I am but just returned from Oxford, and know nothing of it," and the
like, until the same query was put in a higher tone by a personage of
more importance. "I will inquire of the chamberlain, Sir Thomas Copely,"
was the reply. The chamberlain, distinguished by his silver key,
answered that the Earl only awaited Master Varney's return to come down,
but that he would first speak with him in his private chamber. Varney,
therefore, bowed to the company, and took leave, to enter his lord's
apartment.

There was a murmur of expectation which lasted a few minutes, and was
at length hushed by the opening of the folding-doors at the upper end or
the apartment, through which the Earl made his entrance, marshalled by
his chamberlain and the steward of his family, and followed by Richard
Varney. In his noble mien and princely features, men read nothing of
that insolence which was practised by his dependants. His courtesies
were, indeed, measured by the rank of those to whom they were addressed,
but even the meanest person present had a share of his gracious notice.
The inquiries which he made respecting the condition of the manor, of
the Queen's rights there, and of the advantages and disadvantages which
might attend her occasional residence at the royal seat of Woodstock,
seemed to show that he had most earnestly investigated the matter of the
petition of the inhabitants, and with a desire to forward the interest
of the place.

"Now the Lord love his noble countenance!" said the bailiff, who had
thrust himself into the presence-chamber; "he looks somewhat pale. I
warrant him he hath spent the whole night in perusing our memorial.
Master Toughyarn, who took six months to draw it up, said it would take
a week to understand it; and see if the Earl hath not knocked the marrow
out of it in twenty-four hours!"

The Earl then acquainted them that he should move their sovereign
to honour Woodstock occasionally with her residence during her royal
progresses, that the town and its vicinity might derive, from her
countenance and favour, the same advantages as from those of her
predecessors. Meanwhile, he rejoiced to be the expounder of her
gracious pleasure, in assuring them that, for the increase of trade
and encouragement of the worthy burgesses of Woodstock, her Majesty was
minded to erect the town into a Staple for wool.

This joyful intelligence was received with the acclamations not only of
the better sort who were admitted to the audience-chamber, but of the
commons who awaited without.

The freedom of the corporation was presented to the Earl upon knee by
the magistrates of the place, together with a purse of gold pieces,
which the Earl handed to Varney, who, on his part, gave a share to
Lambourne, as the most acceptable earnest of his new service.

The Earl and his retinue took horse soon after to return to court,
accompanied by the shouts of the inhabitants of Woodstock, who made the
old oaks ring with re-echoing, "Long live Queen Elizabeth, and the noble
Earl of Leicester!" The urbanity and courtesy of the Earl even threw a
gleam of popularity over his attendants, as their haughty deportment had
formerly obscured that of their master; and men shouted, "Long life to
the Earl, and to his gallant followers!" as Varney and Lambourne, each
in his rank, rode proudly through the streets of Woodstock.





CHAPTER VIII.

HOST. I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will, at the least, keep
your counsel.--MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR.

It becomes necessary to return to the detail of those circumstances
which accompanied, and indeed occasioned, the sudden disappearance
of Tressilian from the sign of the Black Bear at Cumnor. It will be
recollected that this gentleman, after his rencounter with Varney, had
returned to Giles Gosling's caravansary, where he shut himself up in his
own chamber, demanded pen, ink, and paper, and announced his purpose
to remain private for the day. In the evening he appeared again in the
public room, where Michael Lambourne, who had been on the watch for
him, agreeably to his engagement to Varney, endeavoured to renew his
acquaintance with him, and hoped he retained no unfriendly recollection
of the part he had taken in the morning's scuffle.

But Tressilian repelled his advances firmly, though with civility.
"Master Lambourne," said he, "I trust I have recompensed to your
pleasure the time you have wasted on me. Under the show of wild
bluntness which you exhibit, I know you have sense enough to understand
me, when I say frankly that the object of our temporary acquaintance
having been accomplished, we must be strangers to each other in future."

"VOTO!" said Lambourne, twirling his whiskers with one hand, and
grasping the hilt of his weapon with the other; "if I thought that this
usage was meant to insult me--"

"You would bear it with discretion, doubtless," interrupted Tressilian,
"as you must do at any rate. You know too well the distance that is
betwixt us, to require me to explain myself further. Good evening."

So saying, he turned his back upon his former companion, and entered
into discourse with the landlord. Michael Lambourne felt strongly
disposed to bully; but his wrath died away in a few incoherent oaths
and ejaculations, and he sank unresistingly under the ascendency which
superior spirits possess over persons of his habits and description. He
remained moody and silent in a corner of the apartment, paying the most
marked attention to every motion of his late companion, against whom he
began now to nourish a quarrel on his own account, which he trusted to
avenge by the execution of his new master Varney's directions. The hour
of supper arrived, and was followed by that of repose, when Tressilian,
like others, retired to his sleeping apartment.

He had not been in bed long, when the train of sad reveries, which
supplied the place of rest in his disturbed mind, was suddenly
interrupted by the jar of a door on its hinges, and a light was seen to
glimmer in the apartment. Tressilian, who was as brave as steel, sprang
from his bed at this alarm, and had laid hand upon his sword, when he
was prevented from drawing it by a voice which said, "Be not too rash
with your rapier, Master Tressilian. It is I, your host, Giles Gosling."

At the same time, unshrouding the dark lantern, which had hitherto
only emitted an indistinct glimmer, the goodly aspect and figure of
the landlord of the Black Bear was visibly presented to his astonished
guest.

"What mummery is this, mine host?" said Tressilian. "Have you supped as
jollily as last night, and so mistaken your chamber? or is midnight a
time for masquerading it in your guest's lodging?"

"Master Tressilian," replied mine host, "I know my place and my time as
well as e'er a merry landlord in England. But here has been my hang-dog
kinsman watching you as close as ever cat watched a mouse; and here have
you, on the other hand, quarrelled and fought, either with him or with
some other person, and I fear that danger will come of it."

"Go to, thou art but a fool, man," said Tressilian. "Thy kinsman is
beneath my resentment; and besides, why shouldst thou think I had
quarrelled with any one whomsoever?"

"Oh, sir," replied the innkeeper, "there was a red spot on thy very
cheek-bone, which boded of a late brawl, as sure as the conjunction of
Mars and Saturn threatens misfortune; and when you returned, the buckles
of your girdle were brought forward, and your step was quick and
hasty, and all things showed your hand and your hilt had been lately
acquainted."

"Well, good mine host, if I have been obliged to draw my sword," said
Tressilian, "why should such a circumstance fetch thee out of thy warm
bed at this time of night? Thou seest the mischief is all over."

"Under favour, that is what I doubt. Anthony Foster is a dangerous man,
defended by strong court patronage, which hath borne him out in matters
of very deep concernment. And, then, my kinsman--why, I have told
you what he is; and if these two old cronies have made up their old
acquaintance, I would not, my worshipful guest, that it should be at
thy cost. I promise you, Mike Lambourne has been making very particular
inquiries at my hostler when and which way you ride. Now, I would have
you think whether you may not have done or said something for which you
may be waylaid, and taken at disadvantage."

"Thou art an honest man, mine host," said Tressilian, after a moment's
consideration, "and I will deal frankly with thee. If these men's malice
is directed against me--as I deny not but it may--it is because they are
the agents of a more powerful villain than themselves."

"You mean Master Richard Varney, do you not?" said the landlord; "he was
at Cumnor Place yesterday, and came not thither so private but what he
was espied by one who told me."

"I mean the same, mine host."

"Then, for God's sake, worshipful Master Tressilian," said honest
Gosling, "look well to yourself. This Varney is the protector and patron
of Anthony Foster, who holds under him, and by his favour, some lease
of yonder mansion and the park. Varney got a large grant of the lands
of the Abbacy of Abingdon, and Cumnor Place amongst others, from his
master, the Earl of Leicester. Men say he can do everything with him,
though I hold the Earl too good a nobleman to employ him as some men
talk of. And then the Earl can do anything (that is, anything right or
fitting) with the Queen, God bless her! So you see what an enemy you
have made to yourself."

"Well--it is done, and I cannot help it," answered Tressilian.

"Uds precious, but it must be helped in some manner," said the host.
"Richard Varney--why, what between his influence with my lord, and his
pretending to so many old and vexatious claims in right of the abbot
here, men fear almost to mention his name, much more to set themselves
against his practices. You may judge by our discourses the last night.
Men said their pleasure of Tony Foster, but not a word of Richard
Varney, though all men judge him to be at the bottom of yonder mystery
about the pretty wench. But perhaps you know more of that matter than
I do; for women, though they wear not swords, are occasion for many
a blade's exchanging a sheath of neat's leather for one of flesh and
blood."

"I do indeed know more of that poor unfortunate lady than thou dost,
my friendly host; and so bankrupt am I, at this moment, of friends and
advice, that I will willingly make a counsellor of thee, and tell thee
the whole history, the rather that I have a favour to ask when my tale
is ended."

"Good Master Tressilian," said the landlord, "I am but a poor innkeeper,
little able to adjust or counsel such a guest as yourself. But as sure
as I have risen decently above the world, by giving good measure and
reasonable charges, I am an honest man; and as such, if I may not
be able to assist you, I am, at least, not capable to abuse your
confidence. Say away therefore, as confidently as if you spoke to your
father; and thus far at least be certain, that my curiosity--for I will
not deny that which belongs to my calling--is joined to a reasonable
degree of discretion."

"I doubt it not, mine host," answered Tressilian; and while his auditor
remained in anxious expectation, he meditated for an instant how he
should commence his narrative. "My tale," he at length said, "to be
quite intelligible, must begin at some distance back. You have heard of
the battle of Stoke, my good host, and perhaps of old Sir Roger Robsart,
who, in that battle, valiantly took part with Henry VII., the Queen's
grandfather, and routed the Earl of Lincoln, Lord Geraldin and his wild
Irish, and the Flemings whom the Duchess of Burgundy had sent over, in
the quarrel of Lambert Simnel?"

"I remember both one and the other," said Giles Gosling; "it is sung
of a dozen times a week on my ale-bench below. Sir Roger Robsart of
Devon--oh, ay, 'tis him of whom minstrels sing to this hour,--


     'He was the flower of Stoke's red field,
     When Martin Swart on ground lay slain;
     In raging rout he never reel'd,
     But like a rock did firm remain.'

     [This verse, or something similar, occurs in a long ballad, or
     poem, on Flodden Field, reprinted by the late Henry Weber.]

"Ay, and then there was Martin Swart I have heard my grandfather talk
of, and of the jolly Almains whom he commanded, with their slashed
doublets and quaint hose, all frounced with ribands above the
nether-stocks. Here's a song goes of Martin Swart, too, an I had but
memory for it:--


     'Martin Swart and his men,
     Saddle them, saddle them,
     Martin Swart and his men;
     Saddle them well.'"

     [This verse of an old song actually occurs in an old play where
     the singer boasts,

     "Courteously I can both counter and knack
     Of Martin Swart and all his merry men."]

"True, good mine host--the day was long talked of; but if you sing so
loud, you will awake more listeners than I care to commit my confidence
unto."

"I crave pardon, my worshipful guest," said mine host, "I was oblivious.
When an old song comes across us merry old knights of the spigot, it
runs away with our discretion."

"Well, mine host, my grandfather, like some other Cornishmen, kept a
warm affection to the House of York, and espoused the quarrel of this
Simnel, assuming the title of Earl of Warwick, as the county afterwards,
in great numbers, countenanced the cause of Perkin Warbeck, calling
himself the Duke of York. My grandsire joined Simnel's standard, and was
taken fighting desperately at Stoke, where most of the leaders of that
unhappy army were slain in their harness. The good knight to whom he
rendered himself, Sir Roger Robsart, protected him from the immediate
vengeance of the king, and dismissed him without ransom. But he was
unable to guard him from other penalties of his rashness, being the
heavy fines by which he was impoverished, according to Henry's mode of
weakening his enemies. The good knight did what he might to mitigate the
distresses of my ancestor; and their friendship became so strict, that
my father was bred up as the sworn brother and intimate of the present
Sir Hugh Robsart, the only son of Sir Roger, and the heir of his honest,
and generous, and hospitable temper, though not equal to him in martial
achievements."

"I have heard of good Sir Hugh Robsart," interrupted the host, "many a
time and oft; his huntsman and sworn servant, Will Badger, hath spoken
of him an hundred times in this very house. A jovial knight he is,
and hath loved hospitality and open housekeeping more than the present
fashion, which lays as much gold lace on the seams of a doublet as would
feed a dozen of tall fellows with beef and ale for a twelvemonth, and
let them have their evening at the alehouse once a week, to do good to
the publican."

"If you have seen Will Badger, mine host," said Tressilian, "you have
heard enough of Sir Hugh Robsart; and therefore I will but say, that the
hospitality you boast of hath proved somewhat detrimental to the estate
of his family, which is perhaps of the less consequence, as he has but
one daughter to whom to bequeath it. And here begins my share in the
tale. Upon my father's death, now several years since, the good Sir Hugh
would willingly have made me his constant companion. There was a
time, however, at which I felt the kind knight's excessive love for
field-sports detained me from studies, by which I might have profited
more; but I ceased to regret the leisure which gratitude and hereditary
friendship compelled me to bestow on these rural avocations. The
exquisite beauty of Mistress Amy Robsart, as she grew up from childhood
to woman, could not escape one whom circumstances obliged to be so
constantly in her company--I loved her, in short, mine host, and her
father saw it."

"And crossed your true loves, no doubt?" said mine host. "It is the way
in all such cases; and I judge it must have been so in your instance,
from the heavy sigh you uttered even now."

"The case was different, mine host. My suit was highly approved by
the generous Sir Hugh Robsart; it was his daughter who was cold to my
passion."

"She was the more dangerous enemy of the two," said the innkeeper. "I
fear me your suit proved a cold one."

"She yielded me her esteem," said Tressilian, "and seemed not unwilling
that I should hope it might ripen into a warmer passion. There was
a contract of future marriage executed betwixt us, upon her father's
intercession; but to comply with her anxious request, the execution was
deferred for a twelvemonth. During this period, Richard Varney appeared
in the country, and, availing himself of some distant family connection
with Sir Hugh Robsart, spent much of his time in his company, until, at
length, he almost lived in the family."

"That could bode no good to the place he honoured with his residence,"
said Gosling.

"No, by the rood!" replied Tressilian. "Misunderstanding and misery
followed his presence, yet so strangely that I am at this moment at a
loss to trace the gradations of their encroachment upon a family which
had, till then, been so happy. For a time Amy Robsart received the
attentions of this man Varney with the indifference attached to common
courtesies; then followed a period in which she seemed to regard him
with dislike, and even with disgust; and then an extraordinary species
of connection appeared to grow up betwixt them. Varney dropped those
airs of pretension and gallantry which had marked his former approaches;
and Amy, on the other hand, seemed to renounce the ill-disguised disgust
with which she had regarded them. They seemed to have more of privacy
and confidence together than I fully liked, and I suspected that they
met in private, where there was less restraint than in our presence.
Many circumstances, which I noticed but little at the time--for I deemed
her heart as open as her angelic countenance--have since arisen on my
memory, to convince me of their private understanding. But I need not
detail them--the fact speaks for itself. She vanished from her father's
house; Varney disappeared at the same time; and this very day I have
seen her in the character of his paramour, living in the house of his
sordid dependant Foster, and visited by him, muffled, and by a secret
entrance."

"And this, then, is the cause of your quarrel? Methinks, you should
have been sure that the fair lady either desired or deserved your
interference."

"Mine host," answered Tressilian, "my father--such I must ever consider
Sir Hugh Robsart--sits at home struggling with his grief, or, if so
far recovered, vainly attempting to drown, in the practice of
his field-sports, the recollection that he had once a daughter--a
recollection which ever and anon breaks from him under circumstances the
most pathetic. I could not brook the idea that he should live in misery,
and Amy in guilt; and I endeavoured to-seek her out, with the hope of
inducing her to return to her family. I have found her, and when I have
either succeeded in my attempt, or have found it altogether unavailing,
it is my purpose to embark for the Virginia voyage."

"Be not so rash, good sir," replied Giles Gosling, "and cast not
yourself away because a woman--to be brief--IS a woman, and changes
her lovers like her suit of ribands, with no better reason than mere
fantasy. And ere we probe this matter further, let me ask you what
circumstances of suspicion directed you so truly to this lady's
residence, or rather to her place of concealment?"

"The last is the better chosen word, mine host," answered Tressilian;
"and touching your question, the knowledge that Varney held large grants
of the demesnes formerly belonging to the monks of Abingdon directed me
to this neighbourhood; and your nephew's visit to his old comrade Foster
gave me the means of conviction on the subject."

"And what is now your purpose, worthy sir?--excuse my freedom in asking
the question so broadly."

"I purpose, mine host," said Tressilian, "to renew my visit to the place
of her residence to-morrow, and to seek a more detailed communication
with her than I have had to-day. She must indeed be widely changed from
what she once was, if my words make no impression upon her."

"Under your favour, Master Tressilian," said the landlord, "you can
follow no such course. The lady, if I understand you, has already
rejected your interference in the matter."

"It is but too true," said Tressilian; "I cannot deny it."

"Then, marry, by what right or interest do you process a compulsory
interference with her inclination, disgraceful as it may be to herself
and to her parents? Unless my judgment gulls me, those under whose
protection she has thrown herself would have small hesitation to reject
your interference, even if it were that of a father or brother; but as
a discarded lover, you expose yourself to be repelled with the strong
hand, as well as with scorn. You can apply to no magistrate for aid or
countenance; and you are hunting, therefore, a shadow in water, and will
only (excuse my plainness) come by ducking and danger in attempting to
catch it."

"I will appeal to the Earl of Leicester," said Tressilian, "against
the infamy of his favourite. He courts the severe and strict sect of
Puritans. He dare not, for the sake of his own character, refuse my
appeal, even although he were destitute of the principles of honour and
nobleness with which fame invests him. Or I will appeal to the Queen
herself."

"Should Leicester," said the landlord, "be disposed to protect his
dependant (as indeed he is said to be very confidential with Varney),
the appeal to the Queen may bring them both to reason. Her Majesty is
strict in such matters, and (if it be not treason to speak it) will
rather, it is said, pardon a dozen courtiers for falling in love with
herself, than one for giving preference to another woman. Coragio then,
my brave guest! for if thou layest a petition from Sir Hugh at the foot
of the throne, bucklered by the story of thine own wrongs, the favourite
Earl dared as soon leap into the Thames at the fullest and deepest, as
offer to protect Varney in a cause of this nature. But to do this
with any chance of success, you must go formally to work; and, without
staying here to tilt with the master of horse to a privy councillor, and
expose yourself to the dagger of his cameradoes, you should hie you to
Devonshire, get a petition drawn up for Sir Hugh Robsart, and make as
many friends as you can to forward your interest at court."

"You have spoken well, mine host," said Tressilian, "and I will profit
by your advice, and leave you to-morrow early."

"Nay, leave me to-night, sir, before to-morrow comes," said he landlord.
"I never prayed for a guest's arrival more eagerly than I do to have
you safely gone, My kinsman's destiny is most like to be hanged for
something, but I would not that the cause were the murder of an honoured
guest of mine. 'Better ride safe in the dark,' says the proverb, 'than
in daylight with a cut-throat at your elbow.' Come, sir, I move you for
your own safety. Your horse and all is ready, and here is your score."

"It is somewhat under a noble," said Tressilian, giving one to the host;
"give the balance to pretty Cicely, your daughter, and the servants of
the house."

"They shall taste of your bounty, sir," said Gosling, "and you should
taste of my daughter's lips in grateful acknowledgment, but at this hour
she cannot grace the porch to greet your departure."

"Do not trust your daughter too far with your guests, my good landlord,"
said Tressilian.

"Oh, sir, we will keep measure; but I wonder not that you are jealous
of them all.--May I crave to know with what aspect the fair lady at the
Place yesterday received you?"

"I own," said Tressilian, "it was angry as well as confused, and affords
me little hope that she is yet awakened from her unhappy delusion."

"In that case, sir, I see not why you should play the champion of a
wench that will none of you, and incur the resentment of a favourite's
favourite, as dangerous a monster as ever a knight adventurer
encountered in the old story books."

"You do me wrong in the supposition, mine host--gross wrong," said
Tressilian; "I do not desire that Amy should ever turn thought upon me
more. Let me but see her restored to her father, and all I have to do in
Europe--perhaps in the world--is over and ended."

"A wiser resolution were to drink a cup of sack, and forget her," said
the landlord. "But five-and-twenty and fifty look on those matters with
different eyes, especially when one cast of peepers is set in the skull
of a young gallant, and the other in that of an old publican. I pity
you, Master Tressilian, but I see not how I can aid you in the matter."

"Only thus far, mine host," replied Tressilian--"keep a watch on the
motions of those at the Place, which thou canst easily learn without
suspicion, as all men's news fly to the ale-bench; and be pleased to
communicate the tidings in writing to such person, and to no other,
who shall bring you this ring as a special token. Look at it; it is of
value, and I will freely bestow it on you."

"Nay, sir," said the landlord, "I desire no recompense--but it seems an
unadvised course in me, being in a public line, to connect myself in a
matter of this dark and perilous nature. I have no interest in it."

"You, and every father in the land, who would have his daughter released
from the snares of shame, and sin, and misery, have an interest deeper
than aught concerning earth only could create."

"Well, sir," said the host, "these are brave words; and I do pity from
my soul the frank-hearted old gentleman, who has minished his estate
in good housekeeping for the honour of his country, and now has his
daughter, who should be the stay of his age, and so forth, whisked up
by such a kite as this Varney. And though your part in the matter is
somewhat of the wildest, yet I will e'en be a madcap for company, and
help you in your honest attempt to get back the good man's child, so far
as being your faithful intelligencer can serve. And as I shall be true
to you, I pray you to be trusty to me, and keep my secret; for it were
bad for the custom of the Black Bear should it be said the bear-warder
interfered in such matters. Varney has interest enough with the
justices to dismount my noble emblem from the post on which he swings so
gallantly, to call in my license, and ruin me from garret to cellar."

"Do not doubt my secrecy, mine host," said Tressilian; "I will retain,
besides, the deepest sense of thy service, and of the risk thou dost
run--remember the ring is my sure token. And now, farewell! for it was
thy wise advice that I should tarry here as short a time as may be."

"Follow me, then, Sir Guest," said the landlord, "and tread as gently as
if eggs were under your foot, instead of deal boards. No man must know
when or how you departed."

By the aid of his dark lantern he conducted Tressilian, as soon as he
had made himself ready for his journey, through a long intricacy of
passages, which opened to an outer court, and from thence to a remote
stable, where he had already placed his guest's horse. He then aided
him to fasten on the saddle the small portmantle which contained his
necessaries, opened a postern door, and with a hearty shake of the hand,
and a reiteration of his promise to attend to what went on at Cumnor
Place, he dismissed his guest to his solitary journey.





CHAPTER IX.


     Far in the lane a lonely hut he found,
     No tenant ventured on the unwholesome ground:
     Here smokes his forge, he bares his sinewy arm,
     And early strokes the sounding anvil warm;
     Around his shop the steely sparkles flew,
     As for the steed he shaped the bending shoe.--GAY'S TRIVIA.

As it was deemed proper by the traveller himself, as well as by Giles
Gosling, that Tressilian should avoid being seen in the neighbourhood of
Cumnor by those whom accident might make early risers, the landlord had
given him a route, consisting of various byways and lanes, which he was
to follow in succession, and which, all the turns and short-cuts duly
observed, was to conduct him to the public road to Marlborough.

But, like counsel of every other kind, this species of direction is much
more easily given than followed; and what betwixt the intricacy of the
way, the darkness of the night, Tressilian's ignorance of the country,
and the sad and perplexing thoughts with which he had to contend, his
journey proceeded so slowly, that morning found him only in the vale of
Whitehorse, memorable for the defeat of the Danes in former days, with
his horse deprived of a fore-foot shoe, an accident which threatened to
put a stop to his journey by laming the animal. The residence of a
smith was his first object of inquiry, in which he received little
satisfaction from the dullness or sullenness of one or two peasants,
early bound for their labour, who gave brief and indifferent answers to
his questions on the subject. Anxious, at length, that the partner of
his journey should suffer as little as possible from the unfortunate
accident, Tressilian dismounted, and led his horse in the direction of a
little hamlet, where he hoped either to find or hear tidings of such an
artificer as he now wanted. Through a deep and muddy lane, he at length
waded on to the place, which proved only an assemblage of five or six
miserable huts, about the doors of which one or two persons, whose
appearance seemed as rude as that of their dwellings, were beginning
the toils of the day. One cottage, however, seemed of rather superior
aspect, and the old dame, who was sweeping her threshold, appeared
something less rude than her neighbours. To her Tressilian addressed the
oft-repeated question, whether there was a smith in this neighbourhood,
or any place where he could refresh his horse? The dame looked him in
the face with a peculiar expression as she replied, "Smith! ay, truly is
there a smith--what wouldst ha' wi' un, mon?"

"To shoe my horse, good dame," answered Tressiliany; "you may see that
he has thrown a fore-foot shoe."

"Master Holiday!" exclaimed the dame, without returning any direct
answer--"Master Herasmus Holiday, come and speak to mon, and please
you."

"FAVETE LINGUIS," answered a voice from within; "I cannot now come
forth, Gammer Sludge, being in the very sweetest bit of my morning
studies."

"Nay, but, good now, Master Holiday, come ye out, do ye. Here's a mon
would to Wayland Smith, and I care not to show him way to devil; his
horse hath cast shoe."

"QUID MIHI CUM CABALLO?" replied the man of learning from within; "I
think there is but one wise man in the hundred, and they cannot shoe a
horse without him!"

And forth came the honest pedagogue, for such his dress bespoke him. A
long, lean, shambling, stooping figure was surmounted by a head thatched
with lank, black hair somewhat inclining to grey. His features had the
cast of habitual authority, which I suppose Dionysius carried with him
from the throne to the schoolmaster's pulpit, and bequeathed as a legacy
to all of the same profession, A black buckram cassock was gathered at
his middle with a belt, at which hung, instead of knife or weapon, a
goodly leathern pen-and-ink case. His ferula was stuck on the other
side, like Harlequin's wooden sword; and he carried in his hand the
tattered volume which he had been busily perusing.

On seeing a person of Tressilian's appearance, which he was better
able to estimate than the country folks had been, the schoolmaster
unbonneted, and accosted him with, "SALVE, DOMINE. INTELLIGISNE LINGUAM
LATINAM?"

Tressilian mustered his learning to reply, "LINGUAE LATINAE HAUD PENITUS
IGNARUS, VENIA TUA, DOMINE ERUDITISSIME, VERNACULAM LIBENTIUS LOQUOR."

The Latin reply had upon the schoolmaster the effect which the mason's
sign is said to produce on the brethren of the trowel. He was at once
interested in the learned traveller, listened with gravity to his story
of a tired horse and a lost shoe, and then replied with solemnity, "It
may appear a simple thing, most worshipful, to reply to you that there
dwells, within a brief mile of these TUGURIA, the best FABER FERARIUS,
the most accomplished blacksmith, that ever nailed iron upon horse. Now,
were I to say so, I warrant me you would think yourself COMPOS VOTI, or,
as the vulgar have it, a made man."

"I should at least," said Tressilian, "have a direct answer to a plain
question, which seems difficult to be obtained in this country."

"It is a mere sending of a sinful soul to the evil un," said the old
woman, "the sending a living creature to Wayland Smith."

"Peace, Gammer Sludge!" said the pedagogue; "PAUCA VERBA, Gammer Sludge;
look to the furmity, Gammer Sludge; CURETUR JENTACULUM, Gammer Sludge;
this gentleman is none of thy gossips." Then turning to Tressilian, he
resumed his lofty tone, "And so, most worshipful, you would really think
yourself FELIX BIS TERQUE should I point out to you the dwelling of this
same smith?"

"Sir," replied Tressilian, "I should in that case have all that I want
at present--a horse fit to carry me forward;--out of hearing of your
learning." The last words he muttered to himself.

"O CAECA MENS MORTALIUM!" said the learned man "well was it sung by
Junius Juvenalis, 'NUMINIBUS VOTA EXAUDITA MALIGNIS!'"

"Learned Magister," said Tressilian, "your erudition so greatly exceeds
my poor intellectual capacity that you must excuse my seeking elsewhere
for information which I can better understand."

