And the more we study it, the more we are impressed by it, and the
greater grows our love and veneration for the man of whom were uttered
the immortal words, "First in war, first in peace, and first in the
hearts of his countrymen"--words whose truth grows more apparent with
every passing year.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is one of the maxims of history that great events produce great men,
and the struggle for independence abundantly proved this. Never again in
the country's history did it possess such a group of statesmen as during
its first years, the only other period at all comparable with it being
that which culminated in the Civil War. It was inevitable that these men
should assume the guidance of the newly-launched ship of state, and
Washington had, in every way possible, availed himself of their
assistance. Alexander Hamilton had been his secretary of the treasury,
Thomas Jefferson his secretary of state, and James Monroe his minister
to France. The first man to succeed him in the presidency, however, was
none of these, but John Adams of Massachusetts. His election
was not uncontested, as Washington's had been; in fact, he was elected
by a majority of only three, Jefferson receiving 68 electoral votes to
his 71.

Let us pause for a moment to see how this contest originated, for it was
the beginning of the party government which has endured to the present
day, and which is considered by many people to be essential to the
administration of the Republic. When Washington was elected there were,
strictly speaking, no parties; but there was a body of men who had
favored the adoption of the Constitution, and another, scarcely less
influential, who had opposed it. The former were called Federals, as
favoring a federation of the several states, and the latter were called
Anti-Federals, as opposing it.

One point of difference always leads to others, wider and wider apart,
as the rain-drop, shattered on the summit of the Great Divide, flows one
half to the Atlantic the other half to the Pacific. So, after the
adoption of the Constitution, there was never any serious question of
abrogating it, but two views arose as to its interpretation. The
Federals, in their endeavor to strengthen the national government,
favored the liberal view, which was that anything the Constitution did
not expressly forbid was permitted; while the Anti-Federals, anxious to
preserve all the power possible to the several states, favored the
strict view, which was that unless the Constitution expressly permitted
a thing, it could not be done. As there were many, many points upon
which the Constitution was silent--its framers being mere human beings
and not all-wise intelligences--it will be seen that these
interpretations were as different as black and white. It was this
divergence, combined with another as to whether, in joining the Union,
the several states had surrendered their sovereignty, which has
persisted as the fundamental difference between the Republican and
Democratic parties to the present day.

Adams was a Federalist, and his choice as the candidate of that party
was due to the fact that Hamilton, its leader, was too unpopular with
the people at large to stand any chance of election, more especially
against such a man as Jefferson, who would be his opponent. With
Hamilton out of the way, the place plainly belonged to Adams by right of
succession, and he was nominated. He was aided by the fact that he had
served as Vice-President during both of Washington's administrations,
and it was felt that he would be much more likely to carry out the
policies of his distinguished predecessor than Jefferson, who had been
opposed to Washington on many public questions. Even at that, as has
been said, he won by a majority of only three votes.

In a general way Adams did continue Washington's policies, even
retaining his cabinet. But, while his attitude on national questions
was, in the main, a wise one, he was so unwise and undignified in minor
things, so consumed by petty jealousies, envies and contentions, that he
made enemies instead of friends, and when, four years later, he was
again the Federal candidate, he was easily beaten by Jefferson, and
retired from the White House a soured and disappointed man,
fleeing from the capital by night in order that he might not have to
witness the inauguration of his successor. To such depths had he been
brought by colossal egotism. In his earlier years, he had done
distinguished service as a member of the Continental Congress, but his
prestige never recovered from the effect of his conduct during his term
as President, and his last years were passed in retirement. By a
singular coincidence, he and Jefferson died upon the same day, July 4,
1826.

Thomas Jefferson, whose influence is perhaps more generally acknowledged
in the life of the Republic of to-day than that of any other man of his
time, and whose name, Washington's apart, is oftenest on men's lips, was
born in Virginia in 1743, graduated from William and Mary College,
studied law, and took a prominent part in the agitation preceding the
Revolution. Early in his life, owing to various influences, he began
forming those ideas of simplicity and equality which had such an
influence over his later life, and over the great party of which he was
the founder. His temperament was what we call "artistic"; that is, he
loved books and music and architecture, and the things which make for
what we call culture. And yet, with all that, he soon grew wise and
skillful in the world's affairs, possessing an industry and insight
which assured his speedy success as a lawyer, despite an impediment of
speech which prevented him from being an effective orator.

He had the good fortune to marry happily, finding a comrade and
helpmate, as well as a wife, in beautiful Martha Skelton, with
whom he rode away to his estate at Monticello when he was twenty-seven.
She saw him write the Declaration of Independence, saw him war-governor
of Virginia, and second only to Washington in the respect and affection
of the people of that great commonwealth; and then she died. The shock
of her death left Jefferson a stricken man; he secluded himself from the
public, and declared that his life was at an end.

Washington, however, eight years later, persuaded him to accept a place
in his cabinet as secretary of state. Within a year he had definitely
taken his place as the head of the Anti-Federalist, or Republican party,
and laid the foundations of what afterwards became known as the
Democratic party. His trust in the people had grown and deepened, his
heart had grown more tender with the coming of affliction, and it was
his theory that in a democracy, the people should control public policy
by imposing their wishes upon their rulers, who were answerable to
them--a theory which is now accepted, in appearance, at least, by all
political parties, but which the Federalist leaders of that time
thoroughly detested. Jefferson seems to have felt, too, that the
tendency of those early years was too greatly toward an aristocracy,
which the landed gentry of Virginia were only too willing to provide,
and when, at last, he was chosen for the presidency, he set the country
such an example of simplicity and moderation that there was never again
any chance of its running into that danger.

Everyone has read the story of how, on the day of his
inauguration, he rode on horseback to the capitol, clad in studiously
plain clothes and without attendants, tied his horse to the fence, and
walked unannounced into the Senate chamber. This careful avoidance of
display marked his whole official career, running sometimes, indeed,
into an ostentation of simplicity whose good taste might be questioned.
But of Jefferson's entire sincerity there can be no doubt. Inconsistent
as he sometimes was--as every man is--his purposes and policies all
tended steadily toward the betterment of humanity; and the great mass of
the people who to this day revere his memory, "pay a just debt of
gratitude to a friend who not only served them, as many have done, but
who honored and respected them, as very few have done."

Perhaps the greatest single act of his administration was the purchase
from France of the vast territory known as Louisiana, which included the
state now bearing that name, and the wide, untrodden, wilderness west of
the Mississippi, paying for it the sum of fifteen million dollars--a
rate of a fraction of a cent an acre. The purchase aroused the bitterest
opposition, but Jefferson seems to have had a clearer vision than most
men of what the future of America was to be. He served for two terms,
refusing a third nomination which he was besought to accept, and
retiring to private life on March 4, 1809, after a nearly continuous
public service of forty-four years. The remainder of his life was spent
quietly at his home at Monticello, where men flocked for a
guidance which never failed them. The cause to which his last years were
devoted was characteristic of the man--the establishment of a common
school system in Virginia, and the founding of the University of
Virginia, which still bears the imprint of his mind.

[Illustration: JEFFERSON]

Jefferson is one of the few men whose portrait, as preserved for us,
shows us the man as we imagine him to be. No one can look at that lofty
and noble countenance, with its calm and wide-set eyes, its firm yet
tender mouth, its expression of complete serenity, without realizing
that here was a man placed above the weakness and pettiness and meanness
of the world, on a pinnacle of his own, strong in spirit, wise in
judgment, and almost prophetic in vision.

The presidency descended, by an overwhelming majority, to one of
Jefferson's stanch friends and supporters, for whom he had paved the
way--James Madison, also a Virginian, who had been his secretary of
state for eight years, and who was himself to serve two terms, during
which the influence of the "Sage of Monticello" was paramount. The great
crisis which Madison had to face was the second war with England, a war
brought on by British aggression on the high seas, and bitterly opposed,
especially in New England. The war, characterized by blunders on land
and brilliant successes on the ocean, really resulted without victory to
either side, and, indeed, was very nearly a defeat for America; but in
the end, it enabled us to regain possession of the posts which
England had persisted in occupying along the western boundary, and
banished forever any fear that she might, at any time in the future,
attempt to reassert her sovereignty over the United States.

Madison was also fortunate in his wife, the beautiful and brilliant
Dolly Payne Todd, who played so prominent a part in the social life of
the time, and who, when the British were marching into Washington to
sack that city, managed to save some of the treasures of the White House
from the invaders. It is difficult for us to realize, at this distant
day, that our beautiful capital was once in the enemy's hands, given
over to the flames; that was one of the great disgraces of the War of
1812; for the only force which rallied to the defense of the city was a
few regiments of untrained militia, which could not stand for a minute
before the British regulars, but ran away at the first fire.

Madison and his wife, however, soon came back to the White House from
which they had been driven, and remained there four years longer, until
the close of his second term, in 1817. For nearly a score of years
thereafter, they lived a happy and tranquil life on their estate,
Montpelier.

It is somewhat difficult to estimate Madison. He stood on a sort of
middle ground between Jefferson and Hamilton. Earlier in his career,
Hamilton influenced him deeply in regard to the adoption of the
Constitution, of which he has been called the father. But, at a later
date, Jefferson's influence became uppermost, and Madison
swung over to the extreme of the state rights view, and drew the
resolutions of the Virginia legislature declaring the Alien and Sedition
laws "utterly null and void and of no effect," so that he has also been
called the "Father of Nullification." However unstable his opinions may
have been, there is no questioning his patriotism or the purity of his
motives.

Again the presidential tradition was to remain unbroken, for Madison's
successor was James Monroe, his secretary of state, a Virginian and a
Democrat. The preponderance of the Democratic party was never more in
evidence, for while he received 183 electoral votes, Rufus King, the
Federalist candidate, received only 34. This, however, was as nothing to
the great personal triumph he achieved four years later, when, as a
candidate for re-election, only one vote was cast against him, and that
by a man who voted as he did because he did not wish to see a second
President chosen with the unanimity which had honored Washington.

Monroe is principally remembered to-day from a "doctrine" enunciated by
him and known by his name, which remains a vital portion of American
policy. It was in 1823 that he declared that the United States would
consider any attempt of a European power to establish itself in this
hemisphere as dangerous to her peace and safety, and as the
manifestation of an unfriendly disposition. The language is cautious and
diplomatic, but what it means in plain English is that the United States
will resist by force any attempt of a European power to
conquer and colonize any portion of the three Americas--in other words,
that this country will safeguard the independence of all her neighbors.
This principle has come to be regarded as a basic one in the foreign
relations of the United States, and while no European power has formally
acknowledged it, more than one have had to bow before it. It is
interesting to know that the enunciation of such a "doctrine" was
recommended by Thomas Jefferson, and that Jefferson was Monroe's
constant adviser throughout his career.

Monroe retired from the presidency in 1825, and the seven remaining
years of his life were passed principally on his estate in Virginia.
Jefferson said of him, "He is a man whose soul might be turned wrong
side outwards, without discovering a blemish to the world,"--an estimate
which was, of course, colored by a warm personal friendship, but which
was echoed by many others of his contemporaries. Certain it is that few
men have ever so won the affection and esteem of the nation, and his
administration was known as the "era of good feeling." He is scarcely
appreciated to-day at his true worth, principally because he does not
measure up in genius to the great men who preceded him.

At striking variance with the practical unanimity of Monroe's election
was that of John Quincy Adams, his successor. Over a quarter of a
century had elapsed since a northern man had been chosen to the
presidency. That man, strangely enough, was the father of the
present candidate, but had retired from office after one acrimonious
term, discredited and disappointed. Since then, the government of the
country had been in the hands of Virginians. Now came John Quincy Adams,
calling himself a Democrat, but really inheriting the principles of his
father, and the contest which ensued for the presidency was
unprecedented in the history of the country.

Adams's principal opponent was Andrew Jackson, a mighty man of whom we
shall soon have occasion to speak, and so close was the contest that the
electoral college was not able to make a choice. So, as provided by the
Constitution, it was carried to the House of Representatives, and there,
through the influence of Henry Clay, who was unfriendly to Jackson,
Adams was chosen by a small majority. An administration which began in
bitterness, continued bitter and turbulent. Men's passions were aroused,
and four years later Adams repeated the fate of his father, in being
overwhelmingly defeated.

But the most remarkable portion of his story is yet to come. Before that
time, it had been the custom, as we have seen, for the ex-President to
spend the remaining years of his life in dignified retirement; but the
year after Adams left the White House, he was elected to the House of
Representatives, and was returned regularly every two years until his
death, which occurred upon its floor. He did much excellent work there,
and was conspicuous in more than one memorable scene, but he is chiefly
remembered for his battle for the right of petition. No more
persistent fight was ever made by a man in a parliamentary body and some
reference must be made to it here.

Soon after he took his seat in Congress, the movement against slavery
was begun, and one fruit of it was the appearance of petitions for the
abolition of slavery in the House of Representatives. A few were
presented by Mr. Adams, and then more and more, as they were sent in to
him, and finally the southern representatives became so aroused, that
they succeeded in passing what was known as the "gag rule," which
prevented the reception of these petitions by the House. Adams protested
against this rule as an invasion of his constitutional rights, and from
that time forward, amid the bitterest opposition, addressed his whole
force toward the vindication of the right of petition. On every petition
day, he would offer, in constantly increasing numbers, petitions which
came to him from all parts of the country for the abolition of slavery.
The southern representatives were driven almost to madness, but Adams
kept doggedly on his way, and every year renewed his motion to strike
out the gag rule. As constant dripping will wear away a stone, so his
persistence wore away opposition, or, rather, the sentiment of the
country was gradually changing, and at last, on December 3, 1844, his
motion prevailed, and the great battle which he had fought practically
alone was won. Four years later he fell, stricken with paralysis, at his
place in the House.

It is worth pausing to remark that, of the six men who, up to
this time, had held the presidency, four were from Virginia and two from
Massachusetts; that, in every instance, the Virginians had been
re-elected and had administered the affairs of the country to the
satisfaction of the people, while both the Massachusetts men had been
retired from office at the end of a single term, and after turbulent and
violent administrations. All of them were what may fairly be called
patricians, men of birth and breeding; they were the possessors of a
certain culture and refinement, were descended from well-known families,
and there seemed every reason to believe that the administration of the
country would be continued in the hands of such men. For what other
class of men was fitted to direct it? Then, suddenly, the people spoke,
and selected for their ruler a man from among themselves, a man whose
college was the backwoods, whose opinions were prejudices rather than
convictions, and yet who was, withal, perhaps the greatest popular idol
this country will ever see; whose very blunders endeared him to the
people, because they knew his heart was right.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the fifteenth day of March, 1767, in a little log cabin on the upper
Catawba river, almost on the border-line between North and South
Carolina--so near it, in fact, that no one knows certainly in which
state it stood--a boy was born and christened Andrew Jackson. His father
had died a few days before--one of those sturdy Scotch-Irish whom we
have seen emigrating to America in such numbers in search of
a land of freedom. The boy grew up in the rude backwoods settlement,
rough, boisterous, unlettered; at the age of fourteen, riding with
Sumter in the guerrilla warfare waged throughout the state against the
British, and then, captured and wounded on head and hand by a
sabre-stroke whose mark he bore till his dying day, a prisoner in the
filthy Camden prison-pen, sick of the small-pox, and coming out of it,
at last, more dead than alive.

His mother nursed him back to life, and then started for Charleston to
see what could be done for the prisoners rotting in the British
prison-ships in the harbor, only herself to catch the prison-fever, and
to be buried in a grave which her son was never able to discover.

Young Jackson, sobered by this and other experiences, applied himself
with some diligence to his books, taught school for a time, studied law,
and at the age of twenty was admitted to the bar, for which the standard
was by no means high. To the west, the new state of Tennessee was in
process of organization--an unpeopled wilderness for the most part--and
early in the year 1788, Jackson secured the appointment as public
prosecutor in the new state. It is not probable he had much competition,
for the position was one calling for desperate courage, as well as for
endurance to withstand the privations of back-woods life, and the
pecuniary reward was small. In the fall of 1788, he proceeded to
Nashville with a wagon train which came within an ace of being
annihilated by Indians before it reached its destination.

Jackson found his new position exactly suited to his peculiar genius.
His personal recklessness made him the terror of criminals; he possessed
the precise qualifications for success before backwoods juries and for
personal popularity among the rough people who were his clients, with
