red with white and black decoration. Take, as an example, the latter.
Of course it was a simple mode to employ the red (ocherous) clay for
the wash, the blue clay (which burned white) for the white pigment in
making lines, and any of the black minerals above mentioned for other
marking.

In these earliest kinds of painted pottery the angular decorations of
the corrugated ware or of basketry were repeated, or at the farthest
only elaborated, although on some specimens the suggestions of the
curved ornament already occurred. These resulted, I may not fear to
claim, from carelessness or awkwardness in drawing, for instance, the
corners of acute angles, which, "cutting across-lot" would, it may be
seen, produce the wavy or meandering line from the zigzag, the
ellipsoid from the rectangle, and so on.

Precisely in accordance with this theory were the studies of my
preceptor, the lamented Prof. Charles Fred. Hartt. In a paper "On
Evolution in Ornament," published in several periodicals, among them
the Popular Science Monthly of January, 1875, this gifted naturalist
illustrated his studies by actual examples found on decorated burial
urns from Marajo Island. I must take the liberty of suggesting,
however, that upon some antecedent kind of vessel, the eyes of the
Amazonian Islanders may have been, to give Professor Hartt's idea,
"trained to take physiological and aesthetic delight in regularly
recurring lines and dots"; not on the pottery itself, as he seemed to
think, for decoration was old in basketry and the textiles when
pottery was first made.




DECORATIVE SYMBOLISM.


[Illustration: FIG. 545.--Food-bowl.  FIG. 546.--Water-jar.
               (Showing open or joined space in line near rim.)]

On every class of food- and water-vessels, in collections of both
ancient and modern Pueblo pottery (except, it is important to note, on
pitchers and some sacred receptacles), it may be observed as a
singular, yet almost constant feature, that encircling lines, often
even ornamental zones, are left open or not as it were closed at the
ends. (See Figs. 545, _a_, 546, _a_.) This is clearly a conventional
quality and seemingly of intentional significance. An explanation must
be sought in various directions, and once found will be useful in
guiding to an understanding of the symbolic element in Pueblo ceramic
art. I asked the Indian women, when I saw them making these little
spaces with great care, why they took so much pains to leave them
open. They replied that to close them was _a'k ta ni_, "fearful!"--that
this little space through the line or zone on a vessel was the "exit
trail of life or being", _o' ne yaethl kwai na_, and this was all. How
it came to be first left open and why regarded as the "exit trail,"
they could not tell. If one studies the mythology of this people and
their ways of thinking, then watches them closely, he will, however,
get other clews. When a woman has made a vessel, dried, polished, and
painted it, she will tell you with an air of relief that it is a "Made
Being." Her statement is confirmed as a sort of article of faith, when
you observe that as she places the vessel in the kiln, she also places
in and beside it food. Evidently she vaguely gives something about the
vessel a personal existence. The question arises how did these people
come to regard food-receptacles or water-receptacles as possessed of
or accompanied by conscious existences. I have found that the Zuni
argues actual and essential relationship from similarity in the
appearance, function, or other attributes of even generically diverse
things.[2]

   [2] I would refer those, who may wish to find this characteristic
   more fully set forth, to the introductory pages of my essay on
   Zuni Fetiches, published in the second volume of Contributions to
   North American Ethnology by the Bureau of Ethnology; also to a
   paper read before the American Academy of Sciences on the
   Relations to one another of the Zuni Mythologic and Sociologic
   Systems, published, I regret to say, without my revision, in the
   Popular Science Monthly, for July, 1882.

I here allude to this mental bias because it has both influenced the
decoration of pottery and has been itself influenced by it. In the
first place, the noise made by a pot when struck or when simmering on
the fire is supposed to be the voice of its associated being. The
clang of a pot when it breaks or suddenly cracks in burning is the cry
of this being as it escapes or separates from the vessel. That it has
departed is argued from the fact that the vase when cracked or
fragmentary never resounds as it did when whole. This vague existence
never cries out violently unprovoked; but it is supposed to acquire
the power of doing so by imitation; hence, no one sings, whistles, or
makes other strange or musical sounds resembling those of earthenware
under the circumstances above described during the smoothing,
polishing, painting, or other processes of finishing. The being thus
incited, they think, would surely strive to come out, and would break
the vessel in so doing. In this we find a partial explanation of the
native belief that a pot is accompanied by a conscious existence. The
rest of the solution of this problem in belief is involved in the
native philosophy and worship of water. Water contains the source of
continued life. The vessel holds the water; the source of life
_accompanies_ the water, hence its dwelling place is in the vessel
with the water. Finally, the vessel is supposed to contain the
treasured source, irrespective of the water--as do wells and springs,
or even the places where they have been. If the encircling lines
inside of the eating bowl, _outside_ of the water jar, were closed,
there would be no exit trail for this invisible source of life or for
its influence or breath. Yet, why, it maybe asked, must the source of
life or its influence be provided with a trail by which to pass out
from the vessel? In reply to this I will submit two considerations. It
has been stated that on the earliest Southwestern potteries decoration
was effected by incised or raised ornamentation. Any one who has often
attempted to make vessels according to primitive methods as I have has
found how difficult it is to smoothly join a line incised around a
still soft clay pot, and that this difficulty is even greater when the
ornamental band is laid on in relief. It would be a natural outgrowth
of this predicament to leave the ends unjoined, which indeed the
savage often did. When paint instead of incision or relief came to be
the decorative agent, the lines or bands would be left unjoined in
imitation. As those acquainted with Tylor's "Early History" will
realize, and myth of observation like the above would come to be
assigned in after ages. This may or may not be true of the case in
question; for, as before observed, some classes of sacred receptacles,
as well as the most ancient painted bowls, are not characterized by
the unjoined lines. Whether true or not, it is an insufficient
solution of the problem.

[Illustration: FIG. 547.--Conical or flat-bellied canteen.]

It is natural for the Pueblo to consider water as the prime source of
life, or as accompanied by it, for without the presence of living
water very few things grow in his desert land. During many a drought
chronicled in his oral annals, plants, animals, and men have died as
of a contagious scourge. Naturally, therefore, he has come to regard
water as the milk of adults, to speak of it as such, and as the
all-sufficient nourishment which the earth (in his conception of it as
the mother of men) yields. In the times when his was a race of cliff
and mesa dwellers, the most common vessel appertaining to his daily
life was the flat-bellied canteen or water-carrier. (See Fig. 547.)
This was suspended by a band across the forehead, so as to hang
against the back, thus leaving the hands as well as the feet free for
assistance in climbing. It now survives only for use on long journeys
or at camps distant from water. The original suggestion of its form
seems to have been that of the human mammary gland, or perhaps its
peculiar form may have suggested a relationship between the two.
(Compare Figs. 548, 549.) At any rate, its name in Zuni is _me' he ton
ne_, while _me' ha na_ is the name of the human mammary gland. _Me' he
ton ne_ is from _me' ha na_, mamma, _e' ton nai e_, containing within,
and _to'm me_. From _me' ha na_ comes _wo' ha na_, hanging or placed
against anything, obviously because the mammaries hang or are placed
against the breast; or, possibly, _me ha na_ may be derived from _wo
ha na_ by a reversal of reasoning, which view does not affect the
argument in question. It is probable that the _me' he ton_ was at
first left open at the apex (Fig. 549._a_) instead of at the top (Fig.
549._b_); but, being found liable to leak when furnished with the
aperture so low, this was closed. A surviving superstition inclines me
to this view. When a Zuni woman has completed the _me' he ton_ nearly
to the apex, by the coiling-process, and before she has inserted the
nozzle (Fig. 549._b_), she prepares a little wedge of clay, and, as
she closes the apex with it, she turns her eyes away. If you ask her
why she does this, she will tell you that it is _a'k ta ni_ (fearful)
to look at the vessel while closing it at this point; that, if she
look at it during this operation, she will be liable to become barren;
or that, if children be born to her, they will die during infancy; or
that she maybe stricken with blindness; or those who drink from the
vessel will be afflicted with disease and wasting away! My impression
is that, reasoning from analogy (which with these people means actual
relationship or connection, it will be remembered), the Zuni woman
supposes that by closing the apex of this _artificial_ mamma she
closes the exit-way for the "source of life;" further, that the woman
who closes this exit-way knowingly (in her own sight, that is)
voluntarily closes the exit-way for the source of life in her _own_
mammae; further still, that for this reason the privilege of bearing
infants may be taken away from her, or at any rate (experience showing
the fallacy of this philosophy) she deserves the loss of the sense
(sight) which enabled her to "_knowingly_" close the exit-way of the
source of life.

[Illustration: FIG. 548.  FIG. 549.
               Conical canteen compared with human mammary gland.]

By that tenacity of conservative reasoning which is a marked mental
characteristic of the sedentary Pueblo, other types of the canteen, of
later origin, not only retained the name-root of this primeval form,
but also its attributed functions. For example, the _me' wi k'i lik
ton ne_ (See Fig. 550) is named thus from _me we_, mammaries, _i ki
lik toi e'_, joined together by a neck, and _to'm me_.

Now, when closing the ends (Fig. 550, _c_, _c_) of this curious vessel
in molding it, the women are as careful to turn the eyes away as in
closing the apex of the older form. As the resemblance of either of
the ends of this vessel to the mamma is not striking, they place on
either side of the nozzle a pair of little conical projections,
resembling the teats, and so called. (Fig. 550, _b_.) There are four
of these, instead of, as we might reasonably expect, two. The reason
for this seems to be that the _me' wi k'i lik ton ne_ is the canteen
designed for use by the hunter in preference to all other vessels,
because it may be easily wrapped in a blanket and tied to the back.
Other forms would not do, as the hunter must have the free use not
only of his hands but also of his head, that he may turn quickly this
way or that in looking for or watching game. The proper nourishment of
the hunter is the game he kills; hence, the source of his life, like
that of the young of this game, is symbolized in the canteen by the
mammaries, not of human beings, but of game-animals. A feature in
these canteens dependent upon all this brings us nearer to an
understanding of the question under discussion. When ornamental bands
are painted around either end of the neck of one of them (Fig. 550,
_b_), they are interrupted at the little projections (Fig. 550, _b,_).
Indeed, I have observed specimens on which these lines, if placed
farther out, were interrupted at the top (Fig. 550, _a a_) opposite
the little projections. So, by analogy, it would seem the Pueblos came
to regard paint, like clay, a barrier to the exit of the source of
life. This idea of the source of life once associated with the canteen
would readily become connected with the water-jar, which, if not the
offspring of the canteen, at least usurped its place in the household
economy of these people. From the water-jar it would pass naturally to
drinking-vessels and eating-bowls, explaining the absence of the
interrupted lines on the oldest of these and their constant occurrence
on recent and modern examples; for the painted lines being left open
at the apexes, or near the projections on the canteens, they should
also be unjoined on other vessels with which the same ideas were
associated.

