
They proceeded on their west course, and made over 50 leagues in the day
and night, but the Admiral only counted 47. They were aided by the
current. They saw much very fine grass and herbs from rocks, which came
from the west. They, therefore, considered that they were near land. The
pilots observed the north point, and found that the needles turned a full
point to the west of north. So the mariners were alarmed and dejected,
and did not give their reason. But the Admiral knew, and ordered that the
north should be again observed at dawn. They then found that the needles
were true. The cause was that the star makes the movement, and not the
needles. At dawn, on that Monday, they saw much more weed appearing, like
herbs from rivers, in which they found a live crab, which the Admiral
kept. He says that these crabs are certain signs of land. The sea-water
was found to be less salt than it had been since leaving the Canaries.
The breezes were always soft. Every one was pleased, and the best sailors
went ahead to sight the first land. They saw many tunny-fish, and the
crew of the _Nina_ killed one. The Admiral here says that these signs of
land came from the west, "in which direction I trust in that high God in
whose hands are all victories that very soon we shall sight land." In
that morning he says that a white bird was seen which has not the habit
of sleeping on the sea, called _rabo de junco_ (boatswain-bird).[97-1]


_Tuesday, 18th of September_

This day and night they made over 55 leagues, the Admiral only counting
48. In all these days the sea was very smooth, like the river at Seville.
This day Martin Alonso, with the _Pinta_ which was a fast sailer, did not
wait, for he said to the Admiral, from his caravel, that he had seen a
great multitude of birds flying westward, that he hoped to see land that
night, and that he therefore pressed onward. A great cloud appeared in
the north, which is a sign of the proximity of land.


_Wednesday, 19th of September_

The Admiral continued on his course, and during the day and night he made
but 25 leagues because it was calm. He counted 22. This day, at 10
o'clock, a booby[98-1] came to the ship, and in the afternoon another
arrived, these birds not generally going more than 20 leagues from the
land. There was also some drizzling rain without wind, which is a sure
sign of land. The Admiral did not wish to cause delay by beating to
windward to ascertain whether land was near, but he considered it certain
that there were islands both to the north and south of his position, (as
indeed there were, and he was passing through the middle of them). For
his desire was to press onwards to the Indies, the weather being fine.
For on his return, God willing, he could see all. These are his own
words. Here the pilots found their positions. He of the _Nina_ made the
Canaries 440 leagues distant, the _Pinta_ 420. The pilot of the Admiral's
ship made the distance exactly 400 leagues.


_Thursday, 20th of September_

This day the course was W. b. N., and as her head was all round the
compass owing to the calm that prevailed,[98-2] the ship made only 7 or 8
leagues. Two boobies came to the ship, and afterwards another, a sign of
the proximity of land. They saw much weed, although none was seen on the
previous day. They caught a bird with the hand, which was like a tern.
But it was a river-bird, not a sea-bird, the feet being like those of a
gull. At dawn two or three land-birds came singing to the ship, and they
disappeared before sunset. Afterwards a booby came from W.N.W., and flew
to the S.W., which was a sign that it left land in the W.N.W.; for these
birds sleep on shore, and go to sea in the mornings in search of food,
not extending their flight more than 20 leagues from the land.


_Friday, 21st September_

Most of the day it was calm, and later there was a little wind. During
the day and night they did not make good more than 13 leagues. At dawn
they saw so much weed that the sea appeared to be covered with it, and it
came from the west. A booby was seen. The sea was very smooth, like a
river, and the air the best in the world. They saw a whale, which is a
sign that they were near land, because they always keep near the shore.


_Saturday, 22nd of September_

They shaped a course W.N.W. more or less, her head turning from one to
the other point, and made 30 leagues. Scarcely any weed was seen. They
saw some sandpipers and another bird. Here the Admiral says: "This
contrary wind was very necessary for me, because my people were much
excited at the thought that in these seas no wind ever blew in the
direction of Spain." Part of the day there was no weed, and later it was
very thick.


_Sunday, 23rd of September_

They shaped a course N.W., and at times more northerly; occasionally they
were on their course, which was west, and they made about 22 leagues.
They saw a dove and a booby, another river-bird, and some white birds.
There was a great deal of weed, and they found crabs in it. The sea,
being smooth and calm, the crew began to murmur, saying that here there
was no great sea, and that the wind would never blow so that they could
return to Spain. Afterwards the sea rose very much, without wind, which
astonished them. The Admiral here says: "Thus the high sea was very
necessary to me, such as had not appeared but in the time of the Jews
when they went out of Egypt and murmured against Moses who delivered them
out of captivity."[100-1]


_Monday, 24th of September_

The Admiral went on his west course all day and night, making 14 leagues.
He counted 12. A booby came to the ship, and many sandpipers.[100-2]


_Tuesday, 25th of September_

This day began with a calm, and afterwards there was wind. They were on
their west course until night. The Admiral conversed with Martin Alonso
Pinzon, captain of the other caravel _Pinta_, respecting a chart which he
had sent to the caravel three days before, on which, as it would appear,
the Admiral had certainis lands[TN-1] depicted in that sea.[101-1] Martin
Alonso said that the ships were in the position on which the islands were
placed, and the Admiral replied that so it appeared to him: but it might
be that they had not fallen in with them, owing to the currents which had
always set the ships to the N.E., and that they had not made so much as
the pilots reported. The Admiral then asked for the chart to be returned,
and it was sent back on a line.[101-2] The Admiral then began to plot
the position on it, with the pilot and mariners. At sunset Martin Alonso
went up on the poop of his ship, and with much joy called to the Admiral,
claiming the reward as he had sighted land. When the Admiral heard this
positively declared, he says that he gave thanks to the Lord on his knees
while Martin Alonso said the _Gloria in excelsis_ with his people. The
Admiral's crew did the same. Those of the _Nina_ all went up on the mast
and into the rigging, and declared that it was land. It so seemed to the
Admiral, and that it was distant 25 leagues. They all continued to
declare it was land until night. The Admiral ordered the course to be
altered from W. to S.W., in which direction the land had appeared. That
day they made 4 leagues on a west course, and 17 S.W. during the night,
in all 21; but the people were told that 13 was the distance made good:
for it was always feigned to them that the distances were less, so that
the voyage might not appear so long. Thus two reckonings were kept on
this voyage, the shorter being feigned, and the longer being the true
one. The sea was very smooth, so that many sailors bathed alongside. They
saw many _dorados_[102-1] and other fish.


_Wednesday, 26th of September_

The Admiral continued on the west course until afternoon. Then he altered
course to S.W., until he made out that what had been said to be land was
only clouds. Day and night they made 31 leagues, counting 24 for the
people. The sea was like a river, the air pleasant and very mild.


_Thursday, 27th of September_

The course west, and distance made good during day and night 24 leagues,
20 being counted for the people. Many _dorados_ came. One was killed. A
boatswain-bird came.


_Friday, 28th of September_

The course was west, and the distance, owing to calms, only 14 leagues in
day and night, 13 leagues being counted. They met with little weed; but
caught two _dorados_, and more in the other ships.


_Saturday, 29th of September_

The course was west, and they made 24 leagues, counting 21 for the
people. Owing to calms, the distance made good during day and night was
not much. They saw a bird called _rabiforcado_[103-1] (man-o'-war bird),
which makes the boobies vomit what they have swallowed, and eats it,
maintaining itself on nothing else. It is a sea-bird, but does not sleep
on the sea, and does not go more than 20 leagues from the land. There are
many of them at the Cape Verde Islands. Afterwards they saw two boobies.
The air was very mild and agreeable, and the Admiral says that nothing
was wanting but to hear the nightingale. The sea smooth as a river.
Later, three boobies and a man-o'-war bird were seen three times. There
was much weed.


_Sunday, 30th of September_

The western course was steered, and during the day and night, owing to
calms, only 14 leagues were made, 11 being counted. Four boatswain-birds
came to the ship, which is a great sign of land, for so many birds of
this kind together is a sign that they are not straying or lost. They
also twice saw four boobies. There was much weed. _Note_ that the stars
which are called _Las Guardias_ (the Pointers[103-2]), when night comes
on, are near the western point, and when dawn breaks they are near the
N.E. point; so that, during the whole night, they do not appear to move
more than three lines or 9 hours, and this on each night. The Admiral
says this, and also that at nightfall the needles vary a point westerly,
while at dawn they agree exactly with the star. From this it would appear
that the north star has a movement like the other stars, while the
needles always point correctly.


_Monday, 1st of October_

Course west, and 25 leagues made good, counted for the crew as 20
leagues. There was a heavy shower of rain. At dawn the Admiral's pilot
made the distance from Hierro 578 leagues to the west. The reduced
reckoning which the Admiral showed to the crew made it 584 leagues; but
the truth which the Admiral observed and kept secret was 707.


_Tuesday, 2nd of October_

Course west, and during the day and night 39 leagues were made good,
counted for the crew as 30. The sea always smooth. Many thanks be given
to God, says the Admiral, that the weed is coming from east to west,
contrary to its usual course. Many fish were seen, and one was killed. A
white bird was also seen that appeared to be a gull.


_Wednesday, 3rd of October_

They navigated on the usual course, and made good 47 leagues, counted as
40. Sandpipers appeared, and much weed, some of it very old and some
quite fresh and having fruit. They saw no birds. The Admiral, therefore,
thought that they had left the islands behind them which were depicted
on the charts. The Admiral here says that he did not wish to keep the
ships beating about during the last week, and in the last few days when
there were so many signs of land, although he had information of certain
islands in this region. For he wished to avoid delay, his object being to
reach the Indies. He says that to delay would not be wise.[105-1]


_Thursday, 4th of October_

Course west, and 63 leagues made good during the day and night, counted
as 46. More than forty sandpipers came to the ship in a flock, and two
boobies, and a ship's boy hit one with a stone. There also came a
man-o'-war bird and a white bird like a gull.


_Friday, 5th of October_

The Admiral steered his course, going 11 miles an hour, and during the
day and night they made good 57 leagues, as the wind increased somewhat
during the night: 45 were counted. The sea was smooth and quiet. "To
God," he says, "be many thanks given, the air being pleasant and
temperate, with no weed, many sandpipers, and flying-fish coming on the
deck in numbers."


_Saturday, 6th of October_

The Admiral continued his west course, and during day and night they made
good 40 leagues, 33 being counted. This night Martin Alonso said that it
would be well to steer south of west,[106-1] and it appeared to the
Admiral that Martin Alonso did not say this with respect to the island of
Cipango.[106-2] He saw that if an error was made the land would not be
reached so quickly, and that consequently it would be better to go at
once to the continent and afterwards to the islands.


_Sunday, 7th of October_

The west course was continued; for two hours they went at the rate of 12
miles an hour, and afterwards 8 miles an hour. They made good 23 leagues,
counting 18 for the people. This day, at sunrise, the caravel _Nina_,
which went ahead, being the best sailer, and pushed forward as much as
possible to sight the land first, so as to enjoy the reward which the
Sovereigns had promised to whoever should see it first, hoisted a flag at
the mast-head and fired a gun, as a signal that she had sighted land, for
such was the Admiral's order. He had also ordered that, at sunrise and
sunset, all the ships should join him; because those two times are most
proper for seeing the greatest distance, the haze clearing away. No land
was seen during the afternoon, as reported by the caravel _Nina_, and
they passed a great number of birds flying from N. to S.W. This gave rise
to the belief that the birds were either going to sleep on land, or were
flying from the winter which might be supposed to be near in the land
whence they were coming. The Admiral was aware that most of the islands
held by the Portuguese were discovered by the flight of birds. For this
reason he resolved to give up the west course, and to shape a course
W.S.W. for the two following days.[107-1] He began the new course one
hour before sunset. They made good, during the night, about 5 leagues,
and 23 in the day, altogether 28 leagues.


_Monday, 8th of October_

The course was W.S.W., and 11-1/2 or 12 leagues were made good in the day
and night; and at times it appears that they went at the rate of 15 miles
an hour during the night (if the handwriting is not deceptive).[107-2]
The sea was like the river at Seville. "Thanks be to God," says the
Admiral, "the air is very soft like the April at Seville; and it is a
pleasure to be here, so balmy are the breezes." The weed seemed to be
very fresh. There were many land-birds, and they took one that was flying
to the S.W. Terns,[107-3] ducks, and a booby were also seen.


_Tuesday, 9th of October_

The course was S.W., and they made 5 leagues. The wind then changed, and
the Admiral steered W. by N. 4 leagues. Altogether, in day and night,
they made 11 leagues by day and 20-1/2 leagues by night; counted as 17
leagues altogether. Throughout the night birds were heard passing.


_Wednesday, 10th of October_

The course was W.S.W., and they went at the rate of 10 miles an hour,
occasionally 12 miles, and sometimes 7. During the day and night they
made 59 leagues, counted as no more than 44. Here the people could endure
no longer. They complained of the length of the voyage. But the Admiral
cheered them up in the best way he could, giving them good hopes of the
advantages they might gain from it. He added that, however much they
might complain, he had to go to the Indies, and that he would go on until
he found them, with the help of our Lord.[108-1]


_Thursday, 11th of October_

The course was W.S.W., and there was more sea than there had been during
the whole of the voyage. They saw sandpipers, and a green reed near the
ship. Those of the caravel _Pinta_ saw a cane and a pole, and they took
up another small pole which appeared to have been worked with iron; also
another bit of cane, a land-plant, and a small board. The crew of the
caravel _Nina_ also saw signs of land, and a small branch covered with
berries.[108-2] Every one breathed afresh and rejoiced at these signs.
The run until sunset was 27 leagues.

After sunset the Admiral returned to his original west course, and they
went along at the rate of 12 miles an hour. Up to two hours after
midnight they had gone 90 miles, equal to 22-1/2 leagues. As the caravel
_Pinta_ was a better sailer, and went ahead of the Admiral, she found the
land, and made the signals ordered by the Admiral. The land was first
seen by a sailor named Rodrigo de Triana.[109-1] But the Admiral, at ten
o'clock, being on the castle of the poop,[109-2] saw a light, though it
was so uncertain that he could not affirm it was land. He called Pero
Gutierrez, a gentleman of the King's bed-chamber, and said that there
seemed to be a light, and that he should look at it. He did so, and saw
it.[109-3] The Admiral said the same to Rodrigo Sanchez of Segovia, whom
the King and Queen had sent with the fleet as inspector, but he could see
nothing, because he was not in a place whence anything could be seen.
After the Admiral had spoken he saw the light once or twice, and it was
like a wax candle rising and falling. It seemed to few to be an
indication of land; but the Admiral made certain that land was close.
When they said the _Salve_, which all the sailors were accustomed to sing
in their way, the Admiral asked and admonished the men to keep a good
look-out on the forecastle, and to watch well for land; and to him who
should first cry out that he saw land, he would give a silk doublet,
besides the other rewards promised by the Sovereigns, which were 10,000
maravedis to him who should first see it.[109-4] At two hours after
midnight the land was sighted at a distance of two leagues. They
shortened sail, and lay by under the mainsail without the bonnets.


[_Friday, 12th of October_]

The vessels were hove to, waiting for daylight; and on Friday they
arrived at a small island of the Lucayos, called in the language of the
Indians, Guanahani.[110-1] Presently they saw naked people. The Admiral
went on shore in the armed boat, and Martin Alonso Pinzon, and Vicente
Yanez, his brother, who was captain of the _Nina_. The Admiral took the
royal standard, and the captains went with two banners of the green
cross, which the Admiral took in all the ships as a sign, with an F and a
Y[110-2] and a crown over each letter, one on one side of the cross and
the other on the other. Having landed, they saw trees very green, and
much water, and fruits of diverse kinds. The Admiral called to the two
captains, and to the others who leaped on shore, and to Rodrigo Escovedo,
secretary of the whole fleet, and to Rodrigo Sanchez of Segovia,[110-3]
and said that they should bear faithful testimony that he, in presence of
all, had taken, as he now took, possession of the said island[110-4] for
the King and for the Queen his Lords, making the declarations that are
required, as is now largely set forth in the testimonies which were then
made in writing.

Presently many inhabitants of the island assembled. What follows is in
the actual words of the Admiral in his book of the first navigation and
discovery of the Indies.[110-5] "I," he says, "that we might form great
friendship, for I knew that they were a people who could be more easily
freed and converted to our holy faith by love than by force, gave to
some of them red caps, and glass beads to put round their necks, and
many other things of little value, which gave them great pleasure, and
made them so much our friends that it was a marvel to see. They
afterwards came to the ship's boats where we were, swimming and bringing
us parrots, cotton threads in skeins, darts, and many other things; and
we exchanged them for other things that we gave them, such as glass beads
and small bells. In fine, they took all, and gave what they had with good
will. It appeared to me to be a race of people very poor in everything.
They go as naked as when their mothers bore them, and so do the women,
although I did not see more than one young girl. All I saw were youths,
none more than thirty years of age. They are very well made, with very
handsome bodies, and very good countenances. Their hair is short and
coarse, almost like the hairs of a horse's tail. They wear the hairs
brought down to the eyebrows, except a few locks behind, which they wear
long and never cut. They paint themselves black, and they are the color
of the Canarians, neither black nor white. Some paint themselves white,
others red, and others of what color they find. Some paint their faces,
others the whole body, some only round the eyes, others only on the nose.
They neither carry nor know anything of arms, for I showed them swords,
and they took them by the blade and cut themselves through ignorance.
They have no iron, their darts being wands without iron, some of them
having a fish's tooth at the end, and others being pointed in various
ways. They are all of fair stature and size, with good faces, and well
made. I saw some with marks of wounds on their bodies, and I made signs
to ask what it was, and they gave me to understand that people from other
adjacent islands came with the intention of seizing them, and that they
defended themselves. I believed, and still believe, that they come here
from the mainland to take them prisoners. They should be good servants
and intelligent, for I observed that they quickly took in what was said
to them, and I believe that they would easily be made Christians, as it
appeared to me that they had no religion. I, our Lord being pleased,
will take hence, at the time of my departure, six natives for your
Highnesses, that they may learn to speak. I saw no beast of any kind
except parrots, on this island." The above is in the words of the
Admiral.


_Saturday, 13th of October_

"As soon as dawn broke many of these people came to the beach, all
youths, as I have said, and all of good stature, a very handsome people.
Their hair is not curly, but loose and coarse, like horse hair. In all
the forehead is broad, more so than in any other people I have hitherto
seen. Their eyes are very beautiful and not small, and themselves far
from black, but the color of the Canarians. Nor should anything else be
expected, as this island is in a line east and west from the island of
Hierro in the Canaries. Their legs are very straight, all in one line,
and no belly, but very well formed. They came to the ship in small
canoes, made out of the trunk of a tree like a long boat, and all of one
piece, and wonderfully worked, considering the country. They are large,
some of them holding 40 to 45 men, others smaller, and some only large
enough to hold one man. They are propelled with a paddle like a baker's
shovel, and go at a marvellous rate. If the canoe capsizes, they all
promptly begin to swim, and to bale it out with calabashes that they take
with them. They brought skeins of cotton thread, parrots, darts, and
other small things which it would be tedious to recount, and they give
all in exchange for anything that may be given to them. I was attentive,
and took trouble to ascertain if there was gold. I saw that some of them
had a small piece fastened in a hole they have in the nose, and by signs
I was able to make out that to the south, or going from the island to the
south, there was a king who had great cups full, and who possessed a
great quantity. I tried to get them to go there, but afterwards I saw
that they had no inclination. I resolved to wait until to-morrow in the
afternoon and then to depart, shaping a course to the S.W., for,
according to what many of them told me, there was land to the S., to the
S.W., and N.W., and that the natives from the N.W. often came to attack
them, and went on to the S.W. in search of gold and precious stones.

"This island is rather large and very flat, with bright green trees, much
water, and a very large lake in the centre, without any mountain, and the
whole land so green that it is a pleasure to look on it. The people are
very docile, and for the longing to possess our things, and not having
anything to give in return, they take what they can get, and presently
swim away. Still, they give away all they have got, for whatever may be
given to them, down to broken bits of crockery and glass. I saw one give
16 skeins of cotton for three _ceotis_[113-1] of Portugal, equal to one
_blanca_ of Spain, the skeins being as much as an _arroba_ of cotton
thread. I shall keep it, and shall allow no one to take it, preserving it
all for your Highnesses, for it may be obtained in abundance. It is grown
in this island, though the short time did not admit of my ascertaining
this for a certainty. Here also is found the gold they wear fastened in
their noses. But, in order not to lose time, I intend to go and see if I
can find the island of Cipango.[113-2] Now, as it is night, all the
natives have gone on shore with their canoes."


_Sunday, 14th of October_

"At dawn I ordered the ship's boat and the boats of the caravels to be
got ready, and I went along the coast of the island and to the N.N.E., to
see the other side, which was on the other side to the east, and also to
see the villages. Presently I saw two or three, and the people all came
to the shore, calling out and giving thanks to God. Some of them brought
us water, others came with food, and when they saw that I did want to
land, they got into the sea, and came swimming to us. We understood that
they asked us if we had come from heaven. One old man came into the boat,
and others cried out, in loud voices, to all the men and women, to come
and see the men who had come from heaven, and to bring them to eat and
drink. Many came, including women, each bringing something, giving thanks
to God, throwing themselves on the ground and shouting to us to come on
shore. But I was afraid to land, seeing an extensive reef of rocks which
surrounded the island, with deep water between it and the shore forming a
port large enough for as many ships as there are in Christendom, but with
a very narrow entrance. It is true that within this reef there are some
sunken rocks, but the sea has no more motion than the water in a well. In
order to see all this I went this morning, that I might be able to give a
full account to your Highnesses, and also where a fortress might be
established. I saw a piece of land which appeared like an island,
although it is not one, and on it there were six houses. It might be
converted into an island in two days, though I do not see that it would
be necessary, for these people are very simple as regards the use of
arms, as your Highnesses will see from the seven that I caused to be
taken, to bring home and learn our language and return; unless your
Highnesses should order them all to be brought to Castile, or to be kept
as captives on the same island; for with fifty men they can all be
subjugated and made to do what is required of them. Close to the above
peninsula there are gardens of the most beautiful trees I ever saw, and
with leaves as green as those of Castile in the month of April and May,
and much water. I examined all that port, and afterwards I returned to
the ship and made sail. I saw so many islands that I hardly knew how to
determine to which I should go first. Those natives I had with me said,
by signs, that there were so many that they could not be numbered, and
they gave the names of more than a hundred. At last I looked out for the
largest, and resolved to shape a course for it, and so I did. It will be
distant five leagues from this of _San Salvador_, and the others some
more, some less. All are very flat, and all are inhabited. The natives
make war on each other, although these are very simple-minded and
handsomely-formed people."


_Monday, 15th of October_

"I had laid by during the night, with the fear of reaching the land to
anchor before daylight,[115-1] not knowing whether the coast was clear of
rocks, and at dawn I made sail. As the island was more than 5 leagues
distant and nearer 7, and the tide checked my way, it was noon when we
arrived at the said island. I found that side facing towards the island
of San Salvador trended north and south with a length of 5 leagues, and
the other which I followed ran east and west for more than 10
leagues.[115-2] As from this island I saw another larger one to the west,
I clued up[115-3] the sails, after having run all that day until night,
otherwise I could not have reached the western cape. I gave the name of
Santa Maria de la Concepcion[115-4] to the island, and almost as the sun
set I anchored near the said cape to ascertain if it contained gold. For
the people I had taken from the island of San Salvador told me that here
they wore very large rings of gold on their arms and legs. I really
believed that all they said was nonsense, invented that they might
escape. My desire was not to pass any island without taking possession,
so that, one having been taken, the same may be said of all. I anchored,
and remained until to-day, Tuesday, when I went to the shore with the
boats armed, and landed. The people, who were numerous, went naked, and
were like those of the other island of San Salvador. They let us go over
the island, and gave us what we required. As the wind changed to the
S.E., I did not like to stay, and returned to the ship. A large canoe was
alongside the _Nina_, and one of the men of the island of San Salvador,
who was on board, jumped into the sea and got into the canoe. In the
middle of the night before, another swam away behind the canoe, which
fled, for there never was boat that could have overtaken her, seeing that
in speed they have a great advantage.[116-1] So they reached the land and
left the canoe. Some of my people went on shore in chase of them, but
they all fled like fowls and the canoe they had left was brought
alongside the caravel _Nina_, whither, from another direction, another
small canoe came, with a man who wished to barter with skeins of cotton.
Some sailors jumped into the sea, because he would not come on board the
caravel, and seized him. I was on the poop of my ship, and saw
everything. So I sent for the man, gave him a red cap, some small beads
of green glass, which I put on his arms, and small bells, which I put in
his ears, and ordered his canoe, which was also on board, to be returned
to him. I sent him on shore, and presently made sail to go to the other
large island which was in sight to the westward. I also ordered the other
large canoe, which the caravel _Nina_ was towing astern, to be cast
adrift; and I soon saw that it reached the land at the same time as the
man to whom I had given the above things. I had not wished to take the
skein of cotton that he offered me. All the others came round him and
seemed astonished, for it appeared clear to them that we were good
people. The other man who had fled might do us some harm, because we had
carried him off, and for that reason I ordered this man to be set free
and gave him the above things, that he might think well of us, otherwise,
when your Highnesses again send an expedition, they might not be
friendly. All the presents I gave were not worth four maravedis. At 10 we
departed with the wind S.W., and made for the south, to reach that other
island, which is very large, and respecting which all the men that I
bring from San Salvador make signs that there is much gold, and that they
wear it as bracelets on the arms, on the legs, in the ears and nose, and
round the neck. The distance of this island from that of Santa Maria is
9 leagues on a course east to west. All this part of the island trends
N.W. and S.E., and it appeared that this coast must have length of 28
leagues. It is very flat, without any mountain, like San Salvador and
Santa Maria, all being beach without rocks, except that there are some
sunken rocks near the land, whence it is necessary to keep a good lookout
when it is desired to anchor, and not to come to very near the land; but
the water is always very clear, and the bottom is visible. At a distance
of two shots of a lombard, there is, off all these islands, such a depth
that the bottom cannot be reached. These islands are very green and
fertile, the climate very mild. They may contain many things of which I
have no knowledge, for I do not wish to stop, in discovering and visiting
many islands, to find gold. These people make signs that it is worn on
the arms and legs; and it must be gold, for they point to some pieces
that I have. I cannot err, with the help of our Lord, in finding out
where this gold has its origin. Being in the middle of the channel
between these two islands, that is to say, that of Santa Maria and this
large one, to which I give the name of Fernandina,[117-1] I came upon a
man alone in a canoe going from Santa Maria to Fernandina. He had a
little of their bread, about the size of a fist, a calabash of water, a
piece of brown earth powdered and then kneaded, and some dried leaves,
which must be a thing highly valued by them,[117-2] for they bartered
with it at San Salvador. He also had with him a native basket with a
string of glass beads, and two _blancas_, by which I knew that he had
come from the island of San Salvador, and had been to Santa Maria, and
thence to Fernandina. He came alongside the ship, and I made him come on
board as he desired, also getting the canoe inboard, after taking care of
all his property. I ordered him to be given to eat bread and treacle, and
also to drink: and so I shall take him on to Fernandina, where I shall
return everything to him, order that he may give a good account of us,
that, our Lord pleasing, when your Highnesses shall send here, those who
come may receive honor, and that the natives may give them all they
require."


_Tuesday, 16th of October_

"I sailed from the island of Santa Maria de la Concepcion at about noon,
to go to Fernandina Island, which appeared very large to the westward,
