was imperative to gain time so that the untouched portions of the army
could form across the line of the Confederate advance.

Keenan's regiment of Pennsylvania cavalry, but four hundred sabers
strong, was accordingly sent full against the front of the ten thousand
victorious Confederates.

Keenan himself fell, pierced by bayonets, and the charge was repulsed
at once; but a few priceless moments had been saved, and Pleasanton had
been given time to post twenty-two guns, loaded with double canister,
where they would bear upon the enemy.

The Confederates advanced in a dense mass, yelling and cheering, and the
discharge of the guns fairly blew them back across the work's they had
just taken. Again they charged, and again were driven back; and when the
battle once more began the Union reinforcements had arrived.

It was about this time that Jackson himself was mortally wounded. He had
been leading and urging on the advance of his men, cheering them with
voice and gesture, his pale face flushed with joy and excitement,
while from time to time as he sat on his horse he took off his hat and,
looking upward, thanked heaven for the victory it had vouchsafed him.
As darkness drew near he was in the front, where friend and foe were
mingled in almost inextricable confusion. He and his staff were fired
at, at close range, by the Union troops, and, as they turned, were fired
at again, through a mistake, by the Confederates behind them. Jackson
fell, struck in several places. He was put in a litter and carried back;
but he never lost consciousness, and when one of his generals complained
of the terrible effect of the Union cannonade he answered:

"You must hold your ground."

For several days he lingered, hearing how Lee beat Hooker, in detail,
and forced him back across the river. Then the old Puritan died. At the
end his mind wandered, and he thought he was again commanding in battle,
and his last words were.

"Let us cross over the river and rest in the shade."

Thus perished Stonewall Jackson, one of the ablest of soldiers and one
of the most upright of men, in the last of his many triumphs.




THE CHARGE AT GETTYSBURG

      For the Lord
      On the whirlwind is abroad;
     In the earthquake he has spoken;
      He has smitten with his thunder
      The iron walls asunder,
     And the gates of brass are broken!
                     --Whittier

     With bray of the trumpet,
      And roll of the drum,
     And keen ring of bugle
      The cavalry come:
     Sharp clank the steel scabbards,
      The bridle-chains ring,
     And foam from red nostrils
      The wild chargers fling!

     Tramp, tramp o'er the greensward
      That quivers below,
     Scarce held by the curb bit
      The fierce horses go!
     And the grim-visaged colonel,
      With ear-rending shout,
     Peals forth to the squadrons
      The order, "Trot Out"!
                   --Francis A. Durivage.


The battle of Chancellorsville marked the zenith of Confederate good
fortune. Immediately afterward, in June, 1863, Lee led the victorious
army of Northern Virginia into Pennsylvania. The South was now the
invader, not the invaded, and its heart beat proudly with hopes of
success; but these hopes went down in bloody wreck on July 4, when word
was sent to the world that the high valor of Virginia had failed at last
on the field of Gettysburg, and that in the far West Vicksburg had been
taken by the army of the "silent soldier."

At Gettysburg Lee had under him some seventy thousand men, and his
opponent, Meade, about ninety thousand. Both armies were composed mainly
of seasoned veterans, trained to the highest point by campaign after
campaign and battle after battle; and there was nothing to choose
between them as to the fighting power of the rank and file. The Union
army was the larger, yet most of the time it stood on the defensive;
for the difference between the generals, Lee and Meade, was greater
than could be bridged by twenty thousand men. For three days the battle
raged. No other battle of recent time has been so obstinate and so
bloody. The victorious Union army lost a greater percentage in killed
and wounded than the allied armies of England, Germany, and the
Netherlands lost at Waterloo. Four of its seven corps suffered each a
greater relative loss than befell the world-renowned British infantry
on the day that saw the doom of the French emperor. The defeated
Confederates at Gettysburg lost, relatively, as many men as the defeated
French at Waterloo; but whereas the French army became a mere rabble,
Lee withdrew his formidable soldiery with their courage unbroken, and
their fighting power only diminished by their actual losses in the
field.

The decisive moment of the battle, and perhaps of the whole war, was
in the afternoon of the third day, when Lee sent forward his choicest
troops in a last effort to break the middle of the Union line. The
center of the attacking force was Pickett's division, the flower of the
Virginia infantry; but many other brigades took part in the assault, and
the column, all told, numbered over fifteen thousand men. At the same
time, the Confederates attacked the Union left to create a diversion.
The attack was preceded by a terrific cannonade, Lee gathering one
hundred and fifteen guns, and opening a fire on the center of the Union
line. In response, Hunt, the Union chief of artillery, and Tyler, of
the artillery reserves, gathered eighty guns on the crest of the gently
sloping hill, where attack was threatened. For two hours, from one till
three, the cannonade lasted, and the batteries on both sides suffered
severely. In both the Union and Confederate lines caissons were blown up
by the fire, riderless horses dashed hither and thither, the dead lay in
heaps, and throngs of wounded streamed to the rear. Every man lay down
and sought what cover he could. It was evident that the Confederate
cannonade was but a prelude to a great infantry attack, and at three
o'clock Hunt ordered the fire to stop, that the guns might cool, to be
ready for the coming assault. The Confederates thought that they had
silenced the hostile artillery, and for a few minutes their firing
continued; then, suddenly, it ceased, and there was a lull.

The men on the Union side who were not at the point directly menaced
peered anxiously across the space between the lines to watch the next
move, while the men in the divisions which it was certain were about
to be assaulted, lay hugging the ground and gripping their muskets,
excited, but confident and resolute. They saw the smoke clouds rise
slowly from the opposite crest, where the Confederate army lay, and the
sunlight glinted again on the long line of brass and iron guns which had
been hidden from view during the cannonade. In another moment, out of
the lifting smoke there appeared, beautiful and terrible, the picked
thousands of the Southern army coming on to the assault. They advanced
in three lines, each over a mile long, and in perfect order. Pickett's
Virginians held the center, with on their left the North Carolinians
of Pender and Pettigrew, and on their right the Alabama regiments of
Wilcox; and there were also Georgian and Tennessee regiments in the
attacking force. Pickett's division, however, was the only one able to
press its charge home. After leaving the woods where they started, the
Confederates had nearly a mile and a half to go in their charge. As the
Virginians moved, they bent slightly to the left, so as to leave a gap
between them and the Alabamians on the right.

The Confederate lines came on magnificently. As they crossed the
Emmetsburg Pike the eighty guns on the Union crest, now cool and in good
shape, opened upon them, first with shot and then with shell. Great gaps
were made every second in the ranks, but the gray-clad soldiers closed
up to the center, and the color-bearers leaped to the front, shaking
and waving the flags. The Union infantry reserved their fire until the
Confederates were within easy range, when the musketry crashed out with
a roar, and the big guns began to fire grape and canister. On came the
Confederates, the men falling by hundreds, the colors fluttering in
front like a little forest; for as fast as a color-bearer was shot
some one else seized the flag from his hand before it fell. The North
Carolinians were more exposed to the fire than any other portion of
the attacking force, and they were broken before they reached the line.
There was a gap between the Virginians and the Alabama troops, and this
was taken advantage of by Stannard's Vermont brigade and a demi-brigade
under Gates, of the 20th New York, who were thrust forward into it.
Stannard changed front with his regiments and fell on Pickett's forces
in flank, and Gates continued the attack. When thus struck in the flank,
the Virginians could not defend themselves, and they crowded off toward
the center to avoid the pressure. Many of them were killed or captured;
many were driven back; but two of the brigades, headed by General
Armistead, forced their way forward to the stone wall on the crest,
where the Pennsylvania regiments were posted under Gibbon and Webb.

The Union guns fired to the last moment, until of the two batteries
immediately in front of the charging Virginians every officer but one
had been struck. One of the mortally wounded officers was young Cushing,
a brother of the hero of the Albemarle fight. He was almost cut in two,
but holding his body together with one hand, with the other he fired his
last gun, and fell dead, just as Armistead, pressing forward at the head
of his men, leaped the wall, waving his hat on his sword. Immediately
afterward the battle-flags of the foremost Confederate regiments crowned
the crest; but their strength was spent. The Union troops moved forward
with the bayonet, and the remnant of Pickett's division, attacked on all
sides, either surrendered or retreated down the hill again. Armistead
fell, dying, by the body of the dead Cushing. Both Gibbon and Webb
were wounded. Of Pickett's command two thirds were killed, wounded or
captured, and every brigade commander and every field officer, save one,
fell. The Virginians tried to rally, but were broken and driven again
by Gates, while Stannard repeated, at the expense of the Alabamians, the
movement he had made against the Virginians, and, reversing his front,
attacked them in flank. Their lines were torn by the batteries in front,
and they fell back before the Vermonter's attack, and Stannard reaped a
rich harvest of prisoners and of battle-flags.

The charge was over. It was the greatest charge in any battle of
modern times, and it had failed. It would be impossible to surpass
the gallantry of those that made it, or the gallantry of those that
withstood it. Had there been in command of the Union army a general
like Grant, it would have been followed by a counter-charge, and in all
probability the war would have been shortened by nearly two years; but
no countercharge was made.

As the afternoon waned, a fierce cavalry fight took place on the Union
right. Stuart, the famous Confederate cavalry commander, had moved
forward to turn the Union right, but he was met by Gregg's cavalry, and
there followed a contest, at close quarters, with "the white arm." It
closed with a desperate melee, in which the Confederates, charged under
Generals Wade Hampton and Fitz Lee, were met in mid career by the Union
generals Custer and McIntosh. All four fought, saber in hand, at the
head of their troopers, and every man on each side was put into the
struggle. Custer, his yellow hair flowing, his face aflame with the
eager joy of battle, was in the thick of the fight, rising in his
stirrups as he called to his famous Michigan swordsmen: "Come on, you
Wolverines, come on!" All that the Union infantry, watching eagerly
from their lines, could see, was a vast dust-cloud where flakes of
light shimmered as the sun shone upon the swinging sabers. At last the
Confederate horsemen were beaten back, and they did not come forward
again or seek to renew the combat; for Pickett's charge had failed, and
there was no longer hope of Confederate victory.

When night fell, the Union flags waved in triumph on the field of
Gettysburg; but over thirty thousand men lay dead or wounded, strewn
through wood and meadow, on field and hill, where the three days' fight
had surged.




GENERAL GRANT AND THE VICKSBURG CAMPAIGN

     What flag is this you carry
      Along the sea and shore?
     The same our grandsires lifted up--
      The same our fathers bore.
     In many a battle's tempest
      It shed the crimson rain--
     What God has woven in his loom
      Let no man rend in twain.
     To Canaan, to Canaan,
      The Lord has led us forth,
     To plant upon the rebel towers
      The banners of the North.
                            --Holmes.


On January 29, 1863, General Grant took command of the army intended
to operate against Vicksburg, the last place held by the rebels on the
Mississippi, and the only point at which they could cross the river and
keep up communication with their armies and territory in the southwest.
It was the first high ground below Memphis, was very strongly fortified,
and was held by a large army under General Pemberton. The complete
possession of the Mississippi was absolutely essential to the National
Government, because the control of that great river would cut the
Confederacy in two, and do more, probably, than anything else, to make
the overthrow of the Rebellion both speedy and certain.

The natural way to invest and capture so strong a place, defended and
fortified as Vicksburg was, would have been, if the axioms of the art
of war had been adhered to, by a system of gradual approaches. A strong
base should have been established at Memphis, and then the army and the
fleet moved gradually forward, building storehouses and taking strong
positions as they went. To do this, however, it first would have been
necessary to withdraw the army from the positions it then held not far
above Vicksburg, on the western bank of the river. But such a movement,
at that time, would not have been understood by the country, and would
have had a discouraging effect on the public mind, which it was
most essential to avoid. The elections of 1862 had gone against the
government, and there was great discouragement throughout the North.
Voluntary enlistments had fallen off, a draft had been ordered, and the
peace party was apparently gaining rapidly in strength. General Grant,
looking at this grave political situation with the eye of a statesman,
decided, as a soldier, that under no circumstances would he withdraw the
army, but that, whatever happened, he would "press forward to a decisive
victory." In this determination he never faltered, but drove straight
at his object until, five months later, the great Mississippi stronghold
fell before him.

Efforts were made through the winter to reach Vicksburg from the north
by cutting canals, and by attempts to get in through the bayous and
tributary streams of the great river. All these expedients failed,
however, one after another, as Grant, from the beginning, had feared
that they would. He, therefore, took another and widely different line,
and determined to cross the river from the western to the eastern bank
below Vicksburg, to the south. With the aid of the fleet, which ran the
batteries successfully, he moved his army down the west bank until he
reached a point beyond the possibility of attack, while a diversion
by Sherman at Haines' Bluff, above Vicksburg, kept Pemberton in his
fortifications. On April 26, Grant began to move his men over the river
and landed them at Bruinsburg. "When this was effected," he writes, "I
felt a degree of relief scarcely ever equaled since. Vicksburg was not
yet taken, it is true, nor were its defenders demoralized by any of our
previous movements. I was now in the enemy's country, with a vast river
and the stronghold of Vicksburg between me and my base of supplies, but
I was on dry ground, on the same side of the river with the enemy."

The situation was this: The enemy had about sixty thousand men at
Vicksburg, Haines' Bluff, and at Jackson, Mississippi, about fifty
miles east of Vicksburg. Grant, when he started, had about thirty-three
thousand men. It was absolutely necessary for success that Grant, with
inferior numbers, should succeed in destroying the smaller forces to
the eastward, and thus prevent their union with Pemberton and the
main army at Vicksburg. His plan, in brief; was to fight and defeat a
superior enemy separately and in detail. He lost no time in putting his
plan into action, and pressing forward quickly, met a detachment of the
enemy at Port Gibson and defeated them. Thence he marched to Grand Gulf,
on the Mississippi, which he took, and which he had planned to make a
base of supply. When he reached Grand Gulf, however, he found that he
would be obliged to wait a month, in order to obtain the reinforcements
which he expected from General Banks at Port Hudson. He, therefore, gave
up the idea of making Grand Gulf a base, and Sherman having now joined
him with his corps, Grant struck at once into the interior. He took
nothing with him except ammunition, and his army was in the lightest
marching order. This enabled him to move with great rapidity, but
deprived him of his wagon trains, and of all munitions of war except
cartridges. Everything, however, in this campaign, depended on
quickness, and Grant's decision, as well as all his movements, marked
the genius of the great soldier, which consists very largely in knowing
just when to abandon the accepted military axioms.

Pressing forward, Grant met the enemy, numbering between seven and eight
thousand, at Raymond, and readily defeated them. He then marched on
toward Jackson, fighting another action at Clinton, and at Jackson he
struck General Joseph Johnston, who had arrived at that point to take
command of all the rebel forces. Johnston had with him, at the moment,
about eleven thousand men, and stood his ground. There was a sharp
fight, but Grant easily defeated the enemy, and took possession of the
town. This was an important point, for Jackson was the capital of
the State of Mississippi, and was a base of military supplies. Grant
destroyed the factories and the munitions of war which were gathered
there, and also came into possession of the line of railroad which ran
from Jackson to Vicksburg. While he was thus engaged, an intercepted
message revealed to him the fact that Pemberton, in accordance with
Johnston's orders, had come out of Vicksburg with twenty-five thousand
men, and was moving eastward against him. Pemberton, however, instead
of holding a straight line against Grant, turned at first to the south,
with the view of breaking the latter's line of communication. This was
not a success, for, as Grant says, with grim humor, "I had no line of
communication to break"; and, moreover, it delayed Pemberton when delay
was of value to Grant in finishing Johnston. After this useless turn to
the southward Pemberton resumed his march to the east, as he should have
done in the beginning, in accordance with Johnston's orders; but Grant
was now more than ready. He did not wait the coming of Pemberton.
Leaving Jackson as soon as he heard of the enemy's advance from
Vicksburg, he marched rapidly westward and struck Pemberton at Champion
Hills. The forces were at this time very nearly matched, and the
severest battle of the campaign ensued, lasting four hours. Grant,
however, defeated Pemberton completely, and came very near capturing
his entire force. With a broken army, Pemberton fell back on Vicksburg.
Grant pursued without a moment's delay, and came up with the rear guard
at Big Black River. A sharp engagement followed, and the Confederates
were again defeated. Grant then crossed the Big Black and the next day
was before Vicksburg, with his enemy inside the works.

When Grant crossed the Mississippi at Bruinsburg and struck into the
interior, he, of course, passed out of communication with Washington,
and he did not hear from there again until May 11, when, just as his
troops were engaging in the battle of Black River Bridge, an officer
appeared from Port Hudson with an order from General Halleck to return
to Grand Gulf and thence cooperate with Banks against Port Hudson.
Grant replied that the order came too late. "The bearer of the despatch
insisted that I ought to obey the order, and was giving arguments to
support the position, when I heard a great cheering to the right of our
line, and looking in that direction, saw Lawler, in his shirt-sleeves,
leading a charge on the enemy. I immediately mounted my horse and rode
in the direction of the charge, and saw no more of the officer who had
delivered the message; I think not even to this day." When Grant reached
Vicksburg, there was no further talk of recalling him to Grand Gulf or
Port Hudson. The authorities at Washington then saw plainly enough what
had been done in the interior of Mississippi, far from the reach of
telegraphs or mail.

As soon as the National troops reached Vicksburg an assault was
attempted, but the place was too strong, and the attack was repulsed,
with heavy loss. Grant then settled down to a siege, and Lincoln and
Halleck now sent him ample reinforcements. He no longer needed to ask
for them. His campaign had explained itself, and in a short time he
had seventy thousand men under his command. His lines were soon made so
strong that it was impossible for the defenders of Vicksburg to break
through them, and although Johnston had gathered troops again to the
eastward, an assault from that quarter on the National army, now so
largely reinforced, was practically out of the question. Tighter and
tighter Grant drew his lines about the city, where, every day, the
suffering became more intense. It is not necessary to give the details
of the siege. On July 4, 1863, Vicksburg surrendered, the Mississippi
was in control of the National forces from its source to its mouth, and
the Confederacy was rent in twain. On the same day Lee was beaten at
Gettysburg, and these two great victories really crushed the Rebellion,
although much hard fighting remained to be done before the end was
reached.

Grant's campaign against Vicksburg deserves to be compared with that of
Napoleon which resulted in the fall of Ulm. It was the most brilliant
single campaign of the war. With an inferior force, and abandoning
his lines of communication, moving with a marvelous rapidity through a
difficult country, Grant struck the superior forces of the enemy on the
line from Jackson to Vicksburg. He crushed Johnston before Pemberton
could get to him, and he flung Pemberton back into Vicksburg before
Johnston could rally from the defeat which had been inflicted. With an
inferior force, Grant was superior at every point of contest, and he won
every fight. Measured by the skill displayed and the result achieved,
there is no campaign in our history which better deserves study and
admiration.




ROBERT GOULD SHAW

     Brave, good, and true,
     I see him stand before me now,
     And read again on that young brow,
     Where every hope was new,
     HOW SWEET WERE LIFE! Yet, by the mouth firm-set,
     And look made up for Duty's utmost debt,
     I could divine he knew
     That death within the sulphurous hostile lines,
     In the mere wreck of nobly-pitched designs,
     Plucks hearts-ease, and not rue.

     Right in the van,
     On the red ramparts slippery swell,
     With heart that beat a charge, he fell,
     Foeward, as fits a man;
     But the high soul burns on to light men's feet
     Where death for noble ends makes dying sweet;
     His life her crescent's span
     Orbs full with share in their undarkening days
     Who ever climbed the battailous steeps of praise
     Since valor's praise began.

     We bide our chance,
     Unhappy, and make terms with Fate
     A little more to let us wait;
     He leads for aye the advance,
     Hope's forlorn-hopes that plant the desperate good
     For nobler Earths and days of manlier mood;
     Our wall of circumstance
     Cleared at a bound, he flashes o'er the fight,
     A saintly shape of fame, to cheer the right
     And steel each wavering glance.

     I write of one,
     While with dim eyes I think of three;
     Who weeps not others fair and brave as he?
     Ah, when the fight is won,
     Dear Land, whom triflers now make bold to scorn
     (Thee from whose forehead Earth awaits her morn),
     How nobler shall the sun
     Flame in thy sky, how braver breathe thy air,
     That thou bred'st children who for thee could dare
     And die as thine have done.
                         --Lowell.


Robert Gould Shaw was born in Boston on October 10, 1837, the son of
Francis and Sarah Sturgis Shaw. When he was about nine years old, his
parents moved to Staten Island, and he was educated there, and at school
in the neighborhood of New York, until he went to Europe in 1853, where
he remained traveling and studying for the next three years. He entered
Harvard College in 1856, and left at the end of his third year, in order
to accept an advantageous business offer in New York.

Even as a boy he took much interest in politics, and especially in the
question of slavery. He voted for Lincoln in 1860, and at that time
enlisted as a private in the New York 7th Regiment, feeling that there
was likelihood of trouble, and that there would be a demand for soldiers
to defend the country. His foresight was justified only too soon, and on
April 19, 1861, he marched with his regiment to Washington. The call for
the 7th Regiment was only for thirty days, and at the expiration of that
service he applied for and obtained a commission as second lieutenant in
the 2d Massachusetts, and left with that regiment for Virginia in July,
1861. He threw himself eagerly into his new duties, and soon gained
a good position in the regiment. At Cedar Mountain he was an aid on
General Gordon's staff, and was greatly exposed in the performance of
his duties during the action. He was also with his regiment at Antietam,
and was in the midst of the heavy fighting of that great battle.

Early in 1863, the Government determined to form negro regiments, and
Governor Andrew offered Shaw, who had now risen to the rank of captain,
the colonelcy of one to be raised in Massachusetts, the first black
regiment recruited under State authority. It was a great compliment to
receive this offer, but Shaw hesitated as to his capacity for such a
responsible post. He first wrote a letter declining, on the ground that
he did not feel that he had ability enough for the undertaking, and then
changed his mind, and telegraphed Governor Andrew that he would accept.
It is not easy to realize it now, but his action then in accepting this
command required high moral courage, of a kind quite different from that
which he had displayed already on the field of battle. The prejudice
against the blacks was still strong even in the North. There was a great
deal of feeling among certain classes against enlisting black regiments
at all, and the officers who undertook to recruit and lead negroes were.
exposed to much attack and criticism. Shaw felt, however, that this very
opposition made it all the more incumbent on him to undertake the duty.
He wrote on February 8:

After I have undertaken this work, I shall feel that what I have to do
is to prove that the negro can be made a good soldier... . I am inclined
to think that the undertaking will not meet with so much opposition as
was at first supposed. All sensible men in the army, of all parties,
after a little thought, say that it is the best thing that can be done,
and surely those at home who are not brave or patriotic enough to enlist
should not ridicule or throw obstacles in the way of men who are going
to fight for them. There is a great prejudice against it, but now that
it has become a government matter, that will probably wear away. At
any rate I sha'n't be frightened out of it by its unpopularity. I feel
convinced I shall never regret having taken this step, as far as I
myself am concerned; for while I was undecided, I felt ashamed of myself
as if I were cowardly.


Colonel Shaw went at once to Boston, after accepting his new duty, and
began the work of raising and drilling the 54th Regiment. He met with
great success, for he and his officers labored heart and soul, and the
regiment repaid their efforts. On March 30, he wrote: "The mustering
officer who was here to-day is a Virginian, and has always thought it
was a great joke to try to make soldiers of 'niggers,' but he tells me
now that he has never mustered in so fine a set of men, though about
twenty thousand had passed through his hands since September." On May
28, Colonel Shaw left Boston, and his march through the city was a
triumph. The appearance of his regiment made a profound impression, and
was one of the events of the war which those who saw it never forgot.

The regiment was ordered to South Carolina, and when they were off Cape
Hatteras, Colonel Shaw wrote:

The more I think of the passage of the 54th through Boston, the more
wonderful it seems to me just remember our own doubts and fears, and
other people's sneering and pitying remarks when we began last winter,
and then look at the perfect triumph of last Thursday. We have gone
quietly along, forming the first regiment, and at last left Boston
amidst greater enthusiasm than has been seen since the first three
months' troops left for the war. Truly, I ought to be thankful for
all my happiness and my success in life so far; and if the raising of
colored troops prove such a benefit to the country and to the blacks as
many people think it will, I shall thank God a thousand times that I was
led to take my share in it.


He had, indeed, taken his share in striking one of the most fatal blows
to the barbarism of slavery which had yet been struck. The formation of
the black regiments did more for the emancipation of the negro and the
recognition of his rights, than almost anything else. It was impossible,
after that, to say that men who fought and gave their lives for the
Union and for their own freedom were not entitled to be free. The
acceptance of the command of a black regiment by such men as Shaw and
his fellow-officers was the great act which made all this possible.

After reaching South Carolina, Colonel Shaw was with his regiment at
Port Royal and on the islands of that coast for rather more than a
month, and on July 18 he was offered the post of honor in an assault
upon Fort Wagner, which was ordered for that night. He had proved that
the negroes could be made into a good regiment, and now the second great
opportunity had come, to prove their fighting quality. He wanted to
demonstrate that his men could fight side by side with white soldiers,
and show to somebody beside their officers what stuff they were made of.
He, therefore, accepted the dangerous duty with gladness. Late in the
