Valliere, and yet you refuse to tell me the name of the insulter."

"Sire, I thought it was quite understood that your majesty had abandoned
the idea of making me denounce him."

"Perfectly true, monsieur," returned the king, controlling his anger:
"besides, I shall always know in sufficient time the name of the man
whom I shall feel it my duty to punish."

Manicamp perceived that they had returned to the question again. As for
the king, he saw he had allowed himself to be hurried away a little too
far, and he therefore continued: "And I will punish him--not because
there is any question of Mademoiselle de La Valliere, although I esteem
her very highly--but because a lady was the object of the quarrel. And I
intend that ladies shall be respected at my court, and that quarrels
shall be put a stop to altogether."

Manicamp bowed.

"And now, Monsieur de Manicamp," continued the king, "what was said
about Mademoiselle de la Valliere?"

"Cannot your majesty guess?"

"I?"

"Your majesty can imagine the character of the jests in which young men
permit themselves to indulge."

"They very probably said that she was in love with some one?" the king
ventured to remark.

"Probably so."

"But Mademoiselle de la Valliere has a perfect right to love any one she
pleases," said the king.

"That is the very point De Guiche maintained."

"And on account of which he fought, do you mean?"

"Yes, sire, the very sole cause."

The king colored. "And you do not know anything more, then?"

"In what respect, sire?"

"In the very interesting respect which you are now referring to."

"What does your majesty wish to know?"

"Why, the name of the man with whom La Valliere is in love, and whom De
Guiche's adversary disputed her right to love."

"Sire, I know nothing--I have heard nothing--and have learned nothing,
even accidentally; but De Guiche is a noble-hearted fellow, and if,
momentarily, he substituted himself in the place or stead of La
Valliere's protector, it was because that protector was himself of too
exalted a position to undertake her defense."

These words were more than transparent; they made the king blush, but
this time with pleasure. He struck Manicamp gently on the shoulder.

"Well, well, Monsieur de Manicamp, you are not only a ready, witty
fellow, but a brave gentleman besides, and your friend De Guiche is a
paladin quite after my own heart; you will express that to him from me."

"Your majesty forgives me, then?"

"Completely."

"And I am free?"

The king smiled and held out his hand to Manicamp, which he took and
kissed respectfully. "And then," added the king, "you relate stories so
charmingly."

"I, sire!"

"You told me in the most admirable manner the particulars of the
accident which happened to Guiche. I can see the wild boar rushing out
of the wood--I can see the horse fall down, and the boar rush from the
horse to the rider. You do not simply relate a story well, but you
positively paint its incidents."

"Sire, I think your majesty deigns to laugh at my expense."

"On the contrary," said Louis, seriously, "I have so little intention of
laughing, Monsieur de Manicamp, that I wish you to relate this adventure
to every one."

"The adventure of the hunt?"

"Yes; in the same manner you told it to me, without changing a single
word--you understand."

"Perfectly, sire."

"And you will relate it, then?"

"Without losing a minute."

"Very well! and now summon M. d'Artagnan: I hope you are no longer
afraid of him."

"Oh! sire, from the very moment I am sure of your majesty's kind
dispositions, I no longer fear anything!"

"Call him, then," said the king.

Manicamp opened the door, and said, "Gentlemen, the king wishes you to
return." D'Artagnan, Saint-Aignan and Valot entered.

"Gentlemen," said the king, "I summoned you for the purpose of saying
that Monsieur de Manicamp's explanation has entirely satisfied me."

D'Artagnan glanced at Valot and Saint-Aignan, as much as to say, "Well!
did I not tell you so?"

The king led Manicamp to the door, and then in a low tone of voice,
said, "See that M. de Guiche takes good care of himself, and,
particularly that he recovers as soon as possible; I am very desirous of
thanking him in the name of every lady, but let him take special care
that he does not begin again."

"Were he to die a hundred times, sire, he would begin again if your
majesty's honor were in any way called in question."

This remark was direct enough. But we have already said that the incense
of flattery was very pleasing to the king, and, provided he received it,
he was not very particular as to its quality.

"Very well, very well," he said, as he dismissed Manicamp, "I will see
De Guiche myself, and make him listen to reason." And as Manicamp left
the apartment, the king turned round toward the three spectators of this
scene, and said, "Tell me, Monsieur d'Artagnan, how does it happen that
your sight is so imperfect?--you, whose eyes are generally so very
good."

"My sight bad, sire?"

"Certainly."

"It must be the case, since your majesty says so; but in what respect,
may I ask?"

"Why, with regard to what occurred in the Bois-Rochin."

"Ah! ah!"

"Certainly. You pretend to have seen the tracks of two horses, to have
detected the foot-prints of two men; and have described the particulars
of an engagement, which you assert took place. Nothing of the sort
occurred; pure illusion on your part."

"Ah! ah!" said D'Artagnan.

"Exactly the same thing with the galloping to and fro of the horses, and
the other indications of a struggle. It was the struggle of De Guiche
against the wild boar, and absolutely nothing else; only the struggle
was a long and a terrible one, it seems."

"Ah! ah!" continued D'Artagnan.

"And when I think that I almost believed it for a moment; but, then, you
speak with such confidence."

"I admit, sire, that I must have been very short-sighted," said
D'Artagnan, with a readiness of humor which delighted the king.

"You do admit, then?"

"Admit it, sire, most assuredly I do."

"So that now you see the thing--"

"In quite a different light to what I saw it half an hour ago."

"And to what, then, do you attribute this difference in your opinion?"

"Oh! a very simple thing, sire; half an hour ago I returned from the
Bois-Rochin, where I had nothing to light me but a stupid stable
lantern--"

"While now?"

"While now, I have all the wax-lights of your cabinet, and more than
that, your majesty's own eyes, which illuminate everything, like the
blazing sun at noon-day."

The king began to laugh, and Saint-Aignan broke out into convulsions of
merriment.

"It is precisely like M. Valot," said D'Artagnan, resuming the
conversation where the king had left off; "he has been imagining all
along, that, not only was M. de Guiche wounded by a bullet, but still
more, that he extracted it even from his chest."

"Upon my word," said Valot, "I assure you--"

"Now, did you not believe that?" continued D'Artagnan.

"Yes," said Valot, "not only did I believe it, but at this very moment I
would swear it."

"Well, my dear doctor, you have dreamed it."

"I have dreamed it!"

"M. de Guiche's wound--a mere dream; the bullet a dream. So take my
advice, and say no more about it."

"Well said," returned the king; "M. d'Artagnan's advice is very good. Do
not speak of your dream to any one, M. Valot, and upon the word of a
gentleman, you will have no occasion to repent it. Good evening,
gentlemen; a very sad affair indeed is a wild-boar hunt!"

"A very serious thing indeed," repeated D'Artagnan, in a loud voice, "is
a wild-boar hunt!" and he repeated it in every room through which he
passed, and left the chateau, taking Valot with him.

"And now we are alone," said the king to Saint-Aignan, "what is the name
of De Guiche's adversary?" Saint-Aignan looked at the king.

"Oh! do not hesitate," said the king: "you know that I must forgive."

"De Wardes," said Saint-Aignan.

"Very good," said Louis XIV.; and then hastily retiring to his own room,
added to himself, "To forgive is not to forget."




CHAPTER XXVII.

SHOWING THE ADVANTAGE OF HAVING TWO STRINGS TO ONE'S BOW.


Manicamp quitted the king's apartment delighted at having succeeded so
well, when, just as he reached the bottom of the staircase, and was
about passing before a doorway, he felt that some one suddenly pulled
him by the sleeve. He turned round and recognized Montalais, who was
waiting for him in the passage, and who, in a very mysterious manner,
with her body bent forward, and in a low tone of voice said to him,
"Follow me, monsieur, and without any delay, if you please."

"Where to, mademoiselle?" inquired Manicamp.

"In the first place, a true knight would not have asked such a question,
but would have followed me without requiring any explanation."

"Well, mademoiselle, I am quite ready to conduct myself as a true
knight."

"No, it is too late, and you cannot take the credit of it. We are going
to Madame's apartments, so come at once."

"Ah! ah!" said Manicamp; "lead on, then."

And he followed Montalais, who ran before him as light as Galatea.

"This time," said Manicamp, as he followed his guide, "I do not think
that stories about hunting expeditions would be acceptable. We will try,
however, and if need be--why, if there should be any occasion for it, we
must try something else."

Montalais still ran on.

"How fatiguing it is," thought Manicamp, "to have need of one's head and
legs at the same time."

At last, however, they arrived. Madame had just finished undressing, and
was in a most elegant _deshabille_, but it must be understood that she
had changed her dress before she had any idea of being subjected to the
emotions which agitated her. She was waiting with the most restless
impatience, and Montalais and Manicamp found her standing near the door.
At the sound of their approaching footsteps, Madame came forward to meet
them. "Ah!" she said, "at last!"

"Here is M. Manicamp," replied Montalais.

Manicamp bowed with the greatest respect; Madame signed to Montalais to
withdraw, and she immediately obeyed. Madame followed her with her eyes
in silence until the door closed behind her, and then turning toward
Manicamp, said, "What is the matter?--and is it true, as I am told,
Monsieur de Manicamp, that some one is lying wounded in the chateau?"

"Yes, madame, unfortunately so--Monsieur de Guiche."

"Yes! Monsieur de Guiche," repeated the princess. "I had, in fact, heard
it rumored, but not confirmed. And so, in perfect truth, it is Monsieur
de Guiche who has been so unfortunate."

"M. de Guiche himself, madame."

"Are you aware, M. de Manicamp," said the princess, hastily, "that the
king has the strongest antipathy to duels?"

"Perfectly so, madame; but a duel with a wild beast is not amenable to
his majesty."

"Oh, you will not insult me by supposing that I should credit the absurd
fable which has been reported, with what object I cannot tell,
respecting M. de Guiche having been wounded by a wild boar. No, no,
monsieur; the real truth is known, and, in addition to the inconvenience
of his wound, M. de Guiche runs the risk of losing his liberty."

"Alas! madame, I am well aware of that, but what is to be done?"

"You have seen the king?"

"Yes, madame."

"What did you say to him?"

"I told him how M. de Guiche had been to the chase, and how a wild boar
had rushed forth out of the Bois-Rochin; how M. de Guiche fired at it,
and how, in fact, the furious brute dashed at De Guiche, killed his
horse, and grievously wounded himself."

"And the king believed that?"

"Perfectly."

"Oh, you surprise me, Monsieur de Manicamp; you surprise me very much."
And Madame walked up and down the room, casting a searching look from
time to time at Manicamp, who remained motionless and impassible in the
same place. At last she stopped. "And yet," she said, "every one here
seems united in giving another cause for his wound."

"What cause, madame," said Manicamp, "may I be permitted, without
indiscretion, to ask your highness?"

"You ask such a question? You, M. de Guiche's intimate friend, his
confidant, indeed!"

"Oh, madame! the intimate friend--yes; the confidant--no; De Guiche is a
man who can keep his own secrets, who has some of his own, certainly,
but who never breathes a syllable about them. De Guiche is discretion
itself, madame."

"Very well, then; those secrets which M. de Guiche keeps so
scrupulously, I shall have the pleasure of informing you of," said the
princess, almost spitefully; "for the king may possibly question you a
second time, and if, on the second occasion, you were to repeat the same
story to him, he possibly might not be very well satisfied with it."

"But, madame, I think your highness is mistaken with regard to the king.
His majesty has been perfectly satisfied with me, I assure you."

"In that case, permit me to assure you, Monsieur de Manicamp, that only
proves one thing, which is, that his majesty is very easily satisfied."

"I think your highness is mistaken in arriving at such an opinion: his
majesty is well known not to be contented except with very good
reasons."

"And do you suppose that he will thank you for your officious falsehood,
when he will learn to-morrow that M. de Guiche had, on behalf of his
friend, M. de Bragelonne, a quarrel which ended in a hostile meeting?"

"A quarrel on M. de Bragelonne's account," said Manicamp, with the most
innocent expression in the world; "what does your royal highness do me
the honor to tell me?"

"What is there astonishing in that? M. de Guiche is susceptible,
irritable, and easily loses his temper."

"On the contrary, madame. I know M. de Guiche to be very patient, and
never susceptible or irritable except upon very good grounds."

"But is not friendship a just ground?" said the princess.

"Oh, certainly, madame; and particularly for a heart like his."

"Very good: you will not deny, I suppose, that M. de Bragelonne is M. de
Guiche's friend?"

"A very great friend."

"Well, then, M. de Guiche has taken M. de Bragelonne's part; and as M.
de Bragelonne was absent and could not fight, he fought for him."

Manicamp began to smile, and moved his head and shoulders very slightly,
as much as to say. "Oh, if you will positively have it so--"

"But speak, at all events," said the princess, out of patience: "speak!"

"I?"

"Of course; it is quite clear you are not of my opinion, and that you
have something to say."

"I have only one thing to say, Madame."

"Name it."

"That I do not understand a single word of what you have just been
telling me."

"What!--you do not understand a single word about M. de Guiche's quarrel
with M. de Wardes!" exclaimed the princess, almost out of temper.

Manicamp remained silent.

"A quarrel," she continued, "which arose out of a conversation
scandalous in its tone and purport, and more or less well founded,
respecting the virtue of a certain lady."

"Ah! of a certain lady--that is quite another thing," said Manicamp.

"You begin to understand, do you not?"

"Your highness will excuse me, but I dare not--"

"You dare not," said Madame, exasperated: "very well, then, wait one
moment, and I will dare."

"Madame, madame!" exclaimed Manicamp, as if in great dismay, "be careful
of what you are going to say."

"It would seem, monsieur, that, if I happened to be a man, you would
challenge me, notwithstanding his majesty's edicts, as Monsieur de
Guiche challenged M. de Wardes: and that, too, on account of the virtue
of Mademoiselle de la Valliere."

"Of Mademoiselle de la Valliere!" exclaimed Manicamp, starting backward,
as if hers was the very last name he expected to hear pronounced.

"What makes you start in that manner, Monsieur de Manicamp?" said Madame
ironically: "do you mean to say you would be impertinent enough to
suspect that young lady's honor?"

"Madame, in the whole course of this affair there has not been the
slightest question of Mademoiselle de la Valliere's honor."

"What! when two men have almost blown each other's brains out on a
woman's behalf, do you mean to say she has had nothing to do with the
affair, and that her name has not been called in question at all? I did
not think you so good a courtier. Monsieur de Manicamp."

"Pray forgive me, madame," said the young man, "but we are very far from
understanding each other. You do me the honor to speak one kind of
language, while I am speaking altogether another."

"I beg your pardon, but I do not understand your meaning."

"Forgive me then: but I fancied I understood your highness to remark
that De Guiche and De Wardes had fought on Mademoiselle de la Valliere's
account."

"Certainly."

"On account of Mademoiselle de la Valliere, I think you said?" repeated
Manicamp.

"I do not say that M. de Guiche personally took an interest in
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, but I say that he did so as representing or
acting on behalf of another."

"On behalf of another?"

"Come, do not always assume such a bewildered look. Does not every one
here know that M. de Bragelonne is affianced to Mademoiselle de la
Valliere, and that before he went on the mission with which the king
intrusted him, he charged his friend M. de Guiche to watch over that
interesting young lady."

"There is nothing more for me to say, then. Your highness is well
informed."

"Of everything; so I beg you to understand that clearly."

Manicamp began to laugh, which almost exasperated the princess, who was
not, as we know, of a very patient and enduring disposition.

"Madame," resumed the discreet Manicamp, saluting the princess, "let us
bury this affair altogether in forgetfulness, for it will never be quite
cleared up."

"Oh, as far as that goes, there is nothing more to do, and the
information is complete. The king will learn that M. de Guiche has taken
up the cause of this little adventuress, who gives herself all the airs
of a grand lady; he will learn that Monsieur de Bragelonne, having
nominated his friend M. de Guiche his guardian-in-ordinary of the garden
of the Hesperides, the latter immediately fastened, as he was required
to do, upon the Marquis de Wardes, who ventured to touch the golden
apple. Moreover, you cannot pretend to deny, Monsieur Manicamp--you who
know everything so well--that the king, on his side, casts a longing eye
upon this famous treasure, and that he will bear no slight grudge
against M. de Guiche for constituting himself the defender of it. Are
you sufficiently well informed now, or do you require anything
further--if so, speak, monsieur."

"No, madame, there is nothing more I wish to know."

"Learn, however for you ought to know it, Monsieur de Manicamp--learn
that his majesty's indignation will be followed by terrible
consequences. In princes of a similar temperament to that of his
majesty, the passion which jealousy causes sweeps down like a
whirlwind."

"Which you will temper, madame."

"I!" exclaimed the princess, with a gesture of indescribable irony; "I!
and by what title, may I ask?"

"Because you detect injustice, madame."

"And according to your account, then, it would be an injustice to
prevent the king arranging his love affairs as he pleases."

"You will intercede, however, in M. de Guiche's favor?"

"You are mad, monsieur," said the princess, in a haughty tone of voice.

"On the contrary, I am in the most perfect possession of my senses; and
I repeat, you will defend M. de Guiche before the king."

"Why should I?"

"Because the cause of M. de Guiche is your own, madame," said Manicamp,
with all the ardor with which his eyes were kindled.

"What do you mean by that?"

"I mean, madame, that, with respect to the defense which Monsieur de
Guiche undertook in M. de Bragelonne's absence, I am surprised that your
highness has not detected a pretext in La Valliere's name having been
brought forward."

"A pretext? But a pretext for what?" repeated the princess,
hesitatingly, for Manicamp's steady look had just revealed something of
the truth to her.

"I trust, madame," said the young man, "I have said sufficient to induce
your highness not to overwhelm before his majesty my poor friend, De
Guiche, against whom all the malevolence of a party bitterly opposed to
your own will now be directed."

"You mean, on the contrary, I suppose, that all those who have no great
affection for Mademoiselle de la Valliere, and even, perhaps, a few of
those who have some regard for her, will be angry with the comte?"

"Oh, madame! why will you push your obstinacy to such an extent, and
refuse to open your ears and listen to the counsel of one whose devotion
to you is unbounded? Must I expose myself to the risk of your
displeasure--am I really to be called upon to name, contrary to my own
wish, the person who was the real cause of this quarrel?"

"The person?" said Madame blushing.

"Must I," continued Manicamp, "tell you how poor De Guiche became
irritated, furious, exasperated beyond all control, at the different
rumors which are circulating about this person? Must I, if you persist
in this willful blindness, and if respect should continue to prevent me
naming her--must I, I repeat, recall to your recollection the various
scenes which Monsieur had with the Duke of Buckingham, and the
insinuations which were reported respecting the duke's exile? Must I
remind you of the anxious care the comte always took in his efforts to
please, to watch, to protect that person for whom alone he lives--for
whom alone he breathes? Well! I will do so; and when I shall have made
you recall all the particulars I refer to, you will perhaps understand
how it happened that the comte, having lost all control over himself,
and having been for some time past almost harassed to death by De
Wardes, became, at the first disrespectful expression which the latter
pronounced respecting the person in question, inflamed with passion, and
panted only for an opportunity of revenging the affront."

The princess concealed her face in her hands. "Monsieur, monsieur!" she
exclaimed; "do you know what you are saying, and to whom you are
speaking?"

"Therefore, madame," pursued Manicamp, as if he had not heard the
exclamations of the princess, "nothing will astonish you any
longer--neither the comte's ardor in seeking the quarrel, nor his
wonderful address in transferring it to a quarter foreign to your own
personal interests. That latter circumstance was, indeed, a marvelous
instance of tact and perfect coolness, and if the person in whose behalf
the comte so fought and shed his blood does, in reality, owe some
gratitude to the poor wounded sufferer, it is not on account of the
blood he has shed, or for the agony he has suffered, but for the steps
he has taken to preserve from comment or reflection an honor which is
more precious to him than his own."

"Oh!" cried Madame, as if she had been alone, "is it possible the
quarrel was on my account!"

Manicamp felt he could now breathe for a moment--and gallantly had he
won the right to do so. Madame, on her side, remained for some time
plunged in a painful reverie. Her agitation could be seen by her quick
respiration, by her languishing looks, by the frequency with which she
pressed her hand upon her heart. But, in her, coquetry was not so much a
passive quality, as, on the contrary, a fire which sought for fuel to
maintain itself, and which found what it required.

"If it be as you assert," she said, "the comte will have obliged two
persons at the same time; for Monsieur de Bragelonne also owes a deep
debt of gratitude to M. de Guiche--and with far greater reason, indeed,
because everywhere, and on every occasion, Mademoiselle de la Valliere
will be regarded as having been defended by this generous champion."

Manicamp perceived that there still remained some lingering doubt in the
princess's heart. "A truly admirable service indeed," he said, "is the
one he has rendered to Mademoiselle de la Valliere! A truly admirable
service to M. de Bragelonne! The duel has created a sensation which, in
some respects, casts a dishonorable suspicion upon that young girl; a
sensation, indeed, which will embroil her with the vicomte. The
consequence is, that De Wardes' pistol-bullet has had three results
instead of one; it destroys at the same time the honor of a woman, the
happiness of a man, and, perhaps, it has wounded to death one of the
best gentlemen in France. Oh, madame! your logic is cold and
calculating; it always condemns--it never absolves."

Manicamp's concluding words scattered to the winds the last doubt which
lingered, not in Madame's heart, but in her head. She was no longer a
princess full of scruples, nor a woman with her ever-returning
suspicions, but one whose heart had just felt the mortal chill of a
wound. "Wounded to death!" she murmured, in a faltering voice, "oh,
Monsieur de Manicamp! did you not say, wounded to death?"

Manicamp returned no other answer than a deep sigh.

"And so you said that the comte is dangerously wounded?" continued the
princess.

"Yes, madame; one of his hands is shattered, and he has a bullet lodged
in his breast."

"Gracious heavens!" resumed the princess, with a feverish excitement,
"this is horrible, Monsieur de Manicamp! a hand shattered, do you say,
and a bullet in his breast? And that coward! that wretch! that assassin,
De Wardes, who did it!"

Manicamp seemed overcome by a violent emotion. He had, in fact,
displayed no little energy in the latter part of his speech. As for
Madame, she entirely threw aside all regard for the formal observances
of propriety which society imposes: for when, with her, passion spoke in
accents either of anger or sympathy, nothing could any longer restrain
her impulses. Madame approached Manicamp, who had sunk down upon a seat,
as if his grief were a sufficiently powerful excuse for his infraction
of one of the laws of etiquette. "Monsieur," she said, seizing him by
the hand, "be frank with me."

Manicamp looked up.

"Is M. de Guiche in danger of death?"

"Doubly so, madame," he replied; "in the first place on account of the
hemorrhage which has taken place, an artery having been injured in the
hand; and next, in consequence of the wound in his breast, which
may--the doctor is afraid of it, at least--have injured some vital
part."

"He may die, then?"

"Die, yes, madame; and without even having had the consolation of
knowing that you have been told of his devotion."

"You will tell him."

"I?"

"Yes; are you not his friend?"

"I? oh no, madame. I will only tell M. de Guiche--if, indeed, he is
still in a condition to hear me--I will only tell him what I have
seen--that is, your cruelty for him."

"Oh, monsieur, you will not be guilty of such barbarity!"

"Indeed, madame, I shall speak the truth, for nature is very energetic
in a man of his age. The physicians are clever men, and if, by chance,
the poor comte should survive his wound, I should not wish him to die of
a wound of the heart, after having escaped that of the body." And
Manicamp, rose, and, with an expression of profound respect, seemed to
be desirous of taking leave.

"At least, monsieur," said Madame, stopping him with almost a suppliant
air, "you will be kind enough to tell me in what state your wounded
friend is, and who is the physician who attends him?"

"As regards the state he is in, madame, he is seriously ill; his
physician is M. Valot, his majesty's private medical attendant. M. Valot
is, moreover, assisted by a professional friend, to whose house M. de
Guiche has been carried."

"What! he is not in the chateau?" said Madame.

"Alas, madame! the poor fellow was so ill that he could not even be
conveyed hither."

"Give me the address, monsieur," said the princess, hurriedly: "I will
send to inquire after him."

"Rue du Feurre: a brick-built house, with white outside blinds. The
doctor's name is on the door."

"You are returning to your wounded friend. Monsieur de Manicamp?"

"Yes, madame."

"You will be able, then, to do me a service."

"I am at your highness's orders."

"Do what you intended to do; return to M. de Guiche, send away all those
whom you may find there, and have the kindness yourself to go away too."

"Madame--"

"Let us waste no time in useless explanations. Accept the fact as I
present it to you; see nothing in it beyond what is really there, and
ask nothing further than what I tell you. I am going to send one of my
ladies, perhaps two, because it is now getting late. I do not wish them
to see you, or, rather, I do not wish you to see them. These are
scruples which you can understand--you particularly, Monsieur de
Manicamp, who seem to be capable of divining everything."

"Oh, madame, perfectly. I can even do better still: I will precede, or
rather walk in advance of your attendants; it will, at the same time, be
a means of showing them the way more accurately, and of protecting them
if it happened any occasion might occur, though there is no probability
of their needing protection."

"And by this means, then, they would be sure of entering without any
difficulty, would they not?"

"Certainly, madame: for, as I should be the first to pass, I should
remove any difficulties which might chance to be in the way."

"Very well; go, go, Monsieur de Manicamp, and wait at the bottom of the
staircase."

"I go at once, madame."

"Stay." Manicamp paused. "When you hear the footsteps of two women
descending the stairs, go out, and, without once turning round, take the
road which leads to where the poor comte is lying."

"But if, by any mischance, two other persons were to descend, and I were
to be mistaken?"

"You will hear one of the two clap her hands together very softly. So
go."

Manicamp turned round, bowed once more, and left the room, his heart
overflowing with joy. In fact, he knew very well that the presence of
Madame herself would be the best balm to apply to his friend's wounds. A
quarter of an hour had hardly elapsed when he heard the sound of a door
being opened softly and closed with the same precaution. He listened to
the light footfalls gliding down the staircase, and then heard the
signal agreed upon. He immediately went out, and, faithful to his
promise, bent his way, without once turning round his head, through the
streets of Fontainebleau toward the doctor's dwelling.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

M. MALICORNE THE KEEPER OF THE RECORDS OF THE REALM OF FRANCE.


Two women, whose figures were completely concealed by their mantles, and
whose masks effectually hid the upper portion of their faces, timidly
followed Manicamp's steps. On the first floor, behind curtains of red
damask, the soft light of a lamp, placed upon a low table, faintly
illumined the room, at the other extremity of which, on a large bedstead
supported by spiral columns, around which curtains of the same color as
those which deadened the rays of the lamp had been closely drawn, lay De
Guiche, his head supported by pillows, his eyes looking as if the mists
of death seemed gathering there; his long black hair, scattered over the
pillow, set off the young man's hollowed and pale temples to great
advantage. It could be easily perceived that fever was the principal
occupant of that chamber. Guiche was dreaming. His wandering mind was
pursuing, through gloom and mystery, one of those wild creations which
delirium engenders. Two or three drops of blood, still liquid, stained
the floor. Manicamp hurriedly ran up the stairs, but paused at the
threshold of the door, looked into the room, and, seeing that everything
was perfectly quiet, he advanced toward the foot of the large leathern
armchair, a specimen of furniture of the reign of Henry IV., and seeing
that the nurse, as a matter of course, had dropped off to sleep, he
awoke her, and begged her to pass into the adjoining room. Then,
standing by the side of the bed, he remained for a moment deliberating
whether it would be better to awaken Guiche, in order to acquaint him
with the good news. But as he began to hear behind the door the rustling
of the silk dresses and the hurried breathing of his two companions,
and as he already saw that the curtain which hung before the doorway
seemed on the point of being impatiently drawn aside, he passed round
the bed and followed the nurse into the next room. As soon as he had
disappeared, the curtain was raised, and his two female companions
entered the room he had just left. The one who entered the first made a
gesture to her companion which riveted her to the spot where she stood,
close to the door, and then resolutely advanced toward the bed, drew
back the curtains along the iron rod, and threw them in thick folds
behind the head of the bed. She gazed upon the comte's pallid face,
remarked his right hand enveloped in linen whose dazzling whiteness was
increased by the counterpane covered with dark leaves which was thrown
across a portion of the sick couch. She shuddered as she saw a spot of
blood becoming larger and larger upon the linen bandages. The young
man's white chest was quite uncovered, as if the cool night air would
assist his respiration. A small bandage fastened the dressings of the
wound, around which a bluish circle of extravasated blood was gradually
increasing in size. A deep sigh broke from her lips. She leaned against
one of the columns of the bed, and gazed, through the holes in her mask,
upon the harrowing spectacle before her. A hoarse harsh sigh passed like
a death rattle through the comte's clenched teeth. The masked lady
seized his left hand, which felt as scorching as burning coals. But at
the very moment she placed her icy hand upon it, the action of the cold
was such that De Guiche opened his eyes, and by a look in which revived
intelligence was dawning, seemed as if struggling back again into
existence. The first thing upon which he fixed his gaze was this phantom
standing erect by his bedside. At that sight his eyes became dilated,
but without any appearance of consciousness in them. The lady thereupon
made a sign to her companion, who had remained at the door; and, in all
probability, the latter had already received her lesson, for in a clear
tone of voice, and without any hesitation whatever, she pronounced
these words, "Monsieur le Comte, her royal highness Madame is desirous
of knowing how you are able to bear your wound, and to express to you,
by my lips, her great regret at seeing you suffer."

As she pronounced the word Madame, Guiche started; he had not as yet
remarked the person to whom the voice belonged, and he naturally turned
toward the direction whence it proceeded. But, as he felt the cold hand
still resting on his own, he again turned toward the motionless figure
beside him. "Was it you who spoke, madame?" he asked, in a weak voice,
"or is there another person beside you in the room?"

"Yes," replied the figure, in an almost unintelligible voice, as she
bent down her head.

"Well!" said the wounded man, with a great effort, "I thank you. Tell
Madame that I no longer regret dying, since she has remembered me."

At this word "dying," pronounced by one whose life seemed to hang on a
thread, the masked lady could not restrain her tears, which flowed under
her mask, and which appeared upon her cheeks just where the mask left
her face bare. If Guiche had been in fuller possession of his senses, he
would have seen her tears roll like glistening pearls, and fall upon his
bed. The lady, forgetting that she wore her mask, raised her hand as
though to wipe her eyes, and meeting the rough velvet, she tore away her
mask in anger and threw it on the floor. At the unexpected apparition
before him, which seemed to issue from a cloud, Guiche uttered a cry and
stretched out his arms toward her; but every word perished on his lips,
and his strength seemed utterly abandoning him. His right hand, which
had followed his first impulse, without calculating the amount of
strength he had left, fell back again upon the bed, and immediately
afterward the white linen was stained with a larger spot than before. In
the meantime, the young man's eyes became dim, and closed as if he were
already struggling with the angel of death: and then, after a few
involuntary movements, his head fell back motionless on his pillow;
from pale he had become livid. The lady was frightened; but on this
occasion, contrary to what is usually the case, fear became attractive.
She leaned over the young man, gazed earnestly, fixedly at his pale and
cold face, which she almost touched, then imprinted a rapid kiss upon De
Quiche's left hand, who, trembling as if an electric shock had passed
through him, awoke a second time, opened his large eyes, incapable of
recognition, and again fell into a state of complete insensibility.
"Come," she said to her companion, "we must not remain here any longer;
I shall be committing some folly or other."

"Madame, madame, your highness is forgetting your mask!" said her
vigilant companion.

"Pick it up," replied her mistress, as she tottered almost senseless
toward the staircase, and as the street-door had been left only half
closed, the two women, light as birds, passed through it, and with
hurried steps returned to the palace. One of them ascended toward
Madame's apartments, where she disappeared; the other entered the room
belonging to the maids of honor, namely, on the _entresol_, and having
reached her own room, she sat down before a table, and without giving
herself time even to breathe, wrote the following letter:

     "This evening Madame has been to see M. de Guiche. Everything is
     going on well on this side. See that yours is the same, and do not
     forget to burn this paper."

She then folded the letter in a long thin form, and leaving her room
with every possible precaution, crossed a corridor which led to the
apartments appropriated to the gentlemen attached to Monsieur's service.
She stopped before a door, under which, having previously knocked twice
in a short quick manner, she thrust the paper, and fled. Then, returning
to her own room, she removed every trace of her having gone out, and
also of having written the letter. Amid the investigations she was so
diligently pursuing she perceived on the table the mask which belonged
to Madame, and which, according to her mistress's directions, she had
brought back, but had forgotten to restore to her. "Oh! oh!" she said,
"I must not forget to do to-morrow what I have forgotten to do to-day."

And she took hold of the velvet mask by that part of it which covered
the cheeks, and feeling that her thumb was wet, she looked at it. It was
not only wet, but reddened. The mask had fallen upon one of the spots of
blood which, we have already said, stained the floor, and from the black
velvet outside, which had accidentally come into contact with it, the
blood had passed through to the inside and stained the white cambric
lining. "Oh! oh!" said Montalais, for doubtless our readers have already
recognized her by these various maneuvers, "I shall not give her back
her mask, it is far too precious now."

And rising from her seat, she ran toward a box made of maple wood, which
inclosed different articles of toilet and perfumery. "No, not here," she
said, "such a treasure must not be abandoned to the slightest chance of
detection."

Then, after a moment's silence, and with a smile which was peculiarly
her own, she added:--"Beautiful mask, stained with the blood of that
brave knight, you shall go and join that collection of wonders, La
Valliere's and Raoul's letters, that loving collection, indeed, which
will some day or other form part of the history of France and of
royalty. You shall be taken under M. Malicorne's care," said the
laughing girl, as she began to undress herself, "under the protection of
that worthy M. Malicorne," she said, blowing out the taper, "who thinks
he was born only to become the chief usher of Monsieur's apartments, and
whom I will make keeper of the records and historiographer of the house
of Bourbon, and of the first houses in the kingdom. Let him grumble now,
that discontented Malicorne," she added, as she drew the curtains and
fell fast asleep.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE JOURNEY.


The next day being agreed upon for the departure, the king, at eleven
o'clock precisely, descended the grand staircase with the two queens and
Madame, in order to enter his carriage drawn by six horses which were
pawing the ground in impatience at the foot of the staircase. The whole
court awaited the royal appearance in the _Fer-a-cheval_ crescent, in
their traveling costumes; the large number of saddled horses and
carriages of ladies and gentlemen of the court, surrounded by their
attendants, servants, and pages, formed a spectacle whose brilliancy
could scarcely be equaled. The king entered his carriage with the two
queens; Madame was in the same with Monsieur. The maids of honor
followed the example, and took their seats, two by two, in the carriages
destined for them. The weather was exceedingly warm, a light breeze,
which, early in the morning, all had thought would have been just
sufficient to cool the air, soon became fiercely heated by the rays of
the sun, although it was hidden behind the clouds, and filtered through
the heated vapor which rose from the ground like a scorching wind,
bearing particles of fine dust against the faces of the hasty travelers.
Madame was the first to complain of the heat. Monsieur's only reply was
to throw himself back in the carriage, as if he were about to faint, and
to inundate himself with scents and perfumes, uttering the deepest sighs
all the while; whereupon Madame said to him, with her most amiable
expression: "Really, monsieur, I fancied that you would have been polite
enough, on account of the terrible heat, to have left me my carriage to
myself, and to have performed the journey yourself on horseback."

"Ride on horseback!" cried the prince, with an accent of dismay which
showed how little idea he had of adopting this strange project: "you
cannot suppose such a thing, madame; my skin would peel off if I were to
expose myself to such a burning air as this."

Madame began to laugh.

"You can take my parasol," she said.

"But the trouble of holding it!" replied Monsieur, with the greatest
coolness; "besides, I have no horse."

"How, no horse?" replied the princess, who, if she did not obtain the
solitude she required, at least obtained the amusement of teasing. "No
horse! You are mistaken, monsieur; for I see your favorite bay out
yonder."

"My bay horse!" exclaimed the prince, attempting to lean forward to look
out of the door; but the movement he was obliged to make cost him so
much trouble that he soon hastened to resume his immobility.

"Yes," said Madame: "your horse led by M. de Malicorne."

"Poor beast," replied the prince; "how warm it will soon be!"

And with these words he closed his eyes, like a man on the point of
death. Madame, on her side, reclined indolently in the other corner of
the carriage, and closed her eyes also, not however to sleep, but to
think more at her ease. In the meantime, the king, seated in the front
seat of the carriage, the back of which he had yielded up to the two
queens, was a prey to that restless feverish contrariety experienced by
anxious lovers, who, without being able to quench their ardent thirst,
are ceaselessly desirous of seeing the loved object, and then go away
partially satisfied, without perceiving that they have acquired a more
burning thirst than ever. The king, whose carriage headed the
procession, could not from the place he occupied perceive the carriages
of the ladies and maids of honor, which followed in a line behind it.
Besides, he was obliged to answer the eternal questions of the young
queen, who, happy to have with her "_her dear husband_," as she called
him in utter forgetfulness of royal etiquette, invested him with all her
affection, stifled him with her attentions, afraid that some one might
come to take him from her, or that he himself might suddenly take a
fancy to leave her society. Anne of Austria, whom nothing at that
moment occupied except the occasional sharp throbbings in her bosom,
looked pleased and delighted, and although she perfectly conceived the
king's impatience, tantalizingly prolonged his sufferings by
unexpectedly resuming the conversation at the very moment the king,
absorbed in his own reflections, began to muse over his secret
attachment. Everything seemed to combine--not alone the little teasing
attentions of the queen, but also the queen-mother's tantalizing
interruptions--to make the king's position almost insupportable; for he
knew not how to control the restless longings of his heart. At first, he
complained of the heat, a complaint which was merely preliminary to
other complaints, but with sufficient tact to prevent Maria Theresa
guessing his real object. Understanding the king's remark literally, she
began to fan him with her ostrich plumes. But the heat passed away, and
the king then complained of cramps and stiffness in his legs, and as the
carriages at that moment stopped to change horses, the queen said:
"Shall I get out with you? I too feel tired of sitting. We can walk on a
little distance, the carriage will overtake us, and we can resume our
places again presently."

The king frowned: it is a hard trial a jealous woman makes her husband
submit to whose fidelity she suspects, when, although herself a prey to
jealousy, she watches herself so narrowly that she avoids giving any
pretext for an angry feeling. The king, therefore, in the present case,
could not refuse; he accepted the offer, alighted from the carriage,
gave his arm to the queen, and walked up and down with her while the
horses were being changed. As he walked along, he cast an envious glance
upon the courtiers, who were fortunate enough to be performing the
journey on horseback. The queen soon found out that the promenade she
had suggested afforded the king as little pleasure as he had experienced
from riding in the carriage. She accordingly expressed a wish to return
to her carriage, and the king conducted her to the door, but did not get
in with her. He stepped back a few paces, and looked among the file of
carriages for the purpose of recognizing the one in which he took so
strong an interest. At the door of the sixth carriage he saw La
Valliere's fair countenance. As the king thus stood motionless, wrapped
in thought, without perceiving that everything was ready, and that he
alone was causing the delay, he heard a voice close beside him,
addressing him in the most respectful manner. It was M. Malicorne, in a
complete costume of an equerry, holding over his left arm the bridles of
a couple of horses.

"Your majesty asked for a horse, I believe," he said.

"A horse? Have you one of my horses here?" inquired the king, who
endeavored to remember the person who addressed him, and whose face was
not as yet very familiar to him.

"Sire," replied Malicorne, "at all events I have a horse which is at
your majesty's service."

And Malicorne pointed at Monsieur's bay horse, which Madame had
observed. It was a beautiful creature and most royally caparisoned.

"This is not one of my horses, monsieur," said the king.

"Sire, it is a horse out of his royal highness's stable; but his royal
highness does not ride when the weather is as hot as it is now."

The king did not reply, but hastily approached the horse, which stood
pawing the ground with his foot. Malicorne hastened to hold the stirrup
for him but the king was already in the saddle. Restored to good humor
by this lucky accident, the king hastened toward the queen's carriage,
where he was anxiously expected: and notwithstanding Maria-Theresa's
thoughtful and preoccupied air, he said: "I have been fortunate enough
to find this horse, and I intend to avail myself of it. I felt stifled
in the carriage. Adieu, ladies."

Then, bending most gracefully over the arched neck of his beautiful
steed, he disappeared in a second. Anne of Austria leaned forward, in
order to look after him as he rode away: he did not go very far, for
when he reached the sixth carriage, he reined in his horse suddenly and
took off his hat. He saluted La Valliere, who uttered a cry of surprise
as she saw him, blushing at the same time with pleasure. Montalais, who
occupied the other seat in the carriage, made the king a most respectful
bow. And, then, with all the tact of a woman, she pretended to be
exceedingly interested in the landscape, and withdrew herself into the
left-hand corner. The conversation between the king and La Valliere
began, as all lovers' conversations generally do, namely, by eloquent
looks and by a few words utterly void of common sense. The king
explained how warm he had felt in his carriage, so much so indeed that
he could almost regard the horse he then rode as a blessing thrown in
his way. "And," he added, "my benefactor is an exceedingly intelligent
man, for he seemed to guess my thoughts intuitively. I have now only one
wish, that of learning the name of the gentleman who so cleverly
assisted his king out of his dilemma, and extricated him from his cruel
position."

Montalais, during this colloquy, the first words of which had awakened
her attention, had slightly altered her position, and had contrived so
as to meet the king's look as he finished his remark. It followed very
naturally that the king looked inquiringly as much at her as at La
Valliere; she had every reason to suppose that it was she who was
appealed to, and consequently might be permitted to answer. She
therefore said: "Sire, the horse which your majesty is riding belongs to
Monsieur, and was being led by one of his royal highness's gentlemen."

"And what is that gentleman's name, may I ask, mademoiselle?"

"M. de Malicorne, sire."

The name produced its usual effect, for the king repeated it smilingly.

"Yes, sire," replied Aure. "Stay, it is that gentleman who is galloping
on my left hand;" and she pointed out Malicorne, who, with a very
sanctified expression, was galloping on the left side of the carriage,
knowing perfectly well that they were talking of him at that very
moment, but sitting in his saddle as if were deaf and dumb.

"Yes," said the king, "that is the gentleman; I remember his face, and
will not forget his name;" and the king looked tenderly at La Valliere.

Aure had now nothing further to do; she had let Malicorne's name fall;
the soil was good; all that was now left to be done was to let the name
take root, and the event would bear its fruit in due time. She
consequently threw herself back in her corner, feeling perfectly
justified in making as many agreeable signs of recognition as she liked
to Malicorne, since the latter had had the happiness of pleasing the
king. As it will very readily be believed, Montalais was not mistaken;
and Malicorne, with his quick ear and his sly look, seemed to interpret
her remark as "All goes on well," the whole being accompanied by a
pantomimic action which he fancied conveyed something resembling a kiss.

"Alas! mademoiselle," said the king, after a moment's pause, "the
liberty and freedom of the country is soon about to cease; your
attendance upon Madame will be more strictly enforced, and we shall see
each other no more."

"Your majesty is too much attached to Madame," replied Louise, "not to
come and see her very frequently; and whenever your majesty may pass
across the apartments--"

"Ah!" said the king, in a tender voice, which was gradually lowered in
its tone, "to perceive is not to see, and yet it seems that it would be
quite sufficient for you."

Louise did not answer a syllable; a sigh filled her heart almost to
bursting, but she stifled it.

"You exercise a great control over yourself," said the king to Louise,
who smiled upon him with a melancholy expression. "Exert the strength
you have in loving fondly," he continued, "and I will bless Heaven for
having bestowed it on you."

La Valliere still remained silent, but raised her eyes, brimful of
affection, toward the king. Louis, as if he had been overcome by this
burning glance, passed his hand across his forehead, and pressing the
sides of his horse with his knees, made him bound several paces forward.
La Valliere, leaning back in her carriage, with her eyes half closed,
gazed fixedly upon the king, whose plumes were floating in the air; she
could not but admire his graceful carriage, his delicate and nervous
limbs, which pressed his horse's side, and the regular outline of his
features, which his beautiful curling hair set off to great advantage,
revealing occasionally his small and well-formed ear. In fact the poor
girl was in love, and she reveled in her innocent affection. In a few
moments the king was again by her side.

"Do you not perceive," he said, "how terribly your silence affects me?
Oh! mademoiselle, how pitilessly immovable you would become if you were
ever to resolve to break off all acquaintance with any one; and then too
I think you changeable; in fact--in fact, I dread this deep affection
which fills my whole being."

"Oh! sire, you are mistaken," said La Valliere; "if ever I love, it will
be for my whole life."

"If you love, you say," exclaimed the king; "you do not love now, then."
She hid her face in her hands.

"You see," said the king, "that I am right in accusing you; you must
admit that you are changeable, capricious, a coquette, perhaps."

"Oh, no! sire, be perfectly satisfied on that. No, I say again; no, no!"

"Promise me, then, that for me you will always be the same."

"Oh! always, sire."

"That you will never show any of that severity which would break my
heart, none of that fickleness of manner which would be worse than death
to me."

"Oh! no, no."

"Very well, then! but listen. I like promises, I like to place under the
guarantee of an oath, under the protection of Heaven in fact, everything
which interests my heart and my affections. Promise me, or rather swear
to me, that if in the life we are about to commence, a life which will
be full of sacrifice, mystery, anxiety, disappointment and
misunderstanding; swear to me that if we should be deceiving, or should
misunderstand each other, or should be judging each other unjustly, for
that indeed would be criminal in love such as ours; swear to me,
Louise--"

She trembled with agitation to the very depths of her heart; it was the
first time she had heard her name pronounced in that manner by her royal
lover. As for the king, taking off his glove, and placing his ungloved
hand within the carriage, he continued: "Swear that never in all our
quarrels will we allow one night even to pass by, if any
misunderstanding should arise between us, without a visit, or at least a
message, from either, in order to convey consolation and repose to the
other."

La Valliere took her lover's burning hand between her own icy palms, and
pressed it softly, until a movement of the horse, frightened by the
proximity of the wheels, obliged her to abandon her happiness. She had
sworn as he wished her.

"Return, sire," she said, "return to the queen: I foresee a storm rising
yonder which threatens my peace of mind."

Louis obeyed, saluted Mademoiselle de Montalais, and set off at a gallop
to rejoin the queen's carriage. As he passed Monsieur's carriage, he
observed that he was fast asleep, although Madame, on her part, was wide
awake. As the king passed her, she said, "What a beautiful horse, sire!
is it not Monsieur's bay horse?" The young queen merely remarked, "Are
you better now, sire?"




CHAPTER XXX.

TRIUMFEMINATE.


On the king's arrival in Paris, he sat at the council which had been
summoned, and worked for a certain portion of the day. The queen
remained with the queen-mother, and burst into tears as soon as she had
taken leave of the king. "Ah! madame!" she said, "the king no longer
loves me! What will become of me?"

"A husband always loves his wife when she is like you," replied Anne of
Austria.

"A time may come when he will love another woman instead of me."

"What do you call loving?"

"Always thinking of a person--always seeking her society."

"Do you happen to have remarked," said Anne of Austria, "that the king
has ever done anything of the sort?"

"No, madame," said the young queen, hesitatingly.

"What is there to complain of, then, Marie?"

"You will admit that the king leaves me?"

"The king, my daughter, belongs to his people."

"And that is the very reason why he no longer belongs to me; and that is
the reason, too, why I shall find myself, as so many queens have been
before me, forsaken and forgotten, while glory and honors will be
reserved for others. Oh, my mother! the king is so handsome! how often
will others tell him that they love him, and how much, indeed, they must
do so!"

"It is very seldom that women love the man in loving the king. But
should that happen, which I doubt, you should rather wish, Marie, that
such women should really love your husband. In the first place, the
devoted love of a mistress is a rapid element of the dissolution of a
lover's affection; and then, by dint of loving, the mistress loses all
influence over her lover, whose power or wealth she does not covet,
caring only for his affection. Wish, therefore, that the king should
love but lightly, and that his mistress should love with all her heart."

"Oh, my mother, what power may not a deep affection exercise over him!"

"And yet you say you are abandoned?"

"Quite true, quite true; I speak absurdly. There is a feeling of
anguish, however, which I can never control."

"And that is?"

"The king may make a happy choice--may find a home, with all the tender
influences of home, not far from that we can offer him--a home with
children around him, the children of another woman than myself. Oh,
madame! I should die if I were but to see the king's children."

"Marie, Marie," replied the queen-mother with a smile, and she took the
young queen's hand in her own, "remember what I am going to say, and let
it always be a consolation to you: the king cannot have a Dauphin
without you."

"With this remark the queen-mother quitted her daughter-in-law, in order
to meet Madame, whose arrival in the grand cabinet had just been
announced by one of the pages. Madame had scarcely taken time to change
her dress. Her face revealed her agitation, which betrayed a plan the
execution of which occupied, while the result disturbed, her mind.

"I came to ascertain," she said, "if your majesties are suffering any
fatigue from our journey."

"None at all," said the queen-mother.

"But a slight one," replied Maria-Theresa.

"I have suffered from annoyance more than from anything else," said
Madame.

"What annoyance?" inquired Anne of Austria.

"The fatigue the king undergoes in riding about on horseback."

"That does the king good."

"And it was I who advised him to do it," said Maria-Theresa, turning
pale.

Madame said not a word in reply; but one of those smiles which were
peculiarly her own flitted for a moment across her lips, without passing
over the rest of her face; then, immediately changing the conversation,
she continued, "We shall find Paris precisely like the Paris we left it;
the same intrigues, plots, and flirtations going on."

"Intrigues! What intrigues do you allude to?" inquired the queen-mother.

"People are talking a good deal about M. Fouquet and Madame
Plessis-Belliere."

"Who makes up the number to about ten thousand," replied the
queen-mother. "But what are the plots you speak of?"

"We have, it seems, certain misunderstandings with Holland to settle."

"What about?"

"Monsieur has been telling me the story of the medals."

"Oh!" exclaimed the young-queen, "you mean those medals which were
struck in Holland, on which a cloud is seen passing across the sun,
which is the king's device. You are wrong in calling that a plot--it is
an insult."

"But so contemptible that the king can well despise it," replied the
queen-mother. "Well, what are the flirtations which are alluded to? Do
you mean that of Madame d'Olonne?"

"No, no; nearer ourselves than that."

"_Casa de usted_," murmured the queen-mother, and without moving her
lips, in her daughter-in-law's ear, and also without being overheard by
Madame, who thus continued: "You know the terrible news?"

"Oh, yes; M. de Guiche's wound."

"And you attribute it, I suppose, as every one else does, to an accident
which happened to him while hunting?"

"Yes, of course," said both the queens together, their interest
awakened.

Madame drew closer to them, as she said, in a low tone of voice, "It was
a duel."

"Ah!" said Anne of Austria, in a severe tone: for in her ears the word
"duel," which had been forbidden in France during the time she had
reigned over it, had a strange sound.

"A most deplorable duel, which has nearly cost Monsieur two of his best
friends, and the king two of his best servants."

"What was the cause of the duel?" inquired the young queen, animated by
a secret instinct.

"Flirtations," repeated Madame, triumphantly. "The gentlemen in question
were conversing about the virtue of a particular lady belonging to the
court. One of them thought that Pallas was a very second-rate person
compared to her; the other pretended that the lady in question was an
imitation of Venus alluring Mars; and thereupon the two gentlemen fought
as fiercely as Hector and Achilles."

"Venus alluring Mars?" said the young queen in a low tone of voice,
without venturing to examine into the allegory very deeply.

"Who is the lady?" inquired Anne of Austria, abruptly. "You said, I
believe, she was one of the ladies of honor?"

"Did I say so?" replied Madame.

"Yes; at least, I thought I heard you mention it."

"Are you not aware that such a woman is of ill-omen to a royal house?"

"Is it not Mademoiselle de la Valliere?" said the queen-mother.

"Yes, indeed, that plain-looking creature."

"I thought she was affianced to a gentleman who certainly is not--at
least, I suppose so--either M. de Guiche or M. de Wardes?"

"Very possibly, madame."

The young queen took up a piece of tapestry, and began to unpick with an
affectation of tranquillity which her trembling fingers contradicted.

"What were you saying about Venus and Mars?" pursued the queen-mother.
"Is there a Mars also?"

"She boasts of that being the case."

"Did you say she boasts of it?"

"That was the cause of the duel."

"And M. de Guiche upheld the cause of Mars?"

"Yes, certainly, like the devoted servant he is."

"The devoted servant of whom?" exclaimed the young queen, forgetting her
reserve in allowing her jealous feeling to escape her.

"Mars, not being able to be defended except at the expense of this
Venus," replied Madame, "M. de Guiche maintained the perfect innocence
of Mars, and no doubt affirmed that it was a mere boast of Venus."

"And M. de Wardes," said Anne of Austria, quietly, "spread the report
that Venus was right, I suppose?"

"Oh, De Wardes," thought Madam, "you shall pay most dearly for the wound
you have given that noblest--the best of men!" And she began to attack
De Wardes with the greatest bitterness: thus discharging her own and De
Guiche's debt, with the assurance that she was working the future ruin
of her enemy. She said so much, in fact, that, had Manicamp been there,
he would have regretted that he had shown such strong regard for his
friend, inasmuch as it resulted in the ruin of his unfortunate foe.

"I see nothing in the whole affair but one cause of mischief, and that
is La Valliere herself," said the queen-mother.

The young queen resumed her work with a perfect indifference of manner,
while Madame listened eagerly.

"I do not yet quite understand what you said just now about the danger
of coquetry," resumed Anne of Austria.

"It is quite true," Madame hastened to say, "that, if the girl had not
been a coquette, Mars would not have thought at all about her."

The repetition of this word "Mars" brought a passing color on the
queen's face; but she still continued her work.

"I will not permit that, in my court, gentlemen should be set against
each other in this manner," said Anne of Austria, calmly. "Such manners
were useful enough, perhaps, in a time when the divided nobility had no
other rallying-point than mere gallantry. At that time women, whose sway
was absolute and undivided, were privileged to encourage men's valor by
frequent trials of their courage; but now, thank Heaven, there is but
one master in France, and to him every thought of the mind, and every
pulse of the body, are due. I will not allow my son to be deprived of
any one of his servants." And she turned toward the young queen, saying,
"What is to be done with this La Valliere?"

"La Valliere?" said the queen, apparently surprised, "I do not even know
the name;" and she accompanied this remark by one of those cold, fixed
smiles which are only observed on royal lips.

Madame was herself a princess great in every respect--great in
intelligence, great by birth and pride; the queen's reply, however,
completely astonished her, and she was obliged to pause for a moment in
order to recover herself. "She is one of my maids of honor," she
replied, with a bow.

"In that case," retorted Maria-Theresa, in the same tone, "it is your
affair, my sister, and not ours."

"I beg your pardon," resumed Anne of Austria, "it is my affair, and I
perfectly well understand," she pursued, addressing a look full of
intelligence at Madame, "Madame's motive for saying what she has just
said."

"Everything which emanates from you, Madame," said the English princess,
"proceeds from the lips of Wisdom."

"If we send this girl back again to her own family," said Maria-Theresa,
gently, "we must bestow a pension upon her."

"Which I will provide for out of my income," exclaimed Madame.

"No, no," interrupted Anne of Austria, "no disturbance, I beg. The king
dislikes that the slightest disrespectful remark should be made of any
lady. Let everything be done quite quietly. Will you have the kindness,
madame, to send for this girl here; and you, my daughter, will have the
goodness to retire to your own room."

The old queen's entreaties were commands, and as Maria-Theresa rose to
return to her own apartments, Madame rose in order to send a page to
summon La Valliere.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE FIRST QUARREL.


La Valliere entered the queen-mother's apartments without in the least
suspecting that a serious plot was being concerted against her. She
thought it was for something connected with her duties, and never had
the queen-mother been unkind to her when such was the case. Besides, not
being immediately under the control or direction of Anne of Austria, she
could only have an official connection with her, to which her own
gentleness of disposition, and the rank of the august princess, made her
yield on every occasion with the best possible grace. She therefore
advanced toward the queen-mother with that soft and gentle smile which,
constituted her principal charm, and as she did not approach
sufficiently close, Anne of Austria signed to her to come nearer. Madame
then entered the room, and with a perfectly calm air took her seat
beside her mother-in-law, and continued the work which Maria-Theresa had
begun. When La Valliere, instead of the directions which she expected to
receive immediately on entering the room, perceived these preparations,
she looked with curiosity, if not with uneasiness, at the two
princesses. Anne seemed full of thought, while Madame maintained an
affectation of indifference which would have alarmed a less timid person
even than Louise.

"Mademoiselle," said the queen-mother suddenly, without attempting to
moderate or disguise her Spanish accent, which she never failed to do
except when she was angry, "come closer; we were talking of you, as
every one else seems to be doing."

"Of me!" exclaimed La Valliere, turning pale.

"Do you pretend to be ignorant of it; are you not aware of the duel
between M. de Guiche and M. de Wardes?"

"Oh, madame! I heard of it yesterday," said La Valliere, clasping her
hands together.

"And did you not foresee this quarrel?"

"Why should I, madame?"

"Because two men never fight without a motive, and because you must be
aware of the motive which awakened the animosity of the two in
question."

"I am perfectly ignorant of it, madame."

"A persevering denial is a very common-place mode of defense, and you,
who have great pretensions to be witty and clever, ought to avoid
common-places. What else have you to say?"

"Oh! madame, your majesty terrifies me with your cold severity of
manner; but I do not understand how I can have incurred your
displeasure, or in what respect people can occupy themselves about me."

"Then I will tell you. M. de Guiche has been obliged to undertake your
defense."

"My defense?"

"Yes. He is a gallant knight, and beautiful adventuresses like to see
brave knights couch their lances in their honor. But, for my part, I
hate fields of battle, and more than all, do I hate adventures,
and--take my remark as you please."

La Valliere sank at the queen's feet, who turned her back upon her. She
stretched out her hands toward Madame, who laughed in her face. A
feeling of pride made her rise to her feet.

"I have begged your majesty to tell me what is the crime I am accused
of--I can claim this at your majesty's hands; and I observe that I am
condemned before I am even permitted to justify myself."

"Eh! indeed," cried Anne of Austria, "listen to her beautiful phrases,
Madame, and to her fine sentiments; she is an inexhaustible well of
tenderness and of heroic expressions. One can easily see, young lady,
that we have cultivated our mind in the society of crowned heads."

La Valliere felt struck to the heart; she became, not paler, but as
white as a lily, and all her strength forsook her.

"I wished to inform you," interrupted the queen disdainfully, "that if
you continue to nourish such feelings, you will humiliate us other women
to such a degree that we shall be ashamed of appearing before you.
Become simple in your manners. By-the-by, I am informed that you are
affianced; is it the case?"

La Valliere pressed her hand over her heart, which was wrung with a
fresh pang.

"Answer when you are spoken to!"

"Yes, madame."

"To a gentleman?"

"Yes, madame."

"His name?"

"The Vicomte de Bragelonne."

"Are you aware that it is an exceedingly fortunate circumstance for you,
mademoiselle, that such is the case? and without fortune or position, as
you are, or without any very great personal advantages, you ought to
bless Heaven for having procured you such a future as seems to be in
store for you."

La Valliere did not reply. "Where is this Vicomte de Bragelonne?"
pursued the queen.

"In England," said Madame, "where the report of this young lady's
success will not fail to reach him."

"Oh, Heaven!" murmured La Valliere, in despair.

"Very well, mademoiselle!" said Anne of Austria, "we will get this young
gentleman to return, and send you away somewhere with him. If you are of
a different opinion--for girls have strange views and fancies at times,
trust to me, I will put you in a proper path again. I have done as much
for girls who are not so good as you are, perhaps."

La Valliere ceased to hear the queen, who pitilessly added, "I will send
you somewhere by yourself, where you will be able to procure a little
serious reflection. Reflection calms the ardor of the blood, and
