with good in your nature. Yes, Saint Anne of Auray, to whom I pray to
save you, will absolve you for all you do. And, Marie, am I not here
beside you, without so much as knowing where you go?" and she kissed her
hands with effusion.

"But," replied Marie, "you may yet desert me, if your conscience--"

"Hush, hush, mademoiselle," cried Francine, with a hurt expression. "But
surely you will tell me--"

"Nothing!" said the young lady, in a resolute voice. "Only--and I wish
you to know it--I hate this enterprise even more than I hate him whose
gilded tongue induced me to undertake it. I will be rank and own to you
that I would never have yielded to their wishes if I had not foreseen,
in this ignoble farce, a mingling of love and danger which tempted me.
I cannot bear to leave this empty world without at least attempting to
gather the flowers that it owes me,--whether I perish in the attempt or
not. But remember, for the honor of my memory, that had I ever been a
happy woman, the sight of their great knife, ready to fall upon my neck,
would not have driven me to accept a part in this tragedy--for it is
a tragedy. But now," she said, with a gesture of disgust, "if it were
countermanded, I should instantly fling myself into the Sarthe. It would
not be destroying life, for I have never lived."

"Oh, Saint Anne of Auray, forgive her!"

"What are you so afraid of? You know very well that the dull round of
domestic life gives no opportunity for my passions. That would be bad in
most women, I admit; but my soul is made of a higher sensibility and can
bear great tests. I might have been, perhaps, a gentle being like you.
Why, why have I risen above or sunk beneath the level of my sex? Ah!
the wife of Bonaparte is a happy woman! Yes, I shall die young, for I
am gay, as you say,--gay at this pleasure-party, where there is blood to
drink, as that poor Danton used to say. There, there, forget what I
am saying; it is the woman of fifty who speaks. Thank God! the girl of
fifteen is still within me."

The young country-girl shuddered. She alone knew the fiery, impetuous
nature of her mistress. She alone was initiated into the mysteries of a
soul rich with enthusiasm, into the secret emotions of a being who, up
to this time, had seen life pass her like a shadow she could not grasp,
eager as she was to do so. After sowing broadcast with full hands and
harvesting nothing, this woman was still virgin in soul, but irritated
by a multitude of baffled desires. Weary of a struggle without an
adversary, she had reached in her despair to the point of preferring
good to evil, if it came in the form of enjoyment; evil to good, if
it offered her some poetic emotion; misery to mediocrity, as something
nobler and higher; the gloomy and mysterious future of present death to
a life without hopes or even without sufferings. Never in any heart was
so much powder heaped ready for the spark, never were so many riches
for love to feed on; no daughter of Eve was ever moulded, with a greater
mixture of gold in her clay. Francine, like an angel of earth, watched
over this being whose perfections she adored, believing that she obeyed
a celestial mandate in striving to bring that spirit back among the
choir of seraphim whence it was banished for the sin of pride.

"There is the clock-tower of Alencon," said the horseman, riding up to
the carriage.

"I see it," replied the young lady, in a cold tone.

"Ah, well," he said, turning away with all the signs of servile
submission, in spite of his disappointment.

"Go faster," said the lady to the postilion. "There is no longer any
danger; go at a fast trot, or even a gallop, if you can; we are almost
into Alencon."

As the carriage passed the commandant, she called out to him, in a sweet
voice:--

"We will meet at the inn, commandant. Come and see me."

"Yes, yes," growled the commandant. "'The inn'! 'Come and see me'! Is
that how you speak to an officer in command of the army?" and he shook
his fist at the carriage, which was now rolling rapidly along the road.

"Don't be vexed, commandant, she has got your rank as general up her
sleeve," said Corentin, laughing, as he endeavored to put his horse into
a gallop to overtake the carriage.

"I sha'n't let myself be fooled by any such folks as they," said Hulot
to his two friends, in a growling tone. "I'd rather throw my general's
coat into that ditch than earn it out of a bed. What are these birds
after? Have you any idea, either of you?"

"Yes," said Merle, "I've an idea that that's the handsomest women I ever
saw! I think you're reading the riddle all wrong. Perhaps she's the wife
of the First Consul."

"Pooh! the First Consul's wife is old, and this woman is young," said
Hulot. "Besides, the order I received from the minister gives her name
as Mademoiselle de Verneuil. She is a _ci-devant_. Don't I know 'em?
They all plied one trade before the Revolution, and any man could make
himself a major, or a general in double-quick time; all he had to do was
to say 'Dear heart' to them now and then."

While each soldier opened his compasses, as the commandant was wont to
say, the miserable vehicle which was then used as the mail-coach drew up
before the inn of the Trois Maures, in the middle of the main street of
Alencon. The sound of the wheels brought the landlord to the door. No
one in Alencon could have expected the arrival of the mail-coach at the
Trois Maures, for the murderous attack upon the coach at Mortagne was
already known, and so many people followed it along the street that the
two women, anxious to escape the curiosity of the crowd, ran quickly
into the kitchen, which forms the inevitable antechamber to all Western
inns. The landlord was about to follow them, after examining the coach,
when the postilion caught him by the arm.

"Attention, citizen Brutus," he said; "there's an escort of the Blues
behind us; but it is I who bring you these female citizens; they'll pay
like _ci-devant_ princesses, therefore--"

"Therefore, we'll drink a glass of wine together presently, my lad,"
said the landlord.

After glancing about the kitchen, blackened with smoke, and noticing a
table bloody from raw meat, Mademoiselle de Verneuil flew into the next
room with the celerity of a bird; for she shuddered at the sight and
smell of the place, and feared the inquisitive eyes of a dirty _chef_,
and a fat little woman who examined her attentively.

"What are we to do, wife?" said the landlord. "Who the devil could have
supposed we would have so many on our hands in these days? Before I
serve her a decent breakfast that woman will get impatient. Stop, an
idea! evidently she is a person of quality. I'll propose to put her with
the one we have upstairs. What do you think?"

When the landlord went to look for the new arrival he found only
Francine, to whom he spoke in a low voice, taking her to the farther end
of the kitchen, so as not to be overheard.

"If the ladies wish," he said, "to be served in private, as I have no
doubt they wish to do, I have a very nice breakfast all ready for a lady
and her son, and I dare say wouldn't mind sharing it with you; they are
persons of condition," he added, mysteriously.

He had hardly said the words before he felt a tap on his back from
the handle of a whip. He turned hastily and saw behind him a short,
thick-set man, who had noiselessly entered from a side room,--an
apparition which seemed to terrify the hostess, the cook, and the
scullion. The landlord turned pale when he saw the intruder, who shook
back the hair which concealed his forehead and eyes, raised himself on
the points of his toes to reach the other's ears, and said to him in
a whisper: "You know the cost of an imprudence or a betrayal, and the
color of the money we pay it in. We are generous in that coin."

He added a gesture which was like a horrible commentary to his words.
Though the rotundity of the landlord prevented Francine from seeing
the stranger, who stood behind him, she caught certain words of his
threatening speech, and was thunderstruck at hearing the hoarse tones of
a Breton voice. She sprang towards the man, but he, seeming to move with
the agility of a wild animal, had already darted through a side door
which opened on the courtyard. Utterly amazed, she ran to the window.
Through its panes, yellowed with smoke, she caught sight of the stranger
as he was about to enter the stable. Before doing so, however, he turned
a pair of black eyes to the upper story of the inn, and thence to the
mail-coach in the yard, as if to call some friend's attention to the
vehicle. In spite of his muffling goatskin and thanks to this movement
which allowed her to see his face, Francine recognized the Chouan,
Marche-a-Terre, with his heavy whip; she saw him, indistinctly, in the
obscurity of the stable, fling himself down on a pile of straw, in a
position which enabled him to keep an eye on all that happened at the
inn. Marche-a-Terre curled himself up in such a way that the cleverest
spy, at any distance far or near, might have taken him for one of those
huge dogs that drag the hand-carts, lying asleep with his muzzle on his
paws.

The behavior of the Chouan proved to Francine that he had not recognized
her. Under the hazardous circumstances which she felt her mistress to
be in, she scarcely knew whether to regret or to rejoice in this
unconsciousness. But the mysterious connection between the landlord's
offer (not uncommon among innkeepers, who can thus kill two birds with
one stone), and the Chouan's threats, piqued her curiosity. She left the
dirty window from which she could see the formless heap which she
knew to be Marche-a-Terre, and returned to the landlord, who was still
standing in the attitude of a man who feels he has made a blunder, and
does not know how to get out of it. The Chouan's gesture had petrified
the poor fellow. No one in the West was ignorant of the cruel
refinements of torture with which the "Chasseurs du Roi" punished those
who were even suspected of indiscretion; the landlord felt their knives
already at his throat. The cook looked with a shudder at the iron stove
on which they often "warmed" ("chauffaient") the feet of those they
suspected. The fat landlady held a knife in one hand and a half-peeled
potato in the other, and gazed at her husband with a stupefied air.
Even the scullion puzzled himself to know the reason of their speechless
terror. Francine's curiosity was naturally excited by this silent scene,
the principal actor of which was visible to all, though departed. The
girl was gratified at the evident power of the Chouan, and though by
nature too simple and humble for the tricks of a lady's maid, she was
also far too anxious to penetrate the mystery not to profit by her
advantages on this occasion.

"Mademoiselle accepts your proposal," she said to the landlord, who
jumped as if suddenly awakened by her words.

"What proposal?" he asked with genuine surprise.

"What proposal?" asked Corentin, entering the kitchen.

"What proposal?" asked Mademoiselle de Verneuil, returning to it.

"What proposal?" asked a fourth individual on the lower step of the
staircase, who now sprang lightly into the kitchen.

"Why, the breakfast with your persons of distinction," replied Francine,
impatiently.

"Distinction!" said the ringing and ironical voice of the person who had
just come down the stairway. "My good fellow, that strikes me as a very
poor inn joke; but if it's the company of this young female citizen that
you want to give us, we should be fools to refuse it. In my mother's
absence, I accept," he added, striking the astonished innkeeper on the
shoulder.

The charming heedlessness of youth disguised the haughty insolence
of the words, which drew the attention of every one present to the
new-comer. The landlord at once assumed the countenance of Pilate
washing his hands of the blood of that just man; he slid back two steps
to reach his wife's ear, and whispered, "You are witness, if any harm
comes of it, that it is not my fault. But, anyhow," he added, in a voice
that was lower still, "go and tell Monsieur Marche-a-Terre what has
happened."

The traveller, who was a young man of medium height, wore a dark blue
coat and high black gaiters coming above the knee and over the breeches,
which were also of blue cloth. This simple uniform, without epaulets,
was that of the pupils of the Ecole Polytechnique. Beneath this plain
attire Mademoiselle de Verneuil could distinguish at a glance the
elegant shape and nameless _something_ that tells of natural nobility.
The face of the young man, which was rather ordinary at first sight,
soon attracted the eye by the conformation of certain features which
revealed a soul capable of great things. A bronzed skin, curly fair
hair, sparkling blue eyes, a delicate nose, motions full of ease, all
disclosed a life guided by noble sentiments and trained to the habit
of command. But the most characteristic signs of his nature were in the
chin, which was dented like that of Bonaparte, and in the lower lip,
which joined the upper one with a graceful curve, like that of an
acanthus leaf on the capital of a Corinthian column. Nature had given to
these two features of his face an irresistible charm.

"This young man has singular distinction if he is really a republican,"
thought Mademoiselle de Verneuil.

To see all this at a glance, to brighten at the thought of pleasing, to
bend her head softly and smile coquettishly and cast a soft look able to
revive a heart that was dead to love, to veil her long black eyes with
lids whose curving lashes made shadows on her cheeks, to choose the
melodious tones of her voice and give a penetrating charm to the formal
words, "Monsieur, we are very much obliged to you,"--all this charming
by-play took less time than it has taken to describe it. After this,
Mademoiselle de Verneuil, addressing the landlord, asked to be shown to
a room, saw the staircase, and disappeared with Francine, leaving the
stranger to discover whether her reply was intended as an acceptance or
a refusal.

"Who is that woman?" asked the Polytechnique student, in an airy manner,
of the landlord, who still stood motionless and bewildered.

"That's the female citizen Verneuil," replied Corentin, sharply, looking
jealously at the questioner; "a _ci-devant_; what is she to you?"

The stranger, who was humming a revolutionary tune, turned his head
haughtily towards Corentin. The two young men looked at each other for
a moment like cocks about to fight, and the glance they exchanged
gave birth to a hatred which lasted forever. The blue eye of the young
soldier was as frank and honest as the green eye of the other man was
false and malicious; the manners of the one had native grandeur, those
of the other were insinuating; one was eager in his advance, the other
deprecating; one commanded respect, the other sought it.

"Is the citizen du Gua Saint-Cyr here?" said a peasant, entering the
kitchen at that moment.

"What do you want of him?" said the young man, coming forward.

The peasant made a low bow and gave him a letter, which the young
cadet read and threw into the fire; then he nodded his head and the man
withdrew.

"No doubt you've come from Paris, citizen?" said Corentin, approaching
the stranger with a certain ease of manner, and a pliant, affable air
which seemed intolerable to the citizen du Gua.

"Yes," he replied, shortly.

"I suppose you have been graduated into some grade of the artillery?"

"No, citizen, into the navy."

"Ah! then you are going to Brest?" said Corentin, interrogatively.

But the young sailor turned lightly on the heels of his shoes without
deigning to reply, and presently disappointed all the expectations which
Mademoiselle de Verneuil had based on the charm of his appearance. He
applied himself to ordering his breakfast with the eagerness of a boy,
questioned the cook and the landlady about their receipts, wondered at
provincial customs like a Parisian just out of his shell, made as
many objections as any fine lady, and showed the more lack of mind
and character because his face and manner had seemed to promise them.
Corentin smiled with pity when he saw the face he made on tasting the
best cider of Normandy.

"Heu!" he cried; "how can you swallow such stuff as that? It is meat and
drink both. I don't wonder the Republic distrusts a province where they
knock their harvest from trees with poles, and shoot travellers from the
ditches. Pray don't put such medicine as that on the table; give us some
good Bordeaux, white and red. And above all, do see if there is a good
fire upstairs. These country-people are so backward in civilization!" he
added. "Alas!" he sighed, "there is but one Paris in the world; what
a pity it is I can't transport it to sea! Heavens! spoil-sauce!" he
suddenly cried out to the cook; "what makes you put vinegar in that
fricassee when you have lemons? And, madame," he added, "you gave me
such coarse sheets I couldn't close my eyes all night." Then he began
to twirl a huge cane, executing with a silly sort of care a variety
of evolutions, the greater or less precision and agility of which
were considered proofs of a young man's standing in the class of the
Incroyables, so-called.

"And it is with such dandies as that," said Corentin to the landlord
confidentially, watching his face, "that the Republic expects to improve
her navy!"

"That man," said the young sailor to the landlady, in a low voice, "is
a spy of Fouche's. He has 'police' stamped on his face, and I'll swear
that spot he has got on his chin is Paris mud. Well, set a thief to
catch--"

Just then a lady to whom the young sailor turned with every sign of
outward respect, entered the kitchen of the inn.

"My dear mamma," he said. "I am glad you've come. I have recruited some
guests in your absence."

"Guests?" she replied; "what folly!"

"It is Mademoiselle de Verneuil," he said in a low voice.

"She perished on the scaffold after the affair of Savenay; she went to
Mans to save her brother the Prince de Loudon," returned his mother,
rather brusquely.

"You are mistaken, madame," said Corentin, gently, emphasizing the word
"madame"; "there are two demoiselles de Verneuil; all great houses, as
you know, have several branches."

The lady, surprised at this freedom, drew back a few steps to examine
the speaker; she turned her black eyes upon him, full of the keen
sagacity so natural to women, seeking apparently to discover in what
interest he stepped forth to explain Mademoiselle de Verneuil's birth.
Corentin, on the other hand, who was studying the lady cautiously,
denied her in his own mind the joys of motherhood and gave her those
of love; he refused the possession of a son of twenty to a woman whose
dazzling skin, and arched eyebrows, and lashes still unblemished, were
the objects of his admiration, and whose abundant black hair, parted
on the forehead into simple bands, bought out the youthfulness of an
intelligent head. The slight lines of the brow, far from indicating age,
revealed young passions. Though the piercing eyes were somewhat veiled,
it was either from the fatigue of travelling or the too frequent
expression of excitement. Corentin remarked that she was wrapped in a
mantle of English material, and that the shape of her hat, foreign no
doubt, did not belong to any of the styles called Greek, which ruled the
Parisian fashions of the period. Corentin was one of those beings who
are compelled by the bent of their natures to suspect evil rather than
good, and he instantly doubted the citizenship of the two travellers.
The lady, who, on her side, had made her observations on the person of
Corentin with equal rapidity, turned to her son with a significant look
which may be faithfully translated into the words: "Who is this queer
man? Is he of our stripe?"

To this mute inquiry the youth replied by an attitude and a gesture
which said: "Faith! I can't tell; but I distrust him." Then, leaving his
mother to fathom the mystery, he turned to the landlady and whispered:
"Try to find out who that fellow is; and whether he is really
accompanying the young lady; and why."

"So," said Madame du Gua, looking at Corentin, "you are quite sure,
citizen, that Mademoiselle de Verneuil is living?"

"She is living in flesh and blood as surely, _madame_, as the citizen du
Gua Saint-Cyr."

This answer contained a sarcasm, the hidden meaning of which was known
to none but the lady herself, and any one but herself would have been
disconcerted by it. Her son looked fixedly at Corentin, who coolly
pulled out his watch without appearing to notice the effect of his
answer. The lady, uneasy and anxious to discover at once if the speech
meant danger or was merely accidental, said to Corentin in a natural
tone and manner; "How little security there is on these roads. We were
attacked by Chouans just beyond Mortagne. My son came very near being
killed; he received two balls in his hat while protecting me."

"Is it possible, madame? were you in the mail-coach which those brigands
robbed in spite of the escort,--the one we have just come by? You
must know the vehicle well. They told me at Mortagne that the Chouans
numbered a couple of thousands and that every one in the coach was
killed, even the travellers. That's how history is written! Alas!
madame," he continued, "if they murder travellers so near to Paris you
can fancy how unsafe the roads are in Brittany. I shall return to Paris
and not risk myself any farther."

"Is Mademoiselle de Verneuil young and handsome?" said the lady to the
hostess, struck suddenly with an idea.

Just then the landlord interrupted the conversation, in which there was
something of an angry element, by announcing that breakfast was ready.
The young sailor offered his hand to his mother with an air of false
familiarity that confirmed the suspicions of Corentin, to whom the youth
remarked as he went up the stairway: "Citizen, if you are travelling
with the female citizen de Verneuil, and she accepts the landlord's
proposal, you can come too."

