
But his interest was taken up directly, for Swythe took up one of his
quill pens, examined it, and then, after giving the ink a stir, dipped
in his pen and tried it.

The next minute, while the boy sat resting his chin upon his hands, it
seemed as if beautifully-formed tiny letters kept on growing out of the
pen, running off at the point, and standing one after another in a row,
almost exactly the same size, till four words stood out clearly upon the
cream-coloured parchment.

As he formed the letters with his clever white fingers, Swythe repeated
the name of each, pausing a little to give finish and effect as well as
sound to the words he formed, till he had, after beginning some little
distance in, made so many words upon one of the faintly-drawn lines and
reaching right across the parchment.

"It's wonderful!" cried Alfred.  "I could never do that!"

"It is not wonderful, and you soon will be able to do it," said Swythe;
"but let's say all those words over again letter by letter, and then the
words."

"They are Latin?" asked the boy.

"Yes," said Swythe, "and you are going to learn them so as to know them
next time you see them."

Alfred shook his head, but he managed to repeat the Latin words
straightforward, and after a while pick them out when asked.  Then the
monk proceeded to get out his colours so as to ornament the big initial
letter of what Alfred had learned in Latin as well as in English was
"The History of the Good King Almon."

Then came the most interesting part of the lesson, for, after Swythe had
placed his colours ready--red, yellow, and blue--all in powders ground
up so fine that it was necessary to shut out the breeze which came in at
the window, Alfred learned how the monk made his brushes, by taking a
tuft of badger's hair and tying up one end carefully with a very fine
thread of flax.

"Now watch me," said the old man, and Alfred looked closely while Swythe
took a duck's quill out of a bunch, cut off the hollow part, and then
lightly cut off the end where it had grown from the duck's wing.  Then
the tuft of badger's hair was held by its tied end and passed through
the monk's lips so as to bring the hairs together to a point, which was
carefully pushed into the most open part of the quill and screwed round
till the whole of the tuft was inside.  Then a thrust with a thin piece
of wood sent the hairs right through, all but the tied-up ends; and
Swythe held his work up in triumph--a complete little paint-brush.

"How clever!" cried the boy eagerly; "but how did you get that badger's
hair?"

"Saved," said Swythe, "when the dogs killed that badger last year."

"And the ducks' quills?"

"I picked them up when the ducks were plucked by the scullion."

"You did not tell me how you made that black paint."

"By holding a piece of slate over the burning wick of the lamp till
there was plenty of soot to be scraped off and mixed up with gum water
made from plum-tree gum, the same as I am going to use to mix up these
colours, you see."

As he spoke Swythe took a clean mussel-shell and placed in it a tiny
portion of scarlet powder.

"That's a pretty colour!" said the boy.  "What is it?"

"The colour made by burning some quicksilver and brimstone together in a
very hot fire till it is red, and afterwards I grind it up into fine
dust.  Now," he said, "I'm going to mix this up with gum; and then we'll
paint all the back of the parchment behind the big letter red."

Alfred watched the monk's clever touches with the point of his little
brush till there was a great square patch upon which the letter seemed
to stand.

"Beautiful!" cried Alfred.  "Now it's done!"

"Oh, no," said Swythe; "that's the beginning!  Now we'll paint the
scroll."

"Why do you say _we_" said the boy.  "It is you."

"It's we, because you are helping me," said the monk.  "Very soon you
will be doing letters like this, and then I shall help you."

Alfred sighed.

"Are you going to paint that scroll red too?"

"No: purple," was the reply, and Swythe took up another little packet,
which he opened slowly.

"Why, that's blue," cried Alfred.

"Wait a moment!" said Swythe, taking up another clean mussel-shell, into
which he put a tiny patch of the bright blue dust.  "Now you shall see
it turn purple."

Taking up the brush, whose hairs were thickly covered with red paint, he
poured a few drops of gum water into the shell amongst the blue powder,
mixed all together with the red brush, and to the boy's great delight a
beautiful purple was the result.

Then the leaves that had been sketched in had to be done, and while the
boy wondered another shell was taken, the brush carefully washed, and a
little of the blue dust was mixed with some yellow, when there was a
brilliant green, which the monk made brighter or darker by adding more
yellow or more blue.

The big ornamental letter was now becoming very bright and gay, Alfred
looking upon it as finished; but Swythe went on.

"It's very wonderful!" said the boy.  "You seem as if you can make any
colours out of red, yellow, and blue."

"So will you soon!" said Swythe, smiling, and still painting away, till
at the end of a couple of hours, which seemed to have passed away like
magic, the monk began to carefully clean his brush with water.

"That's done now!" cried Alfred, with a sigh of as much sorrow as
pleasure, for he felt it to be a pity that the task was finished.  "But
do you know, Father Swythe," he continued, as he held his head on one
side and looked critically at the staring white letter with its
beautiful ornamentation, "I think if I could paint and painted that
letter I shouldn't have left it all white like that."

"What would you have done, then?"

"I should have painted it deep yellow like a buttercup--a good sunny
yellow, to look like gold."

"Well done!" cried the monk.  "Why, that's exactly what it is going to
be.  It isn't finished, but I'm not going to paint it yellow.  I'm going
to paint it red first."

"I don't think I shall like that," said the boy, shaking his head.

"Wait and see!" said the monk, and once more mixing up a little red with
gum he carefully painted the white letter scarlet, and held it up.

"There!" cried the boy triumphantly; "it looks now almost like the back
patch, and you've spoiled it all."

"Umph!" grunted the monk, re-opening the window and laying his work in
the sun to dry.  "Wait a bit."

"Yes, I'll wait," said the boy, watching the shiny wet paint turn more
and more dull; "but I don't like it."

Swythe washed his brush carefully again, and as soon as the paint was
dry went carefully over the letter part with gum, so delicately that the
red colour was not disturbed nor the background smeared.

"Yes," said the boy, still watching; "that looks a little better,
because it looks shiny, but it was better white.  Do paint it yellow
now."

"I told you I'm going to make it yellow," said Swythe, laying his work
well out in the sunshine to get thoroughly dry.

Then, taking it from the window-sill and shutting out the breeze again,
Swythe placed his work ready and took out, from a snug corner, a tiny
book made by sewing together about half-a-dozen leaves of parchment, and
upon opening this very carefully Alfred saw within a piece of brilliant
shining gold.

"Oh, how beautiful!" cried Alfred, making a dart at it with his hand.
But, as if he expected this, Swythe put out his own hand and caught his
pupil's just in time, creating such a breeze, though, that the very thin
gold leaf rose up at the corner and fell over, doubling nearly in half.

"There, you see how fine it is!" cried Swythe.

