    With wide-spread palms prepar'd for swimming, fell.
    Shore-shaker Neptune noted him; he shook                         450
    His awful brows, and in his heart he said,
      Thus, suff'ring many mis'ries roam the flood,
    Till thou shalt mingle with a race of men
    Heav'n's special favourites; yet even there
    Fear not that thou shalt feel thy sorrows light.
      He said, and scourging his bright steeds, arrived
    At AEgae, where his glorious palace stands.
      But other thoughts Minerva's mind employ'd
    Jove's daughter; ev'ry wind binding beside,
    She lull'd them, and enjoin'd them all to sleep,                 460
    But roused swift Boreas, and the billows broke
    Before Ulysses, that, deliver'd safe
    From a dire death, the noble Chief might mix
    With maritime Phaeacia's sons renown'd.
      Two nights he wander'd, and two days, the flood
    Tempestuous, death expecting ev'ry hour;
    But when Aurora, radiant-hair'd, had brought
    The third day to a close, then ceas'd the wind,
    And breathless came a calm; he, nigh at hand
    The shore beheld, darting acute his sight                        470
    Toward it, from a billow's tow'ring top.
      Precious as to his children seems the life
    Of some fond father through disease long time
    And pain stretch'd languid on his couch, the prey
    Of some vindictive Pow'r, but now, at last,
    By gracious heav'n to ease and health restored,
    So grateful to Ulysses' sight appear'd
    Forests and hills. Impatient with his feet
    To press the shore, he swam; but when within
    Such distance as a shout may fly, he came,                       480
    The thunder of the sea against the rocks
    Then smote his ear; for hoarse the billows roar'd
    On the firm land, belch'd horrible abroad,
    And the salt spray dimm'd all things to his view.
    For neither port for ships nor shelt'ring cove
    Was there, but the rude coast a headland bluff
    Presented, rocks and craggy masses huge.
    Then, hope and strength exhausted both, deep-groan'd
    The Chief, and in his noble heart complain'd.
      Alas! though Jove hath given me to behold,                     490
    Unhoped, the land again, and I have pass'd,
    Furrowing my way, these num'rous waves, there seems
    No egress from the hoary flood for me.
    Sharp stones hem in the waters; wild the surge
    Raves ev'ry where; and smooth the rocks arise;
    Deep also is the shore, on which my feet
    No standing gain, or chance of safe escape.
    What if some billow catch me from the Deep
    Emerging, and against the pointed rocks
    Dash me conflicting with its force in vain?                      500
    But should I, swimming, trace the coast in search
    Of sloping beach, haven or shelter'd creek,
    I fear lest, groaning, I be snatch'd again
    By stormy gusts into the fishy Deep,
    Or lest some monster of the flood receive
    Command to seize me, of the many such
    By the illustrious Amphitrite bred;
    For that the mighty Shaker of the shores
    Hates me implacable, too well I know.
      While such discourse within himself he held,                   510
    A huge wave heav'd him on the rugged coast,
    Where flay'd his flesh had been, and all his bones
    Broken together, but for the infused
    Good counsel of Minerva azure-eyed.
    With both hands suddenly he seized the rock,
    And, groaning, clench'd it till the billow pass'd.
    So baffled he that wave; but yet again
    The refluent flood rush'd on him, and with force
    Resistless dash'd him far into the sea.
    As pebbles to the hollow polypus                                 520
    Extracted from his stony bed, adhere,
    So he, the rough rocks clasping, stripp'd his hands
    Raw, and the billows now whelm'd him again.
    Then had the hapless Hero premature
    Perish'd, but for sagacity inspired
    By Pallas azure-eyed. Forth from the waves
    Emerging, where the surf burst on the rocks,
    He coasted (looking landward as he swam)
    The shore, with hope of port or level beach.
    But when, still swimming, to the mouth he came                   530
    Of a smooth-sliding river, there he deem'd
    Safest th' ascent, for it was undeform'd
    By rocks, and shelter'd close from ev'ry wind.
    He felt the current, and thus, ardent, pray'd.
      O hear, whate'er thy name, Sov'reign, who rul'st
    This river! at whose mouth, from all the threats
    Of Neptune 'scap'd, with rapture I arrive.
    Even the Immortal Gods the wand'rer's pray'r
    Respect, and such am I, who reach, at length,
    Thy stream, and clasp thy knees, after long toil.                540
    I am thy suppliant. Oh King! pity me.
      He said; the river God at once repress'd
    His current, and it ceas'd; smooth he prepared
    The way before Ulysses, and the land
    Vouchsafed him easy at his channel's mouth.
    There, once again he bent for ease his limbs
    Both arms and knees, in conflict with the floods
    Exhausted; swoln his body was all o'er,
    And from his mouth and nostrils stream'd the brine.
    Breathless and speechless, and of life well nigh                 550
    Bereft he lay, through dreadful toil immense.
    But when, revived, his dissipated pow'rs
    He recollected, loosing from beneath
    His breast the zone divine, he cast it far
    Into the brackish stream, and a huge wave
    Returning bore it downward to the sea,
    Where Ino caught it. Then, the river's brink
    Abandoning, among the rushes prone
    He lay, kiss'd oft the soil, and sighing, said,
    Ah me! what suff'rings must I now sustain,                       560
    What doom, at last, awaits me? If I watch
    This woeful night, here, at the river's side,
    What hope but that the frost and copious dews,
    Weak as I am, my remnant small of life
    Shall quite extinguish, and the chilly air
    Breath'd from the river at the dawn of day?
    But if, ascending this declivity
    I gain the woods, and in some thicket sleep,
    (If sleep indeed can find me overtoil'd
    And cold-benumb'd) then I have cause to fear                     570
    Lest I be torn by wild beasts, and devour'd.
      Long time he mused, but, at the last, his course
    Bent to the woods, which not remote he saw
    From the sea-brink, conspicuous on a hill.
    Arrived, between two neighbour shrubs he crept,
    Both olives, this the fruitful, that the wild;
    A covert, which nor rough winds blowing moist
    Could penetrate, nor could the noon-day sun
    Smite through it, or unceasing show'rs pervade,
    So thick a roof the ample branches form'd                        580
    Close interwoven; under these the Chief
    Retiring, with industrious hands a bed
    Collected broad of leaves, which there he found
    Abundant strew'd, such store as had sufficed
    Two travellers or three for cov'ring warm,
    Though winter's roughest blasts had rag'd the while.
    That bed with joy the suff'ring Chief renown'd
    Contemplated, and occupying soon
    The middle space, hillock'd it high with leaves.
    As when some swain hath hidden deep his torch                    590
    Beneath the embers, at the verge extreme
    Of all his farm, where, having neighbours none,
    He saves a seed or two of future flame
    Alive, doom'd else to fetch it from afar,
    So with dry leaves Ulysses overspread
    His body, on whose eyes Minerva pour'd
    The balm of sleep copious, that he might taste
    Repose again, after long toil severe.


FOOTNOTES:

[21] The Solymi were the ancient inhabitants of Pisidia in Asia-Minor.

[22] The Translator finding himself free to chuse between +audeessa+ and
+edeessa+, has preferred the latter.




BOOK VI

ARGUMENT

Minerva designing an interview between the daughter of Alcinoues and
Ulysses, admonishes her in a dream to carry down her clothes to the
river, that she may wash them, and make them ready for her approaching
nuptials. That task performed, the Princess and her train amuse
themselves with play; by accident they awake Ulysses; he comes forth from
the wood, and applies himself with much address to Nausicaa, who
compassionating his distressed condition, and being much affected by the
dignity of his appearance, interests himself in his favour, and conducts
him to the city.


    There then the noble suff'rer lay, by sleep
    Oppress'd and labour; meantime, Pallas sought
    The populous city of Phaeacia's sons.
    They, in old time, in Hypereia dwelt
    The spacious, neighbours of a giant race
    The haughty Cyclops, who, endued with pow'r
    Superior, troubled them with frequent wrongs.
    Godlike Nausithoues then arose, who thence
    To Scheria led them, from all nations versed
    In arts of cultivated life, remote;                               10
    With bulwarks strong their city he enclosed,
    Built houses for them, temples to the Gods,
    And gave to each a portion of the soil.
    But he, already by decree of fate
    Had journey'd to the shades, and in his stead
    Alcinoues, by the Gods instructed, reign'd.
    To his abode Minerva azure-eyed
    Repair'd, neglecting nought which might advance
    Magnanimous Ulysses' safe return.
    She sought the sumptuous chamber where, in form                   20
    And feature perfect as the Gods, the young
    Nausicaa, daughter of the King, reposed.
    Fast by the pillars of the portal lay
    Two damsels, one on either side, adorn'd
    By all the Graces, and the doors were shut.
    Soft as a breathing air, she stole toward
    The royal virgin's couch, and at her head
    Standing, address'd her. Daughter she appear'd
    Of Dymas, famed for maritime exploits,
    Her friend and her coeval; so disguised                           30
    Caerulean-eyed Minerva thus began.
      Nausicaa! wherefore hath thy mother borne
    A child so negligent? Thy garments share,
    Thy most magnificent, no thought of thine.
    Yet thou must marry soon, and must provide
    Robes for thyself, and for thy nuptial train.
    Thy fame, on these concerns, and honour stand;
    These managed well, thy parents shall rejoice.
    The dawn appearing, let us to the place
    Of washing, where thy work-mate I will be                         40
    For speedier riddance of thy task, since soon
    The days of thy virginity shall end;
    For thou art woo'd already by the prime
    Of all Phaeacia, country of thy birth.
    Come then--solicit at the dawn of day
    Thy royal father, that he send thee forth
    With mules and carriage for conveyance hence
    Of thy best robes, thy mantles and thy zones.
    Thus, more commodiously thou shalt perform
    The journey, for the cisterns lie remote.                         50
      So saying, Minerva, Goddess azure-eyed,
    Rose to Olympus, the reputed seat
    Eternal of the Gods, which never storms
    Disturb, rains drench, or snow invades, but calm
    The expanse and cloudless shines with purest day.
    There the inhabitants divine rejoice
    For ever, (and her admonition giv'n)
    Caerulean-eyed Minerva thither flew.
      Now came Aurora bright-enthroned, whose rays
    Awaken'd fair Nausicaa; she her dream                             60
    Remember'd wond'ring, and her parents sought
    Anxious to tell them. Them she found within.
    Beside the hearth her royal mother sat,
    Spinning soft fleeces with sea-purple dyed
    Among her menial maidens, but she met
    Her father, whom the Nobles of the land
    Had summon'd, issuing abroad to join
    The illustrious Chiefs in council. At his side
    She stood, and thus her filial suit preferr'd.
      Sir![23] wilt thou lend me of the royal wains                   70
    A sumpter-carriage? for I wish to bear
    My costly cloaths but sullied and unfit
    For use, at present, to the river side.
    It is but seemly that thou should'st repair
    Thyself to consultation with the Chiefs
    Of all Phaeacia, clad in pure attire;
    And my own brothers five, who dwell at home,
    Two wedded, and the rest of age to wed,
    Are all desirous, when they dance, to wear
    Raiment new bleach'd; all which is my concern.                    80
      So spake Nausicaa; for she dared not name
    Her own glad nuptials to her father's ear,
    Who, conscious yet of all her drift, replied.
      I grudge thee neither mules, my child, nor aught
    That thou canst ask beside. Go, and my train
    Shall furnish thee a sumpter-carriage forth
    High-built, strong-wheel'd, and of capacious size.
      So saying, he issued his command, whom quick
    His grooms obey'd. They in the court prepared
    The sumpter-carriage, and adjoin'd the mules.                     90
    And now the virgin from her chamber, charged
    With raiment, came, which on the car she placed,
    And in the carriage-chest, meantime, the Queen,
    Her mother, viands of all kinds disposed,
    And fill'd a skin with wine. Nausicaa rose
    Into her seat; but, ere she went, received
    A golden cruse of oil from the Queen's hand
    For unction of herself, and of her maids.
    Then, seizing scourge and reins, she lash'd the mules.
    They trampled loud the soil, straining to draw                   100
    Herself with all her vesture; nor alone
    She went, but follow'd by her virgin train.
    At the delightful rivulet arrived
    Where those perennial cisterns were prepared
    With purest crystal of the fountain fed
    Profuse, sufficient for the deepest stains,
    Loosing the mules, they drove them forth to browze
    On the sweet herb beside the dimpled flood.
    The carriage, next, light'ning, they bore in hand
    The garments down to the unsullied wave,                         110
    And thrust them heap'd into the pools, their task
    Dispatching brisk, and with an emulous haste.
    When they had all purified, and no spot
    Could now be seen, or blemish more, they spread
    The raiment orderly along the beach
    Where dashing tides had cleansed the pebbles most,
    And laving, next, and smoothing o'er with oil
    Their limbs, all seated on the river's bank,
    They took repast, leaving the garments, stretch'd
    In noon-day fervour of the sun, to dry.                          120
    Their hunger satisfied, at once arose
    The mistress and her train, and putting off
    Their head-attire, play'd wanton with the ball,
    The princess singing to her maids the while.
    Such as shaft-arm'd Diana roams the hills,
    Taeygetus sky-capt, or Erymanth,
    The wild boar chasing, or fleet-footed hind,
    All joy; the rural nymphs, daughters of Jove,
    Sport with her, and Latona's heart exults;
    She high her graceful head above the rest                        130
    And features lifts divine, though all be fair,
    With ease distinguishable from them all;
    So, all her train, she, virgin pure, surpass'd.
      But when the hour of her departure thence
    Approach'd (the mules now yoked again, and all
    Her elegant apparel folded neat)
    Minerva azure-eyed mused how to wake
    Ulysses, that he might behold the fair
    Virgin, his destin'd guide into the town.
    The Princess, then, casting the ball toward                      140
    A maiden of her train, erroneous threw
    And plunged it deep into the dimpling stream.
    All shrieked; Ulysses at the sound awoke,
    And, sitting, meditated thus the cause.
      Ah me! what mortal race inhabit here?
    Rude are they, contumacious and unjust?
    Or hospitable, and who fear the Gods?
    So shrill the cry and feminine of nymphs
    Fills all the air around, such as frequent
    The hills, clear fountains, and herbaceous meads.                150
    Is this a neighbourhood of men endued
    With voice articulate? But what avails
    To ask; I will myself go forth and see.
      So saying, divine Ulysses from beneath
    His thicket crept, and from the leafy wood
    A spreading branch pluck'd forcibly, design'd
    A decent skreen effectual, held before.
    So forth he went, as goes the lion forth,
    The mountain-lion, conscious of his strength,
    Whom winds have vex'd and rains; fire fills his eyes,            160
    And whether herds or flocks, or woodland deer
    He find, he rends them, and, adust for blood,
    Abstains not even from the guarded fold,
    Such sure to seem in virgin eyes, the Chief,
    All naked as he was, left his retreat,
    Reluctant, by necessity constrain'd.
    Him foul with sea foam horror-struck they view'd,
    And o'er the jutting shores fled all dispersed.
    Nausicaa alone fled not; for her
    Pallas courageous made, and from her limbs,                      170
    By pow'r divine, all tremour took away.
    Firm she expected him; he doubtful stood,
    Or to implore the lovely maid, her knees
    Embracing, or aloof standing, to ask
    In gentle terms discrete the gift of cloaths,
    And guidance to the city where she dwelt.
    Him so deliberating, most, at length,
    This counsel pleas'd; in suppliant terms aloof
    To sue to her, lest if he clasp'd her knees,
    The virgin should that bolder course resent.                     180
    Then gentle, thus, and well-advised he spake.
      Oh Queen! thy earnest suppliant I approach.
    Art thou some Goddess, or of mortal race?
    For if some Goddess, and from heaven arrived,
    Diana, then, daughter of mighty Jove
    I deem thee most, for such as hers appear
    Thy form, thy stature, and thy air divine.
    But if, of mortal race, thou dwell below,
    Thrice happy then, thy parents I account,
    And happy thrice thy brethren. Ah! the joy                       190
    Which always for thy sake, their bosoms fill,
    When thee they view, all lovely as thou art,
    Ent'ring majestic on the graceful dance.
    But him beyond all others blest I deem,
    The youth, who, wealthier than his rich compeers,
    Shall win and lead thee to his honour'd home.
    For never with these eyes a mortal form
    Beheld I comparable aught to thine,
    In man or woman. Wonder-wrapt I gaze.
    Such erst, in Delos, I beheld a palm                             200
    Beside the altar of Apollo, tall,
    And growing still; (for thither too I sail'd,
    And num'rous were my followers in a voyage
    Ordain'd my ruin) and as then I view'd
    That palm long time amazed, for never grew
    So strait a shaft, so lovely from the ground,
    So, Princess! thee with wonder I behold,
    Charm'd into fixt astonishment, by awe
    Alone forbidden to embrace thy knees,
    For I am one on whom much woe hath fall'n.                       210
    Yesterday I escaped (the twentieth day
    Of my distress by sea) the dreary Deep;
    For, all those days, the waves and rapid storms
    Bore me along, impetuous from the isle
    Ogygia; till at length the will of heav'n
    Cast me, that I might also here sustain
    Affliction on your shore; for rest, I think,
    Is not for me. No. The Immortal Gods
    Have much to accomplish ere that day arrive.
    But, oh Queen, pity me! who after long                           220
    Calamities endured, of all who live
    Thee first approach, nor mortal know beside
    Of the inhabitants of all the land.
    Shew me your city; give me, although coarse,
    Some cov'ring (if coarse cov'ring _thou_ canst give)
    And may the Gods thy largest wishes grant,
    House, husband, concord! for of all the gifts
    Of heav'n, more precious none I deem, than peace
    'Twixt wedded pair, and union undissolved;
    Envy torments their enemies, but joy                             230
    Fills ev'ry virtuous breast, and most their own.
      To whom Nausicaa the fair replied.
    Since, stranger! neither base by birth thou seem'st,
    Nor unintelligent, (but Jove, the King
    Olympian, gives to good and bad alike
    Prosperity according to his will,
    And grief to thee, which thou must patient bear,)
    Now, therefore, at our land and city arrived,
    Nor garment thou shalt want, nor aught beside
    Due to a suppliant guest like thee forlorn.                      240
    I will both show thee where our city stands,
    And who dwell here. Phaeacia's sons possess
    This land; but I am daughter of their King
    The brave Alcinoues, on whose sway depends
    For strength and wealth the whole Phaeacian race.
      She said, and to her beauteous maidens gave
    Instant commandment--My attendants, stay!
    Why flee ye thus, and whither, from the sight
    Of a mere mortal? Seems he in your eyes
    Some enemy of ours? The heart beats not,                         250
    Nor shall it beat hereafter, which shall come
    An enemy to the Phaeacian shores,
    So dear to the immortal Gods are we.
    Remote, amid the billowy Deep, we hold
    Our dwelling, utmost of all human-kind,
    And free from mixture with a foreign race.
    This man, a miserable wand'rer comes,
    Whom we are bound to cherish, for the poor
    And stranger are from Jove, and trivial gifts
    To such are welcome. Bring ye therefore food                     260
    And wine, my maidens, for the guest's regale,
    And lave him where the stream is shelter'd most.
      She spake; they stood, and by each other's words
    Encouraged, placed Ulysses where the bank
    O'erhung the stream, as fair Nausicaa bade,
    Daughter of King Alcinoues the renown'd.
    Apparel also at his side they spread,
    Mantle and vest, and, next, the limpid oil
    Presenting to him in the golden cruse,
    Exhorted him to bathe in the clear stream.                       270
    Ulysses then the maidens thus bespake.
      Ye maidens, stand apart, that I may cleanse,
    Myself, my shoulders from the briny surf,
    And give them oil which they have wanted long.
    But in your presence I bathe not, ashamed
    To show myself uncloath'd to female eyes.
      He said; they went, and to Nausicaa told
    His answer; then the Hero in the stream
    His shoulders laved, and loins incrusted rough
    With the salt spray, and with his hands the scum                 280
    Of the wild ocean from his locks express'd.
    Thus wash'd all over, and refresh'd with oil,
    He put the garments on, Nausicaa's gift.
    Then Pallas, progeny of Jove, his form
    Dilated more, and from his head diffused
    His curling locks like hyacinthine flowers.
    As when some artist, by Minerva made
    And Vulcan wise to execute all tasks
    Ingenious, binding with a golden verge
    Bright silver, finishes a graceful work,                         290
    Such grace the Goddess o'er his ample chest
    Copious diffused, and o'er his manly brows.
    Retiring, on the beach he sat, with grace
    And dignity illumed, where, viewing him,
    The virgin Princess, with amazement mark'd
    His beauty, and her damsels thus bespake.
      My white-arm'd maidens, listen to my voice!
    Not hated, sure, by all above, this man
    Among Phaeacia's godlike sons arrives.
    At first I deem'd him of plebeian sort                           300
    Dishonourable, but he now assumes
    A near resemblance to the Gods above.
    Ah! would to heaven it were my lot to call
    Husband, some native of our land like him
    Accomplish'd, and content to inhabit here!
    Give him, my maidens, food, and give him wine.
      She ended; they obedient to her will,
    Both wine and food, dispatchful, placed, and glad,
    Before Ulysses; he rapacious ate,
    Toil-suff'ring Chief, and drank, for he had lived                310
    From taste of aliment long time estranged.
      On other thoughts meantime intent, her charge
    Of folded vestments neat the Princess placed
    Within the royal wain, then yoked the mules,
    And to her seat herself ascending, call'd
    Ulysses to depart, and thus she spake.
      Up, stranger! seek the city. I will lead
    Thy steps toward my royal Father's house,
    Where all Phaeacia's Nobles thou shalt see.
    But thou (for I account thee not unwise)                         320
    This course pursue. While through the fields we pass,
    And labours of the rural hind, so long
    With my attendants follow fast the mules
    And sumpter-carriage. I will be thy guide.
    But, once the summit gain'd, on which is built
    Our city with proud bulwarks fenced around,
    And laved on both sides by its pleasant port
    Of narrow entrance, where our gallant barks
    Line all the road, each station'd in her place,
    And where, adjoining close the splendid fane                     330
    Of Neptune, stands the forum with huge stones
    From quarries thither drawn, constructed strong,
    In which the rigging of their barks they keep,
    Sail-cloth and cordage, and make smooth their oars;
    (For bow and quiver the Phaeacian race
    Heed not, but masts and oars, and ships well-poised,
    With which exulting they divide the flood)
    Then, cautious, I would shun their bitter taunts
    Disgustful, lest they mock me as I pass;
    For of the meaner people some are coarse                         340
    In the extreme, and it may chance that one,
    The basest there seeing us shall exclaim--
    What handsome stranger of athletic form
    Attends the Princess? Where had she the chance
    To find him? We shall see them wedded soon.
    Either she hath received some vagrant guest
    From distant lands, (for no land neighbours ours)
    Or by her pray'rs incessant won, some God
    Hath left the heav'ns to be for ever hers.
    'Tis well if she have found, by her own search,                  350
    An husband for herself, since she accounts
    The Nobles of Phaeacia, who her hand
    Solicit num'rous, worthy to be scorn'd--
    Thus will they speak, injurious. I should blame
    A virgin guilty of such conduct much,
    Myself, who reckless of her parents' will,
    Should so familiar with a man consort,
    Ere celebration of her spousal rites.
    But mark me, stranger! following my advice,
    Thou shalt the sooner at my father's hands                       360
    Obtain safe conduct and conveyance home.
    Sacred to Pallas a delightful grove
    Of poplars skirts the road, which we shall reach
    Ere long; within that grove a fountain flows,
    And meads encircle it; my father's farm
    Is there, and his luxuriant garden plot;
    A shout might reach it from the city-walls.
    There wait, till in the town arrived, we gain
    My father's palace, and when reason bids
    Suppose us there, then ent'ring thou the town,                   370
    Ask where Alcinoues dwells, my valiant Sire.
    Well known is his abode, so that with ease
    A child might lead thee to it, for in nought
    The other houses of our land the house
    Resemble, in which dwells the Hero, King
    Alcinoues. Once within the court received
    Pause not, but, with swift pace advancing, seek
    My mother; she beside a column sits
    In the hearth's blaze, twirling her fleecy threads
    Tinged with sea-purple, bright, magnificent!                     380
    With all her maidens orderly behind.
    There also stands my father's throne, on which
    Seated, he drinks and banquets like a God.
    Pass that; then suppliant clasp my mother's knees,
    So shalt thou quickly win a glad return
    To thy own home, however far remote.
    Her favour, once, and her kind aid secured,
    Thenceforth thou may'st expect thy friends to see,
    Thy dwelling, and thy native soil again.
    So saying, she with her splendid scourge the mules               390
    Lash'd onward. They (the stream soon left behind)
    With even footsteps graceful smote the ground;
    But so she ruled them, managing with art
    The scourge, as not to leave afar, although
    Following on foot, Ulysses and her train.
    The sun had now declined, when in that grove
    Renown'd, to Pallas sacred, they arrived,
    In which Ulysses sat, and fervent thus
    Sued to the daughter of Jove AEgis-arm'd.
