waxing angry, slew the envoys--an evil deed which their own color in
Maryland and in Virginia reprehended and repudiated. But the harm
was done. From the Potomac to the James Indians listened to Indian
eloquence, reciting the evils that from the first the white man had
brought. Then the red man, in increasing numbers, fell upon the outlying
settlements of the pioneers.

In Virginia there soon arose a popular clamor for effective action. Call
out the militia of every county! March against the Indians! Act! But the
Governor was old, of an ill temper now, and most suspicious of popular
gatherings for any purpose whatsoever. He temporized, delayed, refused
all appeals until the Assembly should meet.

Dislike of Berkeley and his ways and a growing sense of injury and
oppression began to quiver hard in the Virginian frame. The King was
no longer popular, nor Sir William Berkeley, nor were the most of the
Council, nor many of the burgesses of that Long Assembly. There arose a
loud demand for a new election and for changes in public policy.

Where a part of Richmond now stands, there stretched at that time a
tract of fields and hills and a clear winding creek, held by a young
planter named Nathaniel Bacon, an Englishman of that family which
produced "the wisest, greatest, meanest of mankind." The planter himself
lived farther down the river. But he had at this place an overseer
and some indentured laborers. This Nathaniel Bacon was a newcomer
in Virginia--young man who had been entered in Gray's Inn, who had
traveled, who was rumored to have run through much of his own estate.
He had a cousin, also named Nathaniel Bacon, who had come fifteen years
earlier to Virginia "a very rich, politic man and childless," and whose
representations had perhaps drawn the younger Bacon to Virginia. At any
rate he was here, and at the age of twenty-eight the owner of much land
and the possessor of a seat in the Council. But, though he sat in
the Council, he was hardly of the mind of the Governor and those who
supported him.

It was in the spring of 1676 that there began a series of Indian attacks
directed against the plantations and the outlying cabins of the region
above the Falls of the Far West. Among the victims were men of Bacon's
plantation, for his overseer and several of his servants were slain. The
news of this massacre of his men set their young master afire. Even a
less hideous tale might have done it, for he was of a bold and ardent
nature.

Riding up the forest tracks, a company of planters from the threatened
neighborhood gathered together. "Let us make a troop and take fire and
sword among them!" There lacked a commander. "Mr. Bacon, you command!"
Very good; and Mr. Bacon, who is a born orator, made a speech dealing
with the "grievances of the times." Very good indeed; but still there
lacked the Governor's commission. "Send a swift messenger to Jamestown
for it!"

The messenger went and returned. No commission. Mr. Bacon had made an
unpleasant impression upon Sir William Berkeley. This young man,
the Governor said, was "popularly inclined"--had "a constitution not
consistent with" all that Berkeley stood for. Bacon and his neighbors
listened with bent brows to their envoy's report. Murmurs began and
deepened. "Shall we stand idly here considering formalities, while the
redskins murder?" Commission or no commission, they would march; and in
the end, march they did--a considerable troop--to the up-river country,
with the tall, young, eloquent man at their head.

News reached the Governor at Jamestown that they were marching. In a
tight-lipped rage he issued a proclamation and sent it after them. They
and their leader were acting illegally, usurping military powers that
belonged elsewhere! Let them disband, disperse to their dwellings, or
beware action of the rightful powers! Troubled in mind, some disbanded
and dispersed, but threescore at least would by no means do so. Nor
would the young man "of precipitate disposition" who headed the troop.
He rode on into the forest after the Indians, and the others followed
him. Here were the Falls of the Far West, and here on a hill the Indians
had a "fort." This the Virginia planters attacked. The hills above the
James echoed to the sound of the small, desperate fray. In the end the
red men were routed. Some were slain; some were taken prisoner; others
escaped into the deep woods stretching westward.

In the meantime another force of horsemen had been gathered. It was
headed by Berkeley and was addressed to the pursuit and apprehension
of Nathaniel Bacon, who had thus defied authority. But before Berkeley
could move far, fire broke out around him. The grievances of the people
were many and just, and not without a family resemblance to those that
precipitated the Revolution a hundred years later. Not Bacon alone, but
many others who were in despair of any good under their present masters
were ready for heroic measures. Berkeley found himself ringed about by
a genuine popular revolt. He therefore lacked the time now to pursue
Nathaniel Bacon, but spurred back to Jamestown there to deal as best
he might with dangerous affairs. At Jamestown, willy-nilly, the old
Governor was forced to promise reforms. The Long Assembly should be
dissolved and a new Assembly, more conformable to the wishes of the
people, should come into being ready to consider all their troubles.
So writs went out; and there presently followed a hot and turbulent
election, in which that "restricted franchise" of the Long Assembly
was often defied and in part set aside. Men without property presented
themselves, gave their voices, and were counted. Bacon, who had by now
achieved an immense popularity, was chosen burgess for Henricus County.

In the June weather Bacon sailed down to Jamestown, with a number of
those who had backed him in that assumption of power to raise troops
and go against the Indians. When he came to Jamestown it was to find the
high sheriff waiting for him by the Governor's orders. He was put under
arrest. Hot discussion followed. But the people were for the moment
in the ascendent, and Bacon should not be sacrificed. A compromise
was reached. Bacon was technically guilty of "unlawful, mutinous and
rebellious practises." If, on his knees before Governor, Council, and
Burgesses, he would acknowledge as much and promise henceforth to be his
Majesty's obedient servant, he and those implicated with him should
be pardoned. He himself might be readmitted to the Council, and all in
Virginia should be as it had been. He should even have the commission he
had acted without to go and fight against the Indians.

Bacon thereupon made his submission upon his knees, promising that
henceforth he would "demean himself dutifully, faithfully, and
peaceably." Formally forgiven, he was restored to his place in the
Virginia Council. An eyewitness reports that presently he saw "Mr.
Bacon on his quondam seat with the Governor and Council, which seemed
a marvellous indulgence to one whom he had so lately proscribed as a
rebel." The Assembly of 1676 was of a different temper and opinion from
that of the Long Assembly. It was an insurgent body, composed to a large
degree of mere freemen and small planters, with a few of the richer,
more influential sort who nevertheless queried that old divine right of
rule. Berkeley thought that he had good reason to doubt this Assembly's
intentions, once it gave itself rein. He directs it therefore to confine
its attention to Indian troubles. It did, indeed, legislate on Indian
affairs by passing an elaborate act for the prosecution of the war.
An army of a thousand white men was to be raised. Bacon was to be
commander-in-chief. All manner of precautions were to be taken. But this
matter disposed of, the Assembly thereupon turned to "the redressing
several grievances the country was then labouring under; and motions
were made for inspecting the public revenues, the collectors' accounts,"
and so forth. The Governor thundered; friends of the old order
obstructed; but the Assembly went on its way, reforming here and
reforming there. It even went so far as to repeal the preceding
Assembly's legislation regarding the franchise. All white males who are
freemen were now privileged to vote, "together with the freeholders and
housekeepers."

A certain member wanted some detail of procedure retained because it was
customary. "Tis true it has been customary," answered another, "but
if we have any bad customs amongst us, we are come here to mend 'em!"
"Whereupon," says the contemporary narrator, "the house was set in
a laughter." But after so considerable an amount of mending there
threatened a standstill. What was to come next? Could men go further--as
they had gone further in England not so many years ago? Reform had come
to an apparent impasse. While it thus hesitated, the old party gained in
life.

Bacon, now petitioning for his promised commission against the Indians,
seems to have reached the conclusion that the Governor might promise but
meant not to perform, and not only so, but that in Jamestown his very
life was in danger. He had "intimation that the Governor's generosity
in pardoning him and restoring him to his place in the Council were no
other than previous wheedles to amuse him."

In Jamestown lived one whom a chronicler paints for us as "thoughtful
Mr. Lawrence." This gentleman was an Oxford scholar, noted for "wit,
learning, and sobriety... nicely honest, affable, and without blemish in
his conversation and dealings." Thus friends declared, though foes said
of him quite other things. At any rate, having emigrated to Virginia and
married there, he had presently acquired, because of a lawsuit over land
in which he held himself to be unjustly and shabbily treated through
influences of the Governor, an inveterate prejudice against that ruler.
He calls him in short "an old, treacherous villain." Lawrence and
his wife, not being rich, kept a tavern at Jamestown, and there Bacon
lodged, probably having been thrown with Lawrence before this. Persons
are found who hold that Lawrence was the brain, Bacon the arm, of the
discontent in Virginia. There was also Mr. William Drummond, who will be
met with in the account of Carolina. He was a "sober Scotch gentleman of
good repute"--but no more than Lawrence on good terms with the Governor
of Virginia.

On a morning in June, when the Assembly met, it was observed that
Nathaniel Bacon was not in his place in the Council--nor was he to be
found in the building, nor even in Jamestown itself, though Berkeley had
Lawrence's inn searched for him. He had left the town--gone up the river
in his sloop to his plantation at Curles Neck "to visit his wife, who,
as she informed him, was indisposed." In truth it appears that Bacon
had gone for the purpose of gathering together some six hundred up-river
men. Or perhaps they themselves had come together and, needing a leader,
had turned naturally to the man who was under the frown of an unpopular
Governor and all the Governor's supporters in Virginia. At any rate
Bacon was presently seen at the head of no inconsiderable army for
a colony of less than fifty thousand souls. Those with him were only
up-river men; but he must have known that he could gather besides from
every part of the country. Given some initial success, he might even set
all Virginia ablaze. Down the river he marched, he and his six hundred,
and in the summer heat entered Jamestown and drew up before the Capitol.
The space in front of this building was packed with the Jamestown folk
and with the six hundred. Bacon, a guard behind him, advanced to the
central door, to find William Berkeley standing there shaking with rage.
The old royalist has courage. He tears open his silken vest and fine
shirt and faces the young man who, though trained in the law of the
realm, is now filling that law with a hundred wounds. He raises a
passionate voice. "Here! Shoot me! 'Fore God, a fair mark--a fair mark!
Shoot!"

Bacon will not shoot him, but will have that promised commission to go
against the Indians. Those behind him lift and shake their guns. "We
will have it! We will have it!" Governor and Council retire to consider
the demand. If Berkeley is passionate and at times violent, so is
Bacon in his own way, for an eye-witness has to say that "he displayed
outrageous postures of his head, arms, body and legs, often tossing his
hand from his sword to his hat," and that outside the door he had cried:
"Damn my blood! I'll kill Governor, Council, Assembly and all, and
then I'll sheathe my sword in my own heart's blood!" He is no dour,
determined, unwordy revolutionist like the Scotch Drummond, nor still
and subtle like "the thoughtful Mr. Lawrence." He is young and hot, a
man of oratory and outward acts. Yet is he a patriot and intelligent
upon broad public needs. When presently he makes a speech to the excited
Assembly, it has for subject-matter "preserving our lives from the
Indians, inspecting the public revenues, the exorbitant taxes, and
redressing the grievances and calamities of that deplorable country." It
has quite the ring of young men's speeches in British colonies a century
later!

The Governor and his party gave in perforce. Bacon got his commission
and an Act of Indemnity for all chance political offenses. General and
Commander-in-chief against the Indians--so was he styled. Moreover,
the Burgesses, with an alarmed thought toward England, drew up an
explanatory memorial for Charles II's perusal. This paper journeyed
forth upon the first ship to sail, but it had for traveling companion
a letter secretly sent from the Governor to the King. The two
communications were painted in opposite colors. "I have," says Berkeley,
"for above thirty years governed the most flourishing country the sun
ever shone over, but am now encompassed with rebellion like waters."



CHAPTER XIII. REBELLION AND CHANGE

Bacon with an increased army now rode out once more against the Indians.
He made a rendezvous on the upper York--the old Pamunkey--and to this
center he gathered horsemen until there may have been with him not far
from a thousand mounted men. From here he sent detachments against the
red men's villages in all the upper troubled country, and afar into
the sunset woods where the pioneer's cabin had not yet been builded. He
acted with vigor. The Indians could not stand against his horsemen and
concerted measures, and back they fell before the white men, westward
again; or, if they stayed in the ever dwindling villages, they gave
hostages and oaths of peace. Quiet seemed to descend once more upon the
border.

But, if the frontier seemed peaceful, Virginia behind the border was
a bubbling cauldron. Bacon had now become a hero of the people, a
Siegfried capable of slaying the dragon. Nor were Lawrence and Drummond
idle, nor others of their way of thinking. The Indian troubles might
soon be settled, but why not go further, marching against other
troubles, more subtle and long-continuing, and threatening all the
future?

In the midst of this speculation and promise of change, the Governor,
feeling the storm, dissolved the Assembly, proclaimed Bacon and his
adherents rebels and traitors, and made a desperate attempt to raise an
army for use against the new-fangledness of the time. This last he could
not do. Private interest led many planters to side with him, and there
was a fair amount of passionate conviction matching his own, that his
Majesty the King and the forces of law and order were being withstood,
and without just cause. But the mass of the people cried out to his
speeches, "Bacon! Bacon!" As the popular leader had been warned from
Jamestown by news of personal danger, so in his turn Berkeley seems to
have believed that his own liberty was threatened. With suddenness he
departed the place, boarded a sloop, and was "wafted over Chesapeake Bay
thirty miles to Accomac." The news of the Governor's flight, producing
both alarm in one party and enthusiasm in the other, tended to
precipitate the crisis. Though the Indian trouble might by now be called
adjusted, Bacon, far up the York, did not disband his men. He turned and
with them marched down country, not to Jamestown, but to a hamlet called
Middle Plantation, where later was to grow the town of Williamsburg.
Here he camped, and here took counsel with Lawrence and Drummond and
others, and here addressed, with a curious, lofty eloquence, the throng
that began to gather. Hence, too, he issued a "Declaration," recounting
the misdeeds of those lately in power, protesting against the terms
rebel and traitor as applied to himself and his followers, who are only
in arms to protect his Majesty's demesne and subjects, and calling on
those who are well disposed to reform to join him at Middle Plantation,
there to consider the state of the country which had been brought into a
bad way by "Sir William's doting and irregular actings."

Upon his proclamation many did come to Middle Plantation, great planters
and small, men just freed from indentured service, holders of no
land and little land and much land, men of all grades of weight and
consideration and all degrees of revolutionary will, from Drummond--with
a reported speech, "I am in overshoes; I will be in overboots!" and a
wife Sarah who snapped a stick in two with the cry, "I care no more for
the power of England than for this broken straw!"--to those who would be
revolutionary as long as, and only when, it seemed safe to be so.

How much of revolution, despite that speech about his Majesty's demesne
and subjects, was in Bacon's mind, or in Richard Lawrence's mind and
William Drummond's mind, or in the mind of their staunchest supporters,
may hardly now be resolved. Perhaps as much as was in the mind of
Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, and George Mason a century later.

The Governor was in Accomac, breathing fire and slaughter, though as
yet without brand or sword with which to put his ardent desires into
execution. But he and the constituted order were not without friends
and supporters. He had, as his opponents saw, a number of "wicked and
pernicious counsellors, aides and assistants against the commonalty in
these our cruel commotions." Moreover--and a great moreover is that!--it
was everywhere bruited that he had sent to England, to the King, "for
two thousand Red Coates." Perhaps the King--perhaps England--will take
his view, and, not consulting the good of Virginia, send the Red Coats!
What then?

Bacon, as a measure of opposition, proposed "a test or recognition," to
be signed by those here at Middle Plantation who earnestly do wish the
good of Virginia. It was a bold test! Not only should they covenant to
give no aid to the whilom?? Governor against this new general and army,
but if ships should bring the Red Coats they were to withstand them.
There is little wonder that "this bugbear did marvellously startle" that
body of Virginia horsemen, those progressive gentlemen planters, and
others. Yet in the end, after violent contentions, the assembly at
Middle Plantation drew up and signed a remarkable paper, the "Oath at
Middle Plantation." Historically, it is linked on the one hand with
that "thrusting out of his government" of Sir John Harvey in Charles I's
time, and on the other with Virginian proceedings a hundred years later
under the third George. If his Majesty had been, as it was rumored,
wrongly informed that Virginia was in rebellion; if, acting upon that
misinformation, he sent troops against his loyal Virginians--who were
armed only against an evil Governor and intolerable woes then these same
good loyalists would "oppose and suppress all forces whatsoever of that
nature, until such time as the King be fully informed of the state
of the case." What was to happen if the King, being informed, still
supported Berkeley and sent other Red Coats was not taken into
consideration.

This paper, being drawn, was the more quickly signed because there
arrived, in the midst of the debate, a fresh Indian alarm. Attack
threatened a fort upon the York--whence the Governor had seen fit to
remove arms and ammunition! The news came most opportunely for Bacon.
"There were no more discourses." The major portion of the large
assemblage signed.

The old Government in Virginia was thus denied. But it was held that
government there must be, and that the people of Virginia through
representatives must arrange for it. Writs of election, made as usual in
the King's name, and signed by Bacon and by those members of the Council
who were of the revolt, went forth to all counties. The Assembly thus
provided was to meet at Jamestown in September.

So much business done, off rode Bacon and his men to put down this
latest rising of the Indians. Not only these but red men in a new
quarter, tribes south of the James, kept them employed for weeks
to come. Nor were they unmindful of that proud old man, Sir William
Berkeley, over on the Eastern Shore, a well-peopled region where
traveling by boat and by sandy road was sufficiently easy. Bacon,
Lawrence, and Drummond finally decided to take Sir William captive and
to bring him back to Jamestown. For this purpose they dispatched a ship
across the Bay, with two hundred and fifty men, under the command of
Giles Bland, "a man of courage and haughty bearing," and "no great
admirer of Sir William's goodness." The ship proceeded to the Accomac
shore, anchored in some bight, and sent ashore men to treat with the
Governor. But the Governor turned the tables on them. He made himself
captor, instead of being made captive. Bland and his lieutenants were
taken, whereupon their following surrendered into Berkeley's hands.
Bland's second in command was hanged; Bland himself was held in irons.

Now Berkeley's star was climbing. In Accomac he gathered so many that,
with those who had fled with him and later recruits who crossed the
Bay, he had perhaps a thousand men. He stowed these upon the ship of the
ill-fated Bland and upon a number of sloops. With seventeen sail in all,
the old Governor set his face west and south towards the mouth of the
James.

In that river, on the 7th of September, 1676, there appeared this fleet
of the King's Governor, set on retaking Virginia. Jamestown had notice.
The Bacon faction held the place with perhaps eight hundred men, Colonel
Hansford at their head. Summoned by Berkeley to surrender, Hansford
refused, but that same night, by advice of Lawrence and Drummond,
evacuated the place, drawing his force off toward the York. The next
day, emptied of all but a few citizens, Jamestown received the old
Governor and his army.

The tidings found Bacon on the upper York. Acting with his accustomed
energy, he sent out, far and wide, ringing appeals to the country to
rouse itself, for men to join him and march to the defeat of the old
tyrant. Numbers did come in. He moved with "marvelous celerity." When
he had, for the time and place, a large force of rebels, he marched, by
stream and plantation, tobacco field and forest, forge and mill, through
the early autumn country to Jamestown. Civil war was on.

Across the narrow neck of the Jamestown peninsula had been thrown a sort
of fortification with ditch, earthwork, and palisade. Before this
Bacon now sounded trumpets. No answer coming, but the mouths of cannon
appearing at intervals above the breastwork, the "rebel" general halted,
encamped his men, and proceeded to construct siege lines of his own. The
work must be done exposed to Sir William's iron shot.

Now comes a strange and discreditable incident. Patriots,
revolutionists, who on the whole would serve human progress, have yet,
as have we all, dark spots and seamy sides. Bacon's parties of workmen
were threatened, hindered, driven from their task by Berkeley's guns.
Bacon had a curious, unadmirable idea. He sent horsemen to neighboring
loyalist plantations to gather up and bring to camp, not the
planters--for they are with Berkeley in Jamestown--but the planters'
wives. Here are Mistress Bacon (wife of the elder Nathaniel Bacon),
Mistress Bray; Mistress Ballard, Mistress Page, and others. Protesting,
these ladies enter Bacon's camp, who sends one as envoy into the town
with the message that, if Berkeley attacks, the whole number of women
shall be placed as shield to Bacon's men who build earthworks.

He was as good--or as bad--as his word. At the first show of action
against his workmen these royalist women were placed in the front and
were kept there until Bacon had made his counter-line of defense.
Sir William Berkeley had great faults, but at times--not always--he
displayed chivalry. For that day "the ladies' white aprons" guarded
General Bacon and all his works. The next day, the defenses completed,
this "white garde" was withdrawn.

Berkeley waited no longer but, though now at a disadvantage, opened fire
and charged with his men through gate and over earthworks. The battle
that followed was short and decisive. Berkeley's chance-gathered army
was no match for Bacon's seasoned Indian fighters and for desperate men
who knew that they must win or be hanged for traitors. The Governor's
force wavered and, unable to stand its ground, turned and fled, leaving
behind some dead and wounded. Then Bacon, who also had cannon, opened
upon the town and the ships that rode before it. In the night the King's
Governor embarked for the second time and with him, in that armada from
the Eastern Shore, the greater part of the force he had gathered. When
dawn came, Bacon saw that the ships, large and small, were gone, sailing
back to Accomac. Bacon and his following thus came peaceably into
Jamestown, but with the somewhat fell determination to burn the place.
It should "harbor no more rogues." What Bacon, Lawrence, Drummond,
Hansford, and others really hoped--whether they forecasted a republican
Virginia finally at peace and prosperous--whether they saw in a vision
a new capital, perhaps at Middle Plantation, perhaps at the Falls of
the Far West, a capital that should be without old, tyrannic
memories--cannot now be said. However it all may be, they put torch
to the old capital town and soon saw it consumed, for it was no great
place, and not hard to burn.

Jamestown had hardly ceased to smoke when news came that loyalists under
Colonel Brent were gathering in northern counties. Bacon, now ill but
energetic to the end, turned with promptness to meet this new alarm. He
crossed the York and marched northward through Gloucester County. But
the rival forces did not come to a fight. Brent's men deserted by
the double handful. They came into Bacon's ranks "resolving with the
Persians to go and worship the rising sun." Or, hanging fire, reluctant
to commit themselves either way, they melted from Brent, running
homeward by every road. Bacon, with an enlarged, not lessened army, drew
back into Gloucester. Revolutionary fortunes shone fair in prospect. Yet
it was but the moment of brief, deceptive bloom before decay and fall.

At this critical moment Bacon fell sick and died. Some said that he was
poisoned, but that has never been proved. The illness that had attacked
him during his siege of Jamestown and that held on after his victory
seems to have sufficed for his taking off. In Gloucester County he
"surrendered up that fort he was no longer able to keep, into the hands
of that grim and all-conquering Captaine Death." His body was buried,
says the old account, "but where deposited till the Generall day not
knowne, only to those who are resolutely silent in that particular."

With Bacon's death there fell to pieces all this hopeful or unhopeful
movement. Lawrence might have a subtle head and Drummond the courage
to persevere; Hansford, Cheeseman, Bland, and others might have varied
abilities. But the passionate and determined Bacon had been the organ
of action; Bacon's the eloquence that could bring to the cause men with
property to give as well as men with life to lose. It is a question how
soon, had Bacon not died, must have failed his attempt at revolution,
desperate because so premature.

Back came Berkeley from Accomac, his turbulent enemy thus removed.
All who from the first had held with the King's Governor now rode
emboldened. Many who had shouted more or less loudly for the rising
star, now that it was so untimely set, made easy obeisance to the old
sun. A great number who had wavered in the wind now declared that they
had done no such thing, but had always stood steadfast for the ancient
powers.

The old Governor, who might once have been magnanimous, was changed for
the worse. He had been withstood; he would punish. He now gave full rein
to his passionate temper, his bigotry for the throne, and his feeling of
personal wrong. He began in Virginia to outlaw and arrest rebels, and to
doom them to hasty trials and executions. There was no longer a united
army to meet, but only groups and individuals striving for safety
in flight or hiding. Hansford was early taken and hanged with two
lieutenants of Bacon, Wilford and Farlow. Cheeseman died in prison.
Drummond was taken in the swamps of the Chickahominy and carried before
the Governor. Berkeley brought his hands together. "Mr. Drummond, you
are very welcome! I am more glad to see you than any man in Virginia!
Mr. Drummond you shall be hanged in half an hour!" Not in half an hour,
but on the same day he was hanged, imperturbable Scot to the last.
Lawrence, held by many to have been more than Bacon the true author of
the attempt, either put an end to himself or escaped northward, for he
disappears from history. "The last account of Mr. Lawrence was from an
uppermost plantation whence he and four other desperadoes with horses,
pistols, etc., marched away in a snow ankle deep." They "were thought
to have cast themselves into a branch of some river, rather than to
be treated like Drummond." Thus came to early and untimely end the
ringleaders of Bacon's Rebellion. In all, by the Governor's command,
thirty-seven men suffered death by hanging.

There comes to us, down the centuries, the comment of that King for whom
Berkeley was so zealous, a man who fell behind his colonial Governor in
singleness of interest but excelled him in good nature. "That old fool,"
said the second Charles, "has hanged more men in that naked country than
I have done for the murder of my father!"

That letter which Berkeley had written some months before to his
sovereign about the "waters of rebellion" was now seen to have borne
fruit. In January, while the Governor was yet running down fugitives,
confiscating lands, and hanging "traitors," a small fleet from England
sailed in, bringing a regiment of "Red Coates," and with them three
commissioners charged with the duty of bringing order out of confusion.
These commissioners, bearing the King's proclamation of pardon to all
upon submission, were kinder than the irascible and vindictive Governor
of Virginia, and they succeeded at last in restraining his fury. They
made their report to England, and after some months obtained a second
royal proclamation censuring Berkeley's vengeful course, "so derogatory
to our princely clemency," abrogating the Assembly's more violent acts,
and extending full pardon to all concerned in the late "rebellion,"
saving only the arch-rebel Bacon--to whom perhaps it now made little
difference if they pardoned him or not.

But with this piece of good nature, so characteristic of the second
Charles, there came neither to the King in person nor to England as a
whole any appreciation of the true ills behind the Virginian revolt, nor
any attempt to relieve them. Along with the King's first proclamation
came instructions for the Governor. "You shall be no more obliged to
call an Assembly once every year, but only once in two years.... Also
whensoever the Assembly is called fourteen days shall be the time
prefixed for their sitting and no longer." And the narrowed franchise
that Bacon's Assembly had widened is narrowed again. "You shall take
care that the members of the Assembly be elected only by freeholders,
as being more agreeable to the custom of England." Nor is the grant
to Culpeper and Arlington revoked. Nor, wider and deeper, are the
Navigation Laws in any wise bettered. No more than before, no more
indeed than a century later, is there any conception that the child
exists no more for the parent than the parent for the child.

Sir William Berkeley's loyalty had in the end overshot itself. His zeal
fatigued the King, and in 1677 he was recalled to England. As Governor
of Virginia he had been long popular at first but in his old age
detested. He had great personal courage, fidelity, and generosity for
