thirty-four years afterward. Then, so an English writer tells us, a use
was found for the gum--and a name. A stationer accidentally discovered
that it would erase pencil marks, And, as it came from the Indies and
rubbed, of course it was "India rubber."

About the year 1820 American merchantmen, plying between Brazil and
New England, sometimes carried rubber as ballast on the home voyage and
dumped it on the wharves at Boston. One of the shipmasters exhibited to
his friends a pair of native shoes fancifully gilded. Another, with more
foresight, brought home five hundred pairs, ungilded, and offered them
for sale. They were thick, clumsily shaped, and heavy, but they sold.
There was a demand for more. In a few years half a million pairs were
being imported annually. New England manufacturers bid against one
another along the wharves for the gum which had been used as ballast and
began to make rubber shoes.

European vessels had also carried rubber home; and experiments were
being made with it in France and Britain. A Frenchman manufactured
suspenders by cutting a native bottle into fine threads and running
them through a narrow cloth web. And Macintosh, a chemist of Glasgow,
inserted rubber treated with naphtha between thin pieces of cloth and
evolved the garment that still bears his name.

At first the new business in rubber yielded profits. The cost of the
raw material was infinitesimal; and there was a demand for the finished
articles. In Roxbury, Massachusetts, a firm manufacturing patent leather
treated raw rubber with turpentine and lampblack and spread it on cloth,
in an effort to produce a waterproof leather. The process appeared to
be a complete success, and a large capital was employed to make handsome
shoes and clothing out of the new product and in opening shops in the
large cities for their sale. Merchants throughout the country placed
orders for these goods, which, as it happened, were made and shipped in
winter.

But, when summer came, the huge profits of the manufacturers literally
melted away, for the beautiful garments decomposed in the heat; and
loads of them, melting and running together, were being returned to the
factory. And they filled Roxbury with such noisome odors that they had
to be taken out at dead of night and buried deep in the earth.

And not only did these rubber garments melt in the heat. It presently
transpired that severe frost stiffened them to the rigidity of granite.
Daniel Webster had had some experience in this matter himself. "A friend
in New York," he said, "sent me a very fine cloak of India Rubber, and a
hat of the same material. I did not succeed very well with them. I took
the cloak one day and set it out in the cold. It stood very well by
itself. I surmounted it with the hat, and many persons passing by
supposed they saw, standing by the porch, the Farmer of Marshfield."

It was in the year 1834, shortly after the Roxbury manufacturers had
come to realize that their process was worthless and that their great
fortune was only a mirage, and just before these facts became generally
known, that Charles Goodyear made his entrance on the scene. He appeared
first as a customer in the company's store in New York and bought a
rubber life-preserver. When he returned some weeks later with a plan
for improving the tube, the manager confided to him the sad tragedy of
rubber, pointing out that no improvement in the manufactured articles
would meet the difficulty, but that fame and fortune awaited the
inventor of a process that would keep rubber dry and firm and flexible
in all weathers.

Goodyear felt that he had a call from God. "He who directs the
operations of the mind," he wrote at a later date, "can turn it to the
development of the properties of Nature in his own way, and at the time
when they are specially needed. The creature imagines he is executing
some plan of his own, while he is simply an instrument in the hands of
his Maker for executing the divine purposes of beneficence to the race."
It was in the spirit of a crusader, consecrated to a particular service,
that this man took up the problem of rubber. The words quoted are a
fitting preface for the story of the years that followed, which is
a tale of endurance and persistent activity under sufferings and
disappointments such as are scarcely paralleled even in the pages of
invention, darkened as they often are by poverty and defeat.

Charles Goodyear was born at New Haven, December 29, 1800, the son of
Amasa Goodyear and descendant of Stephen Goodyear who was associated
with Theophilus Eaton, the first governor of the Puritan colony of New
Haven. It was natural that Charles should turn his mind to invention, as
he did even when a boy; for his father, a pioneer in the manufacture of
American hardware, was the inventor of a steel hayfork which replaced
the heavy iron fork of prior days and lightened and expedited the labor
of the fields. When Charles was seven his father moved to Naugatuck and
manufactured the first pearl buttons made in America; during the War
of 1812 the Goodyear factory supplied metal buttons to the Government.
Charles, a studious, serious boy, was the close companion of his father.
His deeply religious nature manifested itself early, and he joined the
Congregational Church when he was sixteen. It was at first his intention
to enter the ministry, which seemed to him to offer the most useful
career of service, but, changing his mind, he went to Philadelphia
to learn the hardware business and on coming of age was admitted
to partnership in a firm established there by his father. The firm
prospered for a time, but an injudicious extension of credit led to
its suspension. So it happened that Goodyear in 1834, when he became
interested in rubber, was an insolvent debtor, liable, under the laws of
the time, to imprisonment. Soon afterward, indeed, he was lodged in the
Debtor's Prison in Philadelphia.

 It would seem an inauspicious hour to begin a search which might
lead him on in poverty for years and end nowhere. But, having seen the
need for perfect rubber, the thought had come to him, with the force of
a religious conviction, that "an object so desirable and so important,
and so necessary to man's comfort, as the making of gum-elastic
available to his use, was most certainly placed within his reach."
Thereafter he never doubted that God had called him to this task and
that his efforts would be crowned with success. Concerning his prison
experiences, of which the first was not to be the last, he says that
"notwithstanding the mortification attending such a trial," if the
prisoner has a real aim "for which to live and hope over he may add
firmness to hope, and derive lasting advantage by having proved to
himself that, with a clear conscience and a high purpose, a man may be
as happy within prison walls as in any other (even the most fortunate)
circumstances in life." With this spirit he met every reverse throughout
the ten hard years that followed.

Luckily, as he says, his first experiments required no expensive
equipment. Fingers were the best tools for working the gum. The prison
officials allowed him a bench and a marble slab, a friend procured him
a few dollars' worth of gum, which sold then at five cents a pound, and
his wife contributed her rolling pin. That was the beginning.

For a time he believed that, by mixing the raw gum with magnesia
and boiling it in lime, he had overcome the stickiness which was the
inherent difficulty. He made some sheets of white rubber which were
exhibited, and also some articles for sale. His hopes were dashed when
he found that weak acid, such as apple juice or vinegar, destroyed his
new product. Then in 1836 he found that the application of aqua fortis,
or nitric acid, produced a "curing" effect on the rubber and thought
that he had discovered the secret. Finding a partner with capital, he
leased an abandoned rubber factory on Staten Island. But his partner's
fortune was swept away in the panic of 1837, leaving Goodyear again
an insolvent debtor. Later he found another partner and went to
manufacturing in the deserted plant at Roxbury, with an order from the
Government for a large number of mail bags. This order was given wide
publicity and it aroused the interest of manufacturers throughout the
country. But by the time the goods were ready for delivery the first
bags made had rotted from their handles. Only the surface of the rubber
had been "cured."

This failure was the last straw, as far as Goodyear's friends were
concerned. Only his patient and devoted wife stood by him; she had
labored, known want, seen her children go hungry to school, but she
seems never to have reproached her husband nor to have doubted his
ultimate success. The gentleness and tenderness of his deportment in the
home made his family cling to him with deep affection and bear willingly
any sacrifice for his sake; though his successive failures generally
meant a return of the inventor to the debtor's prison and the casting of
his family upon charity.

The nitric acid process had not solved the problem but it had been a
real step forward. It was in the year 1839, by an accident, that he
discovered the true process of vulcanization which cured not the surface
alone but the whole mass. He was trying to harden the gum by boiling it
with sulphur on his wife's cookstove when he let fall a lump of it on
the red hot iron top. It vulcanized instantly. This was an accident
which only Goodyear could have interpreted. And it was the last. The
strange substance from the jungles of the tropics had been mastered.
It remained, however, to perfect the process, to ascertain the accurate
formula and the exact degree of heat. The Goodyears were so poor during
these years that they received at any time a barrel of flour from a
neighbor thankfully. There is a tradition that on one occasion, when
Goodyear desired to cross between Staten Island and New York, he had to
give his umbrella to the ferry master as security for his fare, and that
the name of the ferry master was Cornelius Vanderbilt, "a man who made
much money because he took few chances." The incident may easily have
occurred, though the ferry master could hardly have been Vanderbilt
himself, unless it had been at an earlier date. Another tradition
says that one of Goodyear's neighbors described him to an inquisitive
stranger thus: "You will know him when you see him; he has on an India
rubber cap, stock, coat, vest, and shoes, and an India rubber purse
WITHOUT A CENT IN IT!"

Goodyear's trials were only beginning. He had the secret at last, but
nobody would believe him. He had worn out even the most sanguine of his
friends. "That such indifference to this discovery, and many incidents
attending it, could have existed in an intelligent and benevolent
community," wrote Goodyear later, "can only be accounted for by existing
circumstances in that community The great losses that had been sustained
in the manufacture of gum-elastic: the length of time the inventor
had spent in what appeared to them to be entirely fruitless efforts
to accomplish anything with it; added to his recent misfortunes and
disappointments, all conspired, with his utter destitution, to produce
a state of things as unfavorable to the promulgation of the discovery as
can well be imagined. He, however, felt in duty bound to beg in earnest,
if need be, sooner than that the discovery should be lost to the world
and to himself.... How he subsisted at this period charity alone can
tell, for it is as well to call things by their right names; and it is
little else than charity when the lender looks upon what he parts with
as a gift. The pawning or selling some relic of better days or some
article of necessity was a frequent expedient. His library had long
since disappeared, but shortly after the discovery of this process, he
collected and sold at auction the schoolbooks of his children, which
brought him the trifling sum of five dollars; small as the amount
was, it enabled him to proceed. At this step he did not hesitate. The
occasion, and the certainty of success, warranted the measure which, in
other circumstances, would have been sacrilege."

His itinerary during those years is eloquent. Wherever there was a man,
who had either a grain of faith in rubber or a little charity for a
frail and penniless monomaniac, thither Goodyear made his way. The goal
might be an attic room or shed to live in rent free, or a few dollars
for a barrel of flour for the family and a barrel of rubber for himself,
or permission to use a factory's ovens after hours and to hang his
rubber over the steam valves while work went on. From Woburn in 1839,
the year of his great discovery, he went to Lynn, from Lynn back to the
deserted factory at Roxbury. Again to Woburn, to Boston, to Northampton,
to Springfield, to Naugatuck; in five years as many removes. When he
lacked boat or railway fare, and he generally did, he walked through
winds and rains and drifting snow, begging shelter at some cottage or
farm where a window lamp gleamed kindly.

Goodyear took out his patent in 1844. The process he invented has been
changed little, if at all, from that day to this. He also invented the
perfect India rubber cloth by mixing fiber with the gum a discovery he
considered rightly as secondary in importance only to vulcanization.
When he died in 1860 he had taken out sixty patents on rubber
manufactures. He had seen his invention applied to several hundred uses,
giving employment to sixty thousand persons, producing annually eight
million dollars' worth of merchandise--numbers which would form but a
fraction of the rubber statistics of today.

Everybody, the whole civilized world round, uses rubber in one form or
another. And rubber makes a belt around the world in its natural as well
as in its manufactured form. The rubber-bearing zone winds north and
south of the equator through both hemispheres. In South America rubber
is the latex of certain trees, in Africa of trees and vines. The best
"wild" rubber still comes from Para in Brazil. It is gathered and
prepared for shipment there today by the same methods the natives
used four hundred years ago. The natives in their canoes follow the
watercourses into the jungles. They cut V-shaped or spiral incisions in
the trunks of the trees that grow sheer to sixty feet before spreading
their shade. At the base of the incisions they affix small clay cups,
like swallows' nests. Over the route they return later with large gourds
in which they collect the fluid from the clay cups. The filled gourds
they carry to their village of grass huts and there they build their
smoky fires of oily palm nuts. Dipping paddles into the fluid gum
they turn and harden it, a coating at a time, in the smoke. The rubber
"biscuit" is cut from the paddle with a wet knife when the desired
thickness has been attained.

Goodyear lived for sixteen years after his discovery of the
vulcanization process. During the last six he was unable to walk without
crutches. He was indifferent to money. To make his discoveries of still
greater service to mankind was his whole aim. It was others who made
fortunes out of his inventions. Goodyear died a poor man.

In his book, a copy of which was printed on gumelastic sheets and bound
in hard rubber carved, he summed up his philosophy in this statement:
"The writer is not disposed to repine and say that he has planted and
others have gathered the fruits. The advantages of a career in life
should not be estimated exclusively by the standard of dollars and
cents, as it is too often done. Man has just cause for regret when he
sows and no one reaps."



CHAPTER VIII. PIONEERS OF THE MACHINE SHOP

There is a tinge of melancholy about the life of such a pioneer as
Oliver Evans, that early American mechanic of great genius, whose
story is briefly outlined in a preceding chapter. Here was a man of
imagination and sensibility, as well as practical power; conferring
great benefits on his countrymen, yet in chronic poverty; derided by his
neighbors, robbed by his beneficiaries; his property, the fruit of his
brain and toil, in the end malevolently destroyed. The lot of the man
who sees far ahead of his time, and endeavors to lead his fellows in
ways for which they are not prepared, has always been hard.

John Stevens, too, as we have seen, met defeat when he tried to thrust
a steam railroad on a country that was not yet ready for it. His
mechanical conceptions were not marked by genius equal to that of
Evans, but they were still too far advanced to be popular. The career
of Stevens, however, presents a remarkable contrast to that of Evans
in other respects. Evans was born poor (in Delaware, 1755) and remained
poor all his life. Stevens was born rich (in New York City, 1749) and
remained rich all his life. Of the family of Evans nothing is known
either before or after him. Stevens, on the contrary, belonged to one of
the best known and most powerful families in America. His grandfather,
John Stevens I, came from England in 1699 and made himself a lawyer and
a great landowner. His father, John Stevens II, was a member from
New Jersey of the Continental Congress and presided at the New Jersey
Convention which ratified the Constitution.

John Stevens III was graduated at King's College (Columbia) in 1768. He
held public offices during the Revolution. To him, perhaps more than
to any other man, is due the Patent Act of 1790, for the protection of
American inventors, for that law was the result of a petition which he
made to Congress and which, being referred to a committee, was favorably
reported. Thus we may regard John Stevens as the father of the American
patent law.

John Stevens owned the old Dutch farm on the Hudson on which the city
of Hoboken now stands. The place had been in possession of the
Bayard family, but William Bayard, who lived there at the time of the
Revolution, was a Loyalist, and his house on Castle Point was burned
down and his estate confiscated. After the Revolution Stevens acquired
the property. He laid it out as a town in 1804, made it his summer
residence, and established there the machine shops in which he and his
sons carried on their mechanical experiments.

These shops were easily the largest and bestequipped in the Union when
in 1838 John Stevens died at the age of ninety. The four brothers, John
Cox, Robert Livingston, James Alexander, and Edwin Augustus, worked
harmoniously together. "No one ever heard of any quarrel or dissension
in the Stevens family. They were workmen themselves, and they were
superior to their subordinates because they were better engineers and
better men of business than any other folk who up to that time had
undertaken the business of transportation in the United States."*

     * Abram S. Hewitt. Quoted in Iles, "Leading American
     Inventors", p. 37.


The youngest of these brothers, Edwin Augustus Stevens, dying in 1868,
left a large part of his fortune to found the Stevens Institute of
Technology, afterwards erected at Hoboken not far from the old family
homestead on Castle Point. The mechanical star of the family, however,
was the second brother, Robert Livingston Stevens, whose many inventions
made for the great improvement of transportation both by land and water.
For a quarter of a century, from 1815 to 1840, he was the foremost
builder of steamboats in America, and under his hand the steamboat
increased amazingly in speed and efficiency. He made great contributions
to the railway. The first locomotives ran upon wooden stringers plated
with strap iron. A loose end--"a snakehead" it was called--sometimes
curled up and pierced through the floor of a car, causing a wreck. The
solid metal T-rail, now in universal use, was designed by Stevens
and was first used on the Camden and Amboy Railroad, of which he was
president and his brother Edwin treasurer and manager. The swivel truck
and the cow-catcher, the modern method of attaching rails to ties, the
vestibule car, and many improvements in the locomotive were also first
introduced on the Stevens road.

The Stevens brothers exerted their influence also on naval construction.
A double invention of Robert and Edwin, the forced draft, to augment
steam power and save coal, and the air-tight fireroom, which they
applied to their own vessels, was afterwards adopted by all navies.
Robert designed and projected an ironclad battleship, the first one
in the world. This vessel, called the Stevens Battery, was begun by
authority of the Government in 1842; but, owing to changes in the design
and inadequate appropriations by Congress, it was never launched. It lay
for many years in the basin at Hoboken an unfinished hulk. Robert died
in 1856. On the outbreak of the Civil War, Edwin tried to revive the
interest of the Government, but by that time the design of the Stevens
Battery was obsolete, and Edwin Stevens was an old man. So the honors
for the construction of the first ironclad man-of-war to fight and win
a battle went to John Ericsson, that other great inventor, who built the
famous Monitor for the Union Government.

Carlyle's oft-quoted term, "Captains of Industry," may fittingly be
applied to the Stevens family. Strong, masterful, and farseeing, they
used ideas, their own and those of others, in a large way, and were able
to succeed where more timorous inventors failed. Without the stimulus of
poverty they achieved success, making in their shops that combination
of men and material which not only added to their own fortunes but also
served the world.


We left Eli Whitney defeated in his efforts to divert to himself some
adequate share of the untold riches arising from his great invention of
the cotton gin. Whitney, however, had other sources of profit in his
own character and mechanical ability. As early as 1798 he had turned his
talents to the manufacture of firearms. He had established his shops
at Whitneyville, near New Haven; and it was there that he worked out
another achievement quite as important economically as the cotton gin,
even though the immediate consequences were less spectacular: namely,
the principle of standardization or interchangeability in manufacture.

This principle is the very foundation today of all American large-scale
production. The manufacturer produces separately thousands of copies of
every part of a complicated machine, confident that an equal number of
the complete machine will be assembled and set in motion. The owner of a
motor car, a reaper, a tractor, or a sewing machine, orders, perhaps
by telegraph or telephone, a broken or lost part, taking it for granted
that the new part can be fitted easily and precisely into the place of
the old.

Though it is probable that this idea of standardization, or
interchangeability, originated independently in Whitney's mind, and
though it is certain that he and one of his neighbors, who will be
mentioned presently, were the first manufacturers in the world to carry
it out successfully in practice, yet it must be noted that the idea was
not entirely new. We are told that the system was already in operation
in England in the manufacture of ship's blocks. From no less an
authority than Thomas Jefferson we learn that a French mechanic had
previously conceived the same idea.* But, as no general result whatever
came from the idea in either France or England, the honors go to Whitney
and North, since they carried it to such complete success that it spread
to other branches of manufacturing. And in the face of opposition. When
Whitney wrote that his leading object was "to substitute correct and
effective operations of machinery for that skill of the artist which
is acquired only by long practice and experience," in order to make the
same parts of different guns "as much like each other as the successive
impressions of a copper-plate engraving," he was laughed to scorn by
the ordnance officers of France and England. "Even the Washington
officials," says Roe, "were sceptical and became uneasy at advancing so
much money without a single gun having been completed, and Whitney went
to Washington, taking with him ten pieces of each part of a musket.
He exhibited these to the Secretary of War and the army officers
interested, as a succession of piles of different parts. Selecting
indiscriminately from each of the piles, he put together ten muskets, an
achievement which was looked on with amazement."**

     * See the letter from Jefferson to John Jay, of April 30,
     1785, cited in Roe, "English and American Tool Builders", p.
     129.

     ** Roe, "English and American Tool Builders", p. 133.


While Whitney worked out his plans at Whitneyville, Simeon North,
another Connecticut mechanic and a gunmaker by trade, adopted the
same system. North's first shop was at Berlin. He afterwards moved to
Middletown. Like Whitney, he used methods far in advance of the time.
Both Whitney and North helped to establish the United States Arsenals
at Springfield, Massachusetts, and at Harper's Ferry, Virginia, in which
their methods were adopted. Both the Whitney and North plants survived
their founders. Just before the Mexican War the Whitney plant began
to use steel for gun barrels, and Jefferson Davis, Colonel of the
Mississippi Rifles, declared that the new guns were "the best rifles
which had ever been issued to any regiment in the world." Later, when
Davis became Secretary of War, he issued to the regular army the same
weapon.

The perfection of Whitney's tools and machines made it possible to
employ workmen of little skill or experience. "Indeed so easy did Mr.
Whitney find it to instruct new and inexperienced workmen, that he
uniformly preferred to do so, rather than to combat the prejudices of
those who had learned the business under a different system."*
This reliance upon the machine for precision and speed has been a
distinguishing mark of American manufacture. A man or a woman of little
actual mechanical skill may make an excellent machine tender, learning
to perform a few simple motions with great rapidity.

     * Denison Olmstead, "Memoir", cited by Roe, p. 159.


Whitney married in 1817 Miss Henrietta Edwards, daughter of Judge
Pierpont Edwards, of New Haven, and granddaughter of Jonathan Edwards.
His business prospered, and his high character, agreeable manners, and
sound judgment won. for him the highest regard of all who knew him;
and he had a wide circle of friends. It is said that he was on intimate
terms with every President of the United States from George Washington
to John Quincy Adams. But his health had been impaired by hardships
endured in the South, in the long struggle over the cotton gin, and he
died in 1825, at the age of fifty-nine. The business which he founded
remained in his family for ninety years. It was carried on after his
death by two of his nephews and then by his son, until 1888, when it was
sold to the Winchester Repeating Arms Company of New Haven.

Here then, in these early New England gunshops, was born the American
system of interchangeable manufacture. Its growth depended upon the
machine tool, that is, the machine for making machines. Machine tools,
of course, did not originate in America. English mechanics were making
machines for cutting metal at least a generation before Whitney. One of
the earliest of these English pioneers was John Wilkinson, inventor and
maker of the boring machine which enabled Boulton and Watt in 1776 to
bring their steam engine to the point of practicability. Without
this machine Watt found it impossible to bore his cylinders with the
necessary degree of accuracy.* From this one fact, that the success of
the steam engine depended upon the invention of a new tool, we may judge
of what a great part the inventors of machine tools, of whom thousands
are unnamed and unknown, have played in the industrial world.

     * Roe, "English and American Tool Builders", p. 1 et seq.


So it was in the shops of the New England gunmakers that machine tools
were first made of such variety and adaptability that they could be
applied generally to other branches of manufacturing; and so it was
that the system of interchangeable manufacture arose as a distinctively
American development. We have already seen how England's policy of
keeping at home the secrets of her machinery led to the independent
development of the spindles and looms of New England. The same policy
affected the tool industry in America in the same way and bred in the
new country a race of original and resourceful mechanics.

One of these pioneers was Thomas Blanchard, born in 1788 on a farm in
Worcester County, Massachusetts, the home also of Eli Whitney and
Elias Howe. Tom began his mechanical career at the age of thirteen by
inventing a device to pare apples. At the age of eighteen he went to
work in his brother's shop, where tacks were made by hand, and one day
took to his brother a mechanical device for counting the tacks to go
into a single packet. The invention was adopted and was found to save
the labor of one workman. Tom's next achievement was a machine to make
tacks, on which he spent six years and the rights of which he sold for
five thousand dollars. It was worth far more, for it revolutionized the
tack industry, but such a sum was to young Blanchard a great fortune.

The tack-making machine gave Blanchard a reputation, and he was
presently sought out by a gun manufacturer, to see whether he could
improve the lathe for turning the barrels of the guns. Blanchard
could; and did. His next problem was to invent a lathe for turning the
irregular wooden stocks. Here he also succeeded and produced a lathe
that would copy precisely and rapidly any pattern. It is from this
invention that the name of Blanchard is best known. The original machine
is preserved in the United States Armory at Springfield, to which
Blanchard was attached for many years, and where scores of the
descendants of his copying lathe may be seen in action today.

Turning gunstocks was, of course, only one of the many uses of
Blanchard's copying lathe. Its chief use, in fact, was in the production
of wooden lasts for the shoemakers of New England, but it was applied to
many branches of wood manufacture, and later on the same principle was
applied to the shaping of metal.

Blanchard was a man of many ideas. He built a steam vehicle for ordinary
roads and was an early advocate of railroads; he built steamboats to ply
upon the Connecticut and incidentally produced in connection with these
his most profitable invention, a machine to bend ship's timbers without
splintering them. The later years of his life were spent in Boston,
and he often served as a patent expert in the courts, where his wide
knowledge, hard common sense, incisive speech, and homely wit made him a
welcome witness.

We now glance at another New England inventor, Samuel Colt, the man who
carried Whitney's conceptions to transcendent heights, the most dashing
and adventurous of all the pioneers of the machine shop in America. If
"the American frontier was Elizabethan in quality," there was surely a
touch of the Elizabethan spirit on the man whose invention so greatly
affected the character of that frontier. Samuel Colt was born at
Hartford in 1814 and died there in 1862 at the age of forty-eight,
leaving behind him a famous name and a colossal industry of his own
creation. His father was a small manufacturer of silk and woolens at
Hartford, and the boy entered the factory at a very early age. At
school in Amherst a little later, he fell under the displeasure of his
teachers. At thirteen he took to sea, as a boy before the mast, on the
East India voyage to Calcutta. It was on this voyage that he conceived
the idea of the revolver and whittled out a wooden model. On his return
he went into his father's works and gained a superficial knowledge of
chemistry from the manager of the bleaching and dyeing department. Then
he took to the road for three years and traveled from Quebec to New
Orleans lecturing on chemistry under the name of "Dr. Coult." The main
feature of his lecture was the administration of nitrous oxide gas to
volunteers from the audience, whose antics and the amusing showman's
patter made the entertainment very popular.

Colt's ambition, however, soared beyond the occupation of itinerant
showman, and he never forgot his revolver. As soon as he had money
enough, he made models of the new arm and took out his patents; and,
having enlisted the interest of capital, he set up the Patent Arms
Company at Paterson, New Jersey, to manufacture the revolver. He did not
succeed in having the revolver adopted by the Government, for the army
officers for a long time objected to the percussion cap (an invention,
by the way, then some twenty years old, which was just coming into use
and without which Colt's revolver would not have been practicable) and
thought that the new weapon might fail in an emergency. Colt found
a market in Texas and among the frontiersmen who were fighting the
Seminole War in Florida, but the sales were insufficient, and in 1842
the company was obliged to confess insolvency and close down the plant.
Colt bought from the company the patent of the revolver, which was
supposed to be worthless.

Nothing more happened until after the outbreak of the Mexican War in
1846. Then came a loud call from General Zachary Taylor for a supply
of Colt's revolvers. Colt had none. He had sold the last one to a
Texas ranger. He had not even a model. Yet he took an order from the
Government for a thousand and proceeded to construct a model. For the
manufacture of the revolvers he arranged with the Whitney plant at
Whitneyville. There he saw and scrutinized every detail of the factory
system that Eli Whitney had established forty years earlier. He resolved
to have a plant of his own on the same system and one that would far
surpass Whitney's. Next year (1848) he rented premises in Hartford. His
