way to various shrines, north or south, and many more for whom a dole of
broth or bread sufficed; but there were also others with heads or limbs
tied up, sometimes injured in the many street fights, but oftener with
the terrible sores only too common from the squalid habits and want of
vegetable diet of the poor. These were all attended to with a tenderness
and patience that spoke well for the charity of Sister Anne and her
assistants, and indeed before long Dame Lilias perceived that, however
slack and easy-going the general habits might be, there were truly meek
and saintly women among the sisterhood.

The morning was not far advanced before a lay-sister came hurrying in
from the portress's wicket to announce that my Lord Cardinal was on his
way to visit the ladies of Scotland. There was great commotion. Mother
Margaret summoned all her nuns and drew them up in state, and Sister
Mabel, who carried the tidings to the guests, asked whether they would
not join in receiving him.

'We are king's daughters,' said Jean haughtily.

'But he is a Prince of the Church and an aged man,' said Lady Drummond,
who had already risen, and was adjusting that headgear of Eleanor's that
never would stay in its place. And her matronly voice acted upon Jean,
so as to conquer the petulant pride, enough to make her remember that
the Lady of Glenuskie was herself a Stewart and king's grandchild, and
moreover knew more of courts and their habits than herself.

So down they went together, in time to join the Prioress on the steps,
as the attendants of the great stately, princely Cardinal Bishop began
to appear. He did not come in state, so that he had only half a dozen
clerks and as many gentlemen in attendance, together with Sir Patrick
and his two sons.

Few of the Plantagenet family had been long-lived, and Cardinal Beaufort
was almost a marvel in the family at seventy. Much evil has been said
and written of him, and there is no doubt that he was one of those
mediaeval prelates who ought to have been warriors or statesmen, and
that he had been no model for the Episcopacy in his youth. But though
far from having been a saint, it would seem that his unpopularity in his
old age was chiefly incurred by his desire to put an end to the long and
miserable war with France, and by his opposition to a much worse man,
the Duke of Gloucester, whose plausible murmurs and amiable manners
made him a general favourite. At this period of his life the old man had
lived past his political ambitions, and his chief desire was to leave
the gentle young king freed from the wasting war by a permanent peace,
to be secured by a marriage with a near connection of the French
monarch, and daughter to the most honourable and accomplished Prince in
Europe. That his measures turned out wretchedly has been charged upon
his memory, and he has been supposed guilty of a murder, of which he was
certainly innocent, and which probably was no murder at all.

He had become a very grand and venerable old man, when old men were
scarce, and his white hair and beard (a survival of the customs of the
days of Edward III) contrasted well with his scarlet hat and cape, as he
came slowly into the cloistered court on his large sober-paced Spanish
mule; a knight and the chaplain of the convent assisted him from it, and
the whole troop of the convent knelt as he lifted his fingers to bestow
his blessing, Jean casting a quick glance around to satisfy her proud
spirit. The Prioress then kissed his hand, but he raised and kissed
the cheeks of his two grand-nieces, after which he moved on to the
Prioress's chamber, and there, after being installed in her large chair,
and waving to the four favoured inmates to be also seated, he looked
critically at the two sisters, and observed, 'So, maidens! one favours
the mother, the other the father! Poor Joan, it is two-and-twenty years
since we bade her good-speed, she and her young king--who behoved to
be a minstrel--on her way to her kingdom, as if it were the land of
Cockayne, for picking up gold and silver. Little of that she found, I
trow, poor wench. Alack! it was a sore life we sent her to. And you are
mourning her freshly, my maidens! I trust she died at peace with God and
man.'

'That reiver, Patrick Hepburn, let the priest from Haddington come to
assoilzie and housel her,' responded Jean.

'Ah! Masses shall be said for her by my bedesmen at St. Cross, and at
all my churches,' said the Cardinal, crossing himself. 'And you are on
your way to your sister, the Dolfine, as your knight tells me. It is
well. You may be worthily wedded in France, and I will take order for
your safe going. Meantime, this is a house where you may well serve
your poor mother's soul by prayers and masses, and likewise perfect
yourselves in French.'

This was not at all what Jean had intended, and she pouted a little,
while the Cardinal asked, changing his language, 'Ces donzelles, ont
elles appris le Francais?'

Jean, who had tried to let Father Romuald teach her a little in
conversation during the first part of the journey, but who had dropped
the notion since other ideas had been inspired at Fotheringay, could not
understand, and pouted the more; but Eleanor, who had been interested,
and tried more in earnest, for Margaret's sake, answered diffidently and
blushing deeply, 'Un petit peu, beau Sire Oncle.'

He smiled, and said, 'You can be well instructed here. The Reverend
Mother hath sisters here who can both speak and write French of Paris.'

'That have I truly, my good Lord,' replied the Prioress. 'Sisters Isabel
and Beata spent their younger days, the one at Rouen, the other at
Bordeaux, and have learned many young ladies in the true speaking of the
French tongue.'

'It is well!' said the Cardinal, 'my fair nieces will have good leisure.
While sharing the orisons that I will institute for the repose of your
mother, you can also be taught the French.'

Jean could not help speaking now, so far was this from all her hopes.
'Sir, sir, the Duke and Duchess of York, and the Countess of Salisbury,
and the Queen of the Isle of Wight all bade us to be their guests.'

'They could haply not have been aware of your dool,' said the Cardinal
gravely.

'But, my Lord, our mother hath been dead since before Martinmas,'
exclaimed Jean.

'I know not what customs of dool be thought befitting in a land like
Scotland,' said the Cardinal, in such a repressive manner that Jean
was only withheld by awe from bursting into tears of disappointment and
anger at the slight to her country.

Lady Drummond ventured to speak. 'Alack, my Lord,' she said, 'my poor
Queen died in the hands of a freebooter, leaving her daughters in such
stress and peril that they had woe enough for themselves, till their
brother the King came to their rescue.'

'The more need that they should fulfil all that may be done for the
grace of her soul,' replied the uncle; but just at this crisis of
Jean's mortification there was a knocking at the door, and a sister
breathlessly entreated--

'Pardon! Merci! My Lord, my Lady Mother! Here's the King, the King
himself--and the King and Queen of the Isle of Wight asking licence to
enter to visit the ladies of Scotland.'

Kings were always held to be free to enter anywhere, even far more
dangerous monarchs than the pious Henry VI. Jean's heart bounded up
again, with a sense of exultation over the old uncle, as the Prioress
went out to receive her new guest, and the Cardinal emitted a sort of
grunting sigh, without troubling himself to go out to meet the youth,
whom he had governed from babyhood, and in whose own name he had, as
one of the council, given permission for wholesome chastisements of the
royal person.

King Henry entered. He was then twenty-four years old, tall, graceful,
and with beautiful features and complexion, almost feminine in their
delicacy, and with a wonderful purity and sweetness in the expression
of the mouth and blue eyes, so that he struck Eleanor as resembling the
angels in the illuminations that she had been studying, as he removed
his dark green velvet jewelled cap on entering, and gave a cousinly,
respectful kiss lightly to each of the young ladies on her cheek,
somewhat as if he were afraid of them. Then after greeting the Cardinal,
who had risen on his entrance, he said that, hearing that his fair
cousins were arrived, he had come to welcome them, and to entreat them
to let him do them such honour as was possible in a court without a
queen.

'The which lack will soon be remedied,' put in his grand-uncle.

'Truly you are in holy keeping here,' said the pious young King,
crossing himself, 'but I trust, my sweet cousins, that you will favour
my poor house at Westminster with your presence at a supper, and share
such entertainment as is in our power to provide.'

'My nieces are keeping their mourning for their mother, from which they
have hitherto been hindered by the tumults of their kingdom,' said the
Cardinal.

'Ah!' said the King, crossing himself, and instantly moved, 'far be it
from me to break into their holy retirement for such a purpose.' (Jean
could have bitten the Cardinal.) 'But I will take order with my Lord
Abbot of Westminster for a grand requiem mass for the good Queen Joanna,
at which they will, I trust, be present, and they will honour my poor
table afterwards.'

To refuse this was quite impossible, and the day was to be fixed after
reference to the Abbess. Meantime the King's eye was caught by the
illuminated breviary. He was a connoisseur in such arts, and eagerly
stood up to look at it as it lay on the desk. Eleanor could not but come
and direct him to the pages with which she had been most delighted. She
found him looking at Jacob's dream on the one side, the Ascension on the
other.

'How marvellous it is!' she said. 'It is like the very light from the
sky!'

'Light from heaven,' said the King; 'Jacob has found it among the
stones. Wandering and homelessness are his first step in the ladder to
heaven!'

'Ah, sir, did you say that to comfort and hearten us?' said Eleanor.

There was a strange look in the startled blue eyes that met hers. 'Nay,
truly, lady, I presumed not so far! I was but wondering whether those
who are born to have all the world are in the way of the stair to
heaven.'

Meantime the King of Wight had made his request for the presence of
the ladies at a supper at Warwick House, and Jean, clasping her hands,
implored her uncle to consent.

'I am sure our mother cannot be the better for our being thus mewed up,'
she cried, 'and I'll rise at prime, and tell my beads for her.'

She looked so pretty and imploring that the old man's heart was melted,
all the more that the King was paying more attention to the book and the
far less beautiful Eleanor, than to her and the invitation was accepted.

The convent bell rang for nones, and the King joined the devotions of
the nuns, though he was not admitted within the choir; and just as
these were over, the Countess of Salisbury arrived to take the Lady of
Glenuskie to see their old friend, the Mother Clare at St. Katharine's,
bringing a sober palfrey for her conveyance.

'A holy woman, full of alms-deeds,' said the King. 'The lady is happy in
her friendship.'

Which words were worth much to Lady Drummond, for the Prioress sent a
lay-sister to invite Mother Clare to a refection at the convent.




CHAPTER 5. THE MEEK USURPER


     'Henry, thou of holy birth,
      Thou to whom thy Windsor gave
      Nativity and name and grave!
      Heavily upon his head
      Ancestral crimes were visited.'--SOUTHEY.


It suits not with the main thread of our story to tell of the happy and
peaceful meetings between the Lady of Glenuskie and her old friend, who
had given up almost princely rank and honour to become the servant
of the poor and suffering strangers at the wharves of London. To Dame
Lilias, Mother Clare's quiet cell at St. Katharine's was a blessed haven
of rest, peace, and charity, such as was neither the guest-chamber nor
the Prioress's parlour at St. Helen's, with all the distractions of
the princesses' visitors and invitations, and with the Lady Joanna
continually pulling against the authority that the Cardinal, her uncle,
was exerting over his nieces.

His object evidently was to keep them back, firstly, from the York
party, and secondly, from the King, under pretext of their mourning for
their mother; and in this he might have succeeded but for the interest
in them that had been aroused in Henry by his companion, namesake, and
almost brother, the King of Wight. The King came or sent each day to St.
Helen's to arrange about the requiem at Westminster, and when their late
travelling companions invited the young ladies to dinner or to supper
expressly to meet the King and the Cardinal--not in state, but at
what would be now called a family party--Beaufort had no excuse for a
refusal, such as he could not give without dire offence. And, indeed, he
was even then obliged to yield to the general voice, and, recalling his
own nephew from Normandy, send the Duke of York to defend the remnant of
the English conquests.

He could only insist that the requiem should be the first occasion of
the young ladies going out of the convent; but they had so many visitors
there that they had not much cause for murmuring, and the French
instructions of Sister Beata did not amount to much, even with Eleanor,
while Jean loudly protested that she was not going to school.

The great day of the requiem came at last. The Cardinal had, through
Sir Patrick Drummond and the Lady, provided handsome robes of black and
purple for his nieces, and likewise palfreys for their conveyance to
Westminster; and made it understood that unless Lady Joanna submitted to
be completely veiled he should send a closed litter.

'The doited auld carle!' she cried, as she unwillingly hooded and veiled
herself. 'One would think we were basilisks to slay the good folk of
London with our eyes.'

The Drummond following, with fresh thyme sprays, beginning to turn
brown, were drawn up in the outer court, all with black scarves across
the breast--George Douglas among them, of course--and they presently
united with the long train of clerks who belonged to the household of
the Cardinal of Winchester. Jean managed her veil so as to get more than
one peep at the throng in the streets through which they passed, so as
to see and to be seen; and she was disappointed that no acclamations
greeted the fair face thus displayed by fits. She did not understand
English politics enough to know that a Beaufort face and Beaufort train
were the last things the London crowd was likely to applaud. They had
not forgotten the penance of the popular Duke Humfrey's wife, which,
justly or unjustly, was imputed to the Cardinal and his nephews of
Somerset.

But the King, in robes of purple and black, came to assist her from her
palfrey before the beautiful entry of the Abbey Church, and led her up
the nave to the desks prepared around what was then termed 'a herce,'
but which would now be called a catafalque, an erection supposed to
contain the body, and adorned with the lozenges of the arms of Scotland
and Beaufort, and of the Stewart, in honour of the Black Knight of Lorn.

The Cardinal was present, but the Abbot of Westminster celebrated. All
was exceedingly solemn and beautiful, in a far different style from the
maimed rites that had been bestowed upon poor Queen Joanna in Scotland.
The young King's face was more angelic than ever, and as psalm and
supplication, dirge and hymn arose, chanted by the full choir, speaking
of eternal peace, Eleanor bowed her head under her veil, as her bosom
swelled with a strange yearning longing, not exactly grief, and large
tears dropped from her eyes as she thought less of her mother than of
her noble-hearted father; and the words came back to her in which Father
Malcolm Stewart, in his own bitter grief, had told the desolate children
to remember that their father was waiting for them in Paradise. Even
Jean was so touched by the music and carried out of herself that she
forgot the spectators, forgot the effect she was to produce, forgot her
struggle with her uncle, and sobbed and wept with all her heart, perhaps
with the more abandon because she, like all the rest, was fasting.

With much reverence for her emotion, the King, when the service was
over, led her out of the church to the adjoining palace, where the Queen
of Wight and the Countess of Suffolk, a kinswoman through the mother
of the Beauforts, conducted the ladies to unveil themselves before they
were to join the noontide refection with the King.

There was no great state about it, spread, as it was, not in the great
hall, but in the richly-tapestried room called Paradise. The King's
manner was most gently and sweetly courteous to both sisters. His three
little orphan half-brothers, the Tudors, were at table; and his kind
care to send them dainties, and the look with which he repressed an
unseasonable attempt of Jasper's to play with the dogs, and Edmund's
roughness with little Owen, reminded the sisters of Mary with 'her
weans,' and they began to speak of them when the meal was over, while
he showed them his chief treasures, his books. There was St. Augustine's
City of God, exquisitely copied; there was the History of St. Louis, by
the bon Sire de Joinville; there were Sir John Froissart's Chronicles,
the same that the good Canon had presented to King Richard of Bordeaux.

Jean cast a careless glance at the illuminations, and exclaimed at Queen
Isabel's high headgear and her becloaked greyhound. Eleanor looked and
longed, and sighed that she could not read the French, and only a very
little of the Latin.

'This you can read,' said Henry, producing the Canterbury Tales; 'the
fair minstrelsy of my Lady of Suffolk's grandsire.'

Eleanor was enchanted. Here were the lines the King of Wight had
repeated to her, and she was soon eagerly listening as Henry read to her
the story of 'Patient Grisell.'

'Ah! but is it well thus tamely to submit?' she asked.

'Patience is the armour and conquest of the godly,' said Henry, quoting
a saying that was to serve 'the meek usurper' well in after-times.

'May not patience go too far?' said Eleanor.

'In this world, mayhap,' said he; 'scarcely so in that which is to
come.'

'I would not be the King's bride to hear him say so,' laughed the Lady
of Suffolk. 'Shall I tell her, my lord, that this is your Grace's ladder
to carry her to heaven?'

Henry blushed like a girl, and said that he trusted never to be so
lacking in courtesy as the knight; and the King of Wight, wishing to
change the subject, mentioned that the Lady Eleanor had sung or said
certain choice ballads, and Henry eagerly entreated for one. It was the
pathetic 'Wife of Usher's Well' that Eleanor chose, with the three sons
whose hats were wreathen with the birk that


                  'Neither grew in dyke nor ditch,
                   Nor yet in any shaugh,
                   But at the gates of Paradise
                   That birk grew fair eneugh.'


Henry was greatly delighted with the verse, and entreated her, if it
were not tedious, to repeat it over again.

In return he promised to lend her some of the translations from the
Latin of Lydgate, the Monk of Bury, and sent them, wrapped in a silken
neckerchief, by the hands of one of his servants to the convent.

'Was that a token?' anxiously asked young Douglas, riding up to David
Drummond, as they got into order to ride back to Winchester House, after
escorting the ladies to St. Helen's.

'Token, no; 'tis a book for Lady Elleen. Never fash yourself, man; the
King, so far as I might judge, is far more taken with Elleen than ever
he is with Jean. He seems but a bookish sort of bodie of Malcolm's
sort.'

'My certie, an' that be sae, we may look to winning back Roxburgh and
Berwick!' returned the Douglas, his eye flashing. 'He's welcome to Lady
Elleen! But that ane should look at her in presence of her sister! He
maun be mair of a monk than a man!'

Such was, in truth, Jean's own opinion when she flounced into her
chamber at the Priory and turned upon her sister.

'Weel, Elleen, and I hope ye've had your will, and are a bit shamed,
