brother-in-law, John Stewart, and a nephew by marriage, Benjamin
Cutbirth, or Cutbird, with two other young men, John Baker and James
Ward, in 1766 crossed the Appalachian Mountains, probably by stumbling
upon the Indian trail winding from base to summit and from peak to base
again over this part of the great hill barrier. They eventually reached
the Mississippi River and, having taken a good quantity of peltry on
the way, they launched upon the stream and came in time to New Orleans,
where they made a satisfactory trade of their furs.

¹ Kentucky, from Ken-ta-ke, an Iroquois word meaning the place of old
fields. Adair calls the territory the old fields. The Indians apparently
used the word old, as we do, in a sense of endearment and possession as
well as relative to age. Boone was fired anew by descriptions of this
successful feat, in which two of his kinsmen had participated. He could
no longer be held back. He must find the magic door that led through
the vast mountain wall into Kentucky--Kentucky, with its green prairies
where the buffalo and deer 96 were as ten thousand thousand cattle
feeding in the wilds, and where the balmy air vibrated with the music of
innumerable wings.

Accordingly, in the autumn of 1767, Boone began his quest of the
delectable country in the company of his friend, William Hill, who had
been with him in Florida. Autumn was the season of departure on all
forest excursions, because by that time the summer crops had been
gathered in and the day of the deer had come. By hunting, the explorers
must feed themselves on their travels and with deerskins and furs they
must on their return recompense those who had supplied their outfit.
Boone, the incessant but not always lucky wanderer, was in these years
ever in debt for an outfit.

Boone and Hill made their way over the Blue Ridge and the Alleghanies
and crossed the Holston and Clinch rivers. Then they came upon the west
fork of the Big Sandy and, believing that it would lead them to the
Ohio, they continued for at least a hundred miles to the westward. Here
they found a buffalo trace, one of the many beaten out by the herds in
their passage to the salt springs, and they followed it into what is
now Floyd County in eastern Kentucky. But this was not the prairie land
described by Findlay; it was rough and hilly 97 and so overgrown with
laurel as to be almost impenetrable. They therefore wended their way
back towards the river, doubtless erected the usual hunter's camp of
skins or blankets and branches, and spent the winter in hunting and
trapping. Spring found them returning to their homes on the Yadkin with
a fair winter's haul.

Such urgent desire as Boone's, however, was not to be defeated. The next
year brought him his great opportunity. John Findlay came to the Yadkin
with a horse pack of needles and linen and peddler's wares to tempt the
slim purses of the Back Country folk. The two erstwhile comrades in
arms were overjoyed to encounter each other again, and Findlay spent the
winter of 1768-69 in Boone's cabin. While the snow lay deep outside and
good-smelling logs crackled on the hearth, they planned an expedition
into Kentucky through the Gap where Virginia, Tennessee, and Kentucky
touch one another, which Findlay felt confident he could find. Findlay
had learned of this route from cross-mountain traders in 1753, when he
had descended the Ohio to the site of Louisville, whence he had gone
with some Shawanoes as a prisoner to their town of Es-kip-pa-ki-thi-ki
or Blue Licks.¹

¹ Hanna, _The Wilderness Trail,_ vol. II, pp. 215-16. 98 On the first
day of May, 1769, Boone and Findlay, accompanied by John Stewart and
three other venturesome spirits, Joseph Holden, James Mooney, and
William Cooley, took horse for the fabled land. Passing through the
Cumberland Gap, they built their first camp in Kentucky on the Red Lick
fork of Station Camp Creek.

This camp was their base of operations. From it, usually in couples, we
infer, the explorers branched out to hunt and to take their observations
of the country. Here also they prepared the deer and buffalo meat for
the winter, dried or smoked the geese they shot in superabundance, made
the tallow and oil needed to keep their weapons in trim, their leather
soft, and their kits waterproof. Their first ill luck befell them in
December when Boone and Stewart were captured by a band of Shawanoes
who were returning from their autumn hunt on Green River. The Indians
compelled the two white men to show them the location of their camp,
took possession of all it contained in skins and furs and also helped
themselves to the horses. They left the explorers with just enough meat
and ammunition to provide for their journey homeward, and told them to
depart and not to intrude again on the red men's hunting 99 grounds.
Having given this pointed warning, the Shawanoes rode on northward
towards their towns beyond the Ohio. On foot, swiftly and craftily,
Boone and his brother-in-law trailed the band for two days. They came
upon the camp in dead of night, recaptured their horses, and fled. But
this was a game in which the Indians themselves excelled, and at
this date the Shawanoes had an advantage over Boone in their thorough
knowledge of the territory; so that within forty-eight hours the white
men were once more prisoners. After they had amused themselves by making
Boone caper about with a horse bell on his neck, while they jeered
at him in broken English, Steal horse, eh? the Shawanoes turned north
again, this time taking the two unfortunate hunters with them. Boone and
Stewart escaped, one day on the march, by a plunge into the thick tall
canebrake. Though the Indians did not attempt to follow them through the
mazes of the cane, the situation of the two hunters, without weapons
or food, was serious enough. When they found Station Camp deserted and
realized that their four companions had given them up for dead or lost
and had set off on the trail for home, even such intrepid souls as
theirs may have felt fear. They raced on in pursuit and 100 fortunately
fell in not only with their party but with Squire Boone, Daniel's
brother, and Alexander Neely, who had brought in fresh supplies of
rifles, ammunition, flour, and horses.

After this lucky encounter the group separated. Findlay was ill, and
Holden, Mooney, and Cooley had had their fill of Kentucky; but Squire,
Neely, Stewart, and Daniel were ready for more adventures. Daniel, too,
felt under the positive necessity of putting in another year at hunting
and trapping in order to discharge his debts and provide for his family.
Near the mouth of Red River the new party built their station camp.
Here, in idle hours, Neely read aloud from a copy of _Gulliver's
Travels_ to entertain the hunters while they dressed their deerskins or
tinkered their weapons. In honor of the Lorbrulgrud of the book, though
with a pronunciation all their own, they christened the nearest creek;
and as Lulbegrud Creek it is still known.

Before the end of the winter the two Boones were alone in the
wilderness. Their brother-in-law, Stewart, had disappeared; and Neely,
discouraged by this tragic event, had returned to the Yadkin. In May,
Squire Boone fared forth, taking with him the season's catch of beaver,
otter, and 101 deerskins to exchange in the North Carolinian trading
houses for more supplies; and Daniel was left solitary in Kentucky.

Now followed those lonely explorations which gave Daniel Boone his
special fame above all Kentucky's pioneers. He was by no means the first
white man to enter Kentucky; and when he did enter, it was as one of
a party, under another man's guidance--if we except his former
disappointing journey into the laurel thickets of Floyd County. But
these others, barring Stewart, who fell there, turned back when they
met with loss and hardship and measured the certain risks against the
possible gains. Boone, the man of imagination, turned to wild earth
as to his kin. His genius lay in the sense of oneness he felt with his
wilderness environment. An instinct he had which these other men, as
courageous perhaps as he, did not possess.

Never in all the times when he was alone in the woods and had no other
man's safety or counsel to consider, did he suffer ill fortune. The
nearest approach to trouble that befell him when alone occurred one day
during this summer when some Indians emerged from their green shelter
and found him, off guard for the moment, standing on a cliff gazing
with rapture over the vast rolling 102 stretches of Kentucky. He was
apparently cut off from escape, for the savages were on three sides,
advancing without haste to take him, meanwhile greeting him with mock
amity. Over the cliff leaped Boone and into the outspread arms of a
friendly maple, whose top bloomed green about sixty feet below the
cliff's rim, and left his would-be captors on the height above, grunting
their amazement.

During this summer Boone journeyed through the valleys of the Kentucky
and the Licking. He followed the buffalo traces to the two Blue Licks
and saw the enormous herds licking up the salt earth, a darkly ruddy
moving mass of beasts whose numbers could not be counted. For many miles
he wound along the Ohio, as far as the Falls. He also found the Big Bone
Lick with its mammoth fossils.

In July, 1770, Daniel returned to the Red River camp and there met
Squire Boone with another pack of supplies. The two brothers continued
their hunting and exploration together for some months, chiefly in
Jessamine County, where two caves still bear Boone's name. In that
winter they even braved the Green River ground, whence had come the
hunting Shawanoes who had taken Daniel's 103 first fruits a year before.
In the same year (1770) there had come into Kentucky from the Yadkin
another party of hunters, called, from their lengthy sojourn in
the twilight zone, the Long Hunters. One of these, Gasper Mansker,
afterwards related how the Long Hunters were startled one day by hearing
sounds such as no buffalo or turkey ever made, and how Mansker himself
stole silently under cover of the trees towards the place whence the
strange noises came, and descried Daniel Boone prone on his back with a
deerskin under him, his famous tall black hat beside him and his
mouth opened wide in joyous but apparently none too tuneful song. This
incident gives a true character touch. It is not recorded of any of the
men who turned back that they sang alone in the wilderness.

In March, 1771, the two Boones started homeward, their horses bearing
the rich harvest of furs and deerskins which was to clear Daniel of debt
and to insure the comfort of the family he had not seen for two years.
But again evil fortune met them, this time in the very gates--for in
the Cumberland Gap they were suddenly surrounded by Indians who took
everything from them, leaving them neither guns nor horses.

104




Chapter VI

The Fight For Kentucky

When Boone returned home he found the Back Country of North Carolina in
the throes of the Regulation Movement. This movement, which had arisen
first from the colonists' need to police their settlements, had more
recently assumed a political character. The Regulators were now in
conflict with the authorities, because the frontier folk were suffering
through excessive taxes, extortionate fees, dishonest land titles,
and the corruption of the courts. In May, 1771, the conflict lost its
quasi-civil nature. The Regulators resorted to arms and were defeated by
the forces under Governor Tryon in the Battle of the Alamance.

The Regulation Movement, which we shall follow in more detail further
on, was a culmination of those causes of unrest which turned men
westward. To escape from oppression and to acquire land 105 beyond
the bounds of tyranny became the earnest desire of independent spirits
throughout the Back Country. But there was another and more potent
reason why the country east of the mountains no longer contented Boone.
Hunting and trapping were Boone's chief means of livelihood. In those
days, deerskins sold for a dollar a skin to the traders at the Forks or
in Hillsborough; beaver at about two dollars and a half, and otter
at from three to five dollars. A pack-horse could carry a load of
one hundred dressed deerskins, and, as currency was scarce, a hundred
dollars was wealth. Game was fast disappearing from the Yadkin. To Boone
above all men, then, Kentucky beckoned. When he returned in the spring
of 1771 from his explorations, it was with the resolve to take his
family at once into the great game country and to persuade some of his
friends to join in this hazard of new fortunes.

The perils of such a venture, only conjectural to us at this distance,
he knew well; but in him there was nothing that shrank from danger,
though he did not court it after the rash manner of many of his
compeers. Neither reckless nor riotous, Boone was never found among
those who opposed violence to authority, even unjust authority; nor
was 106 he ever guilty of the savagery which characterized much of the
retaliatory warfare of that period when frenzied white men bettered the
red man's instruction. In him, courage was illumined with tenderness and
made equable by self-control. Yet, though he was no fiery zealot like
the Ulstermen who were to follow him along the path he had made and
who loved and revered him perhaps because he was so different from
themselves, Boone nevertheless had his own religion. It was a simple
faith best summed up perhaps by himself in his old age when he said that
he had been only an instrument in the hand of God to open the wilderness
to settlement.

Two years passed before Boone could muster a company of colonists for
the dangerous and delectable land. The dishonesty practiced by Lord
Granville's agents in the matter of deeds had made it difficult for
Daniel and his friends to dispose of their acreage. When at last in
the spring of 1773 the Wanderer was prepared to depart, he was again
delayed; this time by the arrival of a little son to whom was given the
name of John. By September, however, even this latest addition to the
party was ready for travel; and that month saw the Boones with a small
caravan of families journeying towards Powell's Valley, whence the 107
Warrior's Path took its way through Cumberland Gap. At this point on the
march they were to be joined by William Russell, a famous pioneer, from
the Clinch River, with his family and a few neighbors, and by some
of Rebecca Boone's kinsmen, the Bryans, from the lower Yadkin, with a
company of forty men.

Of Rebecca Boone history tells us too little--only that she was born a
Bryan, was of low stature and dark eyed, that she bore her husband
ten children, and lived beside him to old age. Except on his hunts and
explorations, she went with him from one cabined home to another, always
deeper into the wilds. There are no portraits of her. We can see her
only as a shadowy figure moving along the wilderness trails beside the
man who accepted his destiny of God to be a way-shower for those of
lesser faith.

He tires not forever on his leagues of march Because her feet are set
to his footprints, And the gleam of her bare hand slants across his
shoulder.

Boone halted his company on Walden Mountain over Powell's Valley to
await the Bryan contingent and dispatched two young men under the
leadership of his son James, then in his seventeenth year, 108 to
notify Russell of the party's arrival. As the boys were returning with
Russell's son, also a stripling, two of his slaves, and some white
laborers, they missed the path and went into camp for the night. When
dawn broke, disclosing the sleepers, a small war band of Shawanoes, who
had been spying on Boone and his party, fell upon them and slaughtered
them. Only one of Russell's slaves and a laborer escaped. The tragedy
seems augmented by the fact that the point where the boys lost the
trail and made their night quarters was hardly three miles from the main
camp--to which an hour later came the two survivors with their gloomy
tidings. Terror now took hold of the little band of emigrants, and
there were loud outcries for turning back. The Bryans, who had arrived
meanwhile, also advised retreat, saying that the signs about the scene
of blood indicated an Indian uprising. Daniel carried the scalped body
of his son, the boy-comrade of his happy hunts, to the camp and buried
it there at the beginning of the trail. His voice alone urged that they
go on.

Fortunately indeed, as events turned out, Boone was overruled, and the
expedition was abandoned. The Bryan party and the others from North
Carolina went back to the Yadkin. Boone himself with 109 his family
accompanied Russell to the Clinch settlement, where he erected a
temporary cabin on the farm of one of the settlers, and then set out
alone on the chase to earn provision for his wife and children through
the winter.

Those who prophesied an Indian war were not mistaken. When the snowy
hunting season had passed and the Powwowing Days were come, the Indian
war drum rattled in the medicine house from the borders of Pennsylvania
to those of Carolina. The causes of the strife for which the red men
were making ready must be briefly noted to help us form a just opinion
of the deeds that followed. Early writers have usually represented the
frontiersmen as saints in buckskin and the Indians as fiends without
the shadow of a claim on either the land or humanity. Many later writers
have merely reversed the shield. The truth is that the Indians and the
borderers reacted upon each other to the hurt of both. Paradoxically,
they grew like enough to hate one another with a savage hatred--and both
wanted the land.

Land! Land! was the slogan of all sorts and conditions of men. Tidewater
officials held solemn powwows with the chiefs, gave wampum strings, 110
and forthwith incorporated.¹ Chiefs blessed their white brothers who had
forever brightened the chain of friendship, departed home, and proceeded
to brighten the blades of their tomahawks and to await, not long, the
opportunity to use them on casual hunters who carried in their kits the
compass, the land-stealer. Usually the surveying hunter was a borderer;
and on him the tomahawk descended with an accelerated gusto. Private
citizens also formed land companies and sent out surveyors, regardless
of treaties. Bold frontiersmen went into No Man's Land and staked out
their claims. In the very year when disaster turned the Boone party
back, James Harrod had entered Kentucky from Pennsylvania and had marked
the site of a settlement.

¹ The activities of the great land companies are described in Alvord's
exhaustive work, _The Mississippi Valley in British Politics._ Ten years
earlier (1763), the King had issued the famous and much misunderstood
Proclamation restricting his loving subjects from the lands west of
the mountains. The colonists interpreted this document as a tyrannous
