owe them their vantage ground.  But when they have been tried and they
have failed, decapitate them.  Medole looks upon revolution as a
description of conjuring trick.  He shuffles cards and arranges them for
a solemn performance, but he refuses to cut them if you look too serious
or I look too eager; for that gives him a suspicion that you know what
is going to turn up; and his object is above all things to produce a
surprise.'

'You are both of you unjust to Count Medole,' said the countess.  'He
imperils more than all of you.'

'Magnificent estates, it is true; but of head or of heart not quite so
much as some of us,' said Luciano, stroking his thick black pendent
moustache and chin-tuft.  'Ah, pardon me; yes! he does imperil a finer
cock's comb.

'When he sinks, and his vanity is cut in two, Medole will bleed so as to
flood his Lombard flats.  It will be worse than death to him.'

Carlo said: 'Do you know what our Agostino says of Count Medole?'

'Oh, for ever Agostino with you young men!' the countess exclaimed.
'I believe he laughs at you.'

'To be sure he does: he laughs at all.  But, what he says of Count Medole
holds the truth of the thing, and may make you easier concerning the
count's estates.  He says that Medole is vaccine matter which the
Austrians apply to this generation of Italians to spare us the terrible
disease.  They will or they won't deal gently with Medole, by-and-by; but
for the present he will be handled tenderly.  He is useful.  I wish I
could say that we thought so too.  And now,' Carlo stooped to her and
took her hand, 'shall we see you at La Scala to-night?'

The countess, with her hands lying in his, replied: 'I have received an
intimation from the authorities that my box is wanted.'

'So you claim your right to occupy it!'

'That is my very humble protest for personal liberty.'

'Good: I shall be there, and shall much enjoy an introduction to the
gentleman who disputes it with you.  Besides, mother, if the Signorina
Vittoria sings .  .  .'

Countess Ammiani's gaze fixed upon her son with a level steadiness.  His
voice threatened to be unequal.  All the pleading force of his eyes was
thrown into it, as he said: 'She will sing: and she gives the signal;
that is certain.  We may have to rescue her.  If I can place her under
your charge, I shall feel that she is safe, and is really protected.'

The countess looked at Luciano before she answered:

'Yes, Carlo, whatever I can do.  But you know I have not a scrap of
influence.'

'Let her lie on your bosom, my mother.'

'Is this to be another Violetta?'

'Her name is Vittoria,' said Carlo, colouring deeply.  A certain Violetta
had been his boy's passion.

Further distracting Austrian band-music was going by.  This time it was
a regiment of Italians in the white and blue uniform.  Carlo and Luciano
leaned over the balcony, smoking, and scanned the marching of their
fellow-countrymen in the livery of servitude.

'They don't step badly,' said one; and the other, with a smile of
melancholy derision, said, 'We are all brothers!'

Following the Italians came a regiment of Hungarian grenadiers, tall,
swam-faced, and particularly light-limbed men, looking brilliant in the
clean tight military array of Austria.  Then a squadron of blue hussars,
and Croat regiment; after which, in the midst of Czech dragoons and
German Uhlans and blue Magyar light horsemen, with General officers and
aides about him, the veteran Austrian Field-Marshal rode, his easy hand
and erect figure and good-humoured smile belying both his age and his
reputation among Italians.  Artillery, and some bravely-clad horse of the
Eastern frontier, possibly Serb, wound up the procession.  It gleamed
down the length of the Corso in a blinding sunlight; brass helmets and
hussar feathers, white and violet surcoats, green plumes, maroon capes,
bright steel scabbards, bayonet-points,--as gallant a show as some
portentously-magnified summer field, flowing with the wind, might be; and
over all the banner of Austria--the black double-headed eagle ramping on
a yellow ground.  This was the flower of iron meaning on such a field.

The two young men held their peace.  Countess Ammiani had pushed her
chair back into a dark corner of the room, and was sitting there when
they looked back, like a sombre figure of black marble.




CHAPTER XVII

IN THE PIAZZA D'ARMI

Carlo and Luciano followed the regiments to the Piazza d'Armi, drawn
after them by that irresistible attraction to youths who have as yet had
no shroud of grief woven for them--desire to observe the aspect of a
brilliant foe.

The Piazza d'Armi was the field of Mars of Milan, and an Austrian review
of arms there used to be a tropical pageant.  The place was too narrow
for broad manoeuvres, or for much more than to furnish an inspection of
all arms to the General, and a display (with its meaning) to the
populace.  An unusually large concourse of spectators lined the square,
like a black border to a vast bed of flowers, nodding now this way, now
that.  Carlo and Luciano passed among the groups, presenting the
perfectly smooth faces of young men of fashion, according to the
universal aristocratic pattern handed down to querulous mortals from
Olympus--the secret of which is to show a triumphant inaction of the
heart and the brain, that are rendered positively subservient to elegance
of limb.  They knew the chances were in favour of their being arrested at
any instant.  None of the higher members of the Milanese aristocracy were
visible; the people looked sullen.  Carlo was attracted by the tall
figure of the Signor Antonio-Pericles, whom he beheld in converse with
the commandant of the citadel, out in the square, among chatting and
laughing General officers.  At Carlo's elbow there came a burst of
English tongues; he heard Vittoria's English name spoken with animation.
'Admire those faces,' he said to Luciano, but the latter was
interchanging quiet recognitions among various heads of the crowd;
a language of the eyelids and the eyebrows.  When he did look round he
admired the fair island faces with an Italian's ardour: 'Their women are
splendid!' and he no longer pushed upon Carlo's arm to make way ahead.
In the English group were two sunny-haired girls and a blue-eyed lady
with the famous English curls, full, and rounding richly.  This lady
talked of her brother, and pointed him out as he rode down the line in
the Marshal's staff.  The young officer indicated presently broke away
and galloped up to her, bending over his horse's neck to join the
conversation.  Emilia Belloni's name was mentioned.  He stared, and
appeared to insist upon a contrary statement.

Carlo scrutinized his features.  While doing so he was accosted, and
beheld his former adversary of the Motter--one, with whom he had
yesterday shaken hands in the Piazza of La Scala.  The ceremony was
cordially renewed.  Luciano unlinked his arm from Carlo and left him.

'It appears that you are mistaken with reference to Mademoiselle
Belloni,' said Captain Gambier.  'We hear on positive authority that
she will not appear at La Scala to-night.  It's a disappointment; though,
from what you did me the honour to hint to me, I cannot allow myself to
regret it.'

Carlo had a passionate inward prompting to trust this Englishman with the
secret.  It was a weakness that he checked.  When one really takes to
foreigners, there is a peculiar impulse (I speak of the people who are
accessible to impulse) to make brothers of them.  He bowed, and said,
'She does not appear?'

'She has in fact quitted Milan.  Not willingly.  I would have stopped the
business if I had known anything of it; but she is better out of the way,
and will be carefully looked after, where she is.  By this time she is in
the Tyrol.'

'And where?' asked Carlo, with friendly interest.

'At a schloss near Meran.  Or she will be there in a very few hours.
I feared--I may inform you that we were very good friends in England--
I feared that when she once came to Italy she would get into political
scrapes.  I dare say you agree with me that women have nothing to do with
politics.  Observe: you see the lady who is speaking to the Austrian
officer?--he is her brother.  Like Mademoiselle Belloni he has adopted a
fresh name; it's the name of his uncle, a General Pierson in the Austrian
service.  I knew him in England: he has been in our service.
Mademoiselle Belloni lived with his sisters for some years two or three.
As you may suppose, they are all anxious to see her.  Shall I introduce.
you?  They will be glad to know one of her Italian friends.'

Carlo hesitated; he longed to hear those ladies talk of Vittoria.  'Do
they speak French?'

'Oh, dear, yes.  That is, as we luckless English people speak it.
Perhaps you will more easily pardon their seminary Italian.  See there,'
Captain Gambier pointed at some trotting squadrons; 'these Austrians have
certainly a matchless cavalry.  The artillery seems good.  The infantry
are fine men--very fine men.  They have a "woodeny" movement; but that's
in the nature of the case: tremendous discipline alone gives homogeneity
to all those nationalities.  Somehow they get beaten.  I doubt whether
anything will beat their cavalry.'

'They are useless in street-fighting,' said Carlo.

'Oh, street-fighting!' Captain Gambier vented a soldier's disgust at the
notion.  'They're not in Paris.  Will you step forward?'

Just then the tall Greek approached the party of English.  The
introduction was delayed.

He was addressed by the fair lady, in the island tongue, as
'Mr. Pericles.' She thanked him for his extreme condescension in deigning
to notice them.  But whatever his condescension had been, it did not
extend to an admitted acquaintance with the poor speech of the land of
fogs.  An exhibition of aching deafness was presented to her so
resolutely, that at last she faltered, 'What!  have you forgotten
English, Mr. Pericles?  You spoke it the other day.'

'It is ze language of necessity--of commerce,' he replied.

'But, surely, Mr. Pericles, you dare not presume to tell me you choose to
be ignorant of it whenever you please?'

'I do not take grits into ze teeth, madame; no more.' 'But you speak it
perfectly.'

'Perfect it may be, for ze transactions of commerce.  I wish to keep my
teez.'

'Alas!' said the lady, compelled, 'I must endeavour to swim in French.'

'At your service, madame,' quoth the Greek, with an immediate doubling of
the length of his body.

Carlo heard little more than he knew; but the confirmation of what we
know will sometimes instigate us like fresh intelligence, and the lover's
heart was quick to apprehend far more than he knew in one direction.  He
divined instantaneously that the English-Austrian spoken of by Barto
Rizzo was the officer sitting on horseback within half-a-dozen yards of
him.  The certainty of the thought cramped his muscles.  For the rest,
it became clear to him that the attempt of the millionaire connoisseur to
carry off Vittoria had received the tacit sanction of the Austrian
authorities; for reasons quite explicable, Mr. Pericles, as the English
lady called him, distinctly hinted it, while affirming with vehement
self-laudation that his scheme had succeeded for the vindication of Art.

'The opera you will hear zis night,' he said, 'will be hissed.  You will
hear a chorus of screech-owls to each song of that poor Irma, whom the
Italian people call "crabapple."  Well; she pleases German ears, and if
they can support her, it is well.  But la Vittoria--your Belloni--you
will not hear; and why?  She has been false to her Art, false!  She has
become a little devil in politics.  It is a Guy Fawkes femelle!  She has
been guilty of the immense crime of ingratitude.  She is dismissed to
study, to penitence, and to the society of her old friends, if they will
visit her.'

'Of course we will,' said the English lady; 'either before or after our
visit to Venice--delicious Venice!'

'Which you have not seen--hein?' Mr. Pericles snarled; 'and have not
smelt.  There is no music in Venice!  But you have nothing but street
tinkle-tinkle!  A place to live in! mon Dieu!'

The lady smiled.  'My husband insists upon trying the baths of Bormio,
and then we are to go over a pass for him to try the grape-cure at Meran.
If I can get him to promise me one whole year in Italy, our visit to
Venice may be deferred.  Our doctor, monsieur, indicates our route.  If
my brother can get leave of absence, we shall go to Bormio and to Meran
with him.  He is naturally astonished that Emilia refused to see him; and
she refused to see us too!  She wrote a letter, dated from the
Conservatorio to him, he had it in his saddlebag, and was robbed of it
and other precious documents, when the wretched, odious people set upon
him in Verona-poor boy!  She said in the letter that she would see him in
a few days after the fifteenth, which is to-day!

'Ah!  a few days after the fifteenth, which is to-day,' Mr. Pericles
repeated.  'I saw you but the day before yesterday, madame, or I could
have brought you together.

She is now away-off--out of sight--the perfule!  Ah false that she is;
speak not of her.  You remember her in England.  There it was trouble,
trouble; but here, we are a pot on a fire with her; speak not of her.
She has used me ill, madame.  I am sick.'

His violent gesticulation drooped.  In a temporary abandonment to
chagrin, he wiped the moisture from his forehead, unwilling or heedless
of the mild ironical mouthing of the ladies, and looked about; for Carlo
had made a movement to retire,--he had heard enough for discomfort.

