which the perusal will flash upon his mind. While he thus indulged
the reveries of an author and a politician, his darling proselyte,
seeing nothing very inviting in the title of the tracts, and
appalled by the bulk and compact lines of the manuscript, quietly
consigned them to a corner of his travelling trunk.

Aunt Rachel's farewell was brief and affectionate. She only
cautioned her dear Edward, whom she probably deemed somewhat
susceptible, against the fascination of Scottish beauty. She
allowed that the northern part of the island contained some
ancient families, but they were all Whigs and Presbyterians except
the Highlanders; and respecting them she must needs say, there
could be no great delicacy among the ladies, where the gentlemen's
usual attire was, as she had been assured, to say the least, very
singular, and not at all decorous. She concluded her farewell with
a kind and moving benediction, and gave the young officer, as a
pledge of her regard, a valuable diamond ring (often worn by the
male sex at that time), and a purse of broad gold-pieces, which
also were more common Sixty Years Since than they have been of
late.





CHAPTER VII

A HORSE-QUARTER IN SCOTLAND


The next morning, amid varied feelings, the chief of which was a
predominant, anxious, and even solemn impression, that he was now
in a great measure abandoned to his own guidance and direction,
Edward Waverley departed from the Hall amid the blessings and
tears of all the old domestics and the inhabitants of the village,
mingled with some sly petitions for sergeantcies and
corporalships, and so forth, on the part of those who professed
that 'they never thoft to ha' seen Jacob, and Giles, and Jonathan
go off for soldiers, save to attend his honour, as in duty bound.'
Edward, as in duty bound, extricated himself from the supplicants
with the pledge of fewer promises than might have been expected
from a young man so little accustomed to the world. After a short
visit to London, he proceeded on horseback, then the general mode
of travelling, to Edinburgh, and from thence to Dundee, a seaport
on the eastern coast of Angus-shire, where his regiment was then
quartered.

He now entered upon a new world, where, for a time, all was
beautiful because all was new. Colonel Gardiner, the commanding
officer of the regiment, was himself a study for a romantic, and
at the same time an inquisitive youth. In person he was tall,
handsome, and active, though somewhat advanced in life. In his
early years he had been what is called, by manner of palliative, a
very gay young man, and strange stories were circulated about his
sudden conversion from doubt, if not infidelity, to a serious and
even enthusiastic turn of mind. It was whispered that a
supernatural communication, of a nature obvious even to the
exterior senses, had produced this wonderful change; and though
some mentioned the proselyte as an enthusiast, none hinted at his
being a hypocrite. This singular and mystical circumstance gave
Colonel Gardiner a peculiar and solemn interest in the eyes of the
young soldier. [Footnote: See Note 5.] It may be easily imagined
that the officers, of a regiment commanded by so respectable a
person composed a society more sedate and orderly than a military
mess always exhibits; and that Waverley escaped some temptations
to which he might otherwise have been exposed.

Meanwhile his military education proceeded. Already a good
horseman, he was now initiated into the arts of the manege, which,
when carried to perfection, almost realise the fable of the
Centaur, the guidance of the horse appearing to proceed from the
rider's mere volition, rather than from the use of any external
and apparent signal of motion. He received also instructions in
his field duty; but I must own, that when his first ardour was
past, his progress fell short in the latter particular of what he
wished and expected. The duty of an officer, the most imposing of
all others to the inexperienced mind, because accompanied with so
much outward pomp and circumstance, is in its essence a very dry
and abstract task, depending chiefly upon arithmetical
combinations, requiring much attention, and a cool and reasoning
head to bring them into action. Our hero was liable to fits of
absence, in which his blunders excited some mirth, and called down
some reproof. This circumstance impressed him with a painful sense
of inferiority in those qualities which appeared most to deserve
and obtain regard in his new profession. He asked himself in vain,
why his eye could not judge of distance or space so well as those
of his companions; why his head was not always successful in
disentangling the various partial movements necessary to execute a
particular evolution; and why his memory, so alert upon most
occasions, did not correctly retain technical phrases and minute
points of etiquette or field discipline. Waverley was naturally
modest, and therefore did not fall into the egregious mistake of
supposing such minuter rules of military duty beneath his notice,
or conceiting himself to be born a general, because he made an
indifferent subaltern. The truth was, that the vague and
unsatisfactory course of reading which he had pursued, working
upon a temper naturally retired and abstracted, had given him that
wavering and unsettled habit of mind which is most averse to study
and riveted attention. Time, in the mean while, hung heavy on his
hands. The gentry of the neighbourhood were disaffected, and
showed little hospitality to the military guests; and the people
of the town, chiefly engaged in mercantile pursuits, were not such
as Waverley chose to associate with. The arrival of summer, and a
curiosity to know something more of Scotland than he could see in
a ride from his quarters, determined him to request leave of
absence for a few weeks. He resolved first to visit his uncle's
ancient friend and correspondent, with the purpose of extending or
shortening the time of his residence according to circumstances.
He travelled of course on horse-back, and with a single
attendant, and passed his first night at a miserable inn, where
the landlady had neither shoes nor stockings, and the landlord,
who called himself a gentleman, was disposed to be rude to his
guest, because he had not bespoke the pleasure of his society to
supper. [Footnote: See Note 6.] The next day, traversing an open
and uninclosed country, Edward gradually approached the Highlands
of Perthshire, which at first had appeared a blue outline in the
horizon, but now swelled into huge gigantic masses, which frowned
defiance over the more level country that lay beneath them. Near
the bottom of this stupendous barrier, but still in the Lowland
country, dwelt Cosmo Comyne Bradwardine of Bradwardine; and, if
grey-haired eld can be in aught believed, there had dwelt his
ancestors, with all their heritage, since the days of the gracious
King Duncan.





CHAPTER VIII

A SCOTTISH MANOR-HOUSE SIXTY YEARS SINCE


It was about noon when Captain Waverley entered the straggling
village, or rather hamlet, of Tully-Veolan, close to which was
situated the mansion of the proprietor. The houses seemed
miserable in the extreme, especially to an eye accustomed to the
smiling neatness of English cottages. They stood, without any
respect for regularity, on each side of a straggling kind of
unpaved street, where children, almost in a primitive state of
nakedness, lay sprawling, as if to be crushed by the hoofs of the
first passing horse. Occasionally, indeed, when such a
consummation seemed inevitable, a watchful old grandam, with her
close cap, distaff, and spindle, rushed like a sibyl in frenzy out
of one of these miserable cells, dashed into the middle of the
path, and snatching up her own charge from among the sunburnt
loiterers, saluted him with a sound cuff, and transported him back
to his dungeon, the little white-headed varlet screaming all the
while, from the very top of his lungs, a shrilly treble to the
growling remonstrances of the enraged matron. Another part in this
concert was sustained by the incessant yelping of a score of idle
useless curs, which followed, snarling, barking, howling, and
snapping at the horses' heels; a nuisance at that time so common
in Scotland, that a French tourist, who, like other travellers,
longed to find a good and rational reason for everything he saw,
has recorded, as one of the memorabilia of Caledonia, that the
state maintained, in each village a relay of curs, called collies,
whose duty it was to chase the chevaux de poste (too starved and
exhausted to move without such a stimulus) from one hamlet to
another, till their annoying convoy drove them to the end of their
stage. The evil and remedy (such as it is) still exist.--But this
is remote from our present purpose, and is only thrown out for
consideration of the collectors under Mr. Dent's Dog Bill.

As Waverley moved on, here and there an old man, bent as much by
toil as years, his eyes bleared with age and smoke, tottered to
the door of his hut, to gaze on the dress of the stranger and the
form and motions of the horses, and then assembled, with his
neighbours, in a little group at the smithy, to discuss the
probabilities of whence the stranger came and where he might be
going. Three or four village girls, returning from the well or
brook with pitchers and pails upon their heads, formed more
pleasing objects, and, with their thin short-gowns and single
petticoats, bare arms, legs, and feet, uncovered heads and braided
hair, somewhat resembled Italian forms of landscape. Nor could a
lover of the picturesque have challenged either the elegance of
their costume or the symmetry of their shape; although, to say the
truth, a mere Englishman in search of the COMFORTABLE, a word
peculiar to his native tongue, might have wished the clothes less
scanty, the feet and legs somewhat protected from the weather, the
head and complexion shrouded from the sun, or perhaps might even
have thought the whole person and dress considerably improved by a
plentiful application of spring water, with a quantum sufficit of
soap. The whole scene was depressing; for it argued, at the first
glance, at least a stagnation of industry, and perhaps of
intellect. Even curiosity, the busiest passion of the idle, seemed
of a listless cast in the village of Tully-Veolan: the curs
aforesaid alone showed any part of its activity; with the
villagers it was passive. They stood, and gazed at the handsome
young officer and his attendant, but without any of those quick
motions and eager looks that indicate the earnestness with which
those who live in monotonous ease at home look out for amusement
abroad. Yet the physiognomy of the people, when more closely
examined, was far from exhibiting the indifference of stupidity;
their features were rough, but remarkably intelligent; grave, but
the very reverse of stupid; and from among the young women an
artist might have chosen more than one model whose features and
form resembled those of Minerva. The children also, whose skins
were burnt black, and whose hair was bleached white, by the
influence of the sun, had a look and manner of life and interest.
It seemed, upon the whole, as if poverty, and indolence, its too
frequent companion, were combining to depress the natural genius
and acquired information of a hardy, intelligent, and reflecting
peasantry.

Some such thoughts crossed Waverley's mind as he paced his horse
slowly through the rugged and flinty street of Tully-Veolan,
interrupted only in his meditations by the occasional caprioles
which his charger exhibited at the reiterated assaults of those
canine Cossacks, the collies before mentioned. The village was
more than half a mile long, the cottages being irregularly divided
from each other by gardens, or yards, as the inhabitants called
them, of different sizes, where (for it is Sixty Years Since) the
now universal potato was unknown, but which were stored with
gigantic plants of kale or colewort, encircled with groves of
nettles, and exhibited here and there a huge hemlock, or the
national thistle, overshadowing a quarter of the petty inclosure.
The broken ground on which the village was built had never been
levelled; so that these inclosures presented declivities of every
degree, here rising like terraces, there sinking like tan-pits.
The dry-stone walls which fenced, or seemed to fence (for they
were sorely breached), these hanging gardens of Tully-Veolan were
intersected by a narrow lane leading to the common field, where
the joint labour of the villagers cultivated alternate ridges and
patches of rye, oats, barley, and pease, each of such minute
extent that at a little distance the unprofitable variety of the
surface resembled a tailor's book of patterns. In a few favoured
instances, there appeared behind the cottages a miserable wigwam,
compiled of earth, loose stones, and turf, where the wealthy might
perhaps shelter a starved cow or sorely galled horse. But almost
every hut was fenced in front by a huge black stack of turf on one
side of the door, while on the other the family dunghill ascended
in noble emulation.

About a bowshot from the end of the village appeared the
inclosures proudly denominated the Parks of Tully-Veolan, being
certain square fields, surrounded and divided by stone walls five
feet in height. In the centre of the exterior barrier was the
upper gate of the avenue, opening under an archway, battlemented
on the top, and adorned with two large weather-beaten mutilated
masses of upright stone, which, if the tradition of the hamlet
could be trusted, had once represented, at least had been once
designed to represent, two rampant Bears, the supporters of the
family of Bradwardine. This avenue was straight and of moderate
length, running between a double row of very ancient horse-
chestnuts, planted alternately with sycamores, which rose to such
huge height, and nourished so luxuriantly, that their boughs
completely over-arched the broad road beneath. Beyond these
venerable ranks, and running parallel to them, were two high
walls, of apparently the like antiquity, overgrown with ivy,
honeysuckle, and other climbing plants. The avenue seemed very
little trodden, and chiefly by foot-passengers; so that being very
broad, and enjoying a constant shade, it was clothed with grass of
a deep and rich verdure, excepting where a foot-path, worn by
occasional passengers, tracked with a natural sweep the way from
the upper to the lower gate. This nether portal, like the former,
opened in front of a wall ornamented with some rude sculpture,
with battlements on the top, over which were seen, half-hidden by
the trees of the avenue, the high steep roofs and narrow gables of
the mansion, with lines indented into steps, and corners decorated
with small turrets. One of the folding leaves of the lower gate
was open, and as the sun shone full into the court behind, a long
line of brilliancy was flung upon the aperture up the dark and
gloomy avenue. It was one of those effects which a painter loves
to represent, and mingled well with the struggling light which
found its way between the boughs of the shady arch that vaulted
the broad green alley.

The solitude and repose of the whole scene seemed almost monastic;
and Waverley, who had given his horse to his servant on entering
the first gate, walked slowly down the avenue, enjoying the
grateful and cooling shade, and so much pleased with the placid
ideas of rest and seclusion excited by this confined and quiet
scene, that he forgot the misery and dirt of the hamlet he had
left behind him. The opening into the paved court-yard
corresponded with the rest of the scene. The house, which seemed
to consist of two or three high, narrow, and steep-roofed
buildings, projecting from each other at right angles, formed one
side of the inclosure. It had been built at a period when castles
were no longer necessary, and when the Scottish architects had not
yet acquired the art of designing a domestic residence. The
windows were numberless, but very small; the roof had some
nondescript kind of projections, called bartizans, and displayed
at each frequent angle a small turret, rather resembling a pepper-
box than a Gothic watchtower. Neither did the front indicate
absolute security from danger. There were loop-holes for musketry,
and iron stanchions on the lower windows, probably to repel any
roving band of gypsies, or resist a predatory visit from the
caterans of the neighbouring Highlands. Stables and other offices
occupied another side of the square. The former were low vaults,
with narrow slits instead of windows, resembling, as Edward's
groom observed, 'rather a prison for murderers, and larceners, and
such like as are tried at 'sizes, than a place for any Christian
cattle.' Above these dungeon-looking stables were granaries,
called girnels, and other offices, to which there was access by
outside stairs of heavy masonry. Two battlemented walls, one of
which faced the avenue, and the other divided the court from the
garden, completed the inclosure.

Nor was the court without its ornaments. In one corner was a tun-
bellied pigeon-house, of great size and rotundity, resembling in
figure and proportion the curious edifice called Arthur's Oven,
which would have turned the brains of all the antiquaries in
England, had not the worthy proprietor pulled it down for the sake
of mending a neighbouring dam-dyke. This dove-cot, or columbarium,
as the owner called it, was no small resource to a Scottish laird
of that period, whose scanty rents were eked out by the
contributions levied upon the farms by these light foragers, and
the conscriptions exacted from the latter for the benefit of the
table.

Another corner of the court displayed a fountain, where a huge
bear, carved in stone, predominated over a large stone-basin, into
which he disgorged the water. This work of art was the wonder of
the country ten miles round. It must not be forgotten, that all
sorts of bears, small and large, demi or in full proportion, were
carved over the windows, upon the ends of the gables, terminated
the spouts, and supported the turrets, with the ancient family
motto, 'Beware the Bear', cut under each hyperborean form. The
court was spacious, well paved, and perfectly clean, there being
probably another entrance behind the stables for removing the
litter. Everything around appeared solitary, and would have been
silent, but for the continued plashing of the fountain; and the
whole scene still maintained the monastic illusion which the fancy
of Waverley had conjured up. And here we beg permission to close a
chapter of still life. [Footnote: See Note 7.]





CHAPTER IX

MORE OF THE MANOR-HOUSE AND ITS ENVIRONS


After having satisfied his curiosity by gazing around him for a
few minutes, Waverley applied himself to the massive knocker of
the hall-door, the architrave of which bore the date 1594. But no
answer was returned, though the peal resounded through a number of
apartments, and was echoed from the court-yard walls without the
house, startling the pigeons from the venerable rotunda which they
occupied, and alarming anew even the distant village curs, which
had retired to sleep upon their respective dunghills. Tired of the
din which he created, and the unprofitable responses which it
excited, Waverley began to think that he had reached the castle of
Orgoglio as entered by the victorious Prince Arthur,--

    When 'gan he loudly through the house to call,
    But no man cared to answer to his cry;
    There reign'd a solemn silence over all,
    Nor voice was heard, nor wight was seen in bower or hall.

Filled almost with expectation of beholding some 'old, old man,
with beard as white as snow,' whom he might question concerning
this deserted mansion, our hero turned to a little oaken wicket-
door, well clenched with iron-nails, which opened in the court-
yard wall at its angle with the house. It was only latched,
notwithstanding its fortified appearance, and, when opened,
admitted him into the garden, which presented a pleasant
scene. [Footnote: Footnote: At Ravelston may be seen such a garden,
which the taste of the proprietor, the author's friend and
kinsman, Sir Alexander Keith, Knight Mareschal, has judiciously
preserved. That, as well as the house is, however, of smaller
dimensions than the Baron of Bradwardine's mansion and garden are
presumed to have been.] The southern side of the house, clothed
with fruit-trees, and having many evergreens trained upon its
walls, extended its irregular yet venerable front along a terrace,
partly paved, partly gravelled, partly bordered with flowers and
choice shrubs. This elevation descended by three several flights
of steps, placed in its centre and at the extremities, into what
might be called the garden proper, and was fenced along the top by
a stone parapet with a heavy balustrade, ornamented from space to
space with huge grotesque figures of animals seated upon their
haunches, among which the favourite bear was repeatedly
introduced. Placed in the middle of the terrace between a sashed-
door opening from the house and the central flight of steps, a
huge animal of the same species supported on his head and fore-
paws a sun-dial of large circumference, inscribed with more
diagrams than Edward's mathematics enabled him to decipher.

The garden, which seemed to be kept with great accuracy, abounded
in fruit-trees, and exhibited a profusion of flowers and
evergreens, cut into grotesque forms. It was laid out in terraces,
which descended rank by rank from the western wall to a large
brook, which had a tranquil and smooth appearance, where it served
as a boundary to the garden; but, near the extremity, leapt in
tumult over a strong dam, or wear-head, the cause of its temporary
tranquillity, and there forming a cascade, was overlooked by an
octangular summer-house, with a gilded bear on the top by way of
vane. After this feat, the brook, assuming its natural rapid and
fierce character, escaped from the eye down a deep and wooded
dell, from the copse of which arose a massive, but ruinous tower,
the former habitation of the Barons of Bradwardine. The margin of
the brook, opposite to the garden, displayed a narrow meadow, or
haugh, as it was called, which formed a small washing-green; the
bank, which retired behind it, was covered by ancient trees.

The scene, though pleasing, was not quite equal to the gardens of
Alcina; yet wanted not the 'due donzellette garrule' of that
enchanted paradise, for upon the green aforesaid two bare-legged
damsels, each standing in a spacious tub, performed with their
feet the office of a patent washing-machine. These did not,
however, like the maidens of Armida, remain to greet with their
harmony the approaching guest, but, alarmed at the appearance of a
handsome stranger on the opposite side, dropped their garments (I
should say garment, to be quite correct) over their limbs, which
their occupation exposed somewhat too freely, and, with a shrill
exclamation of 'Eh, sirs!' uttered with an accent between modesty
and coquetry, sprung off like deer in different directions.

Waverley began to despair of gaining entrance into this solitary
and seemingly enchanted mansion, when a man advanced up one of the
garden alleys, where he still retained his station. Trusting this
might be a gardener, or some domestic belonging to the house,
Edward descended the steps in order to meet him; but as the figure
approached, and long before he could descry its features, he was
struck with the oddity of its appearance and gestures. Sometimes
this mister wight held his hands clasped over his head, like an
Indian Jogue in the attitude of penance; sometimes he swung them
perpendicularly, like a pendulum, on each side; and anon he
slapped them swiftly and repeatedly across his breast, like the
substitute used by a hackney-coachman for his usual flogging
exercise, when his cattle are idle upon the stand, in a clear
frosty day. His gait was as singular as his gestures, for at times
he hopped with great perseverance on the right foot, then
exchanged that supporter to advance in the same manner on the
left, and then putting his feet close together he hopped upon both
at once. His attire also was antiquated and extravagant. It
consisted in a sort of grey jerkin, with scarlet cuffs and slashed
sleeves, showing a scarlet lining; the other parts of the dress
corresponded in colour, not forgetting a pair of scarlet
stockings, and a scarlet bonnet, proudly surmounted with a
turkey's feather. Edward, whom he did not seem to observe, now
perceived confirmation in his features of what the mien and
gestures had already announced. It was apparently neither idiocy
nor insanity which gave that wild, unsettled, irregular expression
to a face which naturally was rather handsome, but something that
resembled a compound of both, where the simplicity of the fool was
mixed with the extravagance of a crazed imagination. He sung with
great earnestness, and not without some taste, a fragment of an
old Scottish ditty:--

    False love, and hast thou play'd me this
    In summer among the flowers?
