
Nefert felt tired and sleepy the next morning, and begged the princess
to introduce her to her new duties for the first time next day; but the
princess spoke to her encouragingly, told her that no man should put off
doing right till the morrow, and urged her to follow her into her
workshop.

"We must both come to different minds," said she.  "I often shudder
involuntarily, and feel as if I bore a brand--as if I had a stain here on
my shoulder where it was touched by Paaker's rough hand."

The first day of labor gave Nefert a good many difficulties to overcome;
on the second day the work she had begun already had a charm for her, and
by the third she rejoiced in the little results of her care.

Bent-Anat had put her in the right place, for she had the direction of a
large number of young girls and women, the daughters, wives, and widows
of those Thebans who were at the war, or who had fallen in the field, who
sorted and arranged the healing herbs.  Her helpers sat in little circles
on the ground; in the midst of each lay a great heap of fresh and dry
plants, and in front of each work-woman a number of parcels of the
selected roots, leaves, and flowers.

An old physician presided over the whole, and had shown Nefert the first
day the particular plants which he needed.

The wife of Mena, who was fond of flowers, had soon learnt them all, and
she taught willingly, for she loved children.

She soon had favorites among the children, and knew some as being
industrious and careful, others as idle and heedless:

"Ay! ay!"  she exclaimed, bending over a little half-naked maiden with
great almond-shaped eyes.  "You are mixing them all together.  Your
father, as you tell me, is at the war.  Suppose, now, an arrow were to
strike him, and this plant, which would hurt him, were laid on the
burning wound instead of this other, which would do him good--that would
be very sad."

The child nodded her head, and looked her work through again.  Nefert
turned to a little idler, and said: "You are chattering again, and doing
nothing, and yet your father is in the field.  If he were ill now, and
has no medicine, and if at night when he is asleep he dreams of you, and
sees you sitting idle, he may say to himself: 'Now I might get well, but
my little girl at home does not love me, for she would rather sit with
her hands in her lap than sort herbs for her sick father.'"

Then Nefert turned to a large group of the girls, who were sorting
plants, and said: "Do you, children, know the origin of all these
wholesome, healing herbs?  The good Horus went out to fight against Seth,
the murderer of his father, and the horrible enemy wounded Horus in the
eye in the struggle; but the son of Osiris conquered, for good always
conquers evil.  But when Isis saw the bad wound, she pressed her son's
head to her bosom, and her heart was as sad as that of any poor human
mother that holds her suffering child in her arms.  And she thought: 'How
easy it is to give wounds, and how hard it is to heal them!' and so she
wept; one tear after another fell on the earth, and wherever they wetted
the ground there sprang up a kindly healing plant."

"Isis is good!"  cried a little girl opposite to her.  Mother says Isis
loves children when they are good."

"Your mother is right," replied Nefert.  "Isis herself has her dear
little son Horus; and every human being that dies, and that was good,
becomes a child again, and the Goddess makes it her own, and takes it to
her breast, and nurses it with her sister Nephthys till he grows up and
can fight for his father."

Nefert observed that while she spoke one of the women was crying.  She
went up to her, and learned that her husband and her son were both dead,
the former in Syria, and the latter after his return to Egypt.  "Poor
soul!"  said Nefert.  "Now you will be very careful, that the wounds of
others may be healed.  I will tell you something more about Isis.  She
loved her husband Osiris dearly, as you did your dead husband, and I my
husband Mena, but he fell a victim to the cunning of Seth, and she could
not tell where to find the body that had been carried away, while you can
visit your husband in his grave.  Then Isis went through the land
lamenting, and ah! what was to become of Egypt, which received all its
fruitfulness from Osiris.  The sacred Nile was dried up, and not a blade
of verdure was green on its banks.  The Goddess grieved over this beyond
words, and one of her tears fell in the bed of the river, and immediately
it began to rise.  You know, of course, that each inundation arises from
a tear of Isis.  Thus a widow's sorrow may bring blessing to millions of
human beings."

The woman had listened to her attentively, and when Nefert ceased
speaking she said:

"But I have still three little brats of my son's to feed, for his wife,
who was a washerwoman, was eaten by a crocodile while she was at work.
Poor folks must work for themselves, and not for others.  If the princess
did not pay us, I could not think of the wounds of the soldiers, who do
not belong to me.  I am no longer strong, and four mouths to fill--"

Nefert was shocked--as she often was in the course of her new duties--and
begged Bent-Gnat to raise the wages of the woman.

"Willingly," said the princess.  "How could I beat down such an
assistant.  Come now with me into the kitchen.  I am having some fruit
packed for my father and brothers; there must be a box for Mena too."
Nefert followed her royal friend, found them packing in one case the
golden dates of the oasis of Amon, and in another the dark dates of
Nubia, the king's favorite sort.  "Let me pack them!"  cried Nefert;
she made the servants empty the box again, and re-arranged the various-
colored dates in graceful patterns, with other fruits preserved in sugar.

Bent-Anat looked on, and when she had finished she took her hand.
"Whatever your fingers have touched," she exclaimed, "takes some pretty
aspect.  Give me that scrap of papyrus; I shall put it in the case, and
write upon it:

"'These were packed for king Rameses by his daughter's clever helpmate,
the wife of Mena.'"

After the mid-day rest the princess was called away, and Nefert remained
for some hours alone with the work-women.

When the sun went down, and the busy crowd were about to leave, Nefert
detained them, and said: "The Sun-bark is sinking behind the western
hills; come, let us pray together for the king and for those we love in
the field.  Each of you think of her own: you children of your fathers,
you women of your sons, and we wives of our distant husbands, and let us
entreat Amon that they may return to us as certainly as the sun, which
now leaves us, will rise again to-morrow morning."

Nefert knelt down, and with her the women and the children.

When they rose, a little girl went up to Nefert, and said, pulling her
dress: "Thou madest us kneel here yesterday, and already my mother is
better, because I prayed for her."

"No doubt," said Nefert, stroking the child's black hair.

She found Bent-Anat on the terrace meditatively gazing across to the
Necropolis, which was fading into darkness before her eyes.  She started
when she heard the light footsteps of her friend.

"I am  disturbing thee,"  said  Nefert, about  to retire.

"No, stay," said Bent-Anat.  "I thank the Gods that I have you, for my
heart is sad--pitifully sad."

"I know where your thoughts were," said Nefert softly.  "Well?" asked the
princess.

"With Pentaur."

"I think of him--always of him," replied the princess, "and nothing else
occupies my heart.  I am no longer myself.  What I think I ought not to
think, what I feel I ought not to feel, and yet, I cannot command it, and
I think my heart would bleed to death if I tried to cut out those
thoughts and feelings.  I have behaved strangely, nay unbecomingly, and
now that which is hard to endure is hanging over me, something strange-
which will perhaps drive you from me back to your mother."

"I will share everything with you," cried Nefert.  "What is going to
happen?  Are you then no longer the daughter of Rameses?"

"I showed myself to the people as a woman of the people," answered Bent-
Anat, "and I must take the consequences.  Bek en Chunsu, the high-priest
of Amon, has been with me, and I have had a long conversation with him.
The worthy man is good to me, I know, and my father ordered me to follow
his advice before any one's.  He showed me that I have erred deeply.  In
a state of uncleanness I went into one of the temples of the Necropolis,
and after I had once been into the paraschites' house and incurred
Ameni's displeasure, I did it a second time.  They know over there all
that took place at the festival.  Now I must undergo purification, either
with great solemnity at the hands of Ameni himself, before all the
priests and nobles in the House of Seti, or by performing a pilgrimage to
the Emerald-Hathor, under whose influence the precious stones are hewn
from the rocks, metals dug out, and purified by fire.  The Goddess shall
purge me from my uncleanness as metal is purged from the dross.  At a
day's journey and more from the mines, an abundant stream flows from the
holy mountain-Sinai," as it is called by the Mentut--and near it stands
the sanctuary of the Goddess, in which priests grant purification.  The
journey is a long one, through the desert, and over the sea; But Bek en
Chunsu advises me to venture it.  Ameni, he says, is not amiably disposed
towards me, because I infringed the ordinance which he values above all
others.  I must submit to double severity, he says, because the people
look first to those of the highest rank; and if I went unpunished for
contempt of the sacred institutions there might be imitators among the
crowd.  He speaks in the name of the Gods, and they measure hearts with
an equal measure.  The ell-measure is the symbol of the Goddess of Truth.
I feel that it is all not unjust; and yet I find it hard to submit to the
priest's decree, for I am the daughter of Rameses!"

"Aye, indeed!"  exclaimed Nefert, "and he is himself a God!"

"But he taught me to respect the laws!" interrupted the princess.
"I discussed another thing with Bek en Chunsu.  You know I rejected the
suit of the Regent.  He must secretly be much vexed with me.  That indeed
would not alarm me, but he is the guardian and protector appointed over
me by my father, and yet can I turn to him in confidence for counsel, and
help?  No! I am still a woman, and Rameses' daughter!  Sooner will I
travel through a thousand deserts than humiliate my father through his
child.  By to-morrow I shall have decided; but, indeed, I have already
decided to make the journey, hard as it is to leave much that is here.
Do not fear, dear!  but you are too tender for such a journey, and to
such a distance; I might--"

"No, no," cried Nefert.  "I am going, too, if you were going to the four
pillars of heaven, at the limits of the earth.  You have given me a new
life, and the little sprout that is green within me would wither again if
I had to return to my mother.  Only she or I can be in our house, and I
will re-enter it only with Mena."

"It is settled--I must go," said the princess.  "Oh! if only my father
were not so far off, and that I could consult him!"

"Yes! the war, and always the war!"  sighed Nefert.  "Why do not men rest
content with what they have, and prefer the quiet peace, which makes life
lovely, to idle fame?"

"Would they be men? should we love them?"  cried Bent-Anat eagerly.
"Is not the mind of the Gods, too, bent on war?  Did you ever see a more
sublime sight than Pentaur, on that evening when he brandished the stake
he had pulled up, and exposed his life to protect an innocent girl who
was in danger?"

"I dared not once look down into the court," said Nefert.  "I was in such
an agony of mind.  But his loud cry still rings in my ears."

"So rings the war cry of heroes before whom the enemy quails!"  exclaimed
Bent-Anat.
