may offend the servants of the Gods."

"And do everything," retorted the old woman, "that can degrade Rameses in
their sight.  Ani, do you hear, need not write me a new license, but only
renew the old one granted to me by Rameses when I cured his favorite
horse.  They burnt it with my other possessions, when they plundered my
house, and denounced me and my belongings for sorcery.  The permit of
Rameses is what I want, nothing more."

"You shall have it," said the dwarf.  "Good-by; I am charged to look into
the tomb of our house, and see whether the offerings for the dead are
regularly set out; to pour out fresh essences and have various things
renewed.  When Sechet has ceased to rage, and it is cooler, I shall come
by here again, for I should like to call on the paraschites, and see how
the poor child is."




CHAPTER XIII.

During this conversation two men had been busily occupied, in front of
the paraschites' hut, in driving piles into the earth, and stretching a
torn linen cloth upon them.

One of them, old Pinem, whom we have seen tending his grandchild,
requested the other from time to time to consider the sick girl and to
work less noisily.

After they had finished their simple task, and spread a couch of fresh
straw under the awning, they too sat down on the earth, and looked at the
hut before which the surgeon Nebsecht was sitting waiting till the
sleeping girl should wake.

"Who is that?"  asked the leech of the old man, pointing to his young
companion, a tall sunburnt soldier with a bushy red beard.

"My son," replied the paraschites, "who is just returned from Syria."

"Uarda's father?"  asked Nebsecht.

The soldier nodded assent, and said with a rough voice, but not without
cordiality.

"No one could guess it by looking at us--she is so white and rosy.  Her
mother was a foreigner, and she has turned out as delicate as she was.
I am afraid to touch her with my little finger--and there comes a chariot
over the brittle doll, and does not quite crush her, for she is still
alive."

"Without the help of this holy father," said the paraschites, approaching
the surgeon, and kissing his robe, "you would never have seen her alive
again.  May the Gods reward thee for what thou hast done for its poor
folks!"

"And we can pay too," cried the soldier, slapping a full purse that hung
at his gridle.  "We have taken plunder in Syria, and I will buy a calf,
and give it to thy temple."

"Offer a beast of dough, rather."

     [Hogs were sacrificed at the feasts of Selene (the Egyptian
     Nechebt).  The poor offer pigs made of dough.  Herodotus II., 47.
     Various kinds of cakes baked in the form of animals are represented
     on the monuments.]

replied Nebsecht, "and if you wish to show yourself grateful to me, give
the money to your father, so that he may feed and nurse your child in
accordance with my instructions."

"Hm," murmured the soldier; he took the purse from his girdle, flourished
it in his hand, and said, as he handed it to the paraschites:

"I should have liked to drink it! but take it, father, for the child and
my mother."

While the old man hesitatingly put out his hand for the rich gift, the
soldier recollected himself and said, opening the purse:

"Let me take out a few rings, for to-day I cannot go dry.  I have two or
three comrades lodging in the red Tavern.  That is right.  There,--take
the rest of the rubbish."

Nebsecht nodded approvingly at the soldier, and he, as his father
gratefully kissed the surgeon's hand, exclaimed:

"Make the little one sound, holy father!  It, is all over with gifts and
offerings, for I have nothing left; but there are two iron fists and a
breast like the wall of a fortress.  If at any time thou dost want help,
call me, and I will protect thee against twenty enemies.  Thou hast saved
my child--good!  Life for life.  I sign myself thy blood-ally--there."

With these words he drew his poniard out of his girdle.  He scratched his
arm, and let a few drops of his blood run down on a stone at the feet of
Nebsecht--"Look," he said.  "There is my bond, Kaschta has signed himself
thine, and thou canst dispose of my life as of thine own.  What I have
said, I have said."

"I am a man of peace," Nebsecht stammered, "And my white robe protects
me.  But I believe our patient is awake."

The physician rose, and entered the hut.

Uarda's pretty head lay on her grandmother's lap, and her large blue eyes
turned contentedly on the priest.

"She might get up and go out into the air," said the old woman.  "She has
slept long and soundly."  The surgeon examined her pulse, and her wound,
on which green leaves were laid.

"Excellent," he said; "who gave you this healing herb?"

The old woman shuddered, and hesitated; but Uarda said fearlessly; "Old
Hekt, who lives over there in the black cave."

"The witch!"  muttered Nebsecht.  "But we will let the leaves remain; if
they do good, it is no matter where they came from."

"Hekt tasted the drops thou didst give her," said the old woman, "and
agreed that they were good."

"Then we are satisfied with each other," answered Nebsecht, with a smile
of amusement.  "We will carry you now into the open air, little maid; for
the air in here is as heavy as lead, and your damaged lung requires
lighter nourishment."

"Yes, let me go out," said the girl.  "It is well that thou hast not
brought back the other with thee, who tormented me with his vows."

"You mean blind Teta," said Nebsecht, "he will not come again; but the
young priest who soothed your father, when he repulsed the princess, will
visit you.  He is kindly disposed, and you should--you should--"

"Pentaur will come?"  said the girl eagerly.

"Before midday.  But how do you know his name?"

"I know him," said Uarda decidedly.

The surgeon looked at her surprised.

"You must not talk any more," he said, "for your cheeks are glowing, and
the fever may return.  We have arranged a tent for you, and now we will
carry you into the open air."

"Not yet," said the girl.  "Grandmother, do my hair for me, it is so
heavy."

With these words she endeavored to part her mass of long reddish-brown
hair with her slender hands, and to free it from the straws that had got
entangled in it.

"Lie still," said the surgeon, in a warning voice.

"But it is so heavy," said the sick girl, smiling and showing Nebsecht
her abundant wealth of golden hair as if it were a fatiguing burden.
"Come, grandmother, and help me."

The old woman leaned over the child, and combed her long locks carefully
with a coarse comb made of grey horn, gently disengaged the straws from
the golden tangle, and at last laid two thick long plaits on her
granddaughter's shoulders.

Nebsecht knew that every movement of the wounded girl might do mischief,
and his impulse was to stop the old woman's proceedings, but his tongue
seemed spell-bound.  Surprised, motionless, and with crimson cheeks, he
stood opposite the girl, and his eyes followed every movement of her
hands with anxious observation.

She did not notice him.

When the old woman laid down the comb Uarda drew a long breath.

"Grandmother," she said, "give me the mirror."  The old woman brought a
shard of dimly glazed, baked clay.  The girl turned to the light,
contemplated the undefined reflection for a moment, and said:

"I have not seen a flower for so long, grandmother."

"Wait, child," she replied; she took from a jug the rose, which the
princess had laid on the bosom of her grandchild, and offered it to her.
Before Uarda could take it, the withered petals fell, and dropped upon
her.  The surgeon stooped, gathered them up, and put them into the
child's hand.

"How good you are!"  she said; "I am called Uarda--like this flower--and
I love roses and the fresh air.  Will you carry me out now?"

Nebsecht called the paraschites, who came into the hut with his son, and
they carried the girl out into the air, and laid her under the humble
tent they had contrived for her.  The soldier's knees trembled while he
held the light burden of his daughter's weight in his strong hands, and
he sighed when he laid her down on the mat.

"How blue the sky is!"  cried Uarda.  "Ah! grandfather has watered my
pomegranate, I thought so! and there come my doves! give me some corn in
my hand, grandmother.  How pleased they are."

The graceful birds, with black rings round their reddish-grey necks, flew
confidingly to her, and took the corn that she playfully laid between her
lips.

Nebsecht looked on with astonishment at this pretty play.  He felt as if
a new world had opened to him, and some new sense, hitherto unknown to
him, had been revealed to him within his breast.  He silently sat down in
front of the but, and drew the picture of a rose on the sand with a reed-
stem that he picked up.

Perfect stillness was around him; the doves even had flown up, and
settled on the roof.  Presently the dog barked, steps approached; Uarda
lifted herself up and said:

"Grandmother, it is the priest Pentaur."

"Who told you?"  asked the old woman.

"I know it," answered the girl decidedly, and in a few moments a sonorous
voice cried: "Good day to you.  How is your invalid?"

Pentaur was soon standing by Uarda; pleased to hear Nebsecht's good
report, and with the sweet face of the girl.  He had some flowers in his
hand, that a happy maiden had laid on the altar of the Goddess Hathor,
which he had served since the previous day, and he gave them to the sick
girl, who took them with a blush, and held them between her clasped
hands.

"The great Goddess whom I serve sends you these," said Pentaur, "and they
will bring you healing.  Continue to resemble them.  You are pure and
fair like them, and your course henceforth may be like theirs.  As the
sun gives life to the grey horizon, so you bring joy to this dark but.
Preserve your innocence, and wherever you go you will bring love, as
flowers spring in every spot that is trodden by the golden foot of
Hathor.

     [Hathor is frequently called "the golden," particularly at Dendera
     She has much in common with the "golden Aphrodite."]

May her blessing rest upon you!"

He had spoken the last words half to the old couple and half to Uarda,
and was already turning to depart when, behind a heap of dried reeds that
lay close to the awning over the girl, the bitter cry of a child was
heard, and a little boy came forward who held, as high as he could reach,
a little cake, of which the dog, who seemed to know him well, had
snatched half.

"How do you come here, Scherau?"  the paraschites asked the weeping boy;
the unfortunate child that Hekt was bringing up as a dwarf.

"I wanted," sobbed the little one, "to bring the cake to Uarda.  She is
ill--I had so much--"

"Poor child," said the paraschites, stroking the boy's hair; "there-give
it to Uarda."

Scherau went up to the sick girl, knelt down by her, and whispered with
streaming eyes:

"Take it!  It is good, and very sweet, and if I get another cake, and
Hekt will let me out, I will bring it to you.

"Thank you, good little Scherau," said Uarda, kissing the child.  Then
she turned to Pentaur and said:

"For weeks he has had nothing but papyrus-pith, and lotus-bread, and now
he brings me the cake which grandmother gave old Hekt yesterday."

The child blushed all over, and stammered:

"It is only half--but I did not touch it.  Your dog bit out this piece,
and this."

He touched the honey with the tip of his finger, and put it to his lips.
"I was a long time behind the reeds there, for I did not like to come out
because of the strangers there."  He pointed to Nebsecht and Pentaur.
"But now I must go home," he cried.

