your life heedlessly, but remember that it is no longer only your own.
Exercise the gentleness of a father towards the rebels; they did not rise
in mere self-will, but to gain their freedom, the most precious
possession of mankind.  Remember, too, that to shew mercy is better than
to shed blood; the sword killeth, but the favor of the ruler bringeth joy
and happiness.  Conclude the war as speedily as possible, for war is a
perversion of nature; in peace the sons outlive the fathers, but in war
the fathers live to mourn for their slain sons.  Farewell, my young
heroes, go forward and conquer!"




CHAPTER XIII.

Cambyses passed a sleepless night.  The feeling of jealousy, so totally
new to him, increased his desire to possess Nitetis, but he dared not
take her as his wife yet, as the Persian law forbade the king to marry a
foreign wife, until she had become familiar with the customs of Iran and
confessed herself a disciple of Zoroaster.

     [Zoroaster, really Zarathustra or Zerethoschtro, was one of the
     `greatest among founders of new religions and lawgivers.  His name
     signified "golden star" according to Anquetil du Perron.  But this
     interpretation is as doubtful, as the many others which have been
     attempted.  An appropriate one is given in the essay by Kern quoted
     below, from zara golden, and thwistra glittering; thus "the gold
     glittering one."  It is uncertain whether he was born in Bactria,
     Media or Persia, Anquetil thinks in Urmi, a town in Aderbaijan.  His
     father's name was Porosehasp, his mother's Dogdo, and his family
     boasted of royal descent.  The time of his birth is very,--Spiegel
     says "hopelessly"--dark.  Anquetil, and many other scholars would
     place it in the reign of Darius, a view which has been proved to be
     incorrect by Spiegel, Duncker and v. Schack in his introduction.]

According to this law a whole year must pass before Nitetis could become
the wife of a Persian monarch? but what was the law to Cambyses?  In his
eyes the law was embodied in his own person, and in his opinion three
months would be amply sufficient to initiate Nitetis in the Magian
mysteries, after which process she could become his bride.

To-day his other wives seemed hateful, even loathsome, to him.  From
Cambyses' earliest youth his house had been carefully provided with
women.  Beautiful girls from all parts of Asia, black-eyed Armenians,
dazzlingly fair maidens from the Caucasus, delicate girls from the shores
of the Ganges, luxurious Babylonian women, golden-haired Persians and the
effeminate daughters of the Median plains; indeed many of the noblest
Achaemenidae had given him their daughters in marriage.

Phaedime, the daughter of Otanes, and niece of his own mother Kassandane,
had been Cambyses' favorite wife hitherto, or at least the only one of
whom it could be said that she was more to him than a purchased slave
would have been.  But even she, in his present sated and disgusted state
of feeling, seemed vulgar and contemptible, especially when he thought of
Nitetis.

The Egyptian seemed formed of nobler, better stuff than they all.  They
were flattering, coaxing girls; Nitetis was a queen.  They humbled
themselves in the dust at his feet; but when he thought of Nitetis, he
beheld her erect, standing before him, on the same proud level as
himself.  He determined that from henceforth she should not only occupy
Phaedime's place, but should be to him what Kassandane had been to his
father Cyrus.

She was the only one of his wives who could assist him by her knowledge
and advice; the others were all like children, ignorant, and caring for
nothing but dress and finery: living only for petty intrigues and useless
trifles.  This Egyptian girl would be obliged to love him, for he would
be her protector, her lord, her father and brother in this foreign land.

"She must," he said to himself, and to this despot to wish for a thing
and to possess it seemed one and the same.  "Bartja had better take
care," he murmured, "or he shall know what fate awaits the man who dares
to cross my path."

Nitetis too had passed a restless night.

The common apartment of the women was next to her own, and the noise and
singing there had not ceased until nearly midnight.  She could often
distinguish the shrill voice of Boges joking and laughing with these
women, who were under his charge.  At last all was quiet in the wide
palace halls and then her thoughts turned to her distant home and her
poor sister Tachot, longing for her and for the beautiful Bartja, who,
Croesus had told her, was going to-morrow to the war and possibly to
death.  At last she fell asleep, overcome by the fatigue of the journey
and dreaming of her future husband.  She saw him on his black charger.
The foaming animal shied at Bartja who was lying in the road, threw his
rider and dragged him into the Nile, whose waves became blood-red.  In
her terror she screamed for help; her cries were echoed back from the
Pyramids in such loud and fearful tones that she awoke.

But hark! what could that be?  That wailing, shrill cry which she had
heard in her dream,--she could hear it still.

Hastily drawing aside the shutters from one of the openings which served
as windows, she looked out.  A large and beautiful garden, laid out with
fountains and shady avenues, lay before her, glittering with the early
dew.

     [The Persian gardens were celebrated throughout the old world, and
     seem to have been laid out much less stiffly than the Egyptian.
     Even the kings of Persia did not consider horticulture beneath their
     notice, and the highest among the Achaemenidae took an especial
     pleasure in laying out parks, called in Persian Paradises.  Their
     admiration for well-grown trees went so far, that Xerxes, finding on
     his way to Greece a singularly beautiful tree, hung ornaments of
     gold upon its branches.  Firdusi, the great Persian epic poet,
     compares human beauty to the growth of the cypress, as the highest
     praise he can give.  Indeed some trees were worshipped by the
     Persians; and as the tree of life in the Hebrew and Egyptian, so we
     find sacred trees in their Paradise.]

No sound was to be heard except the one which had alarmed her, and this
too died away at last on the morning breeze.  After a few minutes she
heard cries and noise in the distance, then the great city awaking to its
daily work, which soon settled down into a deep, dull murmur like the
roaring of the sea.

Nitetis was by this time so thoroughly awakened from the effect of the
fresh morning air, that she did not care to lie down again.  She went
once more to the window and perceived two figures coming out of the
house.  One she recognized as the eunuch Boges; he was talking to a
beautiful Persian woman carelessly dressed.  They approached her window.
Nitetis hid herself behind the half-opened shutter and listened, for she
fancied she heard her own name.

"The Egyptian is still asleep."  said Boges.  "She must be much fatigued
by the journey.  I see too that one of her windows is still firmly
closed."

"Then tell me quickly," said the Persian.  "Do you really think that this
stranger's coming can injure me in any way?"

"Certainly, I do, my pretty one."

"But what leads you to suppose this?"

"She is only to obey the king's commands, not mine."

"Is that all?"

"No, my treasure.  I know the king.  I can read his features as the Magi
read the sacred books."

"Then we must ruin her."

"More easily said than done, my little bird."

"Leave me alone!  you are insolent."

"Well, but nobody can see us, and you know you can do nothing without my
help."

"Very well then, I don't care.  But tell me quickly what we can do."

"Thanks, my sweet Phaedime.  Well, for the present we must be patient
and wait our time.  That detestable hypocrite Croesus seems to have
established himself as protector of the Egyptian; when he is away, we
must set our snares."

The speakers were by this time at such a distance, that Nitetis could not
understand what they said.  In silent indignation she closed the shutter,
and called her maidens to dress her.  She knew her enemies now--she knew
that a thousand dangers surrounded her, and yet she felt proud and happy,
for was she not chosen to be the real wife of Cambyses?  Her own worth
seemed clearer to her than ever before, from a comparison with these
miserable creatures, and a wonderful certainty of ultimate victory stole
into her heart, for Nitetis was a firm believer in the magic power of
virtue.

"What was that dreadful sound I heard so early?"  she asked of her
principal waiting-woman, who was arranging her hair.

"Do you mean the sounding brass, lady?"

"Scarcely two hours ago I was awakened by a strange and frightful sound."

"That was the sounding brass, lady.  It is used to awaken the young sons
of the Persian nobles, who are brought up at the gate of the king.  You
will soon become accustomed to it.  We have long ceased even to hear it,
and indeed on great festivals, when it is not sounded, we awake from the
unaccustomed stillness.  From the hanging-gardens you will be able to see
how the boys are taken to bathe every morning, whatever the weather may
be.  The poor little ones are taken from their mothers when they are six
years old, to be brought up with the other boys of their own rank under
the king's eye."

"Are they to begin learning the luxurious manners of the court so early?"

"Oh no! the poor boys lead a terrible life.  They are obliged to sleep on
the hard ground, to rise before the sun.  Their food is bread and water,
with very little meat, and they are never allowed to taste wine or
vegetables.  Indeed at times they are deprived of food and drink for some
days, simply to accustom them to privations.  When the court is at
Ecbatana or Pasargadae, and the weather is bitterly cold, they are sure
to be taken out to bathe, and here in Susa, the hotter the sun, the
longer and more difficult the marches they are compelled to take."

     [The summer residences of the kings cf Persia, where it is sometimes
     very cold.  Ecbatana lies at the foot of the high Elburs (Orontes)
     range of mountains in the neighborhood of the modern Hamadan;
     Pasargadae not far from Rachmet in the highlands of Iran]

"And these boys, so simply and severely brought up, become in after life
such luxurious men?"

"Yes, that is always the case.  A meal that has been waited for is all
the more relished when it comes.  These boys see splendor and
magnificence around them daily; they know how rich they are in reality,
and yet have to suffer from hunger and privation.  Who can wonder, if,
when at last they gain their liberty, they plunge into the pleasures of
life with a tenfold eagerness?  But on the other hand, in time of war, or
when going to the chase, they never murmur at hunger or thirst, spring
with a laugh into the mud regardless of their thin boots and purple
trousers, and sleep as soundly on a rock as on their beds of delicate
Arabian wool.  You must see the feats these boys perform, especially when
the king is watching them!  Cambyses will certainly take you if you ask
him."

"I know those exercises already.  In Egypt the girls as well as the boys
are kept to such gymnastic exercises.  My limbs were trained to
flexibility by running, postures, and games with hoops and balls.

"How strange!  Here, we women grow up just as we please, and are taught
nothing but a little spinning and weaving.  Is it true that most of the
Egyptian women can read and write?"

"Yes, nearly all."

"By Mithras, you must be a clever people!  Scarcely any of the Persians,
except the Magi and the scribes, learn these difficult arts.  The sons of
the nobles are taught to speak the truth, to be courageous, obedient, and
to reverence the gods; to hunt, ride, plant trees and discern between
herbs; but whoever, like the noble Darius, wishes to learn the art of
writing, must apply to the Magi.  Women are forbidden to turn their minds
to such studies.--Now your dress is complete.  This string of pearls,
which the king sent this morning, looks magnificent in your raven-black
hair, but it is easy to see that you are not accustomed to the full silk
trousers and high-heeled boots.  If, however, you walk two or three times
up and down the room you will surpass all the Persian ladies even in your
walk!"

At this moment a knock was heard and Boges entered.  He had come to
conduct Nitetis to Kassandane's apartments, where Cambyses was waiting
for her.

The eunuch affected an abject humility, and poured forth a stream of
flattering words, in which he likened the princess to the sun, the starry
heavens, a pure fount of happiness, and a garden of roses.  Nitetis
deigned him not a word in reply, but followed, with a beating heart, to
the queen's apartment.

In order to keep out the noonday sun and produce a salutary half-light
