     kind of examination.  If he had operated thrice successfully on bad
     men, on whose bodies he had been permitted to try his skill, he was
     pronounced "capable for ever."  If, on the other hand, three evil
     Daevayacna (worshippers of the Divs) died under his hands, he was
     pronounced "incapable of healing for evermore."]

Kassandane was very gentle with her son; she begged him not to yield to
passionate anger, and to remember what a sad effect every such outburst
had on his health.

"Yes, mother, you are right," answered the king, smiling bitterly; "I see
that I must get rid of everything that rouses my anger.  The Egyptian
must die, and my perfidious brother shall follow his mistress."

Kassandane used all her eloquence to convince him of the innocence of the
accused, and to pacify his anger, but neither prayers, tears, nor her
motherly exhortations, could in the least alter his resolution to rid
himself of these murderers of his happiness and peace.

At last he interrupted her lamentations by saying: "I feel fearfully
exhausted; I cannot bear these sobs and lamentations any longer.  Nitetis
has been proved guilty.  A man was seen to leave her sleeping-apartment
in the night, and that man was not a thief, but the handsomest man in
Persia, and one to whom she had dared to send a letter yesterday
evening."

"Do you know the contents of that letter?"  asked Croesus, coming up to
the bed.

"No; it was written in Greek.  The faithless creature made use of
characters, which no one at this court can read."

"Will you permit me to translate the letter?"  Cambyses pointed to a
small ivory box in which the ominous piece of writing lay, saying: "There
it is; read it; but do not hide or alter a single word, for to-morrow I
shall have it read over again by one of the merchants from Sinope."

Croesus' hopes revived; he seemed to breathe again as he took the paper.
But when he had read it over, his eyes filled with tears and he murmured:
"The fable of Pandora is only too true; I dare not be angry any longer
with those poets who have written severely against women.  Alas, they are
all false and faithless!  O Kassandane, how the Gods deceive us! they
grant us the gift of old age, only to strip us bare like trees in winter,
and show us that all our fancied gold was dross and all our pleasant and
refreshing drinks poison!"

Kassandane wept aloud and tore her costly robes; but Cambyses clenched
his fist while Croesus was reading the following words:

"Nitetis, daughter of Amasis of Egypt, to Bartja, son of the great Cyrus:

"I have something important to tell you; I can tell it to no one but
yourself.  To-morrow I hope I shall meet you in your mother's apartments.
It lies in your power to comfort a sad and loving heart, and to give it
one happy moment before death.  I have a great deal to tell you, and some
very sad news; I repeat that I must see you soon."

The desperate laughter, which burst from her son cut his mother to the
heart.  She stooped down and was going to kiss him, but Cambyses resisted
her caresses, saying: "It is rather a doubtful honor, mother, to be one
of your favorites.  Bartja did not wait to be sent for twice by that
treacherous woman, and has disgraced himself by swearing falsely.  His
friends, the flower of our young men, have covered themselves with
indelible infamy for his sake; and through him, your best beloved
daughter .  .  .  but no!  Bartja had no share in the corruption of that
fiend in Peri's form.  Her life was made up of hypocrisy and deceit, and
her death shall prove that I know how to punish.  Now leave me, for I
must be alone."

They had scarcely left the room, when he sprang up and paced backwards
and forwards like a madman, till the first crow of the sacred bird
Parodar.  When the sun had risen, he threw himself on his bed again, and
fell into a sleep that was like a swoon.

Meanwhile Bartja had written Sappho a farewell letter, and was sitting
over the wine with his fellow-prisoners and their elder friend Araspes.
"Let us be merry," said Zopyrus, "for I believe it will soon be up with
all our merriment.  I would lay my life, that we are all of us dead by
to-morrow.  Pity that men haven't got more than one neck; if we'd two,
I would not mind wagering a gold piece or two on the chance of our
remaining alive."

"Zopyrus is quite right," said Araspes; "we will make merry and keep our
eyes open; who knows how soon they may be closed for ever?"

"No one need be sad who goes to his death as innocently as we do," said
Gyges.  "Here, cup-bearer, fill my goblet!"

"Ah!  Bartja and Darius!"  cried Zopyrus, seeing the two speaking in a
low voice together, "there you are at your secrets again.  Come to us and
pass the wine-cup.  By Mithras, I can truly say I never wished for death,
but now I quite look forward to the black Azis, because he is going to
take us all together.  Zopyrus would rather die with his friends, than
live without them."

"But the great point is to try and explain what has really happened,"
said Darius.

"It's all the same to me," said Zopyrus, whether I die with or without an
explanation, so long as I know I am innocent and have not deserved the
punishment of perjury.  Try and get us some golden goblets, Bischen; the
wine has no flavor out of these miserable brass mugs.  Cambyses surely
would not wish us to suffer from poverty in our last hours, though he
does forbid our fathers and friends to visit us."

"It's not the metal that the cup is made of," said Bartja, "but the
wormwood of death, "that gives the wine its bitter taste."

"No, really, you're quite  out  there," exclaimed Zopyrus.  "Why I had
nearly forgotten that strangling generally causes death."  As he said
this, he touched Gyges and whispered: "Be as cheerful as you can!  don't
you see that it's very hard for Bartja to take leave of this world?  What
were you saying, Darius?"

"That I thought Oropastes' idea the only admissible one, that a Div had
taken the likeness of Bartja and visited the Egyptian in order to ruin
us."

"Folly!  I don't believe in such things."

"But don't you remember the legend of the Div, who took the beautiful
form of a minstrel and appeared before king Kawus?"

"Of course," cried Araspes.  "Cyrus had this legend so often recited at
the banquets, that I know it by heart.

"Kai Kawus hearkened to the words of the disguised Div and went to
Masenderan, and was beaten there by the Divs and deprived of his
eyesight."

"But," broke in Darius, "Rustem, the great hero, came and conquered
Erscheng and the other bad spirits, freed the captives and restored sight
to the blind, by dropping the blood of the slaughtered Divs into their
eyes.  And so it will be with us, my friends!  We shall be set free, and
the eyes of Cambyses and of our blind and infatuated fathers will be
opened to see our innocence.  Listen, Bischen; if we really should be
executed, go to the Magi, the Chaldwans, and Nebenchari the Egyptian, and
tell them they had better not study the stars any longer, for that those
very stars had proved themselves liars and deceivers to Darius."

"Yes," interrupted Araspes, "I always said that dreams were the only real
prophecies.  Before Abradatas fell in the battle of Sardis, the peerless
Panthea dreamt that she saw him pierced by a Lydian arrow."

"You cruel fellow!"  exclaimed Zopyrus.  "Why do you remind us, that it
is much more glorious to die in battle than to have our necks wrung off"

"Quite right," answered the elder man; "I confess that I have seen many a
death, which I should prefer to our own,--indeed to life itself.  Ah,
boys, there was a time when things went better than they do now."

"Tell us something about those times."

"And tell us why you never married.  It won't matter to you in the next
world, if we do let out your secret."

"There's no secret; any of your own fathers could tell you what you want
to hear from me.  Listen then.  When I was young, I used to amuse myself
with women, but I laughed at the idea of love.  It occurred, however,
that Panthea, the most beautiful of all women, fell into our hands, and
Cyrus gave her into my charge, because I had always boasted that my heart
was invulnerable.  I saw her everyday, and learnt, my friends, that love
is stronger than a man's will.  However, she refused all my offers,
induced Cyrus to remove me from my office near her, and to accept her
husband Abradatas as an ally.  When her handsome husband went out to the
war, this high-minded, faithful woman decked him out with all her own
jewels and told him that the noble conduct of Cyrus, in treating her like
a sister, when she was his captive, could only be repaid by the most
devoted friendship and heroic courage.  Abradatas agreed with her, fought
for Cyrus like a lion, and fell.  Panthea killed herself by his dead
body.  Her servants, on hearing of this, put an end to their own lives
too at the grave of this best of mistresses.  Cyrus shed tears over this
noble pair, and had a stone set up to their memory, which you can see
near Sardis.  On it are the simple words: 'To Panthea, Abradatas, and the
most faithful of servants.'  You see, children, the man who had loved
such a woman could never care for another."

The young men listened in silence, and remained some time after Araspes
had finished, without uttering a word.  At last Bartja raised his hands
to heaven and cried: "O thou great Auramazda!  why dost thou not grant us
a glorious end like Abradatas?  Why must we die a shameful death like
murderers?"

As he said this Croesus came in, fettered and led by whip-bearers.  The
friends rushed to him with a storm of questions, and Bartja too went up
to embrace the man who had been so long his tutor and guide.  But the old
man's cheerful face was severe and serious, and his eyes, generally so
mild, had a gloomy, almost threatening, expression.  He waved the prince
coldly back, saying, in a voice which trembled with pain and reproach:
"Let my hand go, you infatuated boy! you are not worth all the love I
have hitherto felt for you.  You have deceived your brother in a fourfold
manner, duped your friends, betrayed that poor child who is waiting for
you in Naukratis, and poisoned the heart of Amasis' unhappy daughter."

Bartja listened calmly till he heard the word "deceived"; then his hand
clenched, and stamping his foot, he cried: "But for your age and
infirmities, and the gratitude I owe you, old man, these slanderous words
would be your last."

Croesus beard this outbreak of just indignation unmoved, and answered:
"This foolish rage proves that you and Cambyses have the same blood in
your veins.  It would become you much better to repent of your crimes,
and beg your old friend's forgiveness, instead of adding ingratitude to
the unheard-of baseness of your other deeds."

At these words Bartja's anger gave way.  His clenched hands sank down
powerless at his side, and his cheeks became pale as death.

These signs of sorrow softened the old man's indignation.  His love was
strong enough to embrace the guilty as well as the innocent Bartja, and
taking the young man's right hand in both his own, he looked at him as a
father would who finds his son, wounded on the battle-field, and said:
"Tell me, my poor, infatuated boy, how was it that your pure heart fell
away so quickly to the evil powers?"

Bartja shuddered.  The blood came back to his face, but these words cut
him to the heart.  For the first time in his life his belief in the
justice of the gods forsook him.

He called himself the victim of a cruel, inexorable fate, and felt like a
bunted animal driven to its last gasp and hearing the dogs and sportsmen
fast coming nearer.  He had a sensitive, childlike nature, which did not
yet know how to meet the hard strokes of fate.  His body and his physical
courage had been hardened against bodily and physical enemies; but his
teachers had never told him how to meet a hard lot in life; for Cambyses
and Bartja seemed destined only to drink out of the cup of happiness and
joy.

Zopyrus could not bear to see his friend in tears.  He reproached the old
man angrily with being unjust and severe.  Gyges' looks were full of
entreaty, and Araspes stationed himself between the old man and the
youth, as if to ward off the blame of the elder from cutting deeper into
the sad and grieved heart of the younger man.  Darius, however, after
having watched them for some time, came up with quiet deliberation to
Croesus, and said: "You continue to distress and offend one another, and
yet the accused does not seem to know with what offence he is charged,
nor will the accuser hearken to his defence.  Tell us, Croesus, by the
friendship which has subsisted between us up to this clay, what has
induced you to judge Bartja so harshly, when only a short time ago you
believed in his innocence?"

The old man told at once what Darius desired to know--that he had seen a
letter, written in Nitetis' own hand, in which she made a direct
confession of her love to Bartja and asked him to meet her alone.  The
testimony of his own eyes and of the first men in the realm, nay, even
the dagger found under Nitetis' windows, had not been able to convince
him that his favorite was guilty; but this letter had gone like a burning
flash into his heart and destroyed the last remnant of his belief in the
virtue and purity of woman.

"I left the king," he concluded, "perfectly convinced that a sinful
intimacy must subsist between your friend and the Egyptian Princess,
whose heart I had believed to be a mirror for goodness and beauty alone.
Can you find fault with me for blaming him who so shamefully stained this
clear mirror, and with it his own not less spotless soul?"

"But how can I prove my innocence?"  cried Bartja, wringing his hands.
"If you loved me you would believe me; if you really cared for me....."

