looked for and called me in vain, would feel for the first time what he
possessed in me, would miss me, and with the longing the old love would
awaken with fresh ardour.  As soon as the fleet had gained the victory
I would have the prow of my galley turned southward and, without a
farewell, exclaiming only, 'We will meet in Alexandria!' set sail for
Egypt.

"I summoned Alexas, who had remained with me, and ordered him to give me
a signal as soon as the battle was decided in our favour.  I remained on
deck.  Then I saw the ships of the foe describing a wide circle.  The
nauarch told me that Agrippa was trying to surround us.  This roused a
feeling of discomfort.  I began to repent having meddled with men's work.

"Antony looked across at me from his galley.  I waved my hand to point
out the peril, but instead of eagerly and lovingly answering the
greeting, as of yore, he turned his back, and in a short time after the
wildest uproar arose around me.  One ship became entangled with another,
planks and poles shattered with a loud crash.  Shouts, the cries  and
moans of the combatants and the wounded, mingled with the thunder of the
stones hurled by the catapults, and the sharp notes of the signals which
sounded like calls for help.  Two soldiers, stricken by arrows, fell
beside me.  It was horrible!  Yet my courage remained steadfast, even
when a squadron--it was commanded by Aruntius--pressed upon the fleet.
I saw another line of galleys steering directly towards us, and a Roman
vessel assailed by one of mine--I had named her the Selene--turn on her
side and sink.  This pleased me and seemed like the first presage of
victory.  I again ordered Alexas to have the ship's prow turned as soon
as the result of the battle was decided.  Ere I had ceased speaking,
Jason, the steward--you know him--appeared with refreshments.  I took the
beaker, but, ere I could raise it to my lips, he fell to the deck with a
cloven skull, mingling his blood with the spilled juice of the grape.
My blood seemed fairly to freeze in my veins, and Alexas, trembling and
deadly pale, asked, 'Do you command us to quit the battle?'

"Every fibre of my being urged me to give the order, but I controlled
myself, and asked the nauarch, who was standing on the bridge before me,
'Are we gaining the advantage?'  The reply was a positive 'Yes.'  I
thought the fitting time had come, and called to him to steer the galley
southward.  But the man did not seem to understand.  Meanwhile the noise
of the conflict had grown louder and louder.  So, in spite of Charmian,
who besought me not to interfere in the battle, I sent Alexas to the
commander on the bridge, and while he talked with the grey-bearded
seaman, who wrathfully answered I know not what, I glanced at the nearest
ship--I no longer knew whether it was friend or foe--and as I saw the
rows of restless oars moving in countless numbers to and fro, it seemed
as if every ship had become a huge spider, and the long wooden handles of
the oars were its legs and feet.  Each of these monsters appeared to be
seeking to snare me in a horrible net, and when the nauarch came to
beseech me to wait, I imperiously commanded him to obey my orders.

"The luckless man bowed, and performed his Queen's behest.  The giant was
turned, and forced a passage through the maze.

"I breathed more freely.

"What had threatened me like the legs of huge spiders became oars once
more.  Alexas led me under a roof, where no missiles could reach me.  My
desire was fulfilled.  I had escaped Antony's eyes, and we were going
towards Alexandria and my children.  When I at last looked around I saw
that my other ships were following.  I had not given this order, and was
terribly startled.  When I sought Alexas, he had vanished.  The centurion
whom I sent to order the nauarch to give the signal to the other ships to
return to the battle, reported that the captain's dead body has just been
borne away, but that the command should be given.  How this was done I do
not know, but it produced no effect, and no one noticed the anxious
waving of my handkerchief.

"We had left Antony's galley--he was standing on the bridge--far behind.

"I had waved my hand as we passed close by, and he hurried down to bend
far over the bulwark and shout to me.  I can still see his hands raised
to his bearded lips.  I did not understand what he said, and only pointed
southward and in spirit wished him victory and that this separation might
tend to the welfare of our love.  But he shook his head, pressed his hand
despairingly to his brow, and waved his arms as though to give me a sign,
but the Antonias swept far ahead of his ship and steered straight towards
the south.

"I breathed more freely, in the pleasant consciousness of escaping a two-
fold danger.  Had I remained long before Antony's eyes, looking as I did
then, it might--

"Wretched blunder of a wretched woman, I say now.  But at that time I
could not suspect what a terrible doom I had brought down in that hour
upon ourselves, my children, perhaps the whole world; so I remained under
the thrall of these petty fears and thoughts until wounded men were
carried past me.  The sight distressed me; you know how sensitive I am,
and with what difficulty I endure and witness suffering.

"Charmian led me to the cabin.  There I first realized what I had done.
I had hoped to aid in crushing the hated foe, and now perhaps it was I
who had built for him the bridge to victory, to sovereignty, to our
destruction.  Pursued by such thoughts, as if by the Furies, I paced
restlessly to and fro.

"Suddenly I heard a loud noise on deck.  A crashing blow seemed to shake
the huge ship.  We were pursued!  A Roman galley had boarded mine!  This
was my thought as I grasped the dagger Antony had given me.

"But Charmian came back with tidings which seemed scarcely less terrible
than the baseless fear.  I had angrily commanded her to leave me because
she had urged me to revoke the command to turn back.  Now, deadly pale,
she announced that Mark Antony had left his galley, followed me in a
little five-oared boat, and come on board our ship.

"My blood froze in my veins.

"He had come, I imagined, to force me to return to the battle and,
drawing a long breath, my defiant pride urged me to show him that I was
the Queen and would obey only my own will, while my heart impelled me to
sink at his feet and beseech him, without heeding me, to issue any order
which promised to secure a victory.

"But he did not come.

"I sent Charmian up again.  Antony had been unable to continue the
conflict when parted from me.  Now he sat in front of the cabin with his
head resting on his hands, staring at the planks of the deck like one
distraught.  He, he--Antony!  The bravest horseman, the terror of the
foe, let his arms fall like a shepherd-boy whose sheep are stolen by the
wolves.  Mark Antony, the hero who had braved a thousand dangers, had
flung down his sword.  Why, why?  Because a woman had yielded to idle
fears, obeyed the yearning of a mother's heart, and fled?  Of all human
weaknesses, not one had been more alien than cowardice to the man whose
recklessness had led him to many an unprecedented venture.  And now?  No,
a thousand times no!  Fire and water would unite sooner than Mark Antony
and cowardice!  He had been under the coercive power of a demon; a
mysterious spell had forced him--"

"The mightiest power, love," interrupted Iras with enthusiastic warmth--
"a love as great and overmastering as ever subjugated the soul of man."

"Ay, love," repeated  Cleopatra, in a hollow tone.  Then her lips curled
with a faint tinge of derision, and her voice expressed the very
bitterness of doubt, as she continued: "Had it been merely the love which
makes two mortals one, transfers the heart of one to the other, it might
perchance have borne my timorous soul into the hero's breast!  But no.
Violent tempests had raged before the battle.  It had not been possible
always to appear before him in the guise in which we would fain be seen
by those whom we love.

"Even now, when your skilful hands have served me--there is the mirror--
the image it reflects--seems to me like a carefully preserved wreck--"

"O my royal mistress," cried Iras, raising her hands beseechingly, "must
I again declare that neither the grey hairs which are again brown, nor
the few lines which Olympus will soon render invisible, nor whatever else
perhaps disturbs you in the image you behold reflected, impairs your
beauty?  Unclouded and secure of victory, the spell of your godlike
nature--"

"Cease, cease!" interrupted  Cleopatra.  "I know what I know.  No mortal
can escape the great eternal laws of Nature.  As surely as birth
commences life, everything that exists moves onward to destruction
and decay."

"Yet the gods," Iras persisted, "give to their works different degrees of
existence.  The waterlily blooms but a single day, yet how full of vigour
is the sycamore in the garden of the Paneum, which has flourished a
thousand years!  Not a petal in the blossoms of your youth has faded, and
is it conceivable that there is even the slightest diminution in the love
of him who cast away all that man holds dearest because he could not
endure to part, even for days or weeks, from the woman whom he
worshipped?"

"Would that he had done so!" cried Cleopatra mournfully.  "But are you so
sure that it was love which made him follow me?  I am of a different
opinion.  True love does not paralyze, but doubles the high qualities of
man.  I learned this when Caesar was prisoned by a greatly superior force
within this very palace, his ships burned, his supply of water cut off.
In him also, in Antony, I was permitted to witness this magnificent
spectacle twenty--what do I say?-a hundred times, so long as he loved me
with all the ardour of his fiery soul.  But what happened at Actium?
That shameful flight of the cooing dove after his mate, at which
generations yet unborn will point in mockery!  He who does not see more
deeply will attribute to the foolish madness of love this wretched
forgetfulness of duty, honour, fame, the present and the future; but I,
Iras--and this is the thought which whitens one hair after another, which
will speedily destroy the remnant of your mistress's former beauty by the
exhaustion of sleepless nights--I know better.  It was not love which
drew Antony after me, not love that trampled in the dust the radiant
image of reckless courage, not love that constrained the demigod to
follow the pitiful track of a fugitive woman."

Here her voice fell, and seizing the girl's wrist with a painful
pressure, she drew her closer to her side and whispered:

"The goblet of Nektanebus is connected with it.  Ay, tremble!  The powers
that emanate from the glittering wonder are as terrible as they are
unnatural.  The magic spell exerted by the beaker has transformed the
heroic son of Herakles, the more than mortal, into the whimpering coward,
the crushed, broken nonentity I found upon the galley's deck.  You are
silent?  Your nimble tongue finds no reply.  How could you have forgotten
that you aided me to win the wager which forced Antony to gaze into the
beaker before I filled it for him?  How grateful I was to Anubis when
he finally consented to trust to my care this marvel of the temple
treasures, when the first trial succeeded, and Antony, at my bidding,
placed the magnificent wreath which he wore upon the bald brow of that
crabbed old follower of Aristoteles, Diomedes, whom he detested in his
inmost soul!  It was scarcely a year ago, and you know how rarely at
first I used the power of the terrible vessel.  The man whom I loved
obeyed my slightest glance, without its aid.  But later--before the
battle--I felt how gladly he would have sent me, who might ruin all, back
to Egypt.  Besides, I felt--I have already said so--that something had
come between us.  Yet, often as he was on the point of sacrificing me to
the importunate Romans, I need only bid him gaze into the beaker, and
exclaim 'You will not send me hence.  We belong together.  Whither one
goes, the other will follow!' and he besought me not to leave him.  The
very morning before the battle I gave him the drinking cup, urging him,
whatever might happen, never, never to leave me.  And he obeyed this time
also, though the person to whom a magic spell bound him was a fleeing
woman.  It is terrible.  And yet, have I a right to execrate the thrall
of  the beaker?  Scarcely!  For without the Magian's glittering vessel--
a secret voice in my soul has whispered the warning a thousand times
during the sleepless nights--he would have taken another on the galley.
