springs up anew."

"You speak," replied Cleopatra, more and more deeply incensed, with proud
composure, "of the treasures which my ancestors, the powerful monarchs of
a wealthy country, amassed during three hundred years for their noble
race and for the adornment of the women of their line.  Parsimony did not
accord with the generosity and lofty nature of an Antony, yet avarice
itself would not deem the portion still remaining insignificant.  Every
article is registered."

While speaking, she took a manuscript from the hand of Seleukus and
passed it to Octavianus who, with a slight bend of the head, received it
in silence.  But he had scarcely begun to read it when the steward, a
little corpulent man with twinkling eyes half buried in his fat cheeks,
raised his short forefinger, pointed insolently at the Queen, and
asserted that she was trying to conceal some things, and had ordered him
not to place them on the list.  Every tinge of colour faded from the lips
and cheeks of the agitated and passionate woman; tortured by feverish
impatience and no longer able to control her emotions, she raised herself
and, with her own dainty hand, struck the accuser--whom she had lifted
from poverty and obscurity to his present high position--again and again
in the face, till Octavianus, with a smile of superiority, begged her,
much as the man deserved his punishment, to desist.

The unfortunate woman, thus thrown off her guard, flung herself back on
her couch and, panting for breath, with tears streaming from her eyes,
sobbed aloud, declaring that in the presence of such unendurable insult,
such contemptible baseness, she fairly loathed herself.  Then pressing
her clenched hands upon her temples, she exclaimed "Before the eyes of
the foe my royal dignity, which I have maintained all my life, falls from
me like a borrowed mantle.  Yet what am I?  What shall I be to-morrow,
what later?  But who beneath the sun who has warm blood in his veins can
preserve his composure when juicy grapes are held before his thirsting
lips to be withdrawn, as from Tantalus, ere he can taste them?  You came
hither with the assurance of your favour; but the flattering words of
promise which you bestowed upon the unhappy woman were probably only the
drops of poppy-juice given to soothe the ravings of fever.  Was the
favour which you permitted me to see and anticipate for the future merely
intended to delude a miserable--"

But she went no further; Octavianus, with dignified bearing and loud,
clear tones, interrupted "Whoever believes the heir of Caesar capable of
shamefully deceiving a noble woman, a queen, the object of his
illustrious uncle's love, insults and wounds him; but the just anger
which overmastered you may serve as your apology.  Ay," he added in a
totally different tone, "I might even have cause to be grateful for this
indignation, and to wish for another opportunity to witness the outbreak
of passion though in its unbridled fierceness--the royal lioness is
scarcely aware of her own beauty when the tempest of wrath sweeps her
away.  What must she be when it is love that constrains the flame of her
glowing soul to burst into a blaze?"

"Her glowing soul!"  Cleopatra eagerly repeated, and the desire awoke
to subjugate this man who had so confidently boasted of his power of
resistance.  Though he might be stronger than many others, he certainly
was not invincible.  And aware of her still unbroken sway over the hearts
of men, her eyes sparkled with the alluring radiance of love, and a
bewitching smile brightened her face.

The young Imperator's heart began to chafe under the curb and to beat
more quickly, his cheeks flushed and paled by turns.  How she gazed at
him!  What if she loved the nephew as she had once loved the uncle who,
through her, had learned what bliss life can offer?  Ay, it must be
happiness to kiss those lips, to be clasped in those exquisite arms, to
hear one's own name tenderly spoken by those musical tones.  Even the
magnificent marble statue of Ariadne, which he had seen in Athens, had
not displayed to his gaze lines more beautiful than those of the woman
reclining on yonder pillows.  Who could venture to speak in her presence
of vanished charms?  Ah, no!  The spell which had conquered Julius Caesar
was as vivid, as potent as ever.  He himself felt its power; he was
young, and after such unremitting exertions he too yearned to quaff the
nectar of the noblest joys, to steep body and soul in peerless bliss.

So, with a hasty movement, he took one step towards her couch, resolved
to grasp her hands and raise them to his lips.  His ardent gaze answered
hers; but surprised by the power which, though so heavily burdened with
physical and mental suffering, she still possessed over the strongest and
coldest of men, she perceived what was passing in his soul, and a smile
of triumph, blended with the most bitter contempt, hovered around her
beautiful lips.  Should she dupe him into granting her wishes by feigning
love for the first time?  Should she yield to the man who had insulted
her, in order to induce him to accord the children their rights?  Should
she, to gratify her lover's foe, relinquish the sacred grief which was
drawing her after him, give posterity and her children the right to call
her, instead of the most loyal of the loyal, a dishonoured woman, who
sold herself for power?

To all these questions came a prompt denial.  The single stride which
Octavianus had made towards her, his eyes aflame with love, gave her the
right to feel that she had vanquished the victor, and the proud delight
of triumph was too plainly reflected in her mobile features to escape the
penetrating, distrustful gaze of the subjugated Caesar.

But he had scarcely perceived what threatened him, and remembered her
words concerning his famous uncle's surrender only to her and to death,
when he succeeded in conquering his quickly kindled senses.  Blushing at
his own weakness, he averted his eyes from the Queen, and when he met
those of Proculejus and the other witnesses of the scene, he realized the
abyss on whose verge he stood.  He had half succumbed to the danger of
losing, by a moment's weakness, the fruit of great sacrifices and severe
exertions.

His expressive eyes, which had just rested rapturously upon a beautiful
woman, now scanned the spectators with the stern glance of a monarch and,
apparently wishing to moderate an excess of flattering recognition which
might be misinterpreted, he said in an almost pedagogical tone:

"Yet we would rather see the noble lioness in the majestic repose which
best suits all sovereigns.  It is difficult for a calm, deliberate nature
like mine to understand an ardent, quickly kindling heart."

Cleopatra had watched this sudden transition with more surprise than
disappointment.  Octavianus had half surrendered to her, but recovered
his self-command in time, and a man of his temperament does not readily
succumb twice to a danger which he barely escaped.  And this was well!
He should learn that he had misunderstood the glance which fired his
heart; so she answered distantly, with majestic dignity:

"Misery such as mine quenches all ardour.  And love?  Woman's heart is
ever open to it, save where it has lost the desire for power and
pleasure.  You are young and happy, therefore your soul still yearns for
love--I know that--though not for mine.  To me, on the contrary, one
suitor only is welcome, he with the lowered torch, whom you keep aloof
from me.  With him alone is to be found the boon for which this soul has
longed from childhood--painless peace!  You smile.  My past gives you the
right to do so.  I will not lessen it.  Each individual lives his or her
own life.  Few understand the changes of their own existence, far less
those of a stranger's.  The world has witnessed how Peace fled from my
path, or I from hers, and yet I see the possibility of finding the way.
I am safe from the only things which would debar me from those joys
--humiliation and disgrace."  Here she hesitated; then, as if in
explanation, continued in the sweetest tones at her command: "Your
generosity, I think, will guard from these two foes the woman whom just
now--I did not fail to see it--you considered worthy of a more than
gracious glance.  I shall treasure it among memories which will never
fade.  But now, illustrious Imperator! tell me, what is your decision
concerning me and the children?  What may we hope from your favour?"

"That  Octavianus will  be more  and  more warmly animated by the desire
to accord you and yours a worthy destiny, the more firmly you expect that
he will attest his generosity."

"And if I fulfil this desire and expect from you everything that is great
and noble--the condition is not difficult--what proofs of your
graciousness will then await us?"

"Paint them with all the fervour of that vivid power of imagination which
interpreted even my glance in your favour, and devised the marvels by
which you rendered the greatest and most brilliant man in Rome the
happiest of mortals.  But--by Zeus!--it is the fourth hour after
noonday!"

A glance from the window had caused the exclamation.  Then, pressing his
hand upon his heart, he continued in a tone of the most sincere regret
"How gladly I would prolong this fascinating conversation, but important
matters which, unfortunately, cannot be deferred, summon me--"

"And your answer?" cried Cleopatra, panting for breath and gazing at him
with eyes full of expectation.

"Must I repeat it?" he  asked with  impatient haste.  "Very well, then.
In return for implicit confidence on your part, favour, forgiveness,
cordiality, every consideration which you can justly desire.  Your heart
is so rich in warmth of feeling, grant me but a small share of it and ask
tangible gifts in return.  They are already bestowed."  Then greeting her
like a friend who is reluctant to say farewell, he hastily left the
apartment.

"Gone--gone!" cried Iras as the door closed behind him.  "An eel that
slips from the hand which strives to hold him."

"Northern ice," added Cleopatra gloomily as Charmian aided her to find a
more comfortable position.  "As smooth as it is cold; there is nothing
more to hope."

"Yes, my royal mistress, yes," Iras eagerly protested.  "Dolabella is
waiting for him in the Philadelphus court-yard.  From him--you have his
promise--we shall learn what Octavianus has in store for you."

In truth, the Caesar did find the youth at the first gate of the palace,
inspecting his superb Cyrenean horses.

"Magnificent animals!"  cried Octavianus; "a gift from the city!  Will
you drive with me?--A remarkable, a very remarkable woman!"

"Isn't she?" asked Dolabella eagerly.

"Undoubtedly," replied the Caesar.  "But though she might almost be your
mother, an uncommonly dangerous one for youths of your age.  What a
melting voice, what versatility, what fervour!  And yet such regal grace
in every movement!  But I wish to stifle, not to fan, the spark which
perhaps has already fallen into your heart.  And the play, the farce
which she just enacted before me in the midst of most serious matters!"

He uttered a low, short laugh; but Dolabella exclaimed expectantly:
"You rarely laugh, but this conversation--apparently--excites your mirth.
So the result was satisfactory?"

"Let us hope so.  I was as gracious to her as possible."

"That is delightful.  May I know in what manner your kindness and wisdom
have shaped her future?  Or, rather, what did you promise the vanquished
Queen?"

