watered her goats at our well, and while I was still quite a boy and she
a little girl, she would listen for hours when I played on my willow pipe
the songs which Paulus had taught me.  As long as I played she was
perfectly quiet, and when I ceased she wanted to hear more and still
more, until I had too much of it and went away.  Then she would grow
angry, and if I would not do her will she would scold me with bad words.
But she always came again, and as I had no other companion and she was
the only creature who cared to listen to me, I was very well-content that
she should prefer our well to all the others.  Then we grew order and I
began to be afraid of her, for she would talk in such a godless way--and
she even died a heathen.  Paulus, who once overheard us, warned me
against her, and as I had long thrown away the pipe and hunted beasts
with my bow and arrow whenever my father would let me, I was with her for
shorter intervals when I went to the well to draw water, and we became
more and more strangers; indeed, I could be quite hard to her.  Only once
after I came back from the capital something happened--but that I need
not tell you.  The poor child was so unhappy at being a slave and no
doubt had first seen the light in a free-house.

"She was fond of me, more than a sister is of a brother--and when my
father was dead she felt that I ought not to learn the news from any one
but herself.  She had seen which way I had gone with the Pharanites and
followed me up, and she soon found me, for she had the eyes of a gazelle
and the ears of a startled bird.  It was not this time difficult to find
me, for when she sought me we were fighting with the Blemmyes in the
green hollow that leads from the mountain to the sea.  They roared with
fury like wild beasts, for before we could get to the sea the fishermen
in the little town below had discovered their boats, which they had
hidden under sand and stones, and had carried them off to their harbor.
The boy from Raithu who accompanied me, had by my orders kept them in
sight, and had led the fishermen to the hiding-place.  The watchmen whom
they had left with the boats had fled, and had reached their companions
who were fighting round the castle; and at least two hundred of them had
been sent back to the shore to recover possession of the boats and to
punish the fishermen.  This troop met us in the green valley, and there
we fell to fighting.

"The Blemmyes outnumbered us; they soon surrounded us before and behind,
on the right side and on the left, for they jumped and climbed from rock
to rock like mountain goats and then shot down their reed-arrows from
above.  Three or four touched me, and one pierced my hair and remained
hanging in it with the feather at the end of the shaft.

"How the battle went elsewhere I cannot tell you, for the blood mounted
to my head, and I was only conscious that I myself snorted and shouted
like a madman and wrestled with the heathen now here and now there, and
more than once lifted my axe to cleave a skull.  At the same time I saw a
part of our men turn to fly, and I called them back with furious words;
then they turned round and followed me again.

"Once, in the midst of the struggle, I saw Miriam too, clinging pale and
trembling to a rock and looking on at the fight.  I shouted to her to
leave the spot, and go back to my father, but she stood still and shook
her head with a gesture--a gesture so full of pity and anguish--I shall
never forget it.  With hands and eyes she signed to me that my father was
dead, and I understood; at least I understood that some dreadful
misfortune had happened.  I had no time for reflection, for before I
could gain any certain information by word of mouth, a captain of the
heathen had seized me, and we came to a life and death struggle before
Miriam's very eyes.  My opponent was strong, but I showed the girl--who
had often taunted me for being a weakling because I obeyed my father in
everything--that I need yield to no one.  I could not have borne to be
vanquished before her and I flung the heathen to the ground and slew him
with my axe.  I was only vaguely conscious of her presence, for during my
severe struggle I could see nothing but my adversary.  But suddenly I
heard a loud scream, and Miriam sank bleeding close before me.  While I
was kneeling over his comrade one of the Blemmyes had crept up to me, and
had flung his lance at me from a few paces off.  But Miriam--Miriam--"

"She saved you at the cost of her own life," said Petrus completing the
lad's sentence, for at the recollection of the occurrence his voice had
failed and his eyes overflowed with tears.

Hermas nodded assent, and then added softly: "She threw up her arms and
called my name as the spear struck her.  The eldest son of Obedianus
punished the heathen that had done it, and I supported her as she fell
dying and took her curly head on my knees and spoke her name; she opened
her eyes once more, and spoke mine softly and with indescribable
tenderness.  I had never thought that wild Miriam could speak so sweetly,
I was overcome with terrible grief, and kissed her eyes and her lips.
She looked at me once more with a long, wide-open, blissful gaze, and
then she was dead."

"She was a heathen," said Dorothea, drying her eyes, "but for such a
death the Lord will forgive her much."

"I loved her dearly," said Marthana, "and will lay my sweetest flowers on
her grave.  May I cut some sprays from your blooming myrtle for a
wreath?"

"To-morrow, to-morrow, my child," replied Dorothea.  "Now go to rest; it
is already very late."

"Only let me stay till Antonius and Jethro come back," begged the girl.

"I would willingly help you to find your son," said Hermas, "and if you
wish I will go to Raithu and Klysma, and enquire among the fishermen.
Had the centurion--" and as he spoke the young soldier looked down in
some embarrassment, "had the centurion found his fugitive wife of whom he
was in pursuit with Talib, the Amalekite, before he died?"

"Sirona has not yet reappeared," replied Petrus, and perhaps--but just
now you mentioned the name of Paulus, who was so dear to you and your
father.  Do you know that it was he who so shamelessly ruined the
domestic peace of the centurion?"

"Paulus!"  cried Hermas.  "How can you believe it?"

"Phoebicius found his sheepskin in his wife's room," replied Petrus
gravely.  "And the impudent Alexandrian recognized it as his own before
us all and allowed the Gaul to punish him.  He committed the disgraceful
deed the very evening that you were sent off to gain intelligence."

"And Phoebicius flogged him?"  cried Hermas beside himself.  "And the
poor fellow bore this disgrace and your blame, and all--all for my sake.
Now I understand what he meant!  I met him after the battle and he told
me that my father was dead.  When he parted from me, he said he was of
all sinners the greatest, and that I should hear it said down in the
oasis.  But I know better; he is great-hearted and good, and I will not
bear that he should be disgraced and slandered for my sake."  Hermas had
sprung up with these words, and as he met the astonished gaze of his
hosts, he tried to collect himself, and said:

"Paulus never even saw Sirona, and I repeat it, if there is a man who may
boast of being good and pure and quite without sin, it is he.  For me,
and to save me from punishment and my father from sorrow, he owned a sin
that he never committed.  Such a deed is just like him--the brave--
faithful friend!  But such shameful suspicion and disgrace shall not
weigh upon him a moment longer!"

"You are speaking to an older man," said Petrus angrily interrupting the
youth's vehement speech.  "Your friend acknowledged with his own lips--"

"Then he told a lie out of pure goodness," Hermas insisted.  "The
sheepskin that the Gaul found was mine.  I had gone to Sirona, while her
husband was sacrificing to Mithras, to fetch some wine for my father, and
she allowed me to try on the centurion's armor; when he unexpectedly
returned I leaped out into the street and forgot that luckless sheepskin.
Paulus met me as I fled, and said he would set it all right, and sent me
away--to take my place and save my father a great trouble.  Look at me as
severely as you will, Dorothea, but it was only in thoughtless folly that
I slipped into the Gaul's house that evening, and by the memory of my
father--of whom heaven has this day bereft me--I swear that Sirona only
amused herself with me as with a boy, a child, and even refused to let me
kiss her beautiful golden hair.  As surely as I hope to become a warrior,
and as surely as my father's spirit hears what I say, the guilt that
Paulus took upon himself was never committed at all, and when you
condemned Sirona you did an injustice, for she never broke her faith to
her husband for me, nor still less for Paulus."

Petrus and Dorothea exchanged a meaning glance, and Dorothea said:

"Why have we to learn all this from the lips of a stranger?  It sounds
very extraordinary, and yet how simple!  Aye, husband, it would have
become us better to guess something of this than to doubt Sirona.  From
the first it certainly seemed to me impossible that that handsome woman,
for whom quite different people had troubled themselves should err for
this queer beggar--"

"What cruel injustice has fallen on the poor man!"  cried Petrus.  "If he
had boasted of some noble deed, we should indeed have been less ready to
give him credence."

"We are suffering heavy punishment," sighed Dorothea, "and my heart is
bleeding.  Why did you not come to us, Hermas, if you wanted wine?  How
much suffering would have been spared if you had!"

The lad looked down, and was silent; but soon he recollected himself, and
said eagerly:

"Let me go and seek the hapless Paulus; I return you thanks for your
kindness but I cannot bear to stay here any longer.  I must go back to
the mountain."

The senator and his wife did not detain him, and when the court-yard gate
had closed upon him a great stillness reigned in Petrus' sitting-room.
Dorothea leaned far back in her seat and sat looking in her lap while the
tears rolled over her cheeks; Marthana held her hand and stroked it, and
the senator stepped to the window and sighed deeply as he looked down
into the dark court.  Sorrow lay on all their hearts like a heavy leaden
burden.  All was still in the spacious room, only now and then a loud,
long-drawn cry of the wailing women rang through the quiet night and
reached them through the open window; it was a heavy hour, rich in vain,
but silent self-accusation, in anxiety, and short prayers; poor in hope
or consolation.

Presently Petrus heaved a deep sigh, and Dorothea rose to go up to him
and to say to him some sincere word of affection; but just then the dogs
in the yard barked, and the agonized father said softly--in deep
dejection, and prepared for the worst:

"Most likely it is they."

The deaconess pressed his hand in hers, but drew back when a light tap
was heard at the court-yard gate.  "It is not Jethro and Antonius."  said
Petrus, "they have a key."

Marthana had gone up to him, and she clung to him as he leaned far out of
the window and called to whoever it was that had tapped:

"Who is that knocking?"

The dogs barked so loud that neither the senator nor the women were able
to hear the answer which seemed to be returned.

"Listen to Argus," said Dorothea, "he never howls like that, but when you
come home or one of us, or when he is pleased."

Petrus laid his finger on his lips and sounded a clear, shrill whistle,
and as the dogs, obedient to this signal, were silent, he once more
called out, "Whoever you may be, say plainly who you are, that I may open
the gate."

They were kept waiting some few minutes for the answer, and the senator
was on the point of repeating his enquiry, when a gentle voice timidly
came from the gate to the window, saying, "It is I, Petrus, the fugitive
Sirona."  Hardly had the words tremulously pierced the silence, when
Marthana broke from her father, whose hand was resting on her shoulder,
and flew out of the door, down the steps and out to the gate.

"Sirona; poor, dear Sirona," cried the girl as she pushed back the bolt;
as soon as she had opened the door and Sirona had entered the court, she
threw herself on her neck, and kissed and stroked her as if she were her
long lost sister found again; then, without allowing her to speak, she
seized her hand and drew her--in spite of the slight resistance she
