more and more uneasy.

Philippus loved Paula.--A trifling incident suddenly occurred to his mind
which made him certain on that point; he had only too much experience in
such matters.  Yesterday, it had struck him that ever since his father's
death--that was ever since Paula's change of residence--Philippus dressed
more carefully than had been his wont.  "Now this," thought he, "is a
change that does not come over so serious a man unless it is caused by
love."

A mingled torment of pain and rage shot through him as he again saw the
tall shadow cross the window.  For the first time in his life he felt the
pangs of jealousy, which he had so often laughed at in his friends; but
was it not absurd to allow it to torture him; was he not sure, since that
morning's meeting, quite sure of Paula?  And Philippus!  Even if he,
Orion, must retire into the background before a higher judge, in the eyes
of a woman he surely had the advantage!--But in spite of all this it
troubled him to know that the physician was with Paula at such an hour;
he angrily pulled his horse's head round, and it was a pleasure to him to
feel the fiery creature, unused as it was to such rough treatment, turn
restive at it now.  By the time he had gone a hundred steps from those
windows with their cursed glare, the horse was displaying all the temper
and vice that had been taken out of him as a foal.  Orion had to fight a
pitched battle with his steed, and it was a relief to him to exercise his
power with curb and knee.  In vain did the creature dance round and
round; in vain did he rear and plunge; the steady rider was his master;
and it was not till he had brought him to quietness and submission that
Orion drew breath and looked about him while he patted the horse's smooth
neck.

Close at hand, behind a low hedge, spread the thick, dark groves of
Susannah's garden and between them the back of the house was visible,
being more brilliantly lighted than even Paula's rooms.  Three of the
windows showed lights; two were rather dim, however, the result probably
of one lamp only.

All this could not matter to him; nevertheless he remained gazing at the
roof of the colonnade which went round the house below the upper floor;
for, on the terrace it formed, leaning against a window-frame, stood a
small figure with her head thrust so far forth to listen that the light
shone through the curls that framed it.  Katharina was trying to overhear
a dialogue between the Patriarch Benjamin--whose bearded and apostolic
head Orion could clearly recognize--and the priest John, an insignificant
looking little man, of whom, however, the deceased Mukaukas had testified
that he was far superior to old Plotinus the Bishop in intellect and
energy.

The young man could easily have watched Katharina's every movement, but
he did not think it worth while.  Nevertheless, as he rode on, the water-
wagtail's little figure dwelt in his mind; not alone, however, for that
of Paula immediately rose by her side; and the smaller Katharina's
seemed, the more ample and noble did the other appear.  Every word he
had heard that day from Paula's lips rushed to his remembrance, and
the vivid and lovely memory drove out all care.  That woman, who only a
few hours since, had declared herself ready, with him, to hope all
things, to believe all things, and to accept his protection--that lordly
maiden whom he had been glad to bid fix her eye, with him, on the goal of
his future efforts, whose pure gaze could restrain his passion and
impetuosity as by a charm, and who yet granted him the right to strive to
possess her--that proud daughter of heroes, whom even his father would
have clasped to his heart as a daughter--was it possible that she should
betray him like some pleasure-seeking city beauty?  Could she forget her
dignity as a woman?--No! and a thousand times no.  To doubt her was to
insult her--was to wrong her and himself.

The physician loved her; but it certainly was not any warmer feeling than
friendship on her part that made her receive him at this late hour.  The
shame would be his own, if he ever again allowed such base suspicion to
find place in his soul!

He breathed a deep sigh of relief.  And when his servant, who had
lingered to pay the toll at the bridge, came up with him, Orion
dismounted and desired him to lead his horse home, for he himself wished
to return on foot, alone with his thoughts.  He walked meditatively and
slowly under the sycamores, but he had not gone far when, on the other
side of the deserted road, he heard some one overtaking him with long,
quick strides.  He recognized the leech Philippus at a glance and was
glad, for this proved to him how senseless and unjust his doubts had
been, and how little ground he had for regarding the physician as a
rival; for indeed this man did not look like a happy lover.  He hurried
on with his head bent, as though under a heavy burthen, and clasped his
hand to his forehead with a gesture of despair.  No, this nocturnal
wanderer had left no hour of bliss behind him; and if his demeanor was
calculated to rouse any feeling it was not envy, but pity.

Philippus did not heed Orion; absorbed in himself, he strode on, moaning
dully, as if in pain.  For a few minutes he disappeared into a house
whence came loud cries of suffering, and when he came out again, he
walked on, shaking his head now and then, as a man who sees many things
happen which his understanding fails to account for.

The end of his walk was a large, palatial building.  The stucco had
fallen off in places, and in the upper story the windows had been broken
away till their open ings were a world too wide.  In former times this
house had accommodated the State officers of Finance for the province,
and the ground-floor rooms had been suitably and comfortably fitted up
for the Ideologos--the supreme controller of this department, who usually
resided at Alexandria, but who often spent some weeks at Memphis when on
a tour of inspection.  But the Arabians had transferred the management of
the finances of the whole country to the new capital of Fostat on the
other shore of the river, and that of the monetary affairs of the
decaying city had been incorporated with the treasurer's department of
the Mukaukas' household.  The senate of the city had found the expense of
this huge building too heavy, and had been well content to let the lower
rooms to Philippus and his Egyptian friend, Horapollo.

The two men occupied different rooms, but the same slaves attended to
their common housekeeping and also waited on the physician's assistant, a
modest and well-informed Alexandrian.

When Philippus entered his old friend's lofty and spacious study he found
him still up, sitting before a great number of rolls of manuscript, and
so absorbed in his work that he did not notice his late-coming comrade
till the leech bid him good-evening.  His only reply was an
unintelligible murmur, for some minutes longer the old man was lost in
study; at last, however, he looked up at Philippus, impatiently tossing
an ivory ruler-which he had been using to open and smooth the papyrus on
to the table; and at the same moment a dark bundle under it began to
move--this was the old man's slave who had long been sleeping there.

Three lamps on the writing-table threw a bright light on the old man and
his surroundings, while the physician, who had thrown himself on a couch
in a corner of the large room, remained in the dark.

What startled the midnight student was his housemate's unwonted silence;
it disturbed him as the cessation of the clatter of the wheel disturbs a
man who lives in a mill.  He looked at his friend with surprised enquiry,
but Philippus was dumb, and the old man turned once more to his rolls of
manuscript.  But he had lost the necessary concentration; his brown hand,
in which the blue veins stood out like cords, fidgeted with the scrolls
and the ivory rule, and his sunken lips, which had before been firmly
closed, were now twitching restlessly.

The man's whole aspect was singular and not altogether pleasing: his lean
brown figure was bent with age, his thoroughly Egyptian face, with broad
cheekbones and outstanding ears, was seamed and wrinkled like oak-bark;
his scalp was bare of its last hair, and his face clean-shaved, but for a
few tufts of grey hair by way of beard, sprouting from the deep furrows
on his cheeks and chin, like reeds from the narrow bed of a brook; the
razor could not reach them there, and they gave him an untidy and
uncared-for appearance.  His dress answered to his face--if indeed that
could be called dress which consisted of a linen apron and a white
kerchief thrown over his shoulders after sundown.  Still, no one meeting
him in the road could have taken him for a beggar; for his linen was fine
and as white as snow, and his keen, far-seeing eyes, above which, exactly
in the middle, his bristly eyebrows grew strangely long and thick, shone
and sparkled with clear intelligence, firm self-reliance, and a repellent
severity which would no more have become an intending mendicant than the
resolute and often scornful expression which played about his lips.
There was nothing amiable, nothing prepossessing, nothing soft in this
man's face; and those who knew what his life had been could not wonder
that the years had failed to sweeten his abrupt and contradictory
acerbity or to transmute them into that kindly forbearance which old men,
remembering how often they have stumbled and how many they have seen
fall, sometimes find pleasure in practising.

He had been born, eighty years before, in the lovely island of Philae,
beyond the cataract in the district of the temple of Isis, and under the
shadow of the only Egyptian sanctuary in which the heathen cultus was
kept up, and that publicly, as late as in his youth.  Since Theodosius
the Great, one emperor and one Praefectus Augustalis after another had
sent foot-soldiers and cavalry above the falls to put an end to idolatry
in the beautiful isle; but they had always been routed or destroyed by
the brave Blemmyes who haunted the desert between the Nile and the Red
Sea.  These restless nomad tribes acknowledged the Isis of Philae as
their tutelary goddess, and, by a very ancient agreement, the image of
their patroness was carried every year by her priests in a solemn
procession to the Blemmyes, and then remained for a few weeks in their
keeping.  Horapollo's father was the last of the horoscope readers, and
his grandfather had been the last high-priest of the Isis of Philae.  His
childhood had been passed on the island but then a Byzantine legion had
succeeded in beating the Blemmyes, in investing the island, and in
plundering and closing the temple.  The priests of Isis escaped the
imperial raid and Horapollo had spent all his early years with his
father, his grandfather, and two younger sisters, in constant peril and
flight.  His youthful spirit was unremittingly fed with hatred of the
persecutors, the cruel contemners and exterminators of the faith of his
forefathers; and this hatred rose to irreconcilable bitterness after the
massacre at Antioch where the imperial soldiery fell upon all his family,
and his grandfather and two innocent sisters were murdered.  These
horrors were committed at the instigation of the Bishop, who denounced
the Egyptian strangers as idolaters, and to whom the Roman prefect, a
proud and haughty patrician, had readily lent the support of an armed
force.  It was owing to the narrowest chance--or, as the old man would
have it, to the interposition of great Isis, that his father had been so
happy as to get away with him and the treasures he had brought from the
temple at Philae.  Thus they had means to enable them to travel farther
under an assumed name, and they finally settled in Alexandria.  Here the
persecuted youth changed his name, Horus, to its Greek equivalent, and
henceforth he was known at home and in the schools as Apollo.  He was
highly gifted by nature, and availed himself with the utmost zeal of the
means of learning that abounded in Alexandria; he labored indefatigably
and dug deep into every field of Greek science, gaining, under his
father's guidance, all the knowledge of Egyptian horoscopy, which
was not wholly lost even at this late period.

In the midst of the contentious Christian sects of the capital, both
father and son remained heathen and worshippers of Isis; and when the old
priest died at an advanced age, Horapollo moved to Memphis where he led
the quiet and secluded life of a student, mingling only now and then with
the astronomers, astrologers, and calendar-makers at the observatory, or
visiting the alchemists' laboratories, where, even in Christian Egypt,
they still devoted themselves to attempts to transmute the baser into the
noble metals.  Alchemists and star-readers alike soon detected the old
man's superior knowledge, and in spite of his acrid and often
offensively-repellent demeanor, took counsel of him on difficult
questions.  His fame had even reached the Arabs, and, when it was
necessary to find the exact direction towards Mecca for the prayer niche
in Amru's new mosque, he was appealed to, and his decision was final.

Philippus had, some years since, been called to the old man's bedside in
sickness, and being then a beginner and in no great request, he had given
the best of his time and powers to the case.  Horapollo had been much
attracted by the young physician's wide culture and earnest studiousness;
he had conceived a warm liking for him, the warmest perhaps that he had
ever felt for any fellow-human since the death of his own family.  At
last the elder took the younger man into his heart with such overflowing
affection, that it seemed as though his spirit longed to make up now for
