
After he had exchanged a few cordial words with them the widow prepared
to withdraw, and was about to take leave when he went up to her and
announced that he would pay her a visit the next day or the day after;
that he wished to speak with her of matters involving the happiness of
one who was dear to them both, and Dame Joanna, believing that he
referred to Paula, whispered:

"She has no idea as yet of the terrible fate the people have in store for
her.  If possible, spare her the fearful truth before she sleeps this
night."

"If possible," repeated the prelate.  Then, as Mary kissed his hand
before leaving, he drew her to him and said: "Like the Infant Christ,
every Christian child is the Mother's.  You, Mary, are chosen before
thousands!  The Lord took your father to himself as a martyr; your mother
has dedicated herself to Heaven.  Your road is marked out for you, child,
reflect on this.  To-morrow-no, the day after, I will see you and guide
you in the new path."

At these words Joanna turned pale.  She now understood what the bishop's
purpose was in calling on her.  At the bottom of the stairs, she threw
her arms round the child and asked her in--a low voice: "Do you pine for
the cloister--do you wish to go away from us like your mother, to think
of nothing but saving your soul, to live a nun in the holy seclusion
which Pulcheria has described to you so often?"

But this the child positively denied; and as Joanna's head drooped
anxiously and sadly, Mary looked up brightly and exclaimed: "Never fear,
Mother dear!  Things will have altered greatly by the day after tomorrow.
Let the bishop come!  I shall be a match for him!--Oh! you do not know me
yet.  I have been like a lamb among you through all this misfortune and
serious trouble; but there is something more in me than that.  You will
be quite astonished!"

"Nay, nay.  Remain what you are," the widow said.

"Always and ever full of love for you and Pul.  But I am a grand and
trusted person now!  I have something very important to do for Orion
to-morrow.  Something--Rustem will go with me.--Important, very
important, Mother Joanna.  But what it is I must not tell--not even you!"

Here she was interrupted, for the heavy prison door opened for their
exit.

It was many hours before it was again unlocked to let out the bishop, so
long was he detained talking to Paula in her cell.

To his enquiry as to whether she was an orthodox Greek, or as the common
people called it, a Melchite, she replied that she was the latter; adding
that, if he had come with a view to perverting her from the confession
of her forefathers, his visit was thrown away; at the same time she
reverenced him as a Christian and a priest; as a learned man, and the
friend whom her deceased uncle had esteemed above every other minister of
his confession; she was gladly ready to disclose to him all that lay on
her soul in the face of death.  He looked into the pure, calm face; and
though, at her first declaration, he had felt prompted to threaten her
with the hideous end which he had but just done his utmost to avert, he
now remembered the Greek widow's request and bound himself to keep
silence.

He allowed her to talk till midnight, giving him the whole history of all
she had known of joy and sorrow in the course of her young life; his keen
insight searched her soul, his pious heart rose to meet the strength and
courage of hers; and when he quitted her, as he walked home with the
deacon, the first words with which he broke a long silence were:

"While you were asleep, God vouchsafed me an edifying hour through that
heretic child of earth."





CHAPTER XX.

When the door in the tall prison-wall was closed behind the women, Joanna
made her way through streets still sultry under the silence of the night,
Rustem following with the child.

The giant's good heart was devoted to Mary, and he often passed his huge
hand over his eyes while she told him all that the scene they had
witnessed meant, and the fearful end that threatened Paula.  He broke
in now and again, giving utterance to his grief and wrath in strange,
natural sounds; for he looked up to his beautiful sick nurse as to a
superior being, and Mandane, too, had often remarked that they could
never forget all that the noble maiden had done for them.

"If only," Rustem cried at length, clenching his powerful fist, "If only
I could--they should see.  .  .  ."  and the child looked up with shrewd,
imploring eyes, exclaiming eagerly:

"But you could, Rustem, you could!"

"I?"  asked Rustem in surprise, and he shook his head doubtfully.

"Yes, you, Rustem; you of all men.  We were talking over something in the
prison, and if only you were ready and willing to help us in the matter."

"Willing!"  laughed the worthy fellow striking his heart; and he went on
in his strangely-broken Greek, which was, however, quite intelligible:
"I would give hair and skin for the noble lady.  You have only to speak
out."

The child clung to the big man with both hands and drew him to her
saying: "We knew you had a grate ful heart.  But you see.  .  ."  and she
interrupted herself to ask in an altered voice:

"Do you believe in a God?  or stay--do you know what a sacred oath is?
Can you swear solemnly?  Yes, yes.  .  ."  and drawing herself up as tall
as possible she went on very seriously: "Swear by your bride Mandane--as
truly as you believe that she loves you.  .  ."

"But, sweet soul...."

"Swear that you will never betray to a living soul what I am going to
say--not even to Mother Joanna and Pulcheria; no, nor even to your
Mandane, unless you find you cannot help it and she gives her sacred
word...."

"What is it?  You quite frighten me!  What am I to swear?"

"Not to reveal what I am now going to tell you."

"Yes, yes, little Mistress; I can promise you that."  Mary sighed, a
long-drawn "Ah ...!"  and told him that a trustworthy messenger must be
found to go forth to meet Amru, so as to be in time to save Paula.  Then
came the question whether he knew the road over the hills from Babylon to
the ancient town of Berenice; and when he replied that he had lately
travelled that way, and that it was the shortest road to the sea for
Djidda and Medina, she repeated her satisfied "Ah!"  took his hand, and
went on with coaxing but emphatic entreaty while she played with his big
fingers: "And now, best and kindest Rustem, in all Memphis there is but
one really trusty messenger; but he, you see, is betrothed, and so he
would rather get married and go home with his bride than help us to save
the life of poor Paula."

"The cur!"  growled the Persian.

At this Mary laughed out: "Yes, the cur!"  and went on gaily: "But you
are abusing yourself, you stupid Rustem.  You, you are the messenger I
mean, the only faithful and trustworthy one far or near.  You, you must
meet the governor...."

"I!"  said the man, and he stood still with amazement; but Mary pulled
him onward, saying: "But come on, or the others will notice something.--
Yes, you, you must...."

"But child, child," interrupted Rustem lamentably,

"I must go back to my master; and you see, common right and justice...."

"You do not choose to leave your sweetheart; not even if the kind
creature who watched over you day and night should die for it--die the
most cruel and horrible death!  You were ready enough to call that other,
as you supposed, a cur--that other whom no one nursed till he was well
again; but as for yourself.  .  .  ."

"Have patience then!  Hear me, little Mistress!"  Rustem broke in again,
and pulled away his hand.  "I am quite willing to wait and Mandane must
just submit.  But one man is not good for all tasks.  To ride, or guide a
train of merchandise, to keep the cameldrivers in order, to pitch a camp-
--all that I can do; but to parley with grand folks, to go straight up to
such a man as the great chief Amru with prayers and supplications--all
that, you see, sweetheart--even if it were to save my own father, that
would be...."

"But who asks you to do all that?"  said the child.  "You may stand as
mute as a fish: it will be your companion's business to do the talking."

"There is to be another one then?  But, great Masdak!  I hope that will
be enough at any rate!"

"Why will you constantly interrupt me?"  the little girl put in.  "Listen
first and raise objections after wards.  The second messenger--now open
your ears wide--it is I, I myself;--but if you stand still again, you
will really betray me.  The long and short of it is, that as surely as I
mean to save Paula, I mean to go forth to meet Amru, and if you refuse to
go with me I will set out alone and try whether Gibbus the hunchback...."

Rustem had needed some time to collect his senses after this stupendous
surprise, but now he exclaimed: "You--you--to Berenice, and  over the
mountains.  .  .  ."

"Yes, over the mountains," she repeated, "and if need be, through the
clouds."

"But such a thing was never heard of, never heard of on this earth!"  the
Persian remonstrated.  "A girl, a little lady like you--a messenger, and
all alone with a clumsy fellow like me.  No, no, no!"

"And again no, and a hundred times over no!"  cried the child merrily.
"The little lady will stop at home and you will take a boy with you--a
boy called Marius, not Mary."

"A boy!  But I thought.--It is enough to puzzle one...."

"A boy who is a girl and a boy in one," laughed Mary.  "But if you must
have it in plain words: I shall dress up as a boy to go with you;
to-morrow when we set out you will see, you will take me for my own
brother."

"Your own brother!  With a little face like yours!  Then the most
impossible things will become possible," cried Rustem laughing, and he
looked down good humoredly at the little girl.  But suddenly the
preposterousness of her scheme rose again before his mind, and he
exclaimed half-frantically: "But then my master!--It will not do--It will
never do!"

"It is for his sake that you will do us this service," said Mary
confidently.  "He is Paula's friend and protector; and when he hears what
you have done for her he will praise you, while if you leave us in the
