provisions into Ratisbon as a punishment for its desertion of the
Catholic Church, had pursued their evil way in the city.

He first discovered with what very small ill-doers he had to deal when he
held the little lamp toward them, and, to his sincere vexation, found
that they were only little boys, who, moreover, were the children of
honest folk, and therefore could scarcely be genuine scoundrels.

Yet it could hardly be any laudable purpose which brought them at so late
an hour to the cantor house, and therefore, with the intention of turning
the serious attack into a mirthful one; he shouted in a harsh voice the
gibberish which he had compounded of scraps of all sorts of languages,
and whose effect upon unruly youngsters he had tested to his own
amusement.

As his rough "Larum gardum quantitere runze punze ke hi voi la" now
reached the little ones, the impression was far deeper than he had
intended, for the cellar man's youngest son, a little fellow six years
old, first shrieked aloud, and, when the terrible old man's long arms
barred his way, he began to cry piteously.

This troubled the kind-hearted giant, who was really fond of children,
and, ere the little lad was aware of it, the captain's free left hand
grasped the waistband of his little leather breeches and lifted him into
the air.

The swift act doubled the terror and anguish of the struggling little
wight.

As the strong man held him on his arm he fought bravely with his fat
little fists and his sturdy little legs.  But though in the unequal
conflict the boy pitilessly pulled the powerful monster's grayishy yellow
imperial and bushy mustache, and the captain recognised the child from
the Red Cock as one of the rascals who often shouted their nickname of
"Turkey gobbler" after his tall figure, conspicuous from its height and
costume, he strove with honest zeal to soothe the little one.

His deep voice, meanwhile, sounded so gentle and friendly, and his
promise to give him a piece of spice cake which he was bringing home to
Ursel to sweeten the disagreeable taste of her medicine produced so
soothing an influence, that little Hans at last looked up at him
trustingly and hopefully.

The cellar man's oldest son, who had violently assaulted the old
gentleman to release his little brother, now stood penitently before him,
and the landlord's boy related, in somewhat confused but perfectly
intelligible words, the object of their coming, and in whose name they
were bringing the roll and yonder little package to old Ursel.

The story sounded humble enough, but as soon as the captain had set
little Hans on his feet and bent curiously over the forerunners of the
dear friend, which had been placed on the little bench by the door, the
three boys dashed down the stairs, and the shrill voice of the landlord's
son shrieked from the lowest step one "Turkey gobbler" and "Pope's slave"
after another.

"Satan's imps!" shouted the old man; but the outer door, which banged
below him, showed that pursuit of the naughty mockers would result to his
disadvantage.  Then as, with an angry shake of the head, he drew back
from the banisters, he saw his daughter's playmate.

How dear the latter was to him, and how fully his aged heart had retained
its capacity of feeling, were proved by the reception which he gave the
returning knight.  The injury just inflicted seemed to have been entirely
forgotten.  With tears in his eyes and a voice tremulous with deep
emotion, he drew Wolf toward him, kissing first his head, which reached
only to his lips, then his cheeks and brow.  Then, with youthful
vivacity, he expressed his pleasure in seeing him again, and, without
permitting Wolf to speak, he repeatedly exclaimed:

"And my Wawerl, and Ursel in there!  There'll be a jubilee!"

When Wolf had at last succeeded in returning his old friend's greeting
and then expressed a wish, first of all, to clasp the faithful old maid-
servant's hand, the old gentleman's beaming face clouded, and he said,
sighing:

"What has not befallen us here since you went away, my dear Wolf!  My
path has been bordered with tombstones as poplars line the highway.  But
we will let the dead rest.  Nothing can now disturb their peace.  Old
Ursel, too, is longing for the end of life, and we ought not to grudge it
to her.  Only I dread the last hour, and still more the long eternity
which will follow it, for the good, patient woman entered the snare of
the Satanic Protestant doctrine, and will not hear of taking the holy
sacrament."

Wolf begged him to admit him at once, but Blomberg declared that, after
the attack of apoplexy which she had recently had, one thing and another
might happen if she should so unexpectedly see the man to whom her whole
heart clung.  Wolf would do better first to surprise the girl upstairs,
who had no suspicion of his presence.  He, Blomberg, must look after the
old woman now.  He would carry those things--he pointed to the parcels
which the boys had left--into the young nobleman's old room.  Ursel had
always kept it ready for his return, as though she expected him daily.
This suited Wolf, only he insisted upon having his own way about the
articles he had brought, and took them upstairs with him.

He would gladly have greeted the faithful nurse of his childhood at once,
yet it seemed like a fortunate dispensation that, through the old man's
delay below, his wish to have his first meeting with the woman he loved
without witnesses should be fulfilled.




CHAPTER IV.

In spite of the darkness and the zigzag turns of the stairs, Wolf was so
familiar with every corner of the old house that he did not even need to
grope his way with his hand.

He found the door of the Blomberg lodgings open.  Putting down in the
anteroom whatever might be in his way while greeting Barbara, and
carrying the roll of velvet under his arm and a little box in his pocket,
he entered the chamber which the old man called his artist workshop.  It
was in total darkness, but through the narrow open door in the middle of
the left wall one could see what was going on in Barbara's little bow-
windowed room.  This was quite brightly lighted, for she was ironing and
crimping ruffs for the neck, small lace handkerchiefs, and cuffs.

The light required for this purpose was diffused by a couple of tallow
candles and also by the coals which heated the irons.

As she bent over the glow, it shone into her beautiful face and upon her
magnificent fair hair, which rippled in luxuriant confusion about her
round head or fell in thick waves to her hips.  The red kerchief which
had confined it was lying on the floor.  Another had slipped from her
neck and was hanging on the corner of the ironing board.  Her stockings
had lost their fastenings and slipped down to her feet, revealing limbs
whose whiteness and beauty of form vied with the round arms which, after
holding the iron near her hot cheeks, she moved with eager diligence.

The image of a vivacious, early developed child had impressed itself upon
Wolf's mind.  Now he stood before a maiden in the full bloom of her
charms, whose superb symmetry of figure surprised and stirred him to the
depths of his nature.

In spite of her immature youth, he had cherished her in his inmost
heart.  youth, she confronted him as an entirely new and doubly desirable
creature.  The quiet longing which had mastered him was transformed into
passionate yearning, but he restrained it by exerting all the strength of
will peculiar to him, for a voice within cried out that he was too
insignificant for this marvellous maiden.

But when she dipped the tips of her fingers into the dainty little bowl,
which he had once given her for a birthday present, sprinkled the linen
with water, and meanwhile sang in fresh, clear notes the 'ut, re, me, fa,
sol, la' of Perissone Cambio's singing lesson, new wonder seized him.
What compass, what power, what melting sweetness the childish voice
against whose shrillness his foster-father and he himself had zealously
struggled now possessed!  Neither songstress nor member of the boy choir
whom he had heard in Italy or the Netherlands could boast of such bell-
like purity of tone!  He was a connoisseur, and yet it seemed as though
every tone which he heard had received the most thorough cultivation.

Who in Ratisbon could have been her teacher?  To whom did she owe this
masterly training?  As if by a miracle, he knew not whether from looking
or listening, he found a combination of notes which he had long been
seeking for the motet on which he was working.  When he had registered
it, and she sang a few passages from it, what an exquisite delight
awaited him!  But what should he do now?  Ought he to surprise her in
this way?  It would certainly have been proper to be first announced by
her father; but he could not bring himself even to stir a foot.  Beads of
perspiration stood upon his brow.  Panting for breath, he seized his
handkerchief to wipe it, and in doing so the roll of velvet which he had
held under his arm fell on the floor.

Wolf stooped, and, ere he had straightened himself again, he heard
Barbara call in a questioning tone, "Father?" and saw her put down the
iron and stand listening.

Then, willing or not, he was obliged to announce his presence, and, with
a timid "It is I, Wolf," he approached the little bow-windowed room and
hesitatingly crossed the threshold.

"Wolf, my tame Wolf," she repeated gaily, without being in the least
concerned about the condition of her dress.  "I knew that we should soon
meet again, for, just think of it!  I dreamed of you last night.  I was
entering a golden coach.  It was very high, so I put my foot on your
hand, and you lifted me in."

Then, without the least embarrassment, she held out her right hand, but
slapped his fingers smartly when he passionately endeavoured to raise it
to his lips.

Yet the blow was not unkindly meant, for even while he drew back she
voluntarily clasped both his hands, scrutinized him intently from head to
foot, and said calmly:

"Welcome to the old home, Sir Knight!"  Then, laughing gaily, she added:
"Why, such a thing is unprecedented!  Not a feature, not a look is unlike
what it used to be!  And yet you've been roaming five years in foreign
lands!  Changes take place--only look at me!--changes take place more
swiftly here in Ratisbon.  How you stare at me!  I thought so!  Out with
it!  Hasn't the feather-head of those days become quite a charming young
lady?"

Now Wolf would gladly have made as many flattering speeches as she could
desire, but his tongue refused to obey him.  The new meeting was too
unlike his expectation.  The sight of the self-conscious woman who, in
her wonderful beauty, stood leaning with folded arms on the ironing-table
stirred his heart and senses too strongly.

Standing motionless, he strove for words, while his eyes revealed plainly
enough the passionate rapture which agitated his soul.  Barbara perceived
what was passing in his thoughts, and also noticed how her dress had
become disarranged during her work.

Flushing slightly, she pursed up her lips as if to whistle, and with her
head thrust forward she blew into the air in his direction.  Then,
shaking her finger at him, she hastily sat down on the chest beside the
fireplace, wound the kerchief which had fallen off closer around her
neck, and, without the least embarrassment, pulled up her stockings.

"What does it matter!" she cried with a slight shrug of the shoulders.
"How often we two have waded together in water above our knees, like the
storks!  And yet such a thing turns the head of a youth who has returned
from foreign lands a made man, and closes his bearded lips!  Have you
given me even a single honest word of welcome?  That's the way with all
of you!  And you?  If you stand there already like a dumb sign-post, how
will it be when I thoroughly turn your head like all the rest with my
singing?"

