
Wolf had not waited long; it was just striking eleven when Barbara met
him at the door talking with Herr Lerch, the owner of the house.

Before leaving the Grieb, she again glanced into the chapel in the
courtyard dedicated to Saint Dorothea, and uttered a swift though silent
prayer for good success, and that her singing might have a deep influence
upon the august hearer.

Meanwhile she scarcely heeded what her friend was saying, and, while
walking at his side the short distance through a part of Red Cock Street
and across the Haidplatz, he had no words from her lips except the
request that he would tell her father of the great honour awaiting her.

Wolf, too, had imposed silence upon himself; it was necessary for the
singer, on the eve of this important performance, to refrain from talking
in the night air.




CHAPTER XV.

Baron Malfalconnet possessed the gift of lending Time wings and using the
simplest incident as the foundation for an entertaining story.

He knew that his Majesty did not like waiting, and the quarter of an hour
which Barbara had mentioned might easily become a longer period.  So he
adorned the description of his ride as an envoy most generously with many
partially invented details.  Wolf, Herr Peter Schlumperger, Frau
Kastenmayr, his estimable sister, and the party of Ratisbon
excursionists, upon whom he had scarcely bestowed a passing glance,
all played a large and by no means enviable part.

But he gained his object, for the impatient monarch listened gladly, and
all the more willingly in proportion to the more brilliant eloquence with
which the clever connoisseur of mankind placed Barbara in contrast to all
the obscure, insignificant, and ridiculous personages whom he pretended
to have met.  The peculiar charm which her individuality thus obtained
corresponded with the idea which the monarch himself had formed of the
expected guest, and it flattered him to hear his conjecture so remarkably
confirmed.

A few questions from the monarch followed the baron's report.  While the
latter was still answering the last one, Chamberlain de Praet announced
the singer's arrival, and Count Bueren escorted the aged Marquise de
Leria to the monarch.

The Emperor went at once to the table, and as he descended the stairs,
leaning lightly on Malfalconnet's arm, it was scarcely perceptible that
he used the left foot less firmly than the other.

According to his command, only the small table at which he was to sit
with the marquise had been laid in the dining-room.  The boy choir had
taken a position opposite to it.

At his entrance Barbara rose quickly from the chair, into which she had
sunk by no means from weariness.

With a throbbing heart, and still heavily oppressed by anxiety, she
awaited the next moments and what they would bring.

The Benedictio Mensae was again to open the concert.  She needed no notes
for this familiar music.  Yet she looked toward Appenzelder, who had
thanked her for her appearance as if she had done him a great favour.

Now the orchestra behind her was silent.  Now she saw the lackeys and
attendants bow profoundly.  Now Appenzelder raised his arm.

She saw it, but he had not yet touched the desk with the little ebony
staff, and she availed herself of the pause to glance toward the
anxiously expected sovereign, whose presence she felt.

There he stood.

Barbara scarcely noticed the old lady at his left; he, he alone
captivated her eyes, her heart, her senses, her whole being.

What a happy surprise!

How Wolf, Maestro Gombert, and others had described the Emperor, and how
he stood before her!

This chivalrous, superb, almost youthful gentleman and hero, whose
haughty, self-assured bearing so admirably suited the magnificence of his
rich-hued garments, was said to be a gouty old man, bowed by the weight
of care!  Had it not been so abominable, it would have tempted her to
laugh.

How petty men were, how cruel was the fate of the great, to whom envy
clings like their own shadow, and whose image was basely distorted even
by those who knew the grandeur of their intellect and their deeds, and
who owed to them their best success in life!

Her heart beat for this man, not only with the artist's desire to satisfy
the connoisseur, no, but with stormy passion--she felt it now; yet,
though the god of love was called a blind boy, she had retained the full,
clear strength of vision and the absolute power of discernment.

No one, not even the handsomest young knight, could compare in her eyes
with the mature, powerful guide of the destiny of many millions, whose
lofty brow was illumined by the grandeur of his intellect, and with whose
name the memory of glorious victories was associated.  The pride
justified by his birth had led him from one lofty deed to another, and
he could not help carrying his head so high, for how far all the rest of
mankind lay beneath him!  There was no living mortal to whom the Emperor
Charles would have been obliged to look up, or before whom he need bow
his head at all.

She would fain have been able to stamp his image deeply, ineffaceably
upon her soul.  But, alas!

Just at that moment a short, imperious sound reached her ear.
Appenzelder had struck the desk with his baton.  The Benedictio must
begin at once, and now her breath was really coming so quickly that it
seemed impossible for her to sing in this condition.

Deeply troubled, she pressed her hand upon her bosom.

Then the cruel, tyrannical baton struck the wood a second time, and----

But what did this mean?

The Emperor had left his elderly companion after she was seated at the
table, and was advancing--her eyes, clouded by anxious expectation, did
not deceive her--and was walking with stately dignity toward the boy
choir; no, not to it, but directly toward herself.--Now it seemed as
though her heart stood still.

At no price could she have produced even a single note.

But it was not required, for the wave of the imperial hand which she saw
was to Appenzelder, and commanded him to silence his choir.

The unexpected movement concerned her alone, and ere Barbara found time
to ask herself what brought him to her, he already stood before her.

How friendly and yet how chivalrously stately as the slight bow which the
monarch bestowed upon her; and he had scarcely done so when, in peculiar
German, whose strange accent seemed to her extremely charming and
musical, he exclaimed: "we welcome you to the Golden Cross, fairest of
maidens.  You now behold what man can accomplish when he strives for
anything with genuine zeal.  The wisest among the wise declare that even
gods fail in the conflict against the obstinacy of beautiful women, and
yet our longing desire succeeded in capturing you, lovely fugitive."

Barbara alternately flushed and paled as she listened to these words.

She had not heard Frau Lerch's counsel, and yet, obedient to a secret
impulse, she timidly lowered her blue eyes.  But not a word of the
sovereign had escaped her, and, though she still lacked the power of
speech, she found courage to smile and shake her head in denial.

The Emperor did not miss a single change of feature, and, swiftly
understanding her mute contradiction, went on gaily: "Look! look!  So,
fairest of the fair, you refuse to acknowledge our glorious victory?
That bears witness to a specially independent comprehension of things.
But we, how are we to explain such a denial of an accomplished fact?"

Then Barbara stunmoned up courage and answered, still with downcast eyes,
"But, your Majestv, how can I regard myself as conquered and captured
when I voluntarily yielded to your Majesty's wish?"

"And may I perhaps also hope that it gives you pleasure to grant my
entreaty?" asked the sovereign in a subdued tone, gazing as he spoke deep
into the eyes which the young girl had just raised to his.

Barbara did not instantly find the reply she sought, and only bent her
head in assent, but the Emperor was not satisfied with this mute answer,
and eagerly desired to learn whether it was so difficult for her to admit
what he so ardently wished to hear.

Meanwhile her quick intellect had found the fitting response, and, with a
look which told the questioner more than she intended to betray, she
answered softly: "Why should I not have fulfilled your Majesty's request
gladly and proudly?  But what followed the walk here, what befell me
here, is so much more beautiful and greater--"

"And may we know," interrupted the Emperor urgently, "what you find here
that affords your heart so much pleasure?

"You and your favour," she answered quickly, and the flush which suddenly
crimsoned her cheeks showed him how deeply she was moved.

Then Charles went close to her and whispered: "And do you wish to know,
most bewitching woman, how he, in whose presence you confess that you are
glad to remain, looked forward to your coming?  As he would greet
happiness, spring.  And note that I look you in the face, it seems as
though Easter bells were pealing the resurrection of a love long buried
in this breast.  And you, maiden, you will not belie this hope?"

Barbara clung to the back of the chair for support, while from her deeply
agitated soul struggled the exclamation: "This poor heart, my lord,
belongs to you--to you alone!  How it mastered me, who can describe?  But
here, my lord, now----"

Then the monarch whispered warmly: "You are right.  What we have to say
to each other requires a more fitting time and a different place, and we
will find them."

Then he stepped back, drew himself up to his full height, waved his hand
to her with gracious condescension, and in a loud, imperious tone
commanded Appenzelder to begin the Benedictio.

"It rests with the lovely artist yonder," he added, glancing kindly at
Barbara, "whether she will now ennoble with her wonderful voice the
singing of the boy choir.  Later she will probably allow us to hear the
closing melody of the 'Ecce tu pulchra es', which, with such good reason,
delighted the Queen of Hungary, and myself no less."

He seated himself at the table as he spoke, and devoted himself to the
dishes offered him so eagerly that it was difficult to believe in the
deep, yearning emotion that ruled him.  Only the marquise at his side and
Malfalconnet, who had joined the attendant nobles, perceived that he ate
more rapidly than usual, and paid no attention to the preparation of the
viands.

The aged eyes, of the Emperor's watchful companion, to whom up to the
close of the repast he addressed only a few scattered words, also
detected something else.  Rarely, but nevertheless several times, the
Emperor glanced at the boy choir, and when, in doing so, his Majesty's
eyes met the singer's, it was done in a way which proved to the marquise,
who had acquired profound experience at the French court, that an
understanding existed between the sovereign and the artist which could
scarcely date from that day.  This circumstance must be considered, and
behind the narrow, wrinkled brow of the old woman, whose cradle had stood
in a ducal palace, thronged a succession of thoughts and plans precisely
similar to those which had filled the inind of the dressmaker and ex-maid
ere she gave Barbara her farewell kiss.

What the marquise at first had merely conjectured and put together from
various signs, became, by constant assiduous observation, complete cer-
tainty when the singer, after a tolerably long pause, joined in Josquin's
