
She had sprung into the saddle--she always travelled on horseback--
in the worst possible mood, but had urged all who were near the Emperor
Charles's person, and also the almoner Pedro de Soto, to remember the
wounded man and do everything possible to aid his recovery.

She did not mention Barbara, even by a single word, in her farewell to
her royal brother.

The latter had intended to accompany her a portion of the way, but a
great quantity of work--not least in consequence of the loss of time
occasioned by the new love life--had accumulated, and he therefore
preferred to take leave of his sister in the courtyard of the Golden
Cross.

There, with his assistance, she mounted her horse.

Quijada, who usually rendered her this service, stood aloof, silent and
pale.  The regent had noticed it, and attributed his appearance to grief
for her departure.  No one at court held a higher place in her regard,
and it pleased her that he, too, found it so hard to do without her.

As her horse started, her last salute was to the monarch and to him.

Malfalconnet, whose eyes were everywhere, noticed it, and whispered to
the Marquise de Leria, who was standing beside him: "Either Don Luis
would do well to intrust himself to our Mathys's treatment, or this
gentleman is an accomplished actor, or our most gracious lady has
tampered with the fidelity of this most loyal husband, and the
paternosters and pilgrimages of Dona Magdalena de Ulloa have been
vain."

A few minutes after, the Emperor Charles was sitting at the writing table
examining, with the Bishop of Arras, a mountain of reports and documents.
Two or three hours elapsed ere he received ambassadors and gave
audiences, and during that time Quijada was not needed by his royal
master.

He had previously had leisure only to provide for the wounded man,
cleanse himself from blood, change his dress, bid Queen Mary farewell,
and bandage the hurt afresh.  He had done this with his own hands because
he distrusted the reticence of his extremely skilful but heedless French
valet.

When he returned to his lodgings, Master Adrian followed him, and
modestly, yet with all the warmth of affection which he felt for this
true friend of his master, entreated him to permit him to speak freely.
He had perceived, not only by the pallor of Don Luis's cheeks, but other
signs, that he was suffering, and in the name of his wife, who, when her
husband was summoned from her side, had urged him with the earnestness of
anxious love to watch over him, begged him not to force himself beyond
his strength to perform his service, if his sufferings corresponded with
his appearance.

Don Luis looked sharply into the faithful face, and what he found there
induced him to admit that he was concealing a wound.  Adrian silently
beckoned to him, and led the way into his own room, where he entreated
Don Luis to show him the injury.  When he saw it, his by no means mobile
features blanched.

He knew that Quijada had accompanied Barbara home that night.  On this
errand, he was sure of it, Don Luis must have received this serious wound
at the same time as Wolf, or even obtained it from the young knight
himself.  Besides, he felt certain that the object of the Emperor's love
was connected with both disasters.  Yet not a word which could have
resembled a question escaped his beardless lips while he examined, sewed,
and bandaged the deep sword thrust with the skill and care of a surgeon.

When he had finished his task, he thanked Don Luis for the confidence
reposed in him.

Quijada pressed his hand gratefully, and begged him to do his best that
no one, not even the Emperor, should learn anything about this vexatious
mischance.  Then, not from curiosity, for grave motives, he desired to
know what relations existed between Sir Wolf Hartschwert and Barbara.

The answer was somewhat delayed, for Wolf had won the affection of the
influential valet, and what Master Adrian had learned concerning the
young knight's personal affairs from himself, his own wife in Brussels,
and the violinist Massi, he would have confided to no one on earth except
Quijada, and perhaps not even to him had he not accompanied his inquiry
with the assurance that what he intrusted to him would remain buried in
his soul, and be used only for Wolf's advantage.

This promise loosed the cautious valet's tongue.  He knew his man,
and, when Don Luis also desired to learn whether the knight had already
discovered that Barbara was now the Emperor's love, he thought he could
answer in the negative.

What he had heard of Wolf's relation to Barbara was only that the two
had spent their early youth in the same house, that the knight loved
the singer, but that she had rejected his suit.

This avowal appeared to satisfy Quijada, and it really did calm him.  He
now believed that Wolf had misjudged him, and, supposing that he was
coming from a meeting with the girl he loved, had drawn his sword against
him.  The manner in which he had attempted to rid himself of the rival
seemed criminal enough, yet the nocturnal attack had scarcely concerned
him personally, and he would not condemn the man who was usually so calm
and sensible without having heard him.

If Wolf lived--and he desired it from his heart--this act, which he
appeared to have committed in a fit of blind jealousy, should do him no
injury.

With a warm clasp of the hand, which united these two men more firmly
than a long period of mutual intercourse, each went his way in quiet
content.

In the afternoon Master Adrian was sent out to Prebrunn to announce to
Barbara a visit from the Emperor after vespers.

Wolf, it is true, had told her many things about Adrian Dubois, and
informed her how much pleasure he had had at Brussels in visiting him
and his sensible, cheerful wife, how implicitly the Emperor trusted him,
how faithfully he served him, how highly the ambassadors and the most
aristocratic gentlemen esteemed him, and how great an advantage it had
been to him, Wolf, to possess his friendship; yet she thought proper to
treat the valet with the haughty reserve which beseemed her as the
Emperor's favourite, and which yesterday evening had won the approval
of the Wittenberg theologian and of Wolf.

But Master Adrian appeared to take no notice of her manner, and performed
his errand with businesslike composure.

The Emperor Charles wished to know how she liked her new home.

In reality she had found its beauty and comfort far beyond her
expectations, had clapped her hands in surprise when she was conducted by
the marquise through the new abode, and, under the guidance of the house
steward Steen, had been shown the kitchen, the stable, the four horses,
and the garden.  In her reception-room she found a lute and a harp of
exquisitely beautiful workmanship, and a small Milan cabinet made of
ebony inlaid with ivory, in which was a heavy casket bound with silver.
The key had been given to her the evening before by the regent herself,
and when Barbara opened it she discovered so many shining zecchins and
ducats that a long time was occupied when she obeyed Fran Lerch's
request to count them.

The dressmaker from the Grieb was already in her service, and had been
a witness of her sincere delight and grateful pleasure.  The second hour
after their arrival she had helped her to employ Frau Lamperi, the maid
whom the steward called the 'garde-robiere', and had already been to the
city herself to buy, for her fortunate "darling" costly but, on account
of the approach of summer, light materials.  But she had seen Master
Adrian corning, and, while he was passing through the garden, gave her
the advice by no means to praise what she found here, but to appear as
though she had been accustomed to such surroundings, and found this and
that not quite worthy of her, but needing addition and improvement.

At first Barbara had succeeded in assuming the airs of the spoiled lady,
but when Adrian, with prosaic definiteness, asked for details, and she
saw herself compelled to begin the game of dissimulation anew, it grew
repugnant to her.

To her artist nature every restraint soon became irksome, especially so
unpleasant a one, which was opposed to her character, and ere she was her
self aware of it she was again the vivacious Wawerl, and frankly and
freely expressed her pleasure in the beautiful new things she owed to
her lover's kindness.

A smile, so faint and brief that Barbara did not perceive it, was
hovering meanwhile around the valet's thin lips.  The causes of this
strange change of opinion and mood would have been sufficiently
intelligible to him, even had he not perceived one of the reproving
glances which Frau Lerch cast at Barbara.

She, too, had met one; but since she had once obeyed the impulse of her
own nature, and felt content in doing so, she troubled herself no further
about the monitor, and there was nothing in her new home which was not
far more beautiful than what she had had in the precentor's modest house.

The marquise displeased her most deeply, and this also she plainly told
Master Adrian, and begged him to inform his Majesty, with her dutiful
greeting.  His best gift was the precaution which he had taken that she
should live apart from the old monkey.

The valet received this commission, like all the former ones, with a
slight, grave bow.

On the whole, the experienced man was not ill-pleased with her, only it
seemed to him strange that Barbara did not mention the serious misfortune
which had befallen Wolf; yet she knew from his own lips that he loved the
knight, and had learned that the latter's life was in serious danger.

So he turned the conversation to his young friend, and in an instant
a remarkable change took place in Barbara.  Wolf's sorrowful fate and
severe wound had weighed heavily upon her heart, but what the present
brought was so novel and varied that it had crowded the painful event,
near as was the past to which it belonged, into the shadow.

She now desired to know who the murderer was who had attacked him, and
cursed him with impetuous wrath.  She thought it base and shameful that
she had been denied access to his couch.

Poor, poor Wolf!
