interfere with them. I likewise let him know that I would not have men
forced to leave their fields when it would ruin their crops, and that
it was better that ours should suffer than theirs. He was obsequious in
manner and then disobeyed me, till one day I sent three labourers back
again to secure their own hay before they touched ours. And when the
harvest was gathered in the Abbe and I went round the fields of the
poor, and I pointed out the sheaves that might be marked, and they were
not the best.

I taught the girls to knit as they watched their cows, and promised
to buy some of their stockings, so that they might obtain sabots for
themselves with the price. They distrusted me at first, but before
long, they began to perceive that I was their friend, and I began to
experience a nice kind of happiness.

Alas! even this was too sweet to last, or perhaps, as the good Abbe
warned me, I was pleasing myself too much with success, and with going
my own way. The first murmur of the storm came thus: I had been out all
the afternoon with the Abbe, Armantine's bonne, and the two children,
looking at the vineyards, which always interested me much because we
have none like them in England. In one, where they were already treading
the grapes, the good woman begged that M. le Marquis and Mademoiselle
would for once tread the grapes to bring good luck. They were frantic
with joy; we took off their little shoes and silk stockings, rolled them
up in thick cloths, and let them get into the trough and dance on the
grapes with their little white feet. That wine was always called 'the
Vintage of le Marquis.' We could hardly get them away, they were so
joyous, and each carried a great bunch of grapes as a present to the
little boy at home and his mother.

We thought we saw a coachman's head and the top of a carriage passing
through the lanes, and when we came home I was surprised to find my
sister-in-law in tears, thoroughly shaken and agitated.

Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau had been to see her, she said, and had told
her the Count was in Paris, but had not sent for her; and I thought that
enough to account for her state; but when the children began to tell
their eager story, and hold up their grapes to her, she burst again into
tears, and cried: 'Oh, my dear sister, if you would be warned. It is
making a scandal, indeed it is! They call you a plebeian.'

I grew hot and angry, and demanded what could be making a scandal, and
what business Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau had to meddle with me or my
affairs.

'Ah! but she will write to my husband, and he will take me from you, and
that would be dreadful. Give it up. Oh, Marguerite, give it up for MY
sake!'

What was I to give up? I demanded. Running about the country, it
appeared, like a farmer's wife rather than a lady of quality, and
stirring up the poor against their lords. It was well known that all the
English were seditious. See what they had done to their king; and here
was I, beginning the same work. Had not the Count's intendant at
Chateau d'Aubepine thrown in his teeth what Madame de Bellaise did and
permitted? He was going to write to Monseigneur, ay, and the king's own
intendant would hear of it, so I had better take care, and Mademoiselle
had come out of pure benevolence to advise Madame la Comtesse to come
and take refuse at her husband's own castle before the thunderbolt
should fall upon me, and involve her in my ruin.

I laughed. I was sure that I was neither doing nor intending any harm;
I thought the whole a mere ebullition of spite on the duenna's part to
torment and frighten her emancipated victim, and I treated all as a joke
to reassure Cecile, and even laughed at the Abbe for treating the matter
more seriously, and saying it was always perilous to go out of a beaten
track.

'I thought the beaten track and wide road were the dangerous ones,' I
said, with more lightness, perhaps, than suited the subject.

'Ah, Madame,' he returned gravely, 'you have there the truth; but there
may be danger in this world in the narrow path.'

The most effectual consolation that I could invent for Cecile was that
if her husband thought me bad company for her, he could not but fetch
her to her proper home with him, as soon as peace was made. Did I really
think so? The little thing grew radiant with the hope.

Days went on, we heard nothing, and I was persuaded that the whole had
been, as I told Cecile, a mere figment of Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau's.

I had written to beg my mother, with my brother and sister, to come
and join us, and I as already beginning to arrange a suite of rooms
for them, my heart bounding as it only can do at the thought of meeting
those nearest and dearest of one's own blood.

I remember that I was busy giving orders that the linen should be aired,
and overlooking the store of sheets, when Gaspard and Armantine from the
window called out: 'Horses, horses, mamma! fine cavaliers!'

I rushed to the window and recognized the Solivet colours. No doubt the
baron had come to announce the arrival of my mother and the rest, and
I hastened down to meet him at the door, full of delight, with my son
holding my hand.

My first exclamation after the greeting was to ask where they were, and
how soon they would arrive, and I was terribly disappointed when I found
that he had come alone, and that my mother, with Eustace and Annora,
were at the Hotel de Nidemerle, at Paris, without any intention of
leaving it. He himself had come down on business, as indeed was only
natural since he was joined with me in the guardianship of my little
Marquis, and he would likewise be in time to enjoy the chase over the
estates.

He said no more of his purpose then, so I was not alarmed; and he seemed
much struck with the growth and improvement of Gaspard. I had much to
hear of the three who were left to me of my own family. M. de Solivet
had never seen them before, and could hardly remember his mother, so he
could not compare them with what they were before their troubles; but I
gathered that my mother was well in health, and little the worse for
her troubles, and that my little Nan was as tall as myself, a true White
Ribaumont, with an exquisite complexion, who would be all the rage if
she were not so extremely English, more English even than I had been
when I had arrived.

'And my brother, my Eustace. Oh, why did he not come with you?' I asked.

And M. de Solivet gravely answered that our brother was detained by a
suit with the Poligny family respecting the estate of Ribaumont, and,
besides, that the rapidity of the journey would not have agreed with his
state of health. I only then fully understood the matter, for our letter
had been few, and had to be carefully written and made short; and though
I knew that, at the battle of Naseby, Eustace had been wounded and made
prisoner, he had written to me that his hurt was not severe, and that
he had been kindly treated, through the intervention of our cousin Harry
Merrycourt, who, to our great regret, was among the rebels, but who had
become surety for Eustace and procured his release.

I now heard that my brother had been kept with the other prisoners in
a miserable damp barn, letting in the weather on al sides, and with no
bedding or other comforts, so that when Harry Merrycourt sought him out,
he had taken a violent chill, and had nearly died, not from the wound,
but from pleurisy. He had never entirely recovered, though my mother
thought him much stronger and better since he had been in France, out
of sight of all that was so sad and grievous to a loyal cavalier in
England.

'They must come to me,' I cried. 'He will soon be well in this beautiful
air; I will feed him with goat's mild and whey, and Tryphena shall nurse
him well.'

M. de Solivet made no answer to this, but told me how delighted
the Queen of England had to welcome my mother, whom she had at once
appointed as one of her ladies of the bedchamber; and then we spoke of
King Charles, who was at Hampton Court, trying to make terms with the
Parliament, and my brother spoke with regret and alarm of the like
spirit of resistance in our own Parliament of Paris, backed by the mob.
I remember it was on that evening that I first heard the name Frondeurs,
or Slingers, applied to the speechifiers on either side who started
forward, made their hit, and retreated, like the little street boys with
their slings. I was to hear a great deal more of that name.

It was not till after supper that I heard the cause of M. de Solivet's
visit. Cecile, who always retired early, went away sooner than usual to
leave us together, so did the Abbe, and then the baron turned to me and
said: 'Sister, how soon can you be prepared to come with me to Paris?'

I was astounded, thinking at first that Eustace's illness must be more
serious than he had led me to suppose, but he smiled and said notre
frere de Volvent, which was the nearest he could get to Walwyn, had
nothing do with it; it was by express command of the Queen Regent, and
that I might thank my mother and the Queen of England that it was no
worse. 'This is better than a letter de catche,' he added, producing a
magnificent looking envelope with a huge seal of the royal French arms,
that made me laugh rather nervously to brave my dismay, and asked what
he called THAT. He responded gravely that it was no laughing matter, and
I opened it. It was an official order that Gaspard Philippe Beranger de
Bellaise, Marquis de Nidemerle, should be brought to the Louvre to be
presented to the King.

'Well,' I said, 'I must go to Paris. Ought I to have brought my boy
before? I did not know that he ought to pay his homage till he was
older. Was it really such a breach of respect?'

'You are a child yourself, my sister,' he said, much injuring my
dignity. 'What have you not been doing here?'

Then it came on me. The intendant of the King had actually written
complaints of me to the Government. I was sewing disaffection among the
peasants by the favours I granted my own, teaching them for rebellion
like that which raged in England, and bringing up my son in the same
sentiments. Nay, I was called the Firebrand of the Bocage! If these had
been the days of the great Cardinal de Richelieu, my brother assured
me, I should probably have been by this time in the Bastille, and my son
would have been taken from me for ever!'

However, my half-brother heard of it in time, and my mother had flown to
Queen Henrietta, who took her to the Queen-Regent, and together they had
made such representations of my youth, folly, and inexperience that the
Queen-Mother, who had a fellow-feeling for a young widow and her son,
and at last consented to do nothing worse than summon me and my child to
Paris, where my mother and her Queen answered for me that I should live
quietly, and give no more umbrage to the authorities; and my brother De
Solivet had been sent off to fetch me!

I am afraid I was much more angry than grateful, and I said such hot
things about tyranny, cruelty, and oppression that Solivet looked about
in alarm, lest walls should have ears, and told me he feared he had done
wrong in answering for me. He was really a good man, but he could not in
the least understand why I should weep hot tears for my poor people
whom I was just hoping to benefit. He could not enter into feeling for
Jacques Bonhomme so much as for his horse or his dog; and I might have
argued for years without making him see anything but childish folly in
my wishing for any mode of relief better than doles of soup, dressing
wounds, and dowries for maidens.

However, there was no choice; I was helpless, and resistance would have
done my people no good, but rather harm, and would only have led to my
son being separated from me. Indeed, I cherished a hope that when the
good Queen Anne heard the facts she might understand better than
my half-brother did, and that I might become an example and public
benefactor. My brother must have smiled at me in secret, but he did not
contradict me.

My poor mother and the rest would not have been flattered by my
reluctance to come to Paris; but in truth the thought of them was my
drop of comfort, and if Eustace could not come to me I must have gone to
him. And Cecile--what was to become of Cecile?

To come with me of course. Here at least Solivet agreed with me, for he
had as great a horror of Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau as I had, and knew,
moreover, that she wrote spiteful letters to the Count d'Aubepine
about his poor little wife, which happily were treated with the young
gentleman's usual insouciance. Solivet was of my opinion that the old
demoiselle had instigated this attack. He thought so all the more when
he heard that she was actually condescending to wed the intendant of
Chateau d'Aubepine. But he said he had no doubt that my proceedings
would have been stopped sooner or later, and that it was well that it
should be done before I committed myself unpardonably.

Madame d'Aubepine had been placed in my charge by her husband, so that
I was justified in taking her with me. Her husband had spent the last
winter at Paris, but was now with the army in the Low Countries, and
the compliments Solivet paid me on my dear friend's improvement in
appearance and manner inspired us with strong hopes that she might not
attract her husband; for though still small, pale, and timid, she was
very unlike the frightened sickly child he had left.

I believe she was the one truly happy person when we left the Chateau
de Nid de Merle. She was all radiant with hope and joy, and my brother
could not but confess she was almost beautiful, and a creature whom any
man with a heart must love.




CHAPTER X. -- OLD THREADS TAKEN UP.



I think M. de Solivet realised a little better what the sacrifice was to
me, or rather how cruel the parting was to my poor people, when we set
forth on our journey. We had tried to keep the time of our departure a
secret, but it had not been possible to do so, and the whole court was
filled with people weeping and crying out to their young lord and their
good lady, as they called me, not to abandon them, kissing our dresses
as we walked along, and crowding so that we could hardly pass.

Indeed, a lame man, whom I had taught to make mats, threw himself before
the horses of our carriage, crying out that we might as well drive over
him and kill him at once; and an old woman stood up almost like a witch
or prophetess, crying out: 'Ah! that is the way with you all. You are
like all the rest! You gave us hope once, and now you are gone to your
pleasure which you squeeze out of our heart's blood.'

'Ah, good mother,' I said; 'believe me, it is not by my own will that I
leave you; I will never forget you.'

'I trust,' muttered Solivet, 'that no one is here to report all this to
that intendant de Roi,' and he hurried me into the carriage; but there
were tears running down his cheeks, and I believe he emptied his
purse among them, though not without being told by some of the poor
warm-hearted creatures that no money could repay them for the loss of
Madame la Comtesse.

'I did not know how sweet it is to be beloved,' he said to me. 'It is
almost enough to tempt one to play the role de bon seigneur.'

'Ah! brother, if you would. You are no foreigner, you are wiser and
would not make yourself suspected like me.'

He only laughed and shrugged his shoulders; but he was as good to our
poor as it is possible to be as we live here in France, where we are
often absolutely complelled to live at court, and our expenses there
force us to press heavily on our already hard-driven peasants. I
sometimes wonder whether a better time will come, when out good Duke of
Burgundy tries to carry out the maxims of Monseigneur the Archbishop
of Cambray; but I shall not live to see that day. [Footnote: No wonder
Madame de Bellaise's descendants dust not publish these writings while
the ancien regime continued!]

In due time we arrived in Paris. It was pouring with rain, so no one
came to meet us, though I looked out at every turn, feeling that Eustace
must indeed be unwell, or no weather would have kept him from flying to
meet his Meg. Or had he in these six long years ceased to care for me,
and should I find him a politician and a soldier, with his heart given
to somebody else and no room for me?

My heart beat so fast that I could hardly attend to the cries of
wonder and questions of the two children, and indeed of Cecile, to whom
everything was as new and wonderful as to them, though in the wet,
with our windows splashed all over, the first view of Paris was not too
promising. However, at last we drove beneath our own porte cochere, and
upon the steps there were all the servants. And Eustace, my own dear
brother, was at the coach-door to meet us and hand me out.

I passed from his arms to those of my mother, and then to my sister's.
Whatever might come and go, I could not but feel that there was
an indefinable bliss and bien-etre in their very presence! It was
home--coming home--more true content and rest than I had felt since that
fatal day at Nancy.

My mother was enchanted with her grandson, and knew how to welcome
Madame d'Aubepine as one of the family, since she was of course to
reside with us. The Abbe also was most welcome to my mother.

How we all looked at one another, to find the old beings we had loved,
and to learn the new ones we had become! My mother was of course the
least altered; indeed, to my surprise, she was more embonpoint than
before, instead of having the haggard worn air that I had expected, and
though she wept at first, she was soon again smiling.

Eustace, Baron Walwyn and Ribaumont, as he now unfortunately had become,
sat by me. He was much taller than when we had parted, for had not then
reached his full height, and he looked the taller from being very thin.
His moustache and pointed beard had likewise changed him, but there was
clear bright colour on his cheek, and his dear brown eyes shone upon me
with their old sweetness; so that it was not till we had been together
some little time that I found that the gay merry lad whom I had left had
become not only a man, but a very grave and thoughtful man.

Annora was a fine creature, well grown, and with the clearest, freshest
complexion, of the most perfect health, yet so pure and delicate, that
one looked at her like a beautiful flower; but it somehow struck me that
she had a discontented and almost defiant expression. She seemed to
look at me with a sort of distrust, and to be with difficulty polite to
Madame d'Aubepine, while she was almost rude to the Abbe. She scarcely
uttered a word of French, and made a little cry and gesture of disgust,
when Gaspard replied to her in his native tongue, poor child.

She was the chief disappointment to me. I had expected to find, not
indeed my little playfellow, but my own loving sister Nan; and this
young lady was like a stranger. I thought, too, my mother would have
been less lively, she seemed to me to have forgotten everything in the
satisfaction of being at Paris. At first I feared she was looking at me
with displeasure, but presently I observed that she had discarded her
widow's veil, and looked annoyed that I still wore mine. Otherwise she
was agreeable surprised in me, and turned to M. de Solivet, saying:

'Yes, my son, you are right, she is belle, assez belle; and when she is
dressed and has no more that provincial air, she will do very well.'

It was Eustace, my brother, who gave me unmixed delight that evening,
unmixed save for his look of delicate health, for that he should be
graver was only suitable to my feelings, and we knew that we were in
perfect sympathy with one another whenever our eyes met, as of old,
while we had hardly exchanged a word. And then, how gracious and gentle
he was with poor little Madame d'Aubepine, who looked up to him like a
little violet at the food of a poplar tree!

Supper passed in inquires after kinsfolk and old friends. Alas! of how
many the answer was--slain, missing since such a battle. In prison,
ruined, and brought to poverty, seemed to be the best I could hear of
any one I inquired after. That Walwyn was not yet utterly lost seemed to
be owing to Harry Merrycourt.

'He on the wrong side!' I exclaimed.

'He looks on the question as a lawyer,' said my brother; 'holding the
duty of the nation to be rather to the law than to the sovereign.'

'Base! Unworthy of a gentleman!' cried my mother. 'Who would believe him
the kinsman of the gallant Duc de Mericour?'

'He would be ashamed to count kindred with tat effeminate petit maitre!'
cried Annora.

'I think,' said Eustace, 'that the wrong and persecution that his
Huguenot grandfather suffered at the hands of his French family have
had much power in inspiring him with that which he declares is as much
loyalty as what I call by that honoured name.'

'You can speak of him with patience!' cried my mother.

'In common gratitude he is bound to do so,' said Annora.

For not only had Colonel Merrycourt preserved our brother's life after
Naseby, but he had found a plea of service to the King which availed at
the trial that followed at Westminster. Harry had managed to secure
part of the estate, as he had likewise done for our other kindred the
Thistlewoods, by getting appointed their guardian when their father
was killed Chalgrove. But soldiers had been quartered on both families;
there had been a skirmish at Walwyn with Sir Ralph Hopton, much damage
had been done to the house and grounds, and there was no means of
repairing it; all the plate had been melted up, there was nothing to
show for it but a little oval token, with the King's head on one side,
and the Queen's on the other; and as to the chaplet of pearls--

There was a moment's silence as I inquired for them. Annora said:

'Gone, of course; more hatefully than all the rest.'

My brother added, with a smile that evidently cost him an effort:

'You are the only pearl of Ribaumont left, Meg, except this one,'
showing me his ring of thin silver with one pearl set in it; 'I kept
back this one in memory of my grandmother. So Nan will have to go to her
first ball without them.'

And had little Nan never been to a ball? No; she had never danced except
that Christmas when a troop of cavaliers had been quartered at Walwyn--a
merry young captain and his lieutenant, who had sent for the fiddles,
and made them have a dance in the hall, Berenger, and Nan, and all. And
not a week after, the young captain, ay, and our dear Berry, were
lying in their blood at Alresford. Had Nan's heart been left there? I
wondered, when I saw how little she brightened at the mention of the
Court ball where she was to appear next week, and to which it seemed my
mother trusted that I should be invited in token of my being forgiven.

I tried to say that I had never meant to return to the world, and that I
still kept to my mourning; but my mother said with authority that I had
better be grateful for any token of favour that was vouchsafed to me.
She took me into her apartment after supper, and talked to me very
seriously; telling me that I must be very careful, for that I had been
so imprudent, that I should certainly have been deprived of the custody
of my son, if not imprisoned, unless my good godmother, Queen Henrietta,
and herself had made themselves responsible for me.

I told my mother that I had done nothing, absolutely nothing, but attend
to the wants of my son's people, just as I had been used to see my
grandmother, and my aunt Thistlewood, or any English lady, do at home.

'And to what had that brought England?' cried my mother. 'No, child,
those creatures have no gratitude nor proper feeling. There is nothing
to do but to keep them down. See how they are hampering and impeding
the Queen and the Cardinal here, refusing the registry of the taxes
forsooth, as if it were not honour enough to maintain the King's wars
and the splendour of his Court, and enable the nobility to shine!'
