Once alas! he followed that mad Anabaptist fool, John of Leyden, the
fellow who set up as a king, and said that men might have as many wives
as they wished. That was what sent my husband silly, but, thanks be
to the Saints, he has repented of his errors and is reconciled to the
Church and Christian marriage, and now, I, who have a forgiving nature,
am obliged to support him."

"Your business?" said Brant.

"Mynheer," she answered, dropping her husky voice, "you are a friend of
the Countess Montalvo, she who was Lysbeth van Hout?"

"No, I am acquainted with her, that is all."

"At least you are a friend of the Heer Dirk van Goorl who has left this
town for Alkmaar; he who was her lover?"

"Yes, I am his cousin, but he is not the lover of any married woman."

"No, no, of course not; love cannot look through a bridal veil, can it?
Still, you are his friend, and, therefore, perhaps, her friend, and--she
isn't happy."

"Indeed? I know nothing of her present life: she must reap the field
which she has sown. That door is shut."

"Not altogether perhaps. I thought it might interest Dirk van Goorl to
learn that it is still ajar."

"I don't see why it should. Fish merchants are not interested in rotten
herrings; they write off the loss and send out the smack for a fresh
cargo."

"The first fish we catch is ever the finest, Mynheer, and if we haven't
quite caught it, oh! what a fine fish is that."

"I have no time to waste in chopping riddles. What is your errand? Tell
it, or leave it untold, but be quick."

Black Meg leant forward, and the hoarse voice sank to a cavernous
whisper.

"What will you give me," she asked, "if I prove to you that the Captain
Montalvo is not married at all to Lysbeth van Hout?"

"It does not much matter what I would give you, for I saw the thing done
in the Groote Kerk yonder."

"Things are not always done that seem to be done."

"Look here, woman, I have had enough of this," and Brant pointed to the
door.

Black Meg did not stir, only she produced a packet from the bosom of her
dress and laid it on the table.

"A man can't have two wives living at once, can he?"

"No, I suppose not--that is, legally."

"Well, if I show you that Montalvo has two wives, how much?"

Brant became interested. He hated Montalvo; he guessed, indeed he knew
something of the part which the man had played in this infamous affair,
and knew also that it would be a true kindness to Lysbeth to rid her of
him.

"If you _proved_ it," he said, "let us say two hundred florins."

"It is not enough, Mynheer."

"It is all I have to offer, and, mind you, what I promise to pay."

"Ah! yes, the other promises and doesn't pay--the rogue, the rogue," she
added, striking a bony fist upon the table. "Well, I agree, and I ask no
bond, for you merchant folk are not like cavaliers, your word is as good
as your paper. Now read these," and she opened the packet and pushed its
contents towards him.

With the exception of two miniatures, which he placed upon one side,
they were letters written in Spanish and in a very delicate hand. Brant
knew Spanish well, and in twenty minutes he had read them all. They
proved to be epistles from a lady who signed herself Juanita de
Montalvo, written to the Count Juan de Montalvo, whom she addressed as
her husband. Very piteous documents they were also, telling a tale
that need not be set out here of heartless desertion; pleading for the
writer's sake and for the sake of certain children, that the husband and
father would return to them, or at least remit them means to live, for
they, his wife and family, were sunk in great poverty.

"All this is sad enough," said Brant with a gesture of disgust as he
glanced at the miniature of the lady and her children, "but it proves
nothing. How are we to know that she is the man's wife?"

Black Meg put her hand into the bosom of her dress and produced another
letter dated not more than three months ago. It was, or purported to
be, written by the priest of the village where the lady lived, and
was addressed to the Captain the Count Juan de Montalvo at Leyden. In
substance this epistle was an earnest appeal to the noble count from one
who had a right to speak, as the man who had christened him, taught him,
and married him to his wife, either to return to her or to forward
her the means to join him. "A dreadful rumour," the letter ended, "has
reached us here in Spain that you have taken to wife a Dutch lady at
Leyden named Van Hout, but this I do not believe, since never could you
have committed such a crime before God and man. Write, write at once, my
son, and disperse this black cloud of scandal which is gathering on your
honoured and ancient name."

"How did you come by these, woman?" asked Brant.

"The last I had from a priest who brought it from Spain. I met him at
The Hague, and offered to deliver the letter, as he had no safe means
of sending it to Leyden. The others and the pictures I stole out of
Montalvo's room."

"Indeed, most honest merchant, and what might you have been doing in his
Excellency's room?"

"I will tell you," she answered, "for, as he never gave me my pay, my
tongue is loosed. He wished for evidence that the Heer Dirk van Goorl
was a heretic, and employed me to find it."

Brant's face hardened, and he became more watchful.

"Why did he wish such evidence?"

"To use it to prevent the marriage of Jufvrouw Lysbeth with the Heer
Dirk van Goorl."

"How?"

Meg shrugged her shoulders. "By telling his secret to her so that she
might dismiss him, I suppose, or more likely by threatening that, if she
did not, he would hand her lover over to the Inquisitors."

"I see. And did you get the evidence?"

"Well, I hid in the Heer Dirk's bedroom one night, and looking through
a door saw him and another young man, whom I do not know, reading the
Bible, and praying together."

"Indeed; what a terrible risk you must have run, for had those young
men, or either of them, chanced to catch you, it is quite certain that
you would not have left that room alive. You know these heretics think
that they are justified in killing a spy at sight, and, upon my word,
I do not blame them. In fact, my good woman," and he leaned forward and
looked her straight in the eyes, "were I in the same position I would
have knocked you on the head as readily as though you had been a rat."

Black Meg shrank back, and turned a little blue about the lips.

"Of course, Mynheer, of course, it is a rough game, and the poor agents
of God must take their risks. Not that the other young man had any cause
to fear. I wasn't paid to watch him, and--as I have said--I neither know
nor care who he is."

"Well, who can say, that may be fortunate for you, especially if he
should ever come to know or to care who you are. But it is no affair of
ours, is it? Now, give me those letters. What, do you want your money
first? Very well," and, rising, Brant went to a cupboard and produced
a small steel box, which he unlocked; and, having taken from it the
appointed sum, locked it again. "There you are," he said; "oh, you
needn't stare at the cupboard; the box won't live there after to-day,
or anywhere in this house. By the way, I understand that Montalvo never
paid you."

"Not a stiver," she answered with a sudden access of rage; "the
low thief, he promised to pay me after his marriage, but instead of
rewarding her who put him in that warm nest, I tell you that already he
has squandered every florin of the noble lady's money in gambling and
satisfying such debts as he was obliged to, so that to-day I believe
that she is almost a beggar."

"I see," said Brant, "and now good morning, and look you, if we should
chance to meet in the town, you will understand that I do not know you."

"I understand, Mynheer," said Black Meg with a grin and vanished.

When she had gone Brant rose and opened the window. "Bah!" he said,
"the air is poisoned. But I think I frightened her, I think that I have
nothing to fear. Yet who can tell? My God! she saw me reading the Bible,
and Montalvo knows it! Well, it is some time ago now, and I must take my
chance."

Ah! who could tell indeed?

Then, taking the miniatures and documents with him, Brant started to
call upon his friend and co-religionist, the Heer Pieter van de Werff,
Dirk van Goorl's friend, and Lysbeth's cousin, a young man for whose
judgment and abilities he had a great respect. As a result of this
visit, these two gentlemen left that afternoon for Brussels, the seat of
Government, where they had very influential friends.

It will be sufficient to tell the upshot of their visit. Just at that
time the Government of the Netherlands wished for its own reasons to
stand well with the citizen class, and when those in authority learned
of the dreadful fraud that had been played off upon a lady of note who
was known to be a good Catholic, for the sole object of robbing her of
her fortune, there was indignation in high places. Indeed, an order was
issued, signed by a hand which could not be resisted--so deeply was
one woman moved by the tale of another's wrong--that the Count Montalvo
should be seized and put upon his trial, just as though he were any
common Netherland malefactor. Moreover, since he was a man with many
enemies, no one was found to stand between him and the Royal decree.



Three days later Montalvo made an announcement to Lysbeth. For a wonder
he was supping at home alone with his wife, whose presence he had
commanded. She obeyed and attended, sitting at the further end of the
table, whence she rose from time to time to wait upon him with her own
hands. Watching him the while with her quiet eyes, she noticed that he
was ill at ease.

"Cannot you speak?" he asked at last and savagely. "Do you think it is
pleasant for a man to sit opposite a woman who looks like a corpse in
her coffin till he wishes she were one?"

"So do I," answered Lysbeth, and again there was silence.

Presently she broke it. "What do you want?" she asked. "More money?"

"Of course I want money," he answered furiously.

"Then there is none; everything has gone, and the notary tells me that
no one will advance another stiver on the house. All my jewellery is
sold also."

He glanced at her hand. "You have still that ring," he said.

She looked at it. It was a hoop of gold set with emeralds of
considerable value which her husband had given her before marriage and
always insisted upon her wearing. In fact, it had been bought with the
money which he borrowed from Dirk van Goorl.

"Take it," she said, smiling for the first time, and drawing off the
ring she passed it over to him. He turned his head aside as he stretched
his hand towards the trinket lest his face should betray the shame which
even he must feel.

"If your child should be a son," he muttered, "tell him that his father
had nothing but a piece of advice to leave him; that he should never
touch a dice-box."

"Are you going away then?" she asked.

"For a week or two I must. I have been warned that a difficulty has
arisen, about which I need not trouble you. Doubtless you will hear of
it soon enough, and though it is not true, I must leave Leyden until the
thing blows over. In fact I am going now."

"You are about to desert me," she answered; "having got all my money,
I say that you are going to desert me who am--thus! I see it in your
face."

Montalvo turned away and pretended not to hear.

"Well, thank God for it," Lysbeth added, "only I wish that you could
take your memory and everything else of yours with you."

As these bitter words passed her lips the door opened, and there entered
one of his own subalterns, followed by four soldiers and a man in a
lawyer's robe.

"What is this?" asked Montalvo furiously.

The subaltern saluted as he entered:

"My captain, forgive me, but I act under orders, and they are to arrest
you alive, or," he added significantly, "dead."

"Upon what charge?" asked Montalvo.

"Here, notary, you had best read the charge," said the subaltern, "but
perhaps the lady would like to retire first," he added awkwardly.

"No," answered Lysbeth, "it might concern me."

"Alas! Senora, I fear it does," put in the notary. Then he began to read
the document, which was long and legal. But she was quick to understand.
Before ever it was done Lysbeth knew that she was not the lawful wife of
Count Juan de Montalvo, and that he was to be put upon his trial for
his betrayal of her and the trick he had played the Church. So she
was free--free, and overcome by that thought she staggered, fell, and
swooned away.

When her eyes opened again, Montalvo, officer, notary, and soldiers, all
had vanished.



CHAPTER VIII

THE MARE'S STABLE

When Lysbeth's reason returned to her in that empty room, her first
sense was one of wild exultation. She was free, she was not Montalvo's
wife, never again could she be obliged to see him, never again could
she be forced to endure the contamination of his touch--that was her
thought. She was sure that the story was true; were it not true who
could have moved the authorities to take action against him? Moreover,
now that she had the key, a thousand things were explained, trivial
enough in themselves, each of them, but in their sum amounting to proof
positive of his guilt. Had he not spoken of some entanglement in
Spain and of children? Had he not in his sleep--but it was needless to
remember all these things. She was free! She was free! and there on the
table still lay the symbol of her bondage, the emerald ring that was to
give him the means of flight, a flight from this charge which he knew
was hanging over him. She took it up, dashed it to the ground and
stamped upon it. Next she fell upon her knees, praising and blessing
God, and then, worn out, crept away to rest.

The morning came, the still and beautiful autumn morning, but now
all her exultation had left her, and Lysbeth was depressed and heavy
hearted. She rose and assisted the one servant who remained in the house
to prepare their breakfast, taking no heed of the sidelong glances that
the woman cast at her. Afterwards she went to the market to spend some
of her last florins in necessaries. Here and in the streets she became
aware that she was the object of remark, for people nudged each other
and stared at her. Moreover, as she hurried home appalled, her quick
ear caught the conversation of two coarse women while they walked behind
her.

"She's got it now," said one.

"Serve her right, too," answered the other, "for running after and
marrying a Spanish don."

"Marrying?" broke in the first, "it was the best that she could do. She
couldn't stop to ask questions. Some corpses must be buried quickly."

Glancing behind her, Lysbeth saw the creature nip her nostrils with her
fingers, as though to shut out an evil smell.

Then she could bear it no longer, and turned upon them.

"You are evil slanderers," she said, and walked away swiftly, pursued by
the sound of their loud, insulting laughter.

At the house she was told that two men were waiting to see her. They
proved to be creditors clamouring for large sums of money, which she
could not pay. Lysbeth told them that she knew nothing of the matter.
Thereupon they showed her her own writing at the foot of deeds, and she
remembered that she had signed more things than she chose to keep count
of, everything indeed that the man who called himself her husband put
before her, if only to win an hour of blessed freedom from his presence.
At length the duns went away vowing that they would have their money if
they dragged the bed from under her.

After that came loneliness and silence. No friend appeared to cheer her.
Indeed, she had no friends left, for by her husband's command she had
broken off her acquaintance with all who after the strange circumstances
connected with her marriage were still inclined to know her. He said
that he would have no chattering Dutch vrouws about the house, and they
said and believed that the Countess de Montalvo had become too proud to
associate with those of her own class and people.

Midday came and she could eat no food; indeed, she had touched none for
twenty-four hours; her gorge rose against it, although in her state
she needed food. Now the shame of her position began to come home to
Lysbeth. She was a wife and no wife; soon she must bear the burden of
motherhood, and oh! what would that child be? And what should she be,
its mother? What, too, would Dirk think of her? Dirk, for whom she had
done and suffered all these things. Through the long afternoon hours she
lay upon her bed thinking such thoughts as these till at length her mind
gave and Lysbeth grew light-headed. Her brain became a chaos, a perfect
hell of distorted imaginations.

Then out of its turmoil and confusion rose a vision and a desire; a
vision of peace and a desire for rest. But what rest was there for her
except the rest of death? Well, why not die? God would forgive her, the
Mother of God would plead for her who was shamed and broken-hearted and
unfit to live. Even Dirk would think kindly of her when she was dead,
though, doubtless, now if he met her he would cover his eyes with his
hand. She was burning hot and she was thirsty. How cool the water would
be on this fevered night. What could be better than to slip into it and
slowly let it close above her poor aching head? She would go out and
look at the water; in that, at any rate, there could be no harm.

She wrapped herself in a long cloak and drew its hood over her head.
Then she slipped from the house and stole like a ghost through the
darkling streets and out of the Maren or Sea Poort, where the guard let
her pass thinking that she was a country woman returning to her village.
Now the moon was rising, and by the light of it Lysbeth recognised
the place. Here was the spot where she had stood on the day of the ice
carnival, when that woman who was called Martha the Mare, and who said
that she had known her father, had spoken to her. On that water she had
galloped in Montalvo's sledge, and up yonder canal the race was run.
She followed along its banks, remembering the reedy mere some miles
away spotted with islets that were only visited from time to time by
fishermen and wild-fowlers; the great Haarlemer Meer which covered many
thousands of acres of ground. That mere she felt must look very cool and
beautiful on such a night as this, and the wind would whisper sweetly
among the tall bulrushes which fringed its banks.

On Lysbeth went and on; it was a long, long walk, but at last she came
there, and, oh! the place was sweet and vast and lonely. For so far as
her eye could reach in the light of the low moon there was nothing but
glimmering water broken here and there by the reed-wreathed islands.
Hark! how the frogs croaked and the bitterns boomed among the rushes.
Look where the wild ducks swam leaving behind them broad trails of
silver as their breasts broke the surface of the great mere into
rippling lines.

There, on an island, not a bowshot from her, grew tufts of a daisy-like
marsh bloom, white flowers such as she remembered gathering when she was
a child. A desire came upon her to pluck some of these flowers, and the
water was shallow; surely she could wade to the island, or if not what
did it matter? Then she could turn to the bank again, or she might stay
to sleep a while in the water; what did it matter? She stepped from
the bank--how sweet and cool it felt to her feet! Now it was up to
her knees, now it reached her middle, and now the little wavelets beat
against her breast. But she would not go back, for there ahead of her
was the island, and the white flowers were so close that she could count
them, eight upon one bunch and twelve upon the next. Another step and
the water struck her in the face, one more and it closed above her head.
She rose, and a low cry broke from her lips.

Then, as in a dream, Lysbeth saw a skiff glide out from among the rushes
before her. She saw also a strange mutilated face, which she remembered
dimly, bending over the edge of the boat, and a long, brown hand
stretched out to clasp her, while a hoarse voice bade her keep still and
fear nothing.

After this came a sound of singing in her ears and--darkness.



When Lysbeth woke again she found herself lying upon the ground, or
rather upon a soft mattress of dry reeds and aromatic grasses. Looking
round her she saw that she was in a hut, reed-roofed and plastered with
thick mud. In one corner of this hut stood a fireplace with a chimney
artfully built of clay, and on the fire of turfs boiled an earthen pot.
Hanging from the roof by a string of twisted grass was a fish, fresh
caught, a splendid pike, and near to it a bunch of smoked eels. Over her
also was thrown a magnificent rug of otter skins. Noting these things,
she gathered that she must be in the hovel of some fisherman.

Now by degrees the past came back to Lysbeth, and she remembered her
parting with the man who called himself her husband; remembered also her
moonlight flight and how she had waded out into the waters of the great
mere to pluck the white flowers, and how, as they closed above her
head a hand had been stretched out to save her. Lysbeth remembered,
and remembering, she sighed aloud. The sound of her sighing seemed to
attract the attention of some one who was listening outside the hut; at
any rate a rough door was opened or pushed aside and a figure entered.

"Are you awake, lady?" asked a hoarse voice.

"Yes," answered Lysbeth, "but tell me, how did I come here, and who are
you?"

The figure stepped back so that the light from the open door fell full
upon it. "Look, Carolus van Hout's daughter and Juan Montalvo's wife;
those who have seen me once do not forget me."

Lysbeth sat up on the bed and stared at the gaunt, powerful form,
the deep-set grey eyes, the wide-spread nostrils, the scarred, high
cheek-bones, the teeth made prominent by some devil's work upon the
lips, and the grizzled lock of hair that hung across the forehead. In an
instant she knew her.

"You are Martha the Mare," she said.

"Yes, I am the Mare, none other, and you are in the Mare's stable. What
has he been doing to you, that Spanish dog, that you came last night to
ask the Great Water to hide you and your shame?"

Lysbeth made no answer; the story seemed hard to begin with this strange
woman. Then Martha went on:

"What did I tell you, Lysbeth van Hout? Did I not say that your blood
should warn you against the Spaniards? Well, well, you saved me from the
ice and I have saved you from the water. Ah! who was it that led me to
row round by that outer isle last night because I could not sleep? But
what does it matter; God willed it so, and here you lie in the Mare's
stable. Nay, do not answer me, first you must eat."

Then, going to the pot, she took it from the fire, pouring its contents
into an earthen basin, and, at the smell of them, for the first time
for days Lysbeth felt hungry. Of what that stew was compounded she never
learned, but she ate it to the last spoonful and was thankful, while
Martha, seated on the ground beside her, watched her with delight, from
time to time stretching out a long, thin hand to touch the brown hair
that hung about her shoulders.

"Come out and look," said Martha when her guest had done eating. And she
led her through the doorway of the hut.

Lysbeth gazed round her, but in truth there was not much to see. The hut
itself was hidden away in a little clump of swamp willows that grew upon
a mound in the midst of a marshy plain, broken here and there by patches
of reed and bulrushes. Walking across this plain for a hundred yards or
so, they came to more reeds, and in them a boat hidden cunningly, for
here was the water of the lake, and, not fifty paces away, what seemed
to be the shore of an island. The Mare bade her get into the boat and
rowed her across to this island, then round it to another, and thence to
another and yet another.

"Now tell me," she said, "upon which of them is my stable built?"

Lysbeth shook her head helplessly.

"You cannot tell, no, nor any living man; I say that no man lives who
could find it, save I myself, who know the path there by night or by
day. Look," and she pointed to the vast surface of the mere, "on this
great sea are thousands of such islets, and before they find me the
Spaniards must search them all, for here upon the lonely waters no
spies or hound will help them." Then she began to row again without even
looking round, and presently they were in the clump of reeds from which
they had started.

"I must be going home," faltered Lysbeth.

"No," answered Martha, "it is too late, you have slept long. Look, the
sun is westering fast, this night you must stop with me. Oh! do not be
afraid, my fare is rough, but it is sweet and fresh and plenty; fish
from the mere as much as you will, for who can catch them better than I?
And water-fowl that I snare, yes, and their eggs; moreover, dried flesh
and bacon which I get from the mainland, for there I have friends whom
sometimes I meet at night."

So Lysbeth yielded, for the great peace of this lake pleased her. Oh!
after all that she had gone through it was like heaven to watch the sun
sinking towards the quiet water, to hear the wild-fowl call, to see the
fish leap and the halcyons flash by, and above all to be sure that by
nothing short of a miracle could this divine silence, broken only by
Nature's voices, be defiled with the sound of the hated accents of the
man who had ruined and betrayed her. Yes, she was weary, and a strange
unaccustomed langour crept over her; she would rest there this night
also.

So they went back to the hut, and made ready their evening meal, and as
she fried the fish over the fire of peats, verily Lysbeth found herself
laughing like a girl again. Then they ate it with appetite, and after
it was done, Mother Martha prayed aloud; yes, and without fear, although
she knew Lysbeth to be a Catholic, read from her one treasure, a
Testament, crouching there in the light of the fire and saying:

"See, lady, what a place this is for a heretic to hide in. Where else
may a woman read from the Bible and fear no spy or priest?" Remembering
a certain story, Lysbeth shivered at her words.

"Now," said the Mare, when she had finished reading, "tell me before
you sleep, what it was that brought you into the waters of the Haarlemer
Meer, and what that Spanish man has done to you. Do not be afraid, for
though I am mad, or so they say, I can keep counsel, and between you and
me are many bonds, Carolus van Hout's daughter, some of which you know
and see, and some that you can neither know nor see, but which God will
weave in His own season."

Lysbeth looked at the weird countenance, distorted and made unhuman by
long torment of body and mind, and found in it something to trust; yes,
even signs of that sympathy which she so sorely needed. So she told her
all the tale from the first word of it to the last.

The Mare listened in silence, for no story of evil perpetrated by a
Spaniard seemed to move or astonish her, only when Lysbeth had done, she
said:

"Ah! child, had you but known of me, and where to find me, you should
have asked my aid."

"Why, mother, what could you have done?" answered Lysbeth.

"Done? I would have followed him by night until I found my chance in
some lonely place, and there I would have----" Then she stretched out
her bony hand to the red light of the fire, and Lysbeth saw that in it
was a knife.

She sank back aghast.

"Why are you frightened, my pretty lady?" asked the Mare. "I tell you
that I live on for only one thing--to kill Spaniards, yes, priests first
and then the others. Oh! I have a long count to pay; for every time that
he was tortured a life, for every groan he uttered at the stake a life;
