Wallace."

"But where," demanded Murray, who had listened with delighted
astonishment to this recital, "where is this admirable youth?  Why, if
Kenneth have learned I am arrived, does he not bring him to receive my
thanks and friendship?"

"It is my fault," returned Stephen, "that Kenneth will not approach you
till your repast is over.  I left him to see your followers properly
refreshed.  And for the youth, he seems timid of appearing before you.
Even his name I cannot make known to you till he reveals it himself:
none know him here by any other name than that of Edwin.  He has,
however, granted to-morrow morning for the interview."

"I must submit to his determination," replied Murray; "but I am at a
loss to guess why so brave a creature should hesitate to meet me.  I
can only suppose he dislikes the idea of resigning the troop he has so
well conducted; and if so, I shall think it my duty to yield its
command to him."

"Indeed he richly deserves it," returned Stephen; "for the very soul of
Wallace seemed transfused into his breast, as he cheered us through our
long march from the valley to Glenfinlass; he played with the children,
heartened up the women; and when the men were weary, and lagged by the
way, he sat down on the nearest stones, and sung to us legends of our
ancestors, till every nerve was braced with warlike emulation, and
starting up, we proceeded onward with resolution and even gayety.

"When we arrived at Craignacoheilg, as the women were in great want, I
suddenly recollected that I had an old friend in the neighborhood.
When a boy, I had been the playfellow of Sir John Scott of Loch Doine;
and though I understood him to be now an invalid, I went to him.  When
I told my tale, his brother-in-law, Sir Roger Kirkpatrick, took fire at
my relation, and declared his determination to accompany me to
Craignacoheilg; and when he joined our band on the summit of this rock,
he took the children in his arms, and while he held their hands in his,
vehemently addressed their mothers, 'Let not these hands be baptized,**
till they had been washed in the blood of our foe.  Mercy belongs not
to the enemy, now doomed to fall beneath their father's swords!'"

**It was a custom with Scottish chiefs when any feud existed between
their families, to leave the right hand of their children untouched by
the holy water in baptism, as a sign that no law, even of Heaven,
should prevent them taking revenge.

"It is, indeed a deadly contest," rejoined Murray; "for evil has been
the example of that foe.  How many innocent bosoms have their steel
pierced!  How many helpless babes have their merciless hands dashed
against the stones!  Oh, ruthless war! even a soldier trembles to
contemplate thy horrors."

"Only till he can avenge them!" cried a stern voice, entering the
apartment.  It was Kirkpatrick's, and he proceeded: "When vengeance is
in our grasp, tell me, brave Murray, who will then tremble?  Dost thou
not feel retribution in thine own hands?  Dost thou not see the
tyrant's blood at thy feet?" As he spoke, he looked down, with a horrid
exultation in his eyes; and, bursting into a more horrible laugh,
struck his hand several times on his heart: "It glads me!  I shall see
it--and this arm shall assist to pull him down."

"His power in Scotland may fall," returned Murray; "but Edward will be
too careful of his life to come within reach of our steel."

"That may be," rejoined Kirkpatrick; "but my dagger shall yet drink the
blood of his agents.  Cressingham shall feel my foot upon his neck!
Cressingham shall see that hand torn from its wrist, which durst to
violate the unsullied cheek of a true Scotsman.  Murray, I cannot live
unrevenged."

As he spoke, he quitted the apartment, and with a countenance of such
tremendous fate, that the young warrior doubted it was human; it spoke
not the noble resolves of patriotism, but the portentous malignity with
which the great adversary of mankind determines the ruin of nations; it
seemed to wither the grass on which he moved; and Murray almost thought
that the clouds darkened as the gloomy knight issued from the porch
into the open air.

Kenneth Mackenzie joyfully entered the hall.  Murray received him with
a warm embrace; and, soon after, Stephen Ireland led the wearied
chieftain to a bed of freshly-gathered heath, prepared for him in an
upper chamber.




Chapter XIX.

Craignacoheilg.


Sleep, the gentle sister of that awful power which shrouds man in its
cold bosom, and bears him in still repose to the blissful wakefulness
of eternal life--she, sweet restorer! wraps him in her balmy embraces,
and extracting from his wearied limbs the effects of every toil, safely
relinquishes the refreshed slumberer at morn to the new-born vigor that
is her gift; to the gladsome breezes which call us forth to labor and
enjoyment.

Such was the rest of the youthful Murray, till the shrill notes of a
hundred bugles piercing his ear made him start.  He listened; they
sounded again.  The morning had fully broke.  He sprung from his couch,
hurried on his armor, and snatching up his lance and target, issued
from the tower.  Several women were flying past the gate.  On seeing
him, they exclaimed, "The Lord Wallace is arrived--his bugles have
sounded--our husbands are returned!"

Murray followed their eager footsteps, and reached the edge of the rock
just as the brave group were ascending.  A stranger was also there,
who, from his extreme youth and elegance, he judged must be the young
protector of his clansmen; but he forbore to address him until they
should be presented to each other by Wallace himself.

It was indeed the same.  On hearing the first blast of the horn, the
youthful chieftain had hastened from his bed of heath, and buckling on
his brigandine, rushed to the rock; but at the sight of the noble
figure which first gained the summit, the young hero fell back.  An
indescribable awe checked his steps, and he stood at a distance, while
Kirkpatrick welcomed the chief, and introduced Lord Andrew Murray.
Wallace received the latter with a glad smile; and taking him warmly by
the hand, "Gallant Murray," said he, "with such assistance, I hope to
reinstate your brave uncle in Bothwell Castle, and soon to cut a
passage to even a mightier rescue!  We must carry off Scotland from the
tyrant's arms; or," added he, in a graver tone, "we shall only rivet
her chains the closer."

"I am but a poor auxiliary," returned Murray; "my troop is a scanty
one, for it is my own gathering.  It is not my father's nor my uncle's
strength, that I bring along with me.  But there is one here,"
continued he, "who has preserved a party of men, sent by my cousin Lady
Helen Mar, almost double my numbers."

At this reference to the youthful warrior, Sir Roger Kirkpatrick
discerned him at a distance, and hastened toward him, while Murray
briefly related to Wallace the extraordinary conduct of this unknown.
On being told that the chief waited to receive him, the youth hastened
forward with a trepidation he had never felt before; but it was a
trepidation that did not subtract from his own worth.  It was the
timidity of a noble heart, which believed it approached one of the most
perfect among mortals; and while its anxious pulse beat to emulate such
merit, a generous consciousness of measureless inferiority embarassed
him with a confusion so amiable, that Wallace, who perceived his
extreme youth and emotion, opened his arms and embraced him.  "Brave
youth," cried he, "I trust that the power which blesses our cause will
enable me to return you with many a well-earned glory, to the bosom of
your family!"

Edwin was encouraged by the frank address of a hero whom he expected to
have found reserved, and wrapped in the deep glooms of the fate which
had roused him to be a thunderbolt of heaven; but when he saw a benign,
though pale countenance, hail him with smiles, he made a strong effort
to shake off the awe with which the name, and the dignity of figure and
mein of Wallace had oppressed him; and with a mantling blush he
replied: "My family are worthy of your esteem; my father is brave; but
my mother, fearing for me, her favorite son, prevailed on him to put me
into a monastery.  Dreading the power of the English, even there she
allowed none but the abbot to know who I was.  And as he chose to hide
my name--and I have burst from my concealment without her knowledge--till
I do something worthy of that name, and deserving her pardon, permit
me, noble Wallace, to follow your footsteps by the simple appellation
of Edwin."

"Noble boy," returned the chief, "your wish shall be respected.  We
urge you no further to reveal what such innate bravery must shortly
proclaim in the most honorable manner."

The whole of the troop having ascended, while their wives, children,
and friends were rejoicing in their embraces, Wallace asked some
questions relative to Bothwell, and Murray briefly related the
disasters which had happened there.

"My father," added he, "is still with the Lord of Loch-awe; and thither
I sent to request him to dispatch to the Cartlane Craigs all the
followers he took with him into Argyleshire.  But as things are, would
it not be well to send a second messenger, to say that you have sought
refuge in Glenfinlass?"

"Before he could arrive," returned Wallace, "I hope we shall be where
Lord Bothwell's reinforcements may reach us by water.  Our present
object must be the Earl of Mar.  He is the first Scottish earl who has
hazarded his estates and life for Scotland; and as her best friend, his
liberation must be our first enterprise.  In my circuit through two or
three eastern counties, a promising increase has been made to our
little army.  The Frasers of Oliver Castle have given me two hundred
men; and the brave Sir Alexander Scrymgeour, whom I met in West
Lothian, has not only brought fifty stout Scots to my command, but, as
hereditary standard-bearer of the kingdom, has come himself to carry
the royal banner of Scotland to glory or oblivion."

"To glory!" cried Murray, waving his sword; "O! not while a Scot
survives, shall that blood-red lion** again lick the dust!"

**A lion gules, in a field or, is the arms of Scotland.-(1809.)

"No," cried Kirkpatrick, his eyes flashing fire; "rather may every Scot
and every Southron fall in the struggle, and fill one grave!  Let me,"
cried he, sternly grasping the hilt of his sword, and looking upward,
"let me, oh, Saviour of mankind, live but to see the Forth and the
Clyde, so often reddened with our blood, dye the eastern and the
western oceans with the vital flood of these our foes; and when none is
spared, then let me die in peace."

The eyes of Wallace glanced on the young Edwin, who stood gazing on
Kirkpatrick, and turning on the knight with a powerful look of
apprehension-"Check that prayer," cried he; "remember my brave
companion, what the Saviour of mankind was; and then think, whether he,
who offered life to all the world, will listen to so damning an
invocation.  If we would be blessed in the contest, we must be
merciful."

"To whom?" exclaimed Kirkpatrick; "to the robbers who tear from us our
lands; to the ruffians who wrest from us our honors?  But you are
patient; you never received a blow!"

"Yes," cried Wallace, turning paler; "a heavy one--on my heart."

"True," returned Kirkpatrick, "your wife fell dead under the steel of a
Southron governor; and you slew him for it!  You were revenged; your
feelings were appeased."

"Not the death of fifty thousand governors," replied Wallace, "could
appease my feelings.  Revenge were insufficient to satisfy the
yearnings of my soul."  For a moment he covered his agitated features
with his hand, and then proceeded: "I slew Heselrigge because he was a
monster, under whom the earth groaned.  My sorrow, deep as it was--was
but one of many, which his rapacity, and his nephew's licentiousness,
the whole nation without reserve!  When the sword of war is drawn, all
who resist must conquer or fall; but there are some noble English who
abhor the tyranny they are obliged to exercise over us, and when they
declare such remorse, shall they not find mercy at our hands?  Surely,
if not for humanity's, for policy's sake we ought to give quarter; for
the exterminating sword, if not always victorious, incurs the ruin it
threatens, even hope, that by or righteous cause and our clemency, we
shall not only gather our own people to our legions but turn the hearts
of the poor Welsh and the misled Irish, whom the usurper has forced
into his armies, and so confront him with troops of his own levying.
Many of the English were too just to share in the subjugation of the
country they had sworn to befriend.  And their less honorable
countrymen, when they see Scotsmen no longer consenting to their own
degradation, may take shame to themselves for assisting to betray a
confiding people."

"That may be," returned Kirkpatrick; "but surely you would not rank
Aymer de Valence, who lords it over Dumbarton, and Cressingham, who
acts the tyrant in Stirling--you would not rank them amongst these
conscientious English?"

"No," replied Wallace; "the haughty oppression of the one and the
wanton cruelty of the other, have given Scotland too many wounds for me
to hold a shield before them; meet them, and I leave them to your
sword."

"And by heavens!" cried Kirkpatrick, gnashing his teeth with the fury
of a tiger, "they shall know its point!"

Wallace then informed his friends he purposed marching next morning by
daybreak toward Dumbarton Castle.  "When we make the attack," said he,
"it must be in the night; for I propose seizing it by storm."

Murray and Kirkpatrick joyfully acquiesced.  Edwin smiled an enraptured
assent, and Wallace, with many a gracious look and speech, disengaged
himself from the clinging embraces of the weaker part of the garrison,
who, seeing in him the spring of their husband's might and the guard of
their own safety, clung to him as to a presiding deity.

"You, my dear countrywomen," said he, "shall find a home for your aged
parents, your children, and yourselves, with the venerable Sir John
Scott of Loch Doine.  You are to be conducted thither this evening, and
there await in comfort the happy return of your husbands, whom
Providence now leads forth to be the champions of your country."

Filled with enthusiasm, the women uttered a shout of triumph, and,
embracing their husbands, declared they were ready to resign them
wholly to Heaven and Sir William Wallace.

Wallace left them with these tender relatives, from whom they were so
soon to part, and retired with his chieftains to arrange the plan of
his proposed attack.  Delighted with the glory which seemed to wave to
him from the pinnacles of Dumbarton Rock, Edwin listened in profound
silence to all that was said, and then hastened to his quarters to
prepare his armor for the ensuing morning.




Chapter XX.

The Cliffs of Loch Lubnaig.


In the cool of the evening, while the young chieftain was thus
employed, Kenneth entered to tell him that Sir William Wallace had
called out his little army, to see its strength and numbers.  Edwin's
soul had become not more enamoured of the panoply of war than the
gracious smiles of his admired leader, and at this intelligence he
threw his plans over his brigandine, and placing a swan-plumed bonnet
on his brows, hastened forth to meet his general.

The heights of Craignacoheilg echoed with thronging footsteps, and a
glittering light seemed issuing from her woods, as the rays of the
descending sun glanced on the arms of her assembling warriors.

The thirty followers of Murray appeared just as the two hundred Frasers
entered from an opening in the rocks.  Blood mounted into his face as
he compared his inferior numbers and recollected the obligation they
were to repay, and the greater one he was now going to incur.  However
he threw the standard worked by Helen on his shoulder, and turning to
Wallace, "Behold," cried he, pointing to his men, "the poor man's mite!
It is great, for it is my all!"

"Great, indeed, brave Murray!" returned Wallace, "for it brings me a
host in yourself."

"I will not disgrace my standard!" said he, lowering the banner-staff
to Wallace.  He started when he saw the flowing lock, which he could
not help recognizing.  "This is my betrothed," continued Murray in a
blither tone; "I have sworn to take her for better for worse, and I
pledge you my truth nothing but death shall part us!"

Wallace grasped his hand.  "And I pledge you mine, that the head whence
it drew shall be laid low before I suffer so generous a defender to be
separated, dead or alive, from this standard."  His eyes glanced at the
empress; "Thou art right," continued he; "God doth goest with the
confidence of success, to embrace victory as a bride!"

"No, I am only the bridegroom's man!" replied Murray, gayly moving off;
"I shall be content with a kiss or two from the handmaids, and leave
the lady for my general."

"Happy, happy youth!" said Wallace to himself, as his eyes pursued the
agile footsteps of the young chieftain; "no conquering affection has
yet thrown open thy heart; no deadly injury hath lacerated it with
wounds incurable.  Patriotism is a virgin passion in thy breast, and
innocence and joy wait upon her!"

"We just muster five hundred men!" observed Ker to Wallace; "but they
are all stout in heart as in condition, and ready, even to-night, if
you will it, to commence their march."

"No," replied Wallace; "we must not overstrain the generous spirit.
Let them rest to-night, and to-morrow's dawn shall light us through the
forest."

Ker, who acted as henchman to Wallace, now returned to the ranks to
give the word, and they marched forward.

Sir Alexander Scrymgeour, with his golden standard charged with the
lion of Scotland, led the van.  Wallace raised his bonnet from his
head, as it drew near.  Scrymgeour lowered the staff;  Wallace threw up
his outstretched hand at this action, but the knight not understanding
him, he stepped forward.  "Sir Alexander Scrymgeour," cried he, "that
standard must now bow to me.  It represents the royalty of Scotland,
before which we fight for our liberties.  If virtue yet dwell in the
house of the valiant St. David, some of his offspring will hear of this
day, and lead it forward to conquest and to a crown.  Till such an
hour, let not that standard bend to any man."

Wallace fell back as he spoke, and Scrymgeour, bowing his head in sign
of acquiescence marched on.

Sir Roger Kirkpatrick, at the head of his well-appointed Highlanders
next advanced.  His blood-red banner streamed to the air, and as it
bent to Wallace he saw that the indignant knight had adopted the device
of the hardy King Archaius,** but with a fiercer motto-"Touch, and I
pierce!"

**Archaius, King of Scotland, took for his device the thistle and the
Rewe, and for his motto, "For my defense."

"That man," thought Wallace, as he passed along, "carried a relentless
sword in his very eye!"

The men of Loch Doine, a strong, tall and well-armed body, marched on,
and gave place to the advancing corps of Bothwell.  The eye of Wallace
felt as if turning from gloom and horror to the cheerful light of day,
when it fell on the bright and indigenuous face of Murray.  Kenneth
with his troop followed; and the youthful Edwin, like Cupid in arms,
closed the procession.

Being drawn up in line, their chief, fully satisfied, advanced toward
them, and expressing his sentiments of the patriotism which brought
them into the field, informed them of his intended march.  He then
turned to Stephen Ireland: "The sun has now set," said he, "and before
dark you must conduct the families of my worthy Lanarkment to the
protection of Sir John Scott.  It is time that age, infancy, and female
weakness should cease their wanderings with us; to-night we bid them
adieu, to meet them again, by the leading of the Lord of Hosts, in
freedom and prosperity!"

As Wallace ceased, and was retiring from the ground, several old men,
and young women with their babes in their arms, rushed from behind the
ranks, and throwing themselves at his feet, caught hold of his hands
and garments.  "We go," said the venerable fathers, "to pray for your
welfare; and sure we are, a crown will bless our country's benefactor,
here or in heaven!"

"In heaven," replied Wallace, shaking the plumes of his bonnet over his
eyes, to hide the moisture which suffused them; "I can have no right to
any other crown."

"Yes," cried a hoary-headed shepherd, "you free your country from
tyrants, and the people's hearts will proclaim their deliverer their
sovereign!"

"May your rightful monarch, worthy patriarch," said Wallace, "whether a
Bruce of a Baliol, meet with equal zeal from Scotland at large; and
tyranny must then fall before courage and loyalty!"

The women wept as they clung to his hand and the daughter of Ireland,
holding up her child in her arms, presented it to him.  "Look on my
son!" cried she, with energy; "the first word he speaks shall be
Wallace; the second liberty.  And every drop of milk he draws from my
bosom, shall be turned into blood to nerve a conquering arm, or to flow
for his country!"

At this speech all the women held up their children toward him.
"Here," cried they, "we devote them to Heaven, and to our country!
Adopt them, noble Wallace, to be thy followers in arms, when, perhaps,
their fathers are laid low!"

Unable to speak, Wallace pressed their little faces separately to his
lips, then returning them to their mothers, laid his hand on his heart,
and answered in an agitated voice.  "They are mine!-my weal shall be
theirs--my woe my own."  As he spoke he hurried from the weeping group,
and emerging amid the cliffs, hid himself from their tears and their
blessing.

He threw himself on a shelving rock, whose fern-covered bosom projected
over the winding waters of Loch Lubnaig, and having stilled his own
anguished recollections, he turned his full eyes on the lake beneath;
and while he contemplated its serene surface, he sighed, and thought
how tranquil was nature, till the rebellious passions of man, wearying
of innocent joys, disturbed all by restlessness and invasion on the
peace and happiness of others.

The mists of evening hung on the gigantic tops of Ben Ledi and Ben
Vorlich; then sailing forward, by degrees obscured the whole of the
mountains, leaving nothing for the eye to dwell on but the long silent
expanse of the waters below.

"So," said he, "did I once believe myself forever shut in from the
world, by an obscurity that promised me happiness as well as seclusion!
But the hours of Ellerslie are gone!  No tender wife will now twine
her faithful arms around my neck.  Alas, the angel that sunk my
country's wrongs to a dreamy forgetfulness in her arms, she was to be
immolated that I might awake!  My wife, my unborn babe, they must both
bleed for Scotland!-and the sacrifice shall not be yielded in vain.
No, blessed God," cried he, stretching his clasped hands toward my
countrymen to liberty and happiness!  "Let me counsel with thy wisdom;
let me conquer with thine arm! and when all is finished, give me, O
gracious Father! a quiet grave, beside my wife and child."

Tears, the first he had shed since the hour in which he last pressed
his Marion to his heart, now flowed copiously from his eyes.  The
women, the children, had aroused all his recollections but in so
softened a train, that they melted his heart till he wept.  "It is thy
just tribute, Marion," said he; "it was blood you shed for me, and
shall I check these poor drops?  Look on me, sweet saint, best-beloved
of my soul; O! hover near me in the day of battle, and thousands of
thine and Scotland's enemies shall fall before thy husband's arm!"

The plaintive voice of the Highland pipe at this moment broke upon his
ear.  It was the farewell of the patriarch Lindsay, as he and his
departing company descended the winding paths of Craignacoheilg.
Wallace started on his feet.  The separation had then taken place
between his trusty followers and their families; and guessing the
feelings of those brave men from what was passing in his own breast, he
dried away the traces of his tears, and once more resuming the
warrior's cheerful look, sought that part of the rock where the
Lanarkmen were quartered.

As he drew near he saw some standing on the cliff and others leaning
over, to catch another glance of the departing group ere it was lost
amid the shades of Glenfinlass.

"Are they quite gone?" asked Dugald.

"Quite," answered a young man, who seemed to have got the most
advantageous situation for a view.

"Then," cried he, "may St. Andrew keep them until we meet again!"

"May a greater than St. Andrew hear thy prayer!" ejaculated Wallace.
At the sound of this response from their chief they all turned round.
"My brave companions," said he, "I come to repay this hour's pangs by
telling you that, in the attack of Dumbarton, you shall have the honor
of first mounting the walls.  I shall be at your head, to sign each
brave soldier with a patriot's seal of honor."

"To follow you, my lord," said Dugald, "is our duty."

"I grant it," replied the chief; "and as I am the leader in that duty,
it is mine to dispense to every man his reward; to prove to all men
that virtue alone is true nobility."

"Ah, dearest sir!" exclaimed Edwin, who had been assisting the women to
carry their infants down the steep, and on reascending heard the latter
part of this conversation; "deprive me not of the aim of my life!
These warriors have had you long--have distinguished themselves in your
eyes.  Deprive me not, then, of the advantages of being near you; it
will make me doubly brave.  Oh, my dear commander, let me only carry to
the grave the consciousness that, next to yourself, I was the first to
mount the rock of Dumbarton, and you will make me noble indeed!"

Wallace looked at him with a smile of such graciousness, that the youth
threw himself into his arms.  "You will grant my boon?"

"I will, noble boy," said he; "act up to your sentiments, and you shall
be my brother."

"Call me by that name," cried Edwin, "and I will dare anything."

"Then be the first to follow me on the rock," said he, "and I will lead
you to an honor, the highest in my gift; you shall unloose the chains
of the Earl of Mar!  And ye," continued he, "commemorate the duty of
such sons.  Being the first to strike the blow for her freedom, ye
shall be the first she will distinguish.  I now speak as her minister;
and, as a badge to times immemorial, I bid you wear the Scottish lion
on your shields."

A shout of proud joy issued from every heart; and Wallace, seeing that
honor had dried the tears of regret, left them to repose.  He sent
Edwin to his rest; and himself, avoiding the other chieftains, retired
to his own chamber in the tower.




Chapter XXI.

Loch Lomond.


Profound as was the rest of Wallace, yet the first clarion of the lark
awakened him.  The rosy dawn shone in at the window, and a fresh breeze
wooed him with its inspiring breath to rise and meet it.  But the
impulse was in his own mind; he needed nothing outward to call him to
action.  Rising immediately, he put on his glittering hauberk; and
issuing from the tower, raised his bugle to his lips, and blew so
rousing a blast, that in an instant the whole rock was covered with
soldiers.

Wallace placed his helmet on his head, and advanced toward them, just
as Edwin had joined him, and Sir Roger Kirkpatrick appeared from the
tower.  "Blessed be this morn!" cried the old knight.  "My sword
springs from its scabbard to meet it; and ere its good steel be
sheathed again," continued he, shaking it sternly, "what deaths may dye
its point!"

Wallace shuddered at the ferocity with which his colleague contemplated
this feature of war from which every humane soldier would seek to turn
his thoughts, that he might encounter it with the steadiness of a man,
and not the irresolution of a woman.  To hail the field of blood with
the fierceness of a hatred eager for the slaughter of its victim--to
know any joy in combat but that each contest might render another less
necessary--did not enter into the imagination of Wallace until he had
heard and seen the infuriate Kirkpatrick.  He talked of the coming
battle with horrid rapture, and told the young Edwin he should that day
see Loch Lomond red with English blood.

Offended at such savageness, but without answering him, Wallace drew
toward Murray, and calling to Edwin, ordered him to march at his side.
The youth seemed glad of the summons, and Wallace was pleased to
observe it, as he thought that a longer stay with one who so grossly
overcharged the feelings of honest patriotism, might breed disgust in
his innocent mind against a cause which had so furious and therefore
unjust a defender.

"Justice and mercy ever dwell together," said he to Edwin, who now drew
near him; "for universal love is the parent of justice, as well as of
mercy.  But implacable Revenge! whence did she spring, but from the
head of Satan himself?"

Though their cause appeared the same, never were two spirits more
discordant than those of Wallace and Kirkpatrick.  But Kirkpatrick did
not so soon discover the dissimilarity; as it is easier for purity to
descry its opposite, than for foulness to apprehend that anything can
be purer than itself.

The forces being marshaled according to the preconcerted order, the
three commanders, with Wallace at their head, led forward.

They passed through the forest of Glenfinlass; and morning and evening
still found them threading its unsuspected solitudes in unmolested
security; night, too, watched their onward march.

The sun had just risen as the little band of patriots, the hope of
freedom, emerged upon the eastern bank of Loch Lomond.  The bases of
the mountains were yet covered with the dispersing mist of the morning,
and hardly distinguishable from the blue waters of the lake, which
lashed the shore.  The newly-awakened sheep bleated from the hills, and
the umbrageous herbage, dropping dew, seemed glittering with a thousand
fairy gems.

"Where is the man who would not fight for such a country?" exclaimed
Murray, as he stepped over a bridge of interwoven trees, which crossed
one of the mountain streams.  "This land was not made for slaves.  Look
at these bulwarks of nature!  Every mountain-head which forms this
chain of hills is an impregnable rampart against invasion.  If Baliol
had possessed but half a heart, Edward might have returned even worse
than Caesar--without a cockle to decorate his helmet."

"Baliol has found the oblivion he incurred," returned Wallace; "his
son, perhaps, may better deserve the scepter of such a country.  Let us
cut the way, and he who merits the crown will soon appear to claim it."

"Then it will not be Edward Baliol!" rejoined Scrymgeour.  "During the
inconsistent reign of his father, I once carried a despatch to him from
Scotland.  He was then banqueting in all the luxuries of the English
court; and such a voluptuary I never beheld!  I left the scene of
folly, only praying that so effeminate a prince might never disgrace
the throne of our manly race of kings."

"If such be the tuition of our lords in the court of Edward--and wise is
the policy for his own views!" observed Ker, "what can we expect from
even the Bruce?  They were ever a nobler race than the Baliol; but bad
education and luxury will debase the most princely minds."

"I saw neither of the Bruce when I visited London," replied Scrymgeour;
"the Earl of Carrick was at his house in Cleveland, and Robert Bruce,
his eldest son, with the English army in Guienne.  But they bore a
manly character, particularly young Robert, to whom the troubadours of
Aquitaine have given the flattering appellation of Prince of Chivalry."

"It would be more to his honor," interrupted Murray, "if he compelled
the English to acknowledge him as Prince of Scotland.  With so much
bravery, how can he allow such a civetcat as Edward Baliol to bear away
the title, which is his by the double right of blood and virtue?"

"Perhaps," said Wallace, "the young lion only sleeps!  The time may
come, when both he and his father will rise from their lethargy, and
throw themselves at once into the arms of Scotland.  To stimulate the
dormant patriotism of these two princes, by showing them a subject
leading their people to liberty, is one great end of the victories I
seek.  None other than a brave king can bind the various interests of
this distracted country into one; and therefore, for fair Freedom's
sake, my heart turns toward the Bruces with most anxious hopes."

"For my part," cried Murray, "I have always thought the lady we will
not woo we have no right to pretend to.  If the Bruces will not be at
the pains to snatch Scotland from drowning, I see no reason for making
them a present of what will cost us many a wet jacket before we tug her
from the waves.  He that wins the day ought to wear the laurel; and so,
once for all, I proclaim him King of good old Albin,** who will have
the glory of driving her oppressors beyond her dikes."

**Albin was the ancient name of Scotland.

Wallace did not hear this last sentiment of Murray's, as it was spoken
in a lowered voice in the ear of Kirkpatrick.  "I perfectly agree with
you," was the knight's reply; "and in the true Roman style, may the
death of every Southron now in Scotland, and as many more as fate
chooses to yield us, be the preliminary games of his coronation!"

Wallace, who heard this, turned to Kirkpatrick with a mild rebuke in
his eye.  "Balaam blessed, when he meant to curse!" said he; "but some
curse, when they mean to bless.  Such prayers are blasphemy.  For, can
we expect a blessing on our arms, when all our invocations are for
vengeance rather than victory?"

"Blood for blood is only justice!" returned Murray; "and how can you,
noble Wallace, as a Scot, and as a man, imply any mercy to the villains
who stab us to the heart?"

"I plead not for them," replied Wallace, "but for the poor wretches who
follow their leaders, by force, to the field of Scotland; I would not
inflict on them the cruelties we now resent.  It is not to aggrieve,
but to redress, that we carry arms.  If we make not this distinction,
we turn courage into a crime; and plant disgrace, instead of honor,
upon the warrior's brow."

"I do not understand commiserating the wolves who have so long made
havoc in our country," cried Kirkpatrick; "methinks such maidenly mercy
is rather or of place."

Wallace turned to him with a smile: "I will answer you, my valiant
friend, by adopting your own figure.  It is that these Southron wolves
may not confound us with themselves, that I wish to show in our conduct
rather the generous ardor of the faithful guardian of the fold, than
the rapacious fierceness which equals them with the beasts of the
desert.  As we are men and Scots, let the burden of our prayers be, the
preservation of our country, not the slaughter of our enemies!  The one
is an ambition, with which angels may sympathize; the other, a horrible
desire, which speaks the nature of fiends."

"In some cases this may be," replied Sir Roger, a little reconciled to
the argument, "but not in mine.  My injury yet burns upon my cheek; and
as nothing but the life blood of Cressingham can quench it, I will
listen no more to your doctrine till I am avenged.  That done, I shall
not forget your lesson."

"Generous Kirkpatrick!" exclaimed Wallace, "nothing that is really
cruel can dwell with such manly candor.  Say what you will, I can trust
your heart after this moment."

They had crossed the River Ennerie, and were issuing from between its
narrow ridge of hills, when Wallace, pointing to a stupendous rock
which rose in solitary magnificence in the midst of a vast plain,
exclaimed, "There is Dumbarton Castle!-that citadel holds the fetters
of Scotland; and if we break them there, every minor link will easily
give way."

The men uttered a shout of anticipated triumph at this sight; and
proceeding, soon came in view of the fortifications which helmeted the
rock.  As they approached, they discovered that it had two summits,
being in a manner cleft in twain; the one side rising in a pyramidal
form; while the other, of a more table-shape, sustained the ponderous
buildings of the fortress.

It was dusk when the little army arrived in the rear of a close thicket
to a considerable length over the plain.  On this spot Wallace rested
his men; and while they placed themselves under its covert till the
appointed time of attack, he perceived through an opening in the wood,
the gleaming of soldiers' arms on the ramparts, and fires beginning to
light on a lonely watchtower, which crowned the pinnacle of the highest
rock.

"Poor fools!" exclaimed Murray; "like the rest of their brethren of
clay, they look abroad for evils, and prepare not for those which are
even at their doors!"

"That beacon-fire," cried Scrymgeour, "shall light us to their
chambers; and for once we thank them for their providence."

"That beacon-fire," whispered Edwin to Wallace, "shall light me to
honor!  To-night, by your agreement, I shall call you brother, or lie
dead on the summit of those walls!"

"Edwin," said Wallace, "act as you say; and deserve not only to be
called my brother, but to be the first banneret of freedom in arms!"

He then turned toward the lines; and, giving his orders to each
division, directed them to seek repose on the surrounding heather, till
the now glowing moon should have sunk her telltale light in the waves.




Chapter XXII.

Dumbarton Rock.


All obeyed the voice of their commander, and retired to rest.  But the
eyes of Edwin could not close; his eager spirit was already on the
walls of Dumbarton.  His rapid mind anticipated the ascent of his
general and his troop.  But an imagination no less just than ardent
suggested the difficulties attending so small a force assailing so
formidable a garrison, without some immediate knowledge of its relative
situations.  A sudden thought struck him.  He would mount that rock
alone; he would seek to ascertain the place of Lord Mar's confinement;
that not one life in Wallace's faithful band might be lost in a vague
search.

"Ah! my general," exclaimed he, "Edwin shall be the first to spring
those ramparts; he shall tread that dangerous path alone; and when he
has thus proved himself no unworthy of thy confidence, he will return
to lead thee and thy soldiers to a sure victory, and himself to honor
by thy side!"

This fervant apostrophe, breathed to the night alone, was no sooner
uttered, than he stole from the thicket into which he had cast himself
to respose.  He looked toward the embattled cliff; its summit stood
bright in the moonlight, but deep shadows lay beneath.  "God be my
speed!" cried he, and wrapping himself in his plaid, so mixed its dark
hues with the weeds and herbage at the base of the rock, that he made
its circuit without having attracted observation.

The south side seemed the easiest of ascent and by that he began his
daring attempt.  Having gained the height, he clambered behind a
buttress, the shadow of which cast the wall into such black obscurity,
that he crept safely through one of its crenelles, and dropping gently
inward, alighted on his feet.  Still keeping the shadowed side of the
battlements, he proceeded cautiously along, and so still was his motion
that he passed undiscovered, even by the sentinels who guarded this
quarter of the fortress.

He soon arrived at the open square before the citadel; it was yet
occupied by groups of Southron officers, gayly walking to and fro under
the light of the moon.  In hopes of gaining some useful information
from their discourse, he concealed himself behind a chest of arrows;
and as they passed backward and forward, distinctly heard them jesting
each other about divers fair dames of the country around.  The
conversation terminated in a debate, whether or no the indifference
which their governor De Valence manifested to the majestic beauties of
the Countess of Mar were real or assumed.  A thousand free remarks were
made on the subject, and Edwin gathered sufficient from the discourse,
to understand that the earl and countess were treated severely, and
confined in a large, square tower in the cleft of the rock.

Having learned all that he could expect from these officers, he
speeded, under the friendly shadow, toward the other side of the
citadel, and arrived just as the guard approached to relieve the
sentinels of the northern postern.  He laid himself close to the
ground, and happily overheard the word of the night, as it was given to
the new watch.  This providential circumstances saved his life.

Finding no mode of egress from this place but by the postern at which
the sentinel was stationed, or by attempting a passage through a small
adjoining tower, the door of which stood open, he considered a moment,
and then deciding for the tower, stole unobserved into it.  Fortunately
no person was there; but Edwin found it full of spare arms, with two or
three vacant couches in different corners, where he supposed the
officers on guard occassionally reposed; several watch-cloaks lay on
the floor.  He readily apprehended the use he might make of this
circumstance, and throwing one of them over his shoulders climbed to a
large embrasure in the wall, and, forcing himself through it, dropped
to a declivity on the other side, which shelved down to the cliff,
wherein he saw the square tower.

He had scarcely alighted on firm ground, when a sentinel, followed by
two others presented pikes, approached him, and demanded the word.
"Montjoy!" was his reply.  "Why leap the embrasure?" said one.  "Why
not enter by the postern?" demanded another.  The conversation of the
officers had given him a hint, on which he had formed his answer.
"Love, my brave comrades," replied he, "seldom chooses even ways.  I go
on a message from a young ensign in the keep, to one of the Scottish
damsels in yonder tower.  Delay me, and his vengeance will fall upon us
all."  "Good luck to you, my lad!" was their answer, and, with a
lightened step, he hastened toward the tower.

Not deeming it safe to seek an interview with any of the earl's family,
he crept along the base of the structure, and across the works, till he
reached the high wall that blocks up egress from the north.  He found
this formidable curtain constructed of fragments of rock, and for the
convenience of the guard, a sloping platform from within led to the top
of the wall.  On the other side it was perpendicular.  A solitary
sentinel stood there; and how to pass him was Edwin's next device.  To
attack him would be desparate; being one of a chain of guards around
the interior of the fortress, his voice need only to be raised in the
least to call a regiment to his assistance, and Edwin might be seized
on the instant.

Aware of his danger, but not dismayed, the adventurous youth bethought
him of his former excuse; and remembering a flask of spirits which
Ireland had put into his pouch on leaving Glenfinlass, he affected to
be intoxicated, and staggering up to the man, accosted him in the
character of a servant of the garrison.

The sentinel did not doubt the appearance of the boy, and Edwin,
holding out the flask, said that a pretty girl in the great tower had
not only given him a long draught of the same good liquor but had
filled his bottle, that he might not lack amusement, while her
companion; one of Lady Mar's maids-in-waiting, was tying up a true
lover's knot to send to his master in the garrison.  The man believed
Edwin's tale, and the more readily as he thrust the flask into his
hand, and bade him drink.  "Do not spare it," cried he; "the night is
chilly, and I shall get more where that came from."

The unsuspecting Southron returned him a merry reply, and putting the
flask to his head, soon drained its contents.  They had the effect
Edwin desired.  The soldier became flustered, and impatient of his
duty.  Edwin perceived it, and yawning, complained of drowsiness.  "I
would go to the top of that wall, and sleep sweetly in the moonbeams,"
said he, "if any goodnatured fellow would meanwhile wait for my pretty
Scot!"

The half-inebriated Southron liked no better sport, and regardless of
duty, he promised to draw nearer the tower, and bring from the fair
messenger the expected token.

Having thus far gained his point, with an apparently staggering, but
really agile step, Edwin ascended the wall.  A leap from this dizzy
height was his only way to rejoin Wallace.  To retread his steps
through the fortress in safety would hardly be possible, and, besides,
such a mode of retreat would leave him uninformed on the second object
of his enterprise-to know the most vulnerable side of the fortress.  He
threw himself along the summit of the wall as if to sleep.  He looked
down and saw nothing but the blackness of space, for here the broad
expanse of shadow rendered rocks and building of the same hue and
level.  But hope buoyed him in her arms, and turning his eyes toward
the sentinel, he observed him to have arrived within a few paces of the
square tower.  This was Edwin's moment: grasping the projecting stone
of the embattlement, and commending himself to Heaven, he threw himself
from its summit, and fell a fearful depth to the cliffs beneath.

Meanwhile Wallace, having seen his brave followers depart to their
respose, reclined himself along a pile of moss grown stones, which in
the days of the renowned Fingal, had covered the body of some valiant
Morven chieftain.  He fixed his wakeful eyes on the castle, now
illumined in every part by the fullness of the moon's luster, and
considered which point would be most assailable by the scaling-ladders
he had prepared.  Every side seemed a precipice; the Leven, surrounding
it on the north and the west; the Clyde, broad as a sea, on the south.
The only place that seemed at all accessible was the side next the dike
behind which he lay.  Here the ascent to the castellated part of the
rock, because most perpendicular, was the least guarded with outworks,
and by this he determined to make the attempt as soon as the setting
moon should involve the garrison in darkness.

While he yet mused on what might be the momentous consequences of the
succeeding midnight hours, he thought he heard a swift though cautious
footstep.  He raised himself, and laying his hands on his sword, saw a
figure advancing toward him.

"Who goes there?" demanded Wallace.

"A faithful Scot," was the reply.

Wallace recognized the voice of Edwin.

"What has disturbed you?  Why do you not take rest with the others?"

"That we may have it the surer to-morrow!" replied the youth.  "I am
just returned from the summit of yonder rock."

"How!" interrupted Wallace; "have you scaled it alone, and are returned
in safety?"

Wallace caught him in his arms.  "Intrepid, glorious boy! tell me for
what purpose did you thus hazard your precious life?"

"I wished to learn its most pregnable part," replied Edwin, his young
heart beating with triumph at these encomiums from his commander; "and
particularly where the good earl is confined, that we might make our
attack directly to the point."

"And have you been successful?" demanded Wallace.

"I have," was his answer.  "Lord Mar and his lady are kept in a square
tower which stands in the cleft between the two summits of the rock.
It is not only surrounded by embattled walls, which flank the ponderous
buttresses of this huge dungeon, but the space on which it stands is
bulwarked at each end by a stone curtain of fifteen feet high, guarded
by turrets full of armed men.

"And yet by that side you suppose we must ascend?" said Wallace.

"Certainly; for if you attempt it on the west, we should have to scale
the watch-tower cliff, and the ascent could only be gained in file.  An
auxiliary detachment, to attack in flank, might succeed there; but the
passage being so narrow, would be too tedious for the whole party to
arrive in time. Should we take the south, we must cut through the whole
garrison before we could reach the earl.  And on this side, the morass
lies too near the foot of the rock to admit an approach without the
greatest danger.  But on the north, where I descended, by wading
through part of the Leven, and climbing from cliff to cliff, I have
every hope you may succeed."

Edwin recounted the particulars of his progress through the fortress;
and by the minuteness of his topographical descriptions, enforced his
arguments for the north to be the point assailed.  Closing his
narrative, he explained to the anxious inquiry of Wallace how he had
escaped accident in a leap of so many feet.  The wall was covered with
ivy; he caught by its branches in his descent, and at last happily fell
amongst a thick bed of furze.  After this, he clambered down the steep,
and fording the Leven (there only knee deep), now appeared before his
general, elate in heart, and bright in valor.

"The intrepidity of this action," returned Wallace, glowing with
admiration at so noble a daring in so young a creature, "merits that
every confidence should be placed in the result of your observations.
Your safe return is a pledge of our design being approved.  And when we
go in the strength of Heaven, who can doubt the issue?  This night,
when the Lord of battles puts that fortress into our hands, before the
whole of our little army you shall receive that knighthood you have so
richly deserved.  Such, my truly dear brother, my noble Edwin, shall be
the reward of your virtue and your toil."

Wallace would now have sent him to respose himself; but animated by the
success of his adventure, and exulting in the honor which was so soon
to stamp a sign of this exploit upon him forever, he told his leader
that he felt no want of sleep, and would rather take on him the office
of arousing the other captains to their stations, the moon, their
preconcerted signal, being then approaching its rest.




Chapter XXIII.

The Fortress.


Kirkpatrick, Murray, and Scrymgeour hastened to their commander; and in
a few minutes all were under arms.  Wallace briefly explained his
altered plan of assault, and marshaling his men accordingly, led them
in silence through the water, and along the beach, which lay between
the rock and the Leven.  Arriving at the base just as the moon set,
they began to ascend.  To do this in the dark redoubled the difficulty;
but as Wallace had the place of every accessible stone accurately
described to him by Edwin, he went confidently forward, followed by his
Lanarkmen.

He and they, being the first to mount, fixed and held the tops of the
scaling-ladders, while Kirkpatrick and Scrymgeour, with their men,
gradually ascended, and gained the bottom of the wall.  Here, planting
themselves in the crannies of the rock, under the impenetrable darkness
of the night (for the moon had not only set, but the stars were
obscured by clouds), they awaited the signal for the final ascent.

Meanwhile, Edwin led Lord Andrew with his followers, and the Fraser
men, round by the western side to mount the watchtower rock, and seize
the few soldiers who kept the beacon.  As a signal of having succeeded,
they were to smother the flame on the top of the tower, and thence
