  Still first in front the matchless prince appear'd:
  What glorious toils, what wonders they recite,
  Who view'd him labouring through the ranks of fight?
  I saw him once, when gathering martial powers,
  A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenae's towers;
  Armies he ask'd, and armies had been given,
  Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven;
  While dreadful comets glaring from afar,
  Forewarn'd the horrors of the Theban war.(136)
  Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,
  A fearless envoy, he approach'd the foes;
  Thebes' hostile walls unguarded and alone,
  Dauntless he enters, and demands the throne.
  The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found,
  And dared to combat all those chiefs around:
  Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord;
  For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword.
  Stung with the shame, within the winding way,
  To bar his passage fifty warriors lay;
  Two heroes led the secret squadron on,
  Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;
  Those fifty slaughter'd in the gloomy vale.
  He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale,
  Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire;
  Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!"

  No words the godlike Diomed return'd,
  But heard respectful, and in secret burn'd:
  Not so fierce Capaneus' undaunted son;
  Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun:

  "What needs, O monarch! this invidious praise,
  Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
  Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess
  Our value equal, though our fury less.
  With fewer troops we storm'd the Theban wall,
  And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,(137)
  In impious acts the guilty father died;
  The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
  Far more than heirs of all our parents' fame,
  Our glories darken their diminish'd name."

  To him Tydides thus: "My friend, forbear;
  Suppress thy passion, and the king revere:
  His high concern may well excuse this rage,
  Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage:
  His the first praise, were Ilion's towers o'erthrown,
  And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his own.
  Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite,
  'Tis ours to labour in the glorious fight."

  He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling ground
  Sprung from his car: his ringing arms resound.
  Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar,
  Of arm'd Tydides rushing to the war.
  As when the winds, ascending by degrees,(138)
  First move the whitening surface of the seas,
  The billows float in order to the shore,
  The wave behind rolls on the wave before;
  Till, with the growing storm, the deeps arise,
  Foam o'er the rocks, and thunder to the skies.
  So to the fight the thick battalions throng,
  Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along
  Sedate and silent move the numerous bands;
  No sound, no whisper, but the chief's commands,
  Those only heard; with awe the rest obey,
  As if some god had snatch'd their voice away.
  Not so the Trojans; from their host ascends
  A general shout that all the region rends.
  As when the fleecy flocks unnumber'd stand
  In wealthy folds, and wait the milker's hand,
  The hollow vales incessant bleating fills,
  The lambs reply from all the neighbouring hills:
  Such clamours rose from various nations round,
  Mix'd was the murmur, and confused the sound.
  Each host now joins, and each a god inspires,
  These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires,
  Pale flight around, and dreadful terror reign;
  And discord raging bathes the purple plain;
  Discord! dire sister of the slaughtering power,
  Small at her birth, but rising every hour,
  While scarce the skies her horrid head can bound,
  She stalks on earth, and shakes the world around;(139)
  The nations bleed, where'er her steps she turns,
  The groan still deepens, and the combat burns.

  Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed,
  To armour armour, lance to lance opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew,
  The sounding darts in iron tempests flew,
  Victors and vanquish'd join'd promiscuous cries,
  And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

  As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills,
  With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills
  Rush to the vales, and pour'd along the plain.
  Roar through a thousand channels to the main:
  The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound;
  So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.

  The bold Antilochus the slaughter led,
  The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:
  At great Echepolus the lance arrives,
  Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives;
  Warm'd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
  And shades eternal settle o'er his eyes.
  So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood
  Of force and fire, its walls besmear'd with blood.
  Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,(140)
  Seized to despoil, and dragg'd the corpse along:
  But while he strove to tug the inserted dart,
  Agenor's javelin reach'd the hero's heart.
  His flank, unguarded by his ample shield,
  Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field;
  The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more;
  The soul comes floating in a tide of gore.
  Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain;
  The war renews, the warriors bleed again:
  As o'er their prey rapacious wolves engage,
  Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage.

  In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell;
  Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore
  Amid the flocks on silver Simois' shore:
  The nymph descending from the hills of Ide,
  To seek her parents on his flowery side,
  Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy,
  And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.
  Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain,
  He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
  So falls a poplar, that in watery ground
  Raised high the head, with stately branches crown'd,
  (Fell'd by some artist with his shining steel,
  To shape the circle of the bending wheel,)
  Cut down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread,
  With all its beauteous honours on its head
  There, left a subject to the wind and rain,
  And scorch'd by suns, it withers on the plain
  Thus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius lies
  Stretch'd on the shore, and thus neglected dies.

  At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw;
  The pointed lance with erring fury flew,
  And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.
  He drops the corpse of Simoisius slain,
  And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.
  This saw Ulysses, and with grief enraged,
  Strode where the foremost of the foes engaged;
  Arm'd with his spear, he meditates the wound,
  In act to throw; but cautious look'd around,
  Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew,
  And trembling heard the javelin as it flew.
  A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos came,
  Old Priam's son, Democoon was his name.
  The weapon entered close above his ear,
  Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;(141)
  With piercing shrieks the youth resigns his breath,
  His eye-balls darken with the shades of death;
  Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler rings against the ground.

  Seized with affright the boldest foes appear;
  E'en godlike Hector seems himself to fear;
  Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled;
  The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead:
  But Phoebus now from Ilion's towering height
  Shines forth reveal'd, and animates the fight.
  "Trojans, be bold, and force with force oppose;
  Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!
  Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribb'd with steel;
  Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel.
  Have ye forgot what seem'd your dread before?
  The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more."

  Apollo thus from Ilion's lofty towers,
  Array'd in terrors, roused the Trojan powers:
  While war's fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe,
  And shouts and thunders in the fields below.
  Then great Diores fell, by doom divine,
  In vain his valour and illustrious line.
  A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw,
  (Who from cold AEnus led the Thracian crew,)(142)
  Full on his ankle dropp'd the ponderous stone,
  Burst the strong nerves, and crash'd the solid bone.
  Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands,
  Before his helpless friends, and native bands,
  And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.
  The foe rush'd furious as he pants for breath,
  And through his navel drove the pointed death:
  His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground,
  And the warm life came issuing from the wound.

  His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent,
  Deep in his breast above the pap it went,
  Amid the lungs was fix'd the winged wood,
  And quivering in his heaving bosom stood:
  Till from the dying chief, approaching near,
  The AEtolian warrior tugg'd his weighty spear:
  Then sudden waved his flaming falchion round,
  And gash'd his belly with a ghastly wound;
  The corpse now breathless on the bloody plain,
  To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain;
  The Thracian bands against the victor press'd,
  A grove of lances glitter'd at his breast.
  Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes,
  In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.

  Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace,
  And one the leader of the Epeian race;
  Death's sable shade at once o'ercast their eyes,
  In dust the vanquish'd and the victor lies.
  With copious slaughter all the fields are red,
  And heap'd with growing mountains of the dead.

  Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,
  By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field;
  Might darts be bid to turn their points away,
  And swords around him innocently play;
  The war's whole art with wonder had he seen,
  And counted heroes where he counted men.

  So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired,
  And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired.

                [Illustration: Map of the Plain of Troy.]

                        Map of the Plain of Troy.





BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.

THE ACTS OF DIOMED.

Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this day's battle.
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables him
to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending with any
of the former, excepting Venus. AEneas joins Pandarus to oppose him;
Pandarus is killed, and AEneas in great danger but for the assistance of
Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight, is wounded on the
hand by Diomed. Apollo seconds her in his rescue, and at length carries
off AEneas to Troy, where he is healed in the temple of Pergamus. Mars
rallies the Trojans, and assists Hector to make a stand. In the meantime
AEneas is restored to the field, and they overthrow several of the Greeks;
among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by Sarpedon. Juno and Minerva descend
to resist Mars; the latter incites Diomed to go against that god; he
wounds him, and sends him groaning to heaven.

The first battle continues through this book. The scene is the same as in
the former.

  But Pallas now Tydides' soul inspires,(143)
  Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires,
  Above the Greeks his deathless fame to raise,
  And crown her hero with distinguish'd praise.
  High on his helm celestial lightnings play,
  His beamy shield emits a living ray;
  The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies,
  Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies,
  When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight,
  And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light.
  Such glories Pallas on the chief bestow'd,
  Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flow'd:
  Onward she drives him, furious to engage,
  Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage.

  The sons of Dares first the combat sought,
  A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault;
  In Vulcan's fane the father's days were led,
  The sons to toils of glorious battle bred;
  These singled from their troops the fight maintain,
  These, from their steeds, Tydides on the plain.
  Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near,
  And first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear,
  Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
  And spent in empty air its erring force.
  Not so, Tydides, flew thy lance in vain,
  But pierced his breast, and stretch'd him on the plain.
  Seized with unusual fear, Idaeus fled,
  Left the rich chariot, and his brother dead.
  And had not Vulcan lent celestial aid,
  He too had sunk to death's eternal shade;
  But in a smoky cloud the god of fire
  Preserved the son, in pity to the sire.
  The steeds and chariot, to the navy led,
  Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed.

  Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,
  Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view;
  When by the blood-stain'd hand Minerva press'd
  The god of battles, and this speech address'd:

  "Stern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,
  Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
  Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide;
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
  While we from interdicted fields retire,
  Nor tempt the wrath of heaven's avenging sire."

  Her words allay the impetuous warrior's heat,
  The god of arms and martial maid retreat;
  Removed from fight, on Xanthus' flowery bounds
  They sat, and listen'd to the dying sounds.

  Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,
  And some bold chieftain every leader slew:
  First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,
  His death ennobled by Atrides' hand:

  As he to flight his wheeling car address'd,
  The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
  In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,
  His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.

  Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! doom'd to feel
  The great Idomeneus' protended steel;
  Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)
  From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
  The Cretan javelin reach'd him from afar,
  And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car;
  Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,
  And everlasting shades his eyes surround.

  Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase,
  In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;
  Diana taught him all her sylvan arts,
  To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:
  But vainly here Diana's arts he tries,
  The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;
  From Menelaus' arm the weapon sent,
  Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Next artful Phereclus untimely fell;
  Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
  Thy father's skill, O Phereclus! was thine,
  The graceful fabric and the fair design;
  For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart
  To him the shipwright's and the builder's art.
  Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose,
  The fatal cause of all his country's woes;
  But he, the mystic will of heaven unknown,
  Nor saw his country's peril, nor his own.
  The hapless artist, while confused he fled,
  The spear of Merion mingled with the dead.
  Through his right hip, with forceful fury cast,
  Between the bladder and the bone it pass'd;
  Prone on his knees he falls with fruitless cries,
  And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes.

  From Meges' force the swift Pedaeus fled,
  Antenor's offspring from a foreign bed,
  Whose generous spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair,
  Nursed the young stranger with a mother's care.
  How vain those cares! when Meges in the rear
  Full in his nape infix'd the fatal spear;
  Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides,
  And the cold tongue and grinning teeth divides.

  Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine,
  Sprung from the brave Dolopion's mighty line,
  Who near adored Scamander made abode,
  Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god.
  On him, amidst the flying numbers found,
  Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound;
  On his broad shoulders fell the forceful brand,
  Thence glancing downwards, lopp'd his holy hand,
  Which stain'd with sacred blood the blushing sand.
  Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of death
  Closed his dim eye, and fate suppress'd his breath.

  Thus toil'd the chiefs, in different parts engaged.
  In every quarter fierce Tydides raged;
  Amid the Greek, amid the Trojan train,
  Rapt through the ranks he thunders o'er the plain;
  Now here, now there, he darts from place to place,
  Pours on the rear, or lightens in their face.
  Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strong
  Deluge whole fields, and sweep the trees along,
  Through ruin'd moles the rushing wave resounds,
  O'erwhelm's the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds;
  The yellow harvests of the ripen'd year,
  And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear!(144)
  While Jove descends in sluicy sheets of rain,
  And all the labours of mankind are vain.

  So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire,
  Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire.
  With grief the leader of the Lycian band
  Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand:
  His bended bow against the chief he drew;
  Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew,
  Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore,
  Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore:
  The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed,
  While the proud archer thus exulting cried:

  "Hither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds!
  Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds,
  Not long the deathful dart he can sustain;
  Or Phoebus urged me to these fields in vain."
  So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart
  Stopp'd short of life, and mock'd the shooter's art.
  The wounded chief, behind his car retired,
  The helping hand of Sthenelus required;
  Swift from his seat he leap'd upon the ground,
  And tugg'd the weapon from the gushing wound;
  When thus the king his guardian power address'd,
  The purple current wandering o'er his vest:

  "O progeny of Jove! unconquer'd maid!
  If e'er my godlike sire deserved thy aid,
  If e'er I felt thee in the fighting field;
  Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.
  O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight,
  Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guard'st in fight;
  And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore,
  That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more."

  Thus pray'd Tydides, and Minerva heard,
  His nerves confirm'd, his languid spirits cheer'd;
  He feels each limb with wonted vigour light;
  His beating bosom claim'd the promised fight.
  "Be bold, (she cried), in every combat shine,
  War be thy province, thy protection mine;
  Rush to the fight, and every foe control;
  Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul:
  Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me,
  And all thy godlike father breathes in thee;
  Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,(145)
  And set to view the warring deities.
  These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain;
  Nor rashly strive where human force is vain.
  If Venus mingle in the martial band,
  Her shalt thou wound: so Pallas gives command."

  With that, the blue-eyed virgin wing'd her flight;
  The hero rush'd impetuous to the fight;
  With tenfold ardour now invades the plain,
  Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain.
  As on the fleecy flocks when hunger calls,
  Amidst the field a brindled lion falls;
  If chance some shepherd with a distant dart
  The savage wound, he rouses at the smart,
  He foams, he roars; the shepherd dares not stay,
  But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey;
  Heaps fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground,
  Then leaps victorious o'er the lofty mound.
  Not with less fury stern Tydides flew;
  And two brave leaders at an instant slew;
  Astynous breathless fell, and by his side,
  His people's pastor, good Hypenor, died;
  Astynous' breast the deadly lance receives,
  Hypenor's shoulder his broad falchion cleaves.
  Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rage
  Abas and Polyidus to engage;
  Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old,
  Could fate foresee, and mystic dreams unfold;
  The youths return'd not from the doubtful plain,
  And the sad father tried his arts in vain;
  No mystic dream could make their fates appear,
  Though now determined by Tydides' spear.

  Young Xanthus next, and Thoon felt his rage;
  The joy and hope of Phaenops' feeble age:
  Vast was his wealth, and these the only heirs
  Of all his labours and a life of cares.
  Cold death o'ertakes them in their blooming years,
  And leaves the father unavailing tears:
  To strangers now descends his heapy store,
  The race forgotten, and the name no more.

  Two sons of Priam in one chariot ride,
  Glittering in arms, and combat side by side.
  As when the lordly lion seeks his food
  Where grazing heifers range the lonely wood,
  He leaps amidst them with a furious bound,
  Bends their strong necks, and tears them to the ground:
  So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn,
  Their steeds and chariot to the navy borne.

  With deep concern divine AEneas view'd
  The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued;
  Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies,
  Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
  At length he found Lycaon's mighty son;
  To whom the chief of Venus' race begun:

  "Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours now,
  Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,
  Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall'd fame,
  And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
  O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call
  That wondrous force by which whole armies fall;
  Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies
  To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;
  (Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
  For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
  Whoe'er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer;
  If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare."

  To him the Lycian: "Whom your eyes behold,
  If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:
  Such coursers whirl him o'er the dusty field,
  So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
  If 'tis a god, he wears that chief's disguise:
  Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies,
  Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,
  And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
  I wing'd an arrow, which not idly fell,
  The stroke had fix'd him to the gates of hell;
  And, but some god, some angry god withstands,
  His fate was due to these unerring hands.
  Skill'd in the bow, on foot I sought the war,
  Nor join'd swift horses to the rapid car.
  Ten polish'd chariots I possess'd at home,
  And still they grace Lycaon's princely dome:
  There veil'd in spacious coverlets they stand;
  And twice ten coursers wait their lord's command.
  The good old warrior bade me trust to these,
  When first for Troy I sail'd the sacred seas;
  In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,
  And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
  But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined,
  I heard his counsels with unheedful mind,
  And thought the steeds (your large supplies unknown)
  Might fail of forage in the straiten'd town;
  So took my bow and pointed darts in hand
  And left the chariots in my native land.

  "Too late, O friend! my rashness I deplore;
  These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.
  Tydeus' and Atreus' sons their points have found,
  And undissembled gore pursued the wound.
  In vain they bleed: this unavailing bow
  Serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe.
  In evil hour these bended horns I strung,
  And seized the quiver where it idly hung.
  Cursed be the fate that sent me to the field
  Without a warrior's arms, the spear and shield!
  If e'er with life I quit the Trojan plain,
  If e'er I see my spouse and sire again,
  This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims,
  Broke by my hand, shall feed the blazing flames."

  To whom the leader of the Dardan race:
  "Be calm, nor Phoebus' honour'd gift disgrace.
  The distant dart be praised, though here we need
  The rushing chariot and the bounding steed.
  Against yon hero let us bend our course,
  And, hand to hand, encounter force with force.
  Now mount my seat, and from the chariot's height
  Observe my father's steeds, renown'd in fight;
  Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
  To dare the shock, or urge the rapid race;
  Secure with these, through fighting fields we go;
  Or safe to Troy, if Jove assist the foe.
  Haste, seize the whip, and snatch the guiding rein;
  The warrior's fury let this arm sustain;
  Or, if to combat thy bold heart incline,
  Take thou the spear, the chariot's care be mine."

  "O prince! (Lycaon's valiant son replied)
  As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.
  The horses, practised to their lord's command,
  Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand;
  But, if, unhappy, we desert the fight,
  Thy voice alone can animate their flight;
  Else shall our fates be number'd with the dead,
  And these, the victor's prize, in triumph led.
  Thine be the guidance, then: with spear and shield
  Myself will charge this terror of the field."

  And now both heroes mount the glittering car;
  The bounding coursers rush amidst the war;
  Their fierce approach bold Sthenelus espied,
  Who thus, alarm'd, to great Tydides cried:

  "O friend! two chiefs of force immense I see,
  Dreadful they come, and bend their rage on thee:
  Lo the brave heir of old Lycaon's line,
  And great AEneas, sprung from race divine!
  Enough is given to fame. Ascend thy car!
  And save a life, the bulwark of our war."

  At this the hero cast a gloomy look,
  Fix'd on the chief with scorn; and thus he spoke:

  "Me dost thou bid to shun the coming fight?
  Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?
  Know, 'tis not honest in my soul to fear,
  Nor was Tydides born to tremble here.
  I hate the cumbrous chariot's slow advance,
  And the long distance of the flying lance;
  But while my nerves are strong, my force entire,
  Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire.
  Nor shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight convey
  Those threatening heroes, bear them both away;
  One chief at least beneath this arm shall die;
  So Pallas tells me, and forbids to fly.
  But if she dooms, and if no god withstand,
  That both shall fall by one victorious hand,
  Then heed my words: my horses here detain,
  Fix'd to the chariot by the straiten'd rein;
  Swift to AEneas' empty seat proceed,
  And seize the coursers of ethereal breed;
  The race of those, which once the thundering god(146)
  For ravish'd Ganymede on Tros bestow'd,
  The best that e'er on earth's broad surface run,
  Beneath the rising or the setting sun.
  Hence great Anchises stole a breed unknown,
  By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon:
  Four of this race his ample stalls contain,
  And two transport AEneas o'er the plain.
  These, were the rich immortal prize our own,
  Through the wide world should make our glory known."

  Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on,
  And stern Lycaon's warlike race begun:

  "Prince, thou art met. Though late in vain assail'd,
  The spear may enter where the arrow fail'd."

  He said, then shook the ponderous lance, and flung;
  On his broad shield the sounding weapon rung,
  Pierced the tough orb, and in his cuirass hung,
  "He bleeds! the pride of Greece! (the boaster cries,)
  Our triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!"
  "Mistaken vaunter! (Diomed replied;)
  Thy dart has erred, and now my spear be tried;
  Ye 'scape not both; one, headlong from his car,
  With hostile blood shall glut the god of war."

  He spoke, and rising hurl'd his forceful dart,
  Which, driven by Pallas, pierced a vital part;
  Full in his face it enter'd, and betwixt
  The nose and eye-ball the proud Lycian fix'd;
  Crash'd all his jaws, and cleft the tongue within,
  Till the bright point look'd out beneath the chin.
  Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the ground:
  Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound;
  The starting coursers tremble with affright;
  The soul indignant seeks the realms of night.

  To guard his slaughter'd friend, AEneas flies,
  His spear extending where the carcase lies;
  Watchful he wheels, protects it every way,
  As the grim lion stalks around his prey.
  O'er the fall'n trunk his ample shield display'd,
  He hides the hero with his mighty shade,
  And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes
  Behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
  Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields
  Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:(147)
  He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,
  Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
  Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,
  Full on the bone the pointed marble lights;
  Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,
  And stripp'd the skin, and crack'd the solid bone.
  Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains,
  His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;
  Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies;
  A sudden cloud comes swimming o'er his eyes.
  There the brave chief, who mighty numbers sway'd,
  Oppress'd had sunk to death's eternal shade,
  But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love
  She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,
  His danger views with anguish and despair,
  And guards her offspring with a mother's care.
  About her much-loved son her arms she throws,
  Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
  Screen'd from the foe behind her shining veil,
  The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail;
  Safe through the rushing horse, and feather'd flight
  Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.

  Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands,
  Remain'd unheedful of his lord's commands:
  His panting steeds, removed from out the war,
  He fix'd with straiten'd traces to the car,
  Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains
  The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes:
  These in proud triumph to the fleet convey'd,
  No longer now a Trojan lord obey'd.
  That charge to bold Deipylus he gave,
  (Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,)
  Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein,
  And follow'd where Tydides swept the plain.

  Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes)
  The raging chief in chase of Venus flies:
  No goddess she, commission'd to the field,
  Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield,
  Or fierce Bellona thundering at the wall,
  While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall;
  He knew soft combats suit the tender dame,
  New to the field, and still a foe to fame.
  Through breaking ranks his furious course he bends,
  And at the goddess his broad lance extends;
  Through her bright veil the daring weapon drove,
  The ambrosial veil which all the Graces wove;
  Her snowy hand the razing steel profaned,
  And the transparent skin with crimson stain'd,
  From the clear vein a stream immortal flow'd,
  Such stream as issues from a wounded god;(148)
  Pure emanation! uncorrupted flood!
  Unlike our gross, diseased, terrestrial blood:
  (For not the bread of man their life sustains,
  Nor wine's inflaming juice supplies their veins:)
  With tender shrieks the goddess fill'd the place,
  And dropp'd her offspring from her weak embrace.
  Him Phoebus took: he casts a cloud around
  The fainting chief, and wards the mortal wound.

  Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies,
  The king insults the goddess as she flies:
  "Ill with Jove's daughter bloody fights agree,
  The field of combat is no scene for thee:
  Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care,
  Go, lull the coward, or delude the fair.
  Taught by this stroke renounce the war's alarms,
  And learn to tremble at the name of arms."

  Tydides thus. The goddess, seized with dread,
  Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.
  To aid her, swift the winged Iris flew,
  Wrapt in a mist above the warring crew.
  The queen of love with faded charms she found.
  Pale was her cheek, and livid look'd the wound.
  To Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way:
  Far, on the left, with clouds involved he lay;
  Beside him stood his lance, distain'd with gore,
  And, rein'd with gold, his foaming steeds before.
  Low at his knee, she begg'd with streaming eyes
  Her brother's car, to mount the distant skies,
  And show'd the wound by fierce Tydides given,
  A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven.
  Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain,
  And to her hand commits the golden rein;
  She mounts the seat, oppress'd with silent woe,
  Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.
  The lash resounds, the rapid chariot flies,
  And in a moment scales the lofty skies:
  They stopp'd the car, and there the coursers stood,
  Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial food;
  Before her mother, love's bright queen appears,
  O'erwhelmed with anguish, and dissolved in tears:
  She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed,
  And ask'd what god had wrought this guilty deed?

  [Illustration: VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.]

          VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.


  Then she: "This insult from no god I found,
  An impious mortal gave the daring wound!
  Behold the deed of haughty Diomed!
  'Twas in the son's defence the mother bled.
  The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage;
  But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage."

  Dione then: "Thy wrongs with patience bear,
  And share those griefs inferior powers must share:
  Unnumber'd woes mankind from us sustain,
  And men with woes afflict the gods again.
  The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,(149)
  And lodged in brazen dungeons underground,
  Full thirteen moons imprison'd roar'd in vain;
  Otus and Ephialtes held the chain:
  Perhaps had perish'd had not Hermes' care
  Restored the groaning god to upper air.
  Great Juno's self has borne her weight of pain,
  The imperial partner of the heavenly reign;
  Amphitryon's son infix'd the deadly dart,(150)
  And fill'd with anguish her immortal heart.
  E'en hell's grim king Alcides' power confess'd,
  The shaft found entrance in his iron breast;
  To Jove's high palace for a cure he fled,
  Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;
  Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around,
  Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
  Rash, impious man! to stain the bless'd abodes,
  And drench his arrows in the blood of gods!

         [Illustration: OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.]

                 OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.


  "But thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic deed),
  Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed,
  Know thou, whoe'er with heavenly power contends,
  Short is his date, and soon his glory ends;
  From fields of death when late he shall retire,
  No infant on his knees shall call him sire.
  Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found,
  To stretch thee pale and gasping on the ground;
  Thy distant wife, AEgiale the fair,(151)
  Starting from sleep with a distracted air,
  Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord deplore,
  The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!"

  This said, she wiped from Venus' wounded palm
  The sacred ichor, and infused the balm.
  Juno and Pallas with a smile survey'd,
  And thus to Jove began the blue-eyed maid:

  "Permit thy daughter, gracious Jove! to tell
  How this mischance the Cyprian queen befell,
  As late she tried with passion to inflame
  The tender bosom of a Grecian dame;
  Allured the fair, with moving thoughts of joy,
  To quit her country for some youth of Troy;
  The clasping zone, with golden buckles bound,
  Razed her soft hand with this lamented wound."

  The sire of gods and men superior smiled,
  And, calling Venus, thus address'd his child:
  "Not these, O daughter are thy proper cares,
  Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars;
  Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms;
  To Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms."

  Thus they in heaven: while on the plain below
  The fierce Tydides charged his Dardan foe,
  Flush'd with celestial blood pursued his way,
  And fearless dared the threatening god of day;
  Already in his hopes he saw him kill'd,
  Though screen'd behind Apollo's mighty shield.
  Thrice rushing furious, at the chief he strook;
  His blazing buckler thrice Apollo shook:
  He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud,
  A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

  "O son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and see
  How vast the difference of the gods and thee;
  Distance immense! between the powers that shine
  Above, eternal, deathless, and divine,
  And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth,
  A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth."

  So spoke the god who darts celestial fires:
  He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.
  Then Phoebus bore the chief of Venus' race
  To Troy's high fane, and to his holy place;
  Latona there and Phoebe heal'd the wound,
  With vigour arm'd him, and with glory crown'd.
  This done, the patron of the silver bow
  A phantom raised, the same in shape and show
  With great AEneas; such the form he bore,
  And such in fight the radiant arms he wore.
  Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,
  And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
  Meantime on Ilion's tower Apollo stood,
  And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god:

  "Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;
  Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,
  Rise in thy wrath! to hell's abhorr'd abodes
