I was gently pulling the basket through the window hole, when I heard
one of the crew yawn and stretch himself in his sleep. So, determining
to risk no more, I quietly pack'd the basket, slung it on my right arm,
and with the ham grasp'd by the knuckle in my left, made my way up the
stream.

'Twas thus laden that I enter'd the dingle, and came on the sad sight
therein. I set down the ham as a thing to be asham'd of, and bar'd my
head. The girl lifted her face, and turning, all white and tragical, saw
me.

"My father is dead, sir."

I stoop'd and pil'd a heap of fresh snow over the blood stains. There
was no intent in this but to hide the pity that chok'd me. She had still
to hear about her brother, Anthony. Turning, as by a sudden thought, I
took her hand. She look'd into my eyes, and her own filled with tears.
'Twas the human touch that loosen'd their flow, I think: and sinking
down again beside her father, she wept her fill.

"Mistress Killigrew," I said, as soon as the first violence of her tears
was abated, "I have still some news that is ill hearing. Your enemies
are encamp'd in the woods, about a half mile below this"--and with that
I told my story.

"They have done their worst, sir."

"No."

She looked at me with a question on her lip.

Said I, "you must believe me yet a short while without questioning."

Considering for a moment, she nodded. "You have a right, sir, to be
trusted, tho' I know not so much as your name. Then we must stay close
in hiding?" she added very sensibly, tho' with the last word her voice
trail'd off, and she began again to weep.

But in time, having cover'd the dead baronet's body with sprays of the
wither'd bracken, I drew her to a little distance and prevail'd on
her to nibble a crust of the loaf. Now, all this while, it must be
remembered, I was in my shirt sleeves, and the weather bitter cold.
Which at length her sorrow allow'd her to notice.

"Why, you are shivering, sore!" she said, and running, drew my buff-coat
from her father's body, and held it out to me.

"Indeed," I answer'd, "I was thinking of another expedition to warm my
blood." And promising to be back in half an hour, I follow'd down my
former tracks toward the stream.

Within twenty minutes I was back, running and well-nigh shouting with
joy.

"Come!" I cried to her, "come and see for yourself!"

What had happen'd was this:--Wading cautiously down the brook, I had
cause suddenly to prick up my ears and come to a halt. 'Twas the muffled
tramp of hoofs that I heard, and creeping a bit further, I caught a
glimpse, beyond the hut, of a horse and rider disappearing down the
woods. He was the last of the party, as I guess'd from the sound of
voices and jingling of bits further down the slope. Advancing on the hut
with more boldness, I found it deserted. I scrambled up on the bank and
round to the entrance. The snow before it was trampled and sullied by
the footmarks of men and horses: and as I noted this, came Settle's
voice calling up the slope----

"Jerry--Jerry Toy!"

A nearer voice hail'd in answer.

"Where's Reuben?"

"Coming, Captain--close behind!"

"Curse him for a loitering idiot! We've wasted time enough, as 'tis,"
called back the Captain. "How in thunder is a man to find the road out
of this cursed wood?"

"Straight on, Cap'n--you can't miss it," shouted another voice, not two
gunshots below.

A volcano of oaths pour'd up from Settle. I did not wait for the end of
them: but ran back for Mistress Delia.

Together we descended to the hut. By this time the voices had faded away
in distance. Yet to make sure that the rascals had really departed, we
follow'd their tracks for some way, beside the stream; and suddenly came
to a halt with cries of joyful surprise.

The brook had led us to a point where, over a stony fall veil'd with
brown bracken, it plunged into a narrow ravine. Standing on the lip,
where the water took a smoother glide before leaping, we saw the line
of the ravine mark'd by a rift in the pines, and through this a slice
of the country that lay below. 'Twas a level plain, well watered, and
dotted here and there with houses. A range of wooded hills clos'd the
view, and toward them a broad road wound gently, till the eye lost it at
their base. All this was plain enough, in spite of the snow that cover'd
the landscape. For the sun had burst out above, and the few flakes that
still fell looked black against his brilliance and the dazzling country
below.

But what caus'd our joy was to see, along the road, a small cavalcade
moving away from us, with many bright glances of light and color, as
their steel caps and sashes took the sunshine--a pretty sight, and the
prettier because it meant our present deliverance.

The girl beside me gave a cry of delight, then sigh'd; and after a
minute began to walk back toward the hut: where I left her, and ran up
hill for the basket and ham. On my return, I found her examining a
heap of rusty tools that, it seem'd, she had found on a shelf of the
building. 'Twas no light help to the good fellowship that afterward
united us, that from the first I could read her thoughts often without
words; and for this reason, that her eyes were as candid as the noonday.

So now I answer'd her aloud---

"This afternoon we may venture down to the plain, where no doubt we
shall find a clergyman to sell us a patch of holy ground--"

"Holy ground?" She look'd at me awhile and shook her head. "I am not of
your religion," she said.

"And your father?"

"I think no man ever discovered my father's religion. Perhaps there was
none to discover: but he was no bad father" she steadied her voice and
went on:--"He would prefer the hillside to your 'holy ground.'"

So, an hour later, I delv'd his grave in the frosty earth, close by the
spot where he lay. Somehow, I shiver'd all the while, and had a cruel
shooting pain in my wound that was like to have mastered me before the
task was ended. But I managed to lower the body softly into the hole
and to cover it reverently from sight: and afterward stood leaning on
my spade and feeling very light in the head, while the girl knelt and
pray'd for her father's soul.

And the picture of her as she knelt is the last I remember, till I
open'd my eyes, and was amazed to find myself on my back, and staring up
at darkness.

"What has happen'd?"

"I think you are very ill," said a voice: "can you lean on me, and reach
the hut?"

"Why, yes: that is, I think so. Why is everything dark?"

"The sun has been down for hours. You have been in a swoon first, and
then talk'd--oh, such nonsense! Shame on me, to let you catch this
chill!"

She help'd me to my feet and steadied me: and how we reached the hut I
cannot tell you. It took more than one weary hour, as I now know; but,
at the time, hours and minutes were one to me.

In that hut I lay four nights and four days, between ague fit and fever.
And that is all the account I can give of the time, save that, on the
second day, the girl left me alone in the hut and descended to the
plain, where, after asking at many cottages for a physician, she was
forced to be content with an old woman reputed to be amazingly well
skill'd in herbs and medicines; whom, after a day's trial, she turn'd
out of doors. On the fourth day, fearing for my life, she made another
descent, and coming to a wayside tavern, purchased a pint of aqua vitae,
carried it back, and mix'd a potion that threw me into a profuse sweat.
The same evening I sat up, a sound man.

Indeed, so thoroughly was I recover'd that, waking early next morning,
and finding my sweet nurse asleep from sheer weariness, in a corner of
the hut, I stagger'd up from my bed of dried bracken, and out into the
pure air. Rare it was to stand and drink it in like wine. A footstep
arous'd me. 'Twas Mistress Delia: and turning, I held out my hand.

"Now this is famous," said she: "a day or two will see you as good a man
as ever."

"A day or two? To-morrow at latest, I shall make trial to start." I
noted a sudden change on her face, and added: "Indeed, you must hear
my reasons before setting me down for an ingrate;" and told her of the
King's letter that I carried. "I hoped that for a while our ways might
lie together," said I; and broke off, for she was looking me earnestly
in the face.

"Sir, as you know, my brother Anthony was to have met me--nay, for
pity's sake, turn not your face away! I have guess'd--the sword you
carry--I mark'd it. Sir, be merciful, and tell me!"

I led her a little aside to the foot of a tall pine; and there, tho'
it rung my heart, told her all; and left her to wrestle with this final
sorrow. She was so tender a thing to be stricken thus, that I who had
dealt the blow crept back to the hut, covering my eyes. In an hour's
time I look'd out. She was gone.

At nightfall she return'd, white with grief and fatigue; yet I was glad
to see her eyes red and swol'n with weeping. Throughout our supper
she kept silence; but when 'twas over, look'd up and spoke in a steady
tone----

"Sir, I have a favor to ask, and must risk being held importunate--"

"From you to me," I put in, "all talk of favors had best be dropp'd."

"No--listen. If ever it befel you to lose father or mother or dearly
loved friend, you will know how the anguish stuns--Oh sir! to-day the
sun seem'd fallen out of heaven, and I a blind creature left groping
in the void. Indeed, sir, 'tis no wonder: I had a father, brother,
and servant ready to die for me--three hearts to love and lean on: and
to-day they are gone."

I would have spoken, but she held up a hand.

"Now when you spoke of Anthony--a dear lad!--I lay for some time dazed
with grief. By little and little, as the truth grew plainer, the pain
grew also past bearing. I stood up and stagger'd into the woods to
escape it. I went fast and straight, heeding nothing, for at first my
senses were all confus'd: but in a while the walking clear'd my wits,
and I could think: and thinking, I could weep: and having wept, could
fortify my heart. Here is the upshot, sir--tho' 'tis held immodest for a
maid to ask even far less of a man. We are both bound for Cornwall--you
on an honorable mission, I for my father's estate of Gleys, wherefrom
(as your tale proves) some unseen hands are thrusting me. Alike we carry
our lives in our hands. You must go forward: I may not go back. For from
a King who cannot right his own affairs there is little hope; and in
Cornwall I have surer friends than he. Therefore take me, sir--take
me for a comrade! Am I sad? Do you fear a weary journey? I will
smile--laugh--sing--put sorrow behind me. I will contrive a thousand
ways to cheat the milestones. At the first hint of tears, discard me,
and go your way with no prick of conscience. Only try me--oh, the shame
of speaking thus!"

Her voice had grown more rapid toward the close: and now, breaking off,
she put both hands to cover her face, that was hot with blushes. I went
over and took them in mine:

"You have made me the blithest man alive," said I.

She drew back a pace with a frighten'd look, and would have pull'd her
hands away.

"Because," I went on quickly, "you have paid me this high compliment, to
trust me. Proud was I to listen to you; and merrily will the miles pass
with you for comrade. And so I say--Mistress Killigrew, take me for your
servant."

To my extreme discomposure, as I dropp'd her hands, her eyes were
twinkling with laughter.

"Dear now; I see a dull prospect ahead if we use these long titles!"

"But---"

"Indeed, sir, please yourself. Only as I intend to call you 'Jack'
perhaps 'Delia' will be more of a piece than 'Mistress Killigrew.'" She
dropp'd me a mock curtsey. "And now, Jack, be a good boy, and hitch
me this quilt across the hut. I bought it yesterday at a cottage below
here----"

She ended the sentence with the prettiest blush imaginable; and so,
having fix'd her screen, we shook hands on our comradeship, and wish'd
each other good night.




CHAPTER VIII.

I LOSE THE KING'S LETTER; AND AM CARRIED TO BRISTOL.


Almost before daylight we were afoot, and the first ray of cold sunshine
found us stepping from the woods into the plain, where now the snow was
vanished and a glistening coat of rime spread over all things. Down here
the pines gave way to bare elms and poplars, thickly dotted, and among
them the twisting smoke of farmstead and cottage, here and there, and
the morning stir of kitchen and stable very musical in the crisp air.

Delia stepped along beside me, humming an air or breaking off to
chatter. Meeting us, you would have said we had never a care. The road
went stretching away to the northwest and the hills against the sky
there; whither beyond, we neither knew nor (being both young, and one,
by this time, pretty deep in love) did greatly care. Yet meeting with a
waggoner and his team, we drew up to enquire.

The waggoner had a shock of whitish hair and a face purple-red above,
by reason of the cold, and purple-black below, for lack of a barber. He
purs'd up his mouth and look'd us slowly up and down.

"Come," said I, "you are not deaf, I hope, nor dumb."

"Send I may niver!" the fellow ejaculated, slowly and with
contemplation: "'tis an unseemly sight, yet tickling to the mirthfully
minded. Haw--haw!" He check'd his laughter suddenly and stood like a
stone image beside his horses.

"Good sir," said Delia, laying a hand on my arm (for I was growing
nettled), "your mirth is a riddle: but tell us our way and you are free
to laugh."

"Oh, Scarlet--Scarlet!" answer'd he: "and to me, that am a man o'
blushes from my cradle!"

Convinced by this that the fellow must be an idiot, I told him so, and
left him staring after us; nor heard the sound of his horses moving on
again for many minutes.

After this we met about a dozen on the road, and all paus'd to stare.
But from one--an old woman--we learn'd we were walking toward Marlboro',
and about noon were over the hills and looking into the valley beyond.

'Twas very like the other vale; only a pleasant stream wound along the
bottom, by the banks of which the road took us. Here, by a bridge, we
came to an inn bearing the sign of "The Broad Face," and entered: for
Captain Settle's stock of victuals was now done. A sour-fac'd woman met
us at the door.

"Do you stay here," Delia advis'd me, "and drink a mug of beer while I
bargain with the hostess for fresh food." She follow'd the sour-fac'd
woman into the house.

But out she comes presently with her cheeks flaming and a pair of
bright eyes. "Come!" she commanded, "come at once!" Setting down my
half emptied mug, I went after her across the bridge and up the road,
wondering. In this way we must have walk'd for a mile or more before she
turn'd and stamp'd her little foot--

"Horrible!" she cried. "Horrible--wicked--shameful! Ugh!" There were
tears in her eyes.

"What is shameful?"

She made no reply, but walk'd on again quickly.

"I am getting hungry, for my part," sigh'd I, after a little.

"Then you must starve!"

"Oh!"

She wheel'd round again.

"Jack, this will never do. If you are to have a comrade, let it be a
boy."

"Now, I am very passably content as things are."

"Nonsense: at Marlboro', I mean, you must buy me a suit of boy's
clothes. What are you hearkening to?"

"I thought I heard the noise of guns--or is it thunder?"

"Dear Jack, don't say 'tis thunder! I do mortally fear thunder--and
mice."

"'Twouldn't be thunder at this time of year. No, 'tis guns firing."

"Where?--not that I mind guns."

"Ahead of us."

On the far side of the valley we enter'd a wood, thinking by this to
shorten our way: for the road here took a long bend to eastward. Now, at
first this wood seem'd of no considerable size, but thicken'd and spread
as we advanced. 'Twas only, however, after passing the ridge, and when
daylight began to fail us, that I became alarm'd. For the wood grew
denser, with a tangle of paths criss-crossing amid the undergrowth. And
just then came the low mutter of cannon again, shaking the earth. We
began to run forward, tripping in the gloom over brambles, and stumbling
into holes.

For a mile or so this lasted: and then, without warning, I heard a sound
behind me, and look'd back, to find Delia sunk upon the ground.

"Jack, here's a to-do!"

"What's amiss?"

"Why, I am going to swoon!"

The words were scarce out, when there sounded a crackling and snapping
of twigs ahead, and two figures came rushing toward us--a man and a
woman. The man carried an infant in his arms: and tho' I call'd on them
to stop, the pair ran by us with no more notice than if we had been
stones. Only the woman cried, "Dear Lord, save us!" and wrung her hands
as she pass'd out of sight.

"This is strange conduct," thought I: but peering down, saw that Delia's
face was white and motionless. She had swoon'd, indeed, from weariness
and hunger. So I took her in my arms and stumbled forward, hoping to
find the end of the wood soon. For now the rattle of artillery came
louder and incessant through the trees, and mingling with it, a
multitude of dull shouts and outcries. At first I was minded to run
after the man and woman, but on second thought, resolv'd to see the
danger before hiding from it.

The trees, in a short while, grew sparser, and between the stems I
mark'd a ruddy light glowing. And then I came out on an open space upon
the hillside, with a dip of earth in front; and beyond, a long ridge
of pines standing up black, because of a red glare behind them; and
saw that this came not from any setting sun, but was the light of a
conflagration.

The glare danced and quiver'd in the sky, as I cross'd the hollow. It
made even Delia's white cheek seem rosy. Up amid the pines I clamor'd,
and along the ridge to where it broke off in a steep declivity. And lo!
in a minute I look'd down as 'twere into the infernal pit.

There was a whole town burning below. And in the streets men were
fighting, as could be told by their shouts and the rattle and blaze of
musketry. For a garment of smoke lay over all and hid them: only the
turmoil beat up as from a furnace, and the flames of burning thatches,
and quick jets of firearms like lightning in a thundercloud. Great
sparks floated past us, and over the trees at our back. A hot blast
breath'd on our cheeks. Now and then you might hear a human shriek
distinct amid the din, and this spoke terribly to the heart.

Now the town was Marlboro', and the attacking force a body of royal
troops sent from Oxford to oust the garrison of the Parliament, which
they did this same night, with great slaughter, driving the rebels out
of the place, and back on the road to Bristol. Had we guess'd this,
much ill luck had been spared us; but we knew nought of it, nor whether
friends or foes were getting the better. So (Delia being by this time
recover'd a little) we determined to pass the night in the woods, and on
the morrow to give the place a wide berth.

Retreating, then, to the hollow (that lay on the lee side of the ridge,
away from the north wind), I gather'd a pile of great stones, and spread
my cloak thereover for Delia. To sleep was impossible, even with the
will for it. For the tumult and fighting went on, and only died out
about an hour before dawn: and once or twice we were troubled to hear
the sound of people running on the ridge above. So we sat and talked in
low voices till dawn; and grew more desperately hunger'd than ever.

With the chill of daybreak we started, meaning to get quit of the
neighborhood before any espied us; and fetch'd a compass to the south
without another look at Marlboro'. At the end of two hours, turning
northwest again, we came to some water meadows beside a tiny river (the
Kennet, as I think), and saw, some way beyond, a high road that cross'd
to our side (only the bridge was now broken down), and further yet, a
thick smoke curling up; but whence this came I could not see. Now we
had been avoiding all roads this morning, and hiding at every sound of
footsteps. But hunger was making us bold. I bade Delia crouch down
by the stream's bank, where many alders grew, and set off toward this
