and after some hours watching saw three bolts fired from the next
window. Watching intently, they saw the two first fall into the
moat. They could not see where the other fell; but as there was no
splash in the water, they concluded that it had fallen beyond it,
and in a minute they saw a soldier again advance from the battery,
pick up something at the edge of the water, raise his arm, and
retire. That evening when Captain Vere returned from the ramparts
they informed him of what they had observed.

"Doubtless it is an act of treachery," he said, "and this merchant
is communicating with the enemy. At the same time what you have
seen, although convincing evidence to me, is scarce enough for me
to denounce him. Doubtless he does not write these letters until
he is ready to fire them off, and were he arrested in his house
or on his way to the warehouse we might fail to find proofs of his
guilt, and naught but ill feeling would be caused among his friends.
No, whatever we do we must do cautiously. Have you thought of any
plan by which we might catch him in the act?"

"If two or three men could be introduced into his warehouse,
and concealed in the room from which he fires, they might succeed
in catching him in the act, Captain Vere; but the room may be an
empty one without any place whatever where they could be hidden,
and unless they were actually in the room they would be of little
good, for he would have time, if he heard footsteps, to thrust any
letter he may have written into his mouth, and so destroy it before
it could be seized."

"That is so," Captain Vere agreed. "The matter seems a difficult one,
and yet it is of the greatest importance to hinder communications
with the Spaniards. Tonight all the soldiers who can be spared,
aided by all the citizens able to use mattock and pick, are to set
to work to begin to raise a half moon round the windmill behind
the point they are attacking, so as to have a second line to fall
back upon when the wall gives way, which it will do ere long, for
it is sorely shaken and battered. It is most important to keep this
from the knowledge of the Spaniards. Now, lads, you have shown your
keenness by taking notice of what is going on, see if you cannot
go further, and hit upon some plan of catching this traitor at his
work. If before night we can think of no scheme, I must go to the
governor and tell him frankly that we have suspicions of treachery,
though we cannot prove them, and ask him, in order to prevent the
possibility of our plans being communicated to the enemy, to place
some troops in all the warehouses along that line, so that none
can shoot there from any message to the Spaniards."

Just as Captain Vere finished his supper, the boys came into the
room again.

"We have thought of a plan, sir, that might succeed, although it
would be somewhat difficult. The dormer window from which these
bolts have been fired lies thirty or forty feet away from that from
which we were looking. The roof is so steep that no one could hold
a footing upon it for a moment, nor could a plank be placed upon
which he could walk. The window is about twelve feet from the top
of the roof. We think that one standing on the ledge of our window
might climb on to its top, and once there swing a rope with a stout
grapnel attached to catch on the ridge of the roof; then two or
three men might climb up there and work themselves along, and then
lower themselves down with a rope on to the top of the next window.
They would need to have ropes fastened round their bodies, for the
height is great, and a slip would mean death.

"The one farthest out on the window could lean over when he hears
a noise below him, and when he saw the crossbow thrust from the
window, could by a sudden blow knock it from the fellow's hand,
when it would slide down the roof and fall into the narrow yard
between the warehouse and the walls. Of course some men would be
placed there in readiness to seize it, and others at the door of
the warehouse to arrest the traitor if he ran down."

"I think the plan is a good one, though somewhat difficult of
execution," Captain Vere said. "But this enterprise on the roof
would be a difficult one and dangerous, since as you say a slip
would mean death."

"Lionel and myself, sir, would undertake that with the aid of two
active men to hold the ropes for us. We have both done plenty of
bird nesting in the woods of Hedingham, and are not likely to turn
giddy."

"I don't think it is necessary for more than one to get down on to
that window," Captain Vere said. "Only one could so place himself
as to look down upon the crossbow. However, you shall divide
the honour of the enterprise between you. You, as the eldest and
strongest, Geoffrey, shall carry out your plan on the roof, while
you, Lionel, shall take post at the door with four men to arrest
the traitor when he leaves. I will select two strong and active
men to accompany you, Geoffrey, and aid you in your attempt; but
mind, before you try to get out of the window and to climb on to
its roof, have a strong rope fastened round your body and held by
the others; then in case of a slip, they can haul you in again. I
will see that the ropes and grapnels are in readiness."

The next morning early Geoffrey proceeded with the two men who had
been selected to accompany him to his usual lookout. Both were
active, wiry men, and entered fully into the spirit of the undertaking
when Geoffrey explained its nature to them. They looked out of the
dormer window at the sharp roof slanting away in front of them and
up to the ridge above.

"I think, Master Vickars," one of them, Roger Browne by name, said,
"that I had best go up first. I served for some years at sea, and
am used to climbing about in dizzy places. It is no easy matter to
get from this window sill astride the roof above us, and moreover
I am more like to heave the grapnel so that it will hook firmly on
to the ridge than you are."

"Very well, Roger. I should be willing to try, but doubtless you
would manage it far better than I should. But before you start we
will fasten the other rope round your body, as Captain Vere directed
me to do. Then in case you slip, or anything gives way with your
weight, we can check you before you slide far down below us."

A rope was accordingly tied round the man's body under his arms.
Taking the grapnel, to which the other rope was attached, he got
out on to the sill. It was not an easy task to climb up on to the
ridge of the dormer window, and it needed all his strength and
activity to accomplish the feat. Once astride of the ridge the rest
was easy. At the first cast he threw the grapnel so that it caught
securely on the top of the roof. After testing it with two or three
pulls he clambered up, leaving the lower end of the rope hanging
by the side of the window. As soon as he had gained this position
Geoffrey, who was to follow him, prepared to start.

According to the instructions Browne had given him he fastened
the end of the rope which was round Browne's body under his own
shoulders, then leaning over and taking a firm hold of the rope to
which the grapnel was attached, he let himself out of the window.
Browne hauled from above at the rope round his body, and he pulled
himself with his hands by that attached to the grapnel, and presently
reached the top.

"I am glad you came first, Roger," he said. "I do not think I could
have ever pulled myself up if you had not assisted me."

He unfastened the rope, and the end was thrown down to the window,
and Job Tredgold, the other man, fastened it round him and was
hauled up as Geoffrey had been.

"We will move along now to that stack of chimneys coming through
the roof four feet below the ridge on the town side," Geoffrey
said. "We can stand down there out of sight of the Spaniards. We
shall be sure to attract attention sitting up here, and might have
some bullets flying round our ears, besides which this fellow's
friends might suspect our object and signal to him in some way. It
is two hours yet to the time when we have twice seen him send his
bolts across the moat."

This was accordingly done, and for an hour and a half they sat down
on the roof with their feet against the stack of chimneys.

"It is time to be moving now," Geoffrey said at last. "I think the
best way will be for me to get by the side of the dormer window
instead of above it. It would be very awkward leaning over there,
and I should not have strength to strike a blow; whereas with
the rope under my arms and my foot on the edge of the sill, which
projects a few inches beyond the side of the window, I could stand
upright and strike a downright blow on the crossbow."

"That would be the best way, I think," Roger Browne agreed; "and
I will come down on to the top of the window and lean over. In the
first place your foot might slip, and as you dangle there by the
rope he might cut it and let you shoot over, or he might lean out
and shoot you as you climb up the roof again; but if I am above
with my pistol in readiness there will be no fear of accidents."



CHAPTER V

AN HEROIC DEFENCE


The plan Roger Browne suggested was carried out. Geoffrey was
first lowered to his place by the side of the window, and bracing
himself against its side with a foot on the sill he managed to
stand upright, leaning against the rope that Job Tredgold held from
above. Job had instructions when Geoffrey lifted his arm to ease
the rope a few inches so as to enable the lad to lean forward. After
two or three attempts Geoffrey got the rope to the exact length
which would enable him to look round the corner and to strike a blow
with his right hand, in which he held a stout club. Roger Browne
then descended by the aid of the other rope, and fastening it round
his body lay down astride of the roof of the window with his head
and shoulders over the end, and his pistol held in readiness.

It seemed an age to Geoffrey before he heard the sound of a footstep
in the loft beside him. He grasped his cudgel firmly and leaned
slightly forward. For ten minutes there was quiet within, and Geoffrey
guessed that the traitor was writing the missive he was about to
send to the enemy; then the footstep approached the window, and a
moment later a crossbow was thrust out. A glance at it sufficed to
show that the bolt was enveloped in a piece of paper wound round it
and secured with a string. Steadying himself as well as he could
Geoffrey struck with all his force down upon the crossbow. The
weapon, loosely held, went clattering down the tiles. There was
an exclamation of surprise and fury from within the window, and at
the same moment Job Tredgold, seeing that Geoffrey's attempt had
been successful, hauled away at the rope and began to drag him
backward up the tiles.

The lad saw a man lean out of the window and look up at him, then
a pistol was levelled; but the report came from above the window,
and not from the threatening weapon. A sharp cry of pain was heard,
as the pistol fell from the man's hand and followed the crossbow
down the roof. A few seconds later Geoffrey was hauled up to the
ridge, where he was at once joined by Roger Browne. Shifting the
ropes they moved along till above the window from which they had
issued. Geoffrey was first lowered down. As soon as he had got
in at the window he undid the rope and Job Tredgold followed him,
while Roger Browne slid down by the rope attached to the grapnel;
then they ran downstairs.

As soon as they sallied out below they saw that Lionel and the
men with him had captured a prisoner; and just as they joined the
party the guard came round from the other side of the warehouse,
bringing with them the crossbow, its bolt, and the pistol. The
prisoner, whose shoulder was broken by Roger Browne's shot, was
at once taken to Captain Vere's quarters. That officer had just
arrived from the walls, knowing the time at which the capture would
probably be made.

"So you have succeeded," he said. "Well done, lads; you have earned
the thanks of all. We will take this man at once to the governor,
who is at present at the town hall."

By the time they issued out quite a crowd had assembled, for the
news that William Von Arnig had been brought a prisoner and wounded
to Captain Vere's quarters had spread rapidly. The crowd increased
as they went along, and Captain Vere and his party had difficulty
in making their way to the town hall, many of the people exclaiming
loudly against this treatment of one of the leading citizens. The
governor was, when they entered, holding council with the English
leader, Sir Roger Williams.

"Why, what is this, Captain Vere?" he asked in surprise as that
officer, accompanied by the two boys and followed by Roger Browne
and Job Tredgold guarding the prisoner, entered.

"I have to accuse this man of treacherously communicating with the
enemy," Francis Vere said.

"What?" Arnold de Groenvelt exclaimed in surprise. "Why, this is
Mynheer Von Arnig, one of our most worshipful citizens! Surely,
Captain Vere, there must be some error here?"

"I will place my evidence before you," Captain Vere said; "and it
will be for you to decide upon it. Master Geoffrey Vickars, please
to inform the governor what you know about this matter."

Geoffrey then stated how he and his brother, being at the upper
window of the warehouse, had on two days in succession seen a
crossbow discharged from a neighbouring window, and had noticed a
Spanish soldier come out of a battery and pick up something which
they believed to be the bolt, and how he and his brother had reported
the circumstances to Captain Vere. That officer then took up the
story, and stated that seeing the evidence was not conclusive, and
it was probable that if an attempt was made to arrest the person,
whomsoever he might be, who had used the crossbow, any evidence
of treasonable design might be destroyed before he was seized, he
had accepted the offer of Master Vickars to climb the roof, lower
himself to the window from which the bolt would be shot, and, if
possible, strike it from the man's hands, so that it would fall
down the roof to the courtyard below, where men were placed to
seize it.

Geoffrey then related how he, with the two soldiers guarding the
prisoner, had scaled the roof and taken a position by the window;
how he had seen the crossbow thrust out, and had struck it from
the hands of the man holding it; how the latter had leaned out,
and would have shot him had not Roger Browne from his post above
the window shot him in the shoulder.

"Here are the crossbow and pistol," Captain Vere said; "and this
is the bolt as it was picked up by my men. You see, sir, there is
a paper fastened round it. I know not its contents, for I judged it
best to leave it as it was found until I placed it in your hands."

The governor cut the string, unrolled the paper and examined it.
It contained a statement as to the state of the wall, with remarks
where it was yielding, and where the enemy had best shoot against
it. It said that the defenders had in the night begun to form a half
moon behind it, and contained a sketch showing the exact position
of the new work.

"Gentlemen, what think you of this?" the governor asked the English
officers.

"There can be no doubt that it is a foul act of treachery," Williams
said, "and the traitor merits death."

"We will not decide upon it ourselves," the governor said. "I will
summon six of the leading citizens, who shall sit as a jury with
us. This is a grave matter, and touches the honour of the citizens
as well as the safety of the town."

In a few minutes the six citizens summoned arrived. The evidence
was again given, and then the prisoner was asked what he had to
say in his defence.

"It is useless for me to deny it," he replied. "I am caught in the
act, and must suffer for it. I have done my duty to the King of
Spain, my sovereign; and I warn you he will take vengeance for my
blood."

"That we must risk," the governor said. "Now, gentlemen, you citizens
of this town now attacked by the Spaniards, and you, sir, who are
in command of the soldiers of the queen of England, have heard the
evidence and the answer the prisoner has made. What is your opinion
thereon? Do you, Sir Roger Williams, being highest in rank and
authority, first give your opinion."

"I find that he is guilty of an act of gross treason and treachery.
For such there is but one punishment--death." And the six citizens
all gave the same decision.

"You are found guilty of this foul crime," the governor said, "and
are sentenced to death. In half an hour you will be hung in the
marketplace, as a punishment to yourself and a warning to other
traitors, if such there be in this town of Sluys. As to you, young
sirs, you have rendered a great service to the town, and have
shown a discernment beyond your years. I thank you in the name of
the city and of its garrison, and also in that of the States, whose
servant I am."

A guard of armed citizens were now called in, the prisoner was handed
to them, and orders given to their officer to carry the sentence
into effect. A statement of the crime of the prisoner, with the
names of those who had acted as his judges, and the sentence, was
then drawn out, signed by the governor, and, ordered by him to be
affixed to the door of the town hall. The two lads, finding that
they were no longer required, hastened back to their quarters,
having no wish to be present at the execution of the unhappy wretch
whose crime they had been the means of detecting.

A few days later considerable portions of the battered wall fell,
and shortly afterwards a breach of two hundred and fifty paces
long was effected, and a bridge of large boats constructed by the
enemy from the dyke to the foot of the rampart.

This was not effected without terrible loss. Hundreds of the bravest
Spanish soldiers and sailors were killed, and three officers who
succeeded each other in command of the attack were badly wounded.
The Spanish had laboured under great difficulties owing to the lack
of earth to push their trenches forward to the edge of the moat,
arising from the surrounding country being flooded. They only
succeeded at last by building wooden machines of bullet proof planks
on wheels, behind each of which four men could work. When all was
prepared the Spaniards advanced to the attack, rushing up the breach
with splendid valour, headed by three of their bravest leaders; but
they were met by the English and Dutch, and again and again hurled
back.

Day and night the fighting continued, the Spaniards occasionally
retiring to allow their artillery to open fire again upon the
shattered ruins. But stoutly as the defenders fought, step by step
the Spaniards won their way forward until they had captured the
breach and the west gate adjoining it, there being nothing now beyond
the hastily constructed inner work between them and the town. The
finest regiment of the whole of the Spanish infantry now advanced
to the assault, but they were met by the defenders--already sadly
diminished in numbers, but firm and undaunted as ever,--and their
pikes and their axes well supplied the place of the fallen walls.

Assault after assault was met and repulsed, Sir Roger Williams,
Thomas Baskerville, and Francis Vere being always in the thick of
the fight. Baskerville was distinguished by the white plumes of
his helmet, Vere by his crimson mantle; and the valour of these
leaders attracted the admiration of the Duke of Parma himself,
who watched the fight from the summit of the tower of the western
gate. Francis Vere was twice wounded, but not disabled. Sir Roger
Williams urged him to retire, but he replied that he would rather
be killed ten times in a breach than once in a house.

Day by day the terrible struggle continued. The Spaniards were
able constantly to bring up fresh troops, but the defenders had
no relief. They were reduced in numbers from 1600 to 700 men, and
yet for eighteen days they maintained the struggle, never once
leaving the breach.

The pages brought their food to them, and when the attacks were
fiercest joined in the defence, fighting as boldly and manfully as
the soldiers themselves. Geoffrey and Lionel kept in close attendance
upon Francis Vere, only leaving him to run back to their quarters
and bring up the meals cooked for him and his two officers by Frau
Menyn and her handmaids. Both kept close to him during the fighting.
They knew that they were no match in strength for the Spanish
pikemen; but they had obtained pistols from the armoury, and with
these they did good service, several times freeing him from some
of his assailants when he was sorely pressed. On one occasion when
Francis Vere was smitten down by a blow from an axe, the boys rushed
forward and kept back his assailants until some of the men of the
company came to his aid.

"You have done me brave service indeed," Captain Vere said to them
when he recovered; for his helmet had defended him from serious
injury, though the force of the blow had felled him. "It was a
happy thought of mine when I decided to bring you with me. This is
not the first time that you have rendered me good service, and I
am sure you will turn out brave and valiant soldiers of the queen."

When each assault ceased the weary soldiers threw themselves down
behind the earthen embankment, and obtained such sleep as they
could before the Spaniards mustered for fresh attack. When, after
eighteen days' terrible fighting, the Duke of Parma saw that even
his best troops were unable to break through the wall of steel, he
desisted from the assault and began the slower process of mining.
The garrison from their lookout beheld the soldiers crossing the
bridge with picks and shovels, and prepared to meet them in this
new style of warfare. Captain Uvedale was appointed to command the
men told off for this duty, and galleries were run from several of
the cellars to meet those of the enemy.

As every man was employed either on the rampart or in mining, many
of the pages were told off to act as watchers in the cellars, and
to listen for the faint sounds that told of the approach of the
enemy's miners. As the young Vickars were in attendance on the
officers, they were exempted from this work; but they frequently
went down into the cellars, both to watch the process of mining by
their own men and to listen to the faint sounds made by the enemy's
workmen. One day they were sitting on two wine kegs, watching four
soldiers at work at the end of a short gallery that had been driven
towards the Spaniards. Suddenly there was an explosion, the miners
were blown backwards, the end of the gallery disappeared, and a
crowd of Walloon soldiers almost immediately afterwards rushed in.

The boys sprang to their feet and were about to fly, when an idea
occurred to Geoffrey. He seized a torch, and, standing by the
side of a barrel placed on end by a large tier, shouted in Dutch,
"Another step forward and I fire the magazine!"

The men in front paused. Through the fumes of smoke they saw dimly
