you have given her. Our hut lies so deeply in the forest that there
is little chance of anyone going near it, especially as the whole
of the men of the tribe are away."

Two hours before daylight the Iceni moved forward. They were to
attack at a number of different points, and each chief had had his
position allotted to him. The Sarci were to move directly against
the northern gate and would form the centre of the attack. Each
man, by Beric's order, carried a faggot so that these could be piled
against the wall by the gate and enable them to effect an entrance
without the delay that would be incurred in breaking down the
massive gates. They passed quietly through the cultivated fields,
and past the houses scattered about outside the walls, whose
inhabitants had withdrawn into the city since the alarm spread.
They halted at a short distance from the gate, for sentries would
be on guard there, and remained for nearly an hour, as many of the
other tribesmen had a considerably longer distance to go to reach
their appointed stations. A faint light was beginning to steal
over the sky when, far away on their right, a horn sounded. It was
repeated again and again, each time nearer, and ran along far to
the left; then, raising their war cry, the Sarci dashed forward to
the gate.

The shouts of the sentinels on the walls had arisen as soon as
the first horn sounded, and had scarcely died away when the Sarci
reached the gate. Each man as he arrived threw down his faggot, and
the pile soon reached the top of the wall. Then Beric led the way
up and stood on the Roman work. The sentries, seeing the hopelessness
of resistance, had already fled, and the Sarci poured in. A confused
clamour of shouts and cries rose from the town, above which sounded
the yells of the exulting Iceni. Beric gave the signal for the Sarci
to scatter, and the tribesmen at once began to attack the houses.
Placing himself at the head of Boduoc's chosen party, Beric ran
forward. Already from some of the houses armed men were pouring
out, but disregarding these Beric pressed on until he reached the
house of Caius Muro. His reason for haste was that, standing rather
on the other side of the town, it was nearer the point assailed
by one of the other divisions of the tribe than to the north gate,
and he feared that others might arrive there before him. Reaching
the door he beat upon it with the handle of his sword.

"Open, Cneius," he shouted, "it is I, Beric."

The door was opened at once, and he ran forward into the atrium,
which was filled with frightened slaves, who burst into cries of
terror as, followed by his men, he entered. "Where are you, Cneius?"
Beric shouted.

"I am here," the scribe replied from his cubicule, "I will be with
you in a moment; it is but a minute since we were awoke by the
uproar."

"Be quick!" Beric said, "there is not a moment to be lost.

"Run up to the women's apartments," he said to a slave, "and tell
your mistress to hurry down, for that every minute is precious."

Almost immediately Berenice came down the stairs in her disguise as
a British boy, and at the same moment Cneius issued from his room.

"Come, Berenice," Beric said, "there is not a moment to be lost;
the town is in our hands, and if others of the tribe arrive I might
not be able to save you."

Hurrying them from the house he ordered the men to close round them,
and then started on his way back. A terrible din was going on all
round; yells, shouts, and screams arising from every house. Flames
were bursting up at a dozen points. To his great satisfaction Beric
reached the point where the Sarci were at work, breaking into the
houses, before he encountered any of the other Iceni. The men were
too busy to pay any attention to the little group of their own
tribesmen; passing through these they were soon at the gate. It
already stood open, the bolts having been drawn by those who first
entered. Fifty yards from the wall stood the chariot.

"Now you can leave us," Beric said to his followers, "I will rejoin
you soon."

Berenice was crying bitterly, horror stricken at the sounds she had
heard, though happily she had seen nothing, being closely shut in
by the tall forms of her guard.

"Thanks be to the gods that I have saved you, Berenice," Beric said,
"and you also, Cneius! Now I must commit you to the care of the
driver of the chariot, who is one of my tribesmen. He will take you
to a retreat where you will, I trust, be in perfect safety until
the troubles are over. His mother has promised to do all in her
power for your comfort. You will find one of our huts but a rough
abode, but it will at least be a shelter."

"Cannot you come with us, Beric?" the girl sobbed.

"That I cannot do, Berenice. I am a Briton and a chief, and I must
be with my tribe. And now I must away. Farewell, Berenice! may your
gods and mine watch over you! Farewell, my kind teacher!"

He took off the torque, the collar formed of a number of small metal
cords interlaced with each other, the emblem of rank and command,
and handed it to the driver. "You will show this, Runoc, to any
you meet, for it may be that you will find parties of late comers
on the road. This will be a proof that you are journeying on my
business and under my orders. Do not stop and let them question
you, but drive quickly along, and if they should shout and bid
you stop, hold up the torque and shout, 'I travel at speed by my
chief's orders.'

"Do you both sit down in the chariot," he said to the others. "Then
as you journey rapidly along it will be supposed that you are either
wounded or messengers of importance. Farewell!"

Cneius and the girl had already mounted the chariot, and the driver
now gave the horses rein and started at full speed. Beric turned and
re-entered the town slowly. In those days pity for the vanquished
was a sentiment but little comprehended, and he had certainly not
learned it among the Romans, who frequently massacred their prisoners
wholesale. Woe to the vanquished! was almost a maxim with them. But
Beric shrank from witnessing the scene, now that the tables were
turned upon the oppressors. Nationally he hated the Romans, but
individually he had no feeling against them, and had he had the
power he would at once have arrested the effusion of blood. He
wished to drive them from the kingdom, not to massacre them; but
he knew well that he had no power whatever in such a matter. Even
his own tribesmen would not have stayed their hand at his command.
To slay a Roman was to them a far more meritorious action than to
slay a wolf, and any one who urged mercy would have been regarded
not only as a weakling but as a traitor.

Already the work was well nigh done. Pouring in on all sides
into the city the Iceni had burst into the houses and slain their
occupants whether they resisted or not. A few men here and there
sold their lives dearly, but the great majority had been too panic
stricken with the sudden danger to attempt the slightest resistance.
Some of the inhabitants whose houses were near the temple had fled
thither for refuge before the assailants reached them, but in half
an hour from the striking of the first blow these and the troops
there were the sole survivors of the population of Camalodunum.
For the present the temple was disregarded. It was known that the
garrison did not exceed four hundred men, and there was no fear of
so small a body assuming the offensive.

The work of destruction had commenced. There was but little plundering,
for the Britons despised the Roman luxuries, of the greater part
of which they did not even comprehend the use. They were Roman,
and therefore to be hated as well as despised. Save, therefore,
weapons, which were highly prized, and gold ornaments, which were
taken as trinkets for the women at home, nothing was saved. As the
defenders of each house were slain, fire was applied to hangings
and curtains, and then the assailants hurried away in search of
fresh victims. Thus the work of destruction proceeded concurrently
with that of massacre, and as the sun rose vast columns of smoke
mounting upwards conveyed the news to the women of the Iceni and
Trinobantes for a circle of many miles round, that the attack had
been successful, and that Camalodunum, the seat of their oppressors,
was in flames. Beric, as he made his way towards the centre of the
town, sighed as he passed the shop where two months before he had
stopped a moment to look at the rolls of vellum.

The destruction of the monuments of Roman luxury; the houses with
their costly contents; and even the Palace of Cunobeline, which
had been converted into the residence of the Roman governor, had
not affected him; but he mourned over the loss of the precious
manuscripts which had contained such a wealth of stored up learning.
Already the house was wrapped in flames, which were rushing from
the windows, and the prize which he had looked upon as his own
special share of the plunder had escaped him.

At the edge of the broad open space that surrounded the Temple of
Claudius the Britons were gathering thickly. Beric applied his horn
to his lips, and in a few minutes the Sarci gathered round him.
Bidding them stand in order he moved away to see what disposition
was being made for the attack on the temple, but at present all
were too excited with their success for any to assume the lead or
give orders. At the first rush parties of the Britons had made for
the temple, but had been received with showers of darts and stones,
and had been met on the steps by the Roman soldiers and roughly
repulsed. Walking round he came upon the chariot of Boadicea. The
queen was flushed with excitement and gratified vengeance, and was
shaking her spear menacingly towards the temple; her eye presently
fell upon Beric.

"The work has begun well, my young chief, but we have still to crush
the wolves in their den. It is a strong place, with its massive
walls unpierced save by the doorway at each end; but we will have
them out if to do so we are forced to tear it down stone by stone."

"I trust that we shall not be as long as that would take, queen,"
Beric said, "for we have other work to do."

Just at this moment one of the chiefs of the Trinobantes came up.
"Queen Boadicea," he said, "we crave that we may be allowed to storm
the temple. It is built on our ground as a sign of our subjection,
and we would fain ourselves capture it."

"Be it so," the queen replied. "Do you undertake the task at once."

The Trinobantes, who had joined the Iceni in the attack on the
town, presently gathered with loud shouts, and under their chiefs
rushed at the temple. From the roof darts and stones were showered
down upon them; but though many were killed they swarmed up the
broad steps that surrounded it on all sides and attacked the doors.
Beric shook his head, and returning to his men led them off down
one of the broad streets to an open space a short distance away.

"This will be our gathering place," he said. "Do not wander far
away, and return quickly at the sound of my horn. We may be wanted
presently. I do not think that the Trinobantes will take the temple
in that fashion."

They had indeed advanced entirely unprovided with proper means
of assault. The massive gates against which the Romans had piled
stones, casks of provisions, and other heavy articles were not to
be broken down by such force as the Britons could bring against
them. In vain these chopped with their swords upon the woodwork.
The gates were constructed of oak, and the weapons scarce marked
them. In vain they threw themselves twenty abreast against them.
The doors hardly quivered at the shock, and in the meantime the
assailants were suffering heavily, for from openings in the roof,
extending from the building itself to the pillars that surrounded
it, the Romans dropped missiles upon them.

For some time the Trinobantes persevered, and then their chiefs,
seeing that the attempt was hopeless, called off their followers.
No fresh attempt was made for a time, and Boadicea established
herself in one of the few houses that had escaped the flames, and
there presently the chiefs assembled. Various suggestions were
made, but at last it was decided to batter in the doors with a
heavy tree, and a strong party of men were at once despatched to
fell and prepare two of suitable size. The operation was a long
one, as the trees when found had to be brought down by lighting
fires against the trunks, and it was nightfall before they fell and
the branches were cut off. It was decided, therefore, to postpone
the attack until the next day.

Beric had not been present at the council, to which only a few of
the leading chiefs had been summoned; but he doubted, when he heard
what had been decided upon, whether the attack would be successful.
It was settled that the Trinobantes were to attack the door at one
end of the temple, and the Iceni that at the other. Late in the
evening the chariot returned, and Beric was greatly relieved to hear
that the fugitives had been placed in safety and that the journey
had been made without interference. He was glad to recover his torque,
for its absence would have excited surprise when men's minds were
less occupied and excited. Not until he recovered it could he
go to see Parta, who was lodged with the queen, but as soon as he
recovered it he went in. Every sign of Roman habitation and luxury
had been, as far as possible, obliterated by order of Boadicea
before she entered the house. Hangings had been pulled down, statues
overthrown, and the paintings on the plaster chipped from the walls.

"What have you been doing all day, Beric?" his mother asked. "I
looked to see you long before this, and should have thought that
some accident had befallen you had I not known that the news would
have been speedily brought me had it been so."

"I have been looking after the tribesmen, mother. I should have
come in to see you, but did not wish to intrude among the chiefs
in council with the queen. You represented the Sarci here, and had
we been wanted you would have sent for me. Who are to attack the
temple tomorrow?"

"Not the Sarci, my son. Unser begged that he and his tribe might
have the honour, and the queen and council granted it to him."

"I am glad of it, mother. The duty is an honourable one, but the
loss will be heavy, and others can do the work as well as we could,
and I want to keep our men for the shock of battle with the legions.
Moreover, I doubt whether the doors will be battered down in the
way they propose."

"You do, Beric! and why is that?" The speaker was Aska, who had
just left the group of chiefs gathered round the queen at the other
end of the apartment, and had come close without Beric hearing him.

The lad coloured. "I spoke only for my mother's hearing, sir," he
said. "To no one else should I have ventured to express an opinion on
a course agreed upon by those who are older and wiser than myself."

"That is right, Beric; the young should be silent in the presence
of their elders; nevertheless I should like to know why you think
the assault is likely to fail."

"It was really not my own opinion I was giving, sir. I was thinking
of the manner in which the Romans, who are accustomed to besiege
places with high walls and strong gates, proceed. They have made
these matters a study, while to us an attack upon such a place is
altogether new, seeing that none such exist in Britain save those
the Romans have erected."

"How would they proceed, Beric?"

"They would treat an attack upon such a place as a serious matter,
not to be undertaken rashly and hastily, but only after great
preparation. In order to batter down a gate or a wall they use
heavy beams, such as those that have been prepared for tomorrow,
but they affix to the head a shoe of iron or brass. They do not
swing it upon men's arms, seeing that it would be most difficult
to get so many men to exercise their strength together, and indeed
could not give it the momentum required."

"But we propose to have the beam carried by fifty men, and for all
to rush forward together and drive it against the door."

"If the door were weak and would yield to the first blow that might
avail," Beric said; "but unless it does so the shock will throw
down the tree and the men bearing it. Many will be grievously hurt.
Moreover, if, as will surely be the case, many of the bearers fall
under the darts of the Romans as they approach, others will stumble
over their bodies, and the speed of the whole be greatly checked."

"Then can you tell me how the Romans act in such a case, Beric?"

"Yes, sir. I have frequently heard relations of sieges from soldiers
who have taken part in them. They build, in the first place, movable
towers or sheds running on wheels. These towers are made strong
enough to resist the stones and missiles the besieged may hurl
against them. Under cover of the shelter men push up the towers to
the door or wall to be battered; the beam is then slung on ropes
hanging from the inside of the tower. Other ropes are attached;
numbers of men take hold of these, and working together swing the
beam backwards and forwards, so that each time it strikes the wall
or door a heavy blow. As the beam is of great weight, and many men
work it, the blows are well nigh irresistible, and the strongest
walls crumble and the most massive gates splinter under the shock
of its iron head."

"The Romans truly are skilled warriors," Aska said. "We are but
children in the art of war beside them, and methinks it would be
difficult indeed for us to construct such a machine, though mayhap
it could be done had we with us many men skilled in the making of
chariots. But sometimes, Beric, they must have occasion to attack
places where such machines could not well be used."

"In that case, sir, they sometimes make what they call a tortoise.
The soldiers link their broad shields together, so as to form
a complete covering, resembling the back of a tortoise, and under
shelter of this they advance to the attack. When they reach the
foot of the wall all remain immovable save those in the front line,
who labour with iron bars to loosen the stones at the foot of the
wall, protected from missiles from above by the shields of their
comrades. From time to time they are relieved by fresh workers
until the foundations of the wall are deeply undermined. As they
proceed they erect massive props to keep up the wall, and finally
fill up the hole with combustibles. After lighting these they
retire. When the props are consumed the wall of course falls, and
they then rush forward and climb the breach."

"Truly, Beric, you have profited by your lessons," Aska said, laying
his hand kindly on the lad's shoulder. "The Druids spoke wisely
when they prophesied a great future for you. Before we have done we
may have many Roman strongholds to capture, and when we do I will
see that the council order that your advice be taken as to how they
shall be attacked; but in this matter tomorrow things must remain
as they are. Unser is a proud chief, and headstrong, and would
not brook any interference. Should he be repulsed in the assault,
I will advise the queen to call up the Sarci, and allow you to
proceed in your own manner."

"I will do my best, sir; but time is needed for proceeding according
to the first Roman method, and our shields are too small for the
second. The place should be taken by tomorrow night, for Cerealis
will assuredly move with his legion to relieve it as soon as he
hears the news of our attack."

"That is what has been in our minds," Aska said. "Well, what do
you say, Beric? After what I saw the other day of the movements
you have taught your tribe I should be sorry to have their ranks
thinned in a hopeless attack upon the temple. I would rather that
we should leave it for the present and march out to meet Cerealis,
leaving a guard here to keep the Romans hemmed in until we have
time to deal with them."

Beric stood for a minute or two without answering, and then said,
"I will undertake it, sir, with the Sarci should Unser's attack
fail."



CHAPTER VI: FIRST SUCCESSES


Upon leaving his mother, Beric returned to the spot where the Sarci
were lying. Some of the chiefs were sitting round a fire made of
beams and woodwork dragged from the ruins of the Roman houses.

"We must be up an hour before daybreak; I think that there will
be work for us tomorrow. If Unser and his tribe fail in capturing
the temple we are to try; and there will be preparations to make."
And he explained the plan upon which he had determined.

Daylight was just breaking when the Sarci entered the forest four
miles from Camalodunum. Here they scattered in search of dry wood.
In two hours sufficient had been gathered for their purpose, and it
was made up into two hundred great faggots nearly four feet across
and ten in length, in weight as much as a strong man could carry
on his head. With these they returned to the city. It needed no
questions as to the result of the attack, which had just terminated
with the same fortune that had befallen that on the day previous.
Unser had been killed, and large numbers of his men had fallen in
their vain attempts to hew down the gates. The battering rams had
proved a complete failure. Many of the fifty men who carried the
beam had fallen as they advanced. The others had rushed at the gate
door, but the recoil had thrown them down, and many had had their
limbs broken from the tree falling on them. Attempts had been made
to repeat the assault; but the Romans having pierced the under
part of the roof in many places, let fall javelins and poured down
boiling oil; and at last, having done all that was possible, but
in vain, the tribesmen had fallen back.

Beric proceeded at once to the queen's. A council was being held,
and it had just been determined to march away to meet Cerealis when
Beric entered. Aska left his place in the circle of chiefs as soon
as he saw him enter the door.

"Are you ready to undertake it, Beric? Do not do so unless you have
strong hopes of success. The repulses of yesterday and today have
lowered the spirits of our men, and another failure would still
further harm us."

"I will undertake it, Aska, and I think I can answer for success;
but I shall need three hours before I begin."

"That could be spared," the chief said. "Cerealis will not have
learned the news until last night at the earliest--he may not
know it yet. There is no fear of his arriving here until tomorrow."
Then he returned to his place.

"Before we finally decide, queen," he said, "I would tell you that
the young chief Beric is ready to attack the place with the Sarci.
He has learned much of the Roman methods, and may be more fortunate
than the others have been. I would suggest that he be allowed to
try, for it will have a very ill effect upon the tribes if we fail
in taking the temple, which is regarded as the symbol of Roman
dominion. I will even go so far as to say that a retreat now would
go very far to mar our hopes of success in the war, for the news
would spread through the country and dispirit others now preparing
to join us."

"Why should Beric succeed when Unser has failed?" one of the chiefs
said. "Can a lad achieve a success where one of our best and bravest
chiefs has been repulsed?"

"I think that he might," Aska replied. "At any rate, as he is ready
to risk his life and his tribe in doing so, I pray the queen to
give her consent. He demands three hours to make his preparations
for the attack."

"He shall try," Boadicea said decidedly. "You saw the other day,
chiefs, how well he has learned the Roman methods of war. He shall
have an opportunity now of turning his knowledge to account. Parta,
you are willing that your son should try?"

"Certainly I am willing," Parta said. "He can but die once; he
cannot die in a nobler effort for his country."

"Then it is settled," the queen said. "The Sarci will attack in
three hours."

As soon as Beric heard the decision he hurried away and at once
ordered the tribesmen to scatter through the country and to kill
two hundred of the cattle roaming at present masterless, to strip
off their hides, and bring them in. They returned before the three
hours expired, bringing in the hides. In the meantime Beric had
procured from a half consumed warehouse a quantity of oil, pitch,
and other combustibles, and had smeared the faggots with them. On
the arrival of the men with the hides, these were bound with the
raw side upwards over the faggots.

Two hundred of the strongest men of the tribe were then chosen and
divided into two parties, and the rest being similarly divided,
took their station at the ends of the square facing the gates.
When Beric sounded his horn the faggot bearers raised their burdens
on to their heads and formed in a close square, ten abreast, with
the faggots touching each other. Beric himself commanded the party
facing the principal entrance, and holding a blazing torch in each
hand, took his place in the centre of the square, there being ample
room for him between the lines of men. The rest of the tribe were
ordered to stand firmly in order until he gave the signal for the
advance. Then he again sounded his horn, and the two parties advanced
from the opposite ends of the square.

As soon as they came within reach the Romans showered down darts
and javelins; but these either slipped altogether from the surface
of the wet hides, or, penetrating them, went but a short distance
into the faggots; and the British tribesmen raised shouts of
exultation as the two solid bodies advanced unshaken to the steps
of the temple. Mounting these they advanced to the gates. In vain
the Romans dropped their javelins perpendicularly through the
holes in the ceiling of the colonnade, in vain poured down streams
of boiling oil, which had proved so fatal to the last attack. The
javelins failed to penetrate, the oil streamed harmless off the
hides. The men had, before advancing, received minute instructions.
The ten men in the front line piled their faggots against the door,
and then keeping close to the wall of the temple itself, slipped
round to the side colonnade.

The operation was repeated by the next line, and so on until but
two lines remained. Then the two men at each end of these lines
mounted the pile of faggots and placed their burdens there, leaving
but six standing. In their centre Beric had his place, and now,
kneeling down under their shelter, applied his torches to the pile.
He waited till he saw the flames beginning to mount up. Then he
