heart, pierced and agonized as it was, in my countenance, Isora bent
over me, for I knelt beside her, and I felt her tears upon my
cheek,--"God bless you--and farewell!"

"You insult, you wound me," said I, bitterly, "by this cold and taunting
kindness; tell me, tell me only, who it is that you love better than
me."

Isora had turned to leave me, for I was too proud to detain her; but
when I said this, she came back, after a moment's pause, and laid her
hand upon my arm.

"If it make you happy to know /my/ unhappiness," she said, and the tone
of her voice made me look full in her face, which was one deep blush,
"know that I am not insensible--"

I heard no more: my lips pressed themselves involuntarily to hers,--a
long, long kiss,--burning, intense, concentrating emotion, heart, soul,
all the rays of life's light into a single focus; and she tore herself
away from me,--and I was alone.



CHAPTER IX.

A DISCOVERY AND A DEPARTURE.

I HASTENED home after my eventful interview with Isora, and gave myself
up to tumultuous and wild conjecture.  Aubrey sought me the next
morning: I narrated to him all that had occurred: he said little, but
that little enraged me, for it was contrary to the dictates of my own
wishes.  The character of Morose in the "Silent Woman" is by no means an
uncommon one.  Many men--certainly many lovers--would say with equal
truth, always provided they had equal candour, "All discourses but my
own afflict me; they seem harsh, impertinent, and irksome."  Certainly I
felt that amiable sentiment most sincerely with regard to Aubrey.  I
left him abruptly: a resolution possessed me.  "I will see," said I,
"this Barnard; I will lie in wait for him; I will demand and obtain,
though it be by force, the secret which evidently subsists between him
and this exiled family."

Full of this idea, I drew my cloak round me, and repaired on foot to the
neighbourhood of the Spaniard's cottage.  There was no place near it
very commodious for accommodation both of vigil and concealment.
However, I made a little hill, in a field opposite the house, my
warder's station, and, lying at full length on the ground, wrapt in my
cloak, I trusted to escape notice.  The day passed: no visitor appeared.
The next morning I went from my own rooms, through the subterranean
passage into the castle cave, as the excavation I have before described
was generally termed.  On the shore I saw Gerald by one of the small
fishing-boats usually kept there.  I passed him with a sneer at his
amusements, which were always those of conflicts against fish or fowl.
He answered me in the same strain, as he threw his nets into the boat,
and pushed out to sea.  "How is it that you go alone?" said I; "is there
so much glory in the capture of mackerel and dogfish that you will allow
no one to share it?"

"There are other sports besides those for men," answered Gerald,
colouring indignantly: "my taste is confined to amusements in which he
is but a fool who seeks companionship; and if you could read character
better, my wise brother, you would know that the bold rover is ever less
idle and more fortunate than the speculative dreamer."

As Gerald said this, which he did with a significant emphasis, he rowed
vigorously across the water, and the little boat was soon half way to
the opposite islet.  My eyes followed it musingly as it glided over the
waves, and my thoughts painfully revolved the words which Gerald had
uttered.  "What can he mean?" said I, half aloud; "yet what matters it?
Perhaps some low amour, some village conquest, inspires him with that
becoming fulness of pride and vain-glory; joy be with so bold a rover!"
and I strode away along the beach towards my place of watch; once only I
turned to look at Gerald; he had then just touched the islet, which was
celebrated as much for the fishing it afforded as the smuggling it
protected.

I arrived at last at the hillock, and resumed my station.  Time passed
on, till, at the dusk of evening, the Spaniard came out.  He walked
slowly towards the town; I followed him at a distance.  Just before he
reached the town, he turned off by a path which led to the beach.  As
the evening was unusually fresh and chill, I felt convinced that some
cause, not wholly trivial, drew the Spaniard forth to brave it.  My
pride a little revolted at the idea of following him; but I persuaded
myself that Isora's happiness, and perhaps her father's safety, depended
on my obtaining some knowledge of the character and designs of this
Barnard, who appeared to possess so dangerous an influence over both
daughter and sire; nor did I doubt but that the old man was now gone
forth to meet him.  The times were those of mystery and of intrigue: the
emissaries of the House of Stuart were restlessly at work among all
classes; many of them, obscure and mean individuals, made their way the
more dangerously from their apparent insignificance.  My uncle, a
moderate Tory, was opposed, though quietly and without vehemence, to the
claims of the banished House.  Like Sedley, who became so stanch a
revolutionist, he had seen the Court of Charles II. and the character of
that King's brother too closely to feel much respect for either; but he
thought it indecorous to express opposition loudly against a party among
whom were many of his early friends; and the good old knight was too
much attached to private ties to be very much alive to public feeling.
However, at his well-filled board, conversation, generally, though
displeasingly to himself, turned upon politics, and I had there often
listened, of late, to dark hints of the danger to which we were exposed,
and of the restless machinations of the Jacobites.  I did not,
therefore, scruple to suspect this Barnard of some plot against the
existing state, and I did it the more from observing that the Spaniard
often spoke bitterly of the English Court, which had rejected some
claims he had imagined himself entitled to make upon it; and that he was
naturally of a temper vehemently opposed to quiet and alive to
enterprise.  With this impression, I deemed it fair to seize any
opportunity of seeing, at least, even if I could not question, the man
whom the Spaniard himself confessed to have state reasons for
concealment; and my anxiety to behold one whose very name could agitate
Isora, and whose presence could occasion the state in which I had found
her, sharpened this desire into the keenness of a passion.

While Alvarez descended to the beach, I kept the upper path, which wound
along the cliff.  There was a spot where the rocks were rude and broken
into crags, and afforded me a place where, unseen, I could behold what
passed below.  The first thing I beheld was a boat approaching rapidly
towards the shore; one man was seated in it; he reached the shore, and I
recognized Gerald.  That was a dreadful moment.  Alvarez now slowly
joined him; they remained together for nearly an hour.  I saw Gerald
give the Spaniard a letter, which appeared to make the chief subject of
their conversation.  At length they parted, with the signs rather of
respect than familiarity.  Don Diego returned homeward, and Gerald
re-entered the boat.  I watched its progress over the waves with
feelings of a dark and almost unutterable nature.  "My enemy! my rival!
ruiner of my hopes!--/my brother/!--/my twin brother/!" I muttered
bitterly between my ground teeth.

The boat did not make to the open sea: it skulked along the shore, till
distance and shadow scarcely allowed me to trace the outline of Gerald's
figure.  It then touched the beach, and I could just descry the dim
shape of another man enter; and Gerald, instead of returning homewards,
pushed out towards the islet.  I spent the greater part of the night in
the open air.  Wearied and exhausted by the furious indulgence of my
passions, I gained my room at length.  There, however, as elsewhere,
thought succeeded to thought, and scheme to scheme.  Should I speak to
Gerald?  Should I confide in Alvarez?  Should I renew my suit to Isora?
If the first, what could I hope to learn from my enemy?  If the second,
what could I gain from the father, while the daughter remained averse to
me?  If the third,--there my heart pointed, and the third scheme I
resolved to adopt.

But was I sure that Gerald was this Barnard?  Might there not be some
hope that he was not?  No, I could perceive none.  Alvarez had never
spoken to me of acquaintance with any other Englishman than Barnard; I
had no reason to believe that he ever held converse with any other.
Would it not have been natural too, unless some powerful cause, such as
love to Isora, induced silence,--would it not have been natural that
Gerald should have mentioned his acquaintance with the Spaniard?  Unless
some dark scheme, such as that which Barnard appeared to have in common
with Don Diego, commanded obscurity, would it have been likely that
Gerald should have met Alvarez alone,--at night,--on an unfrequented
spot?  What that scheme /was/, I guessed not,--I cared not.  All my
interest in the identity of Barnard with Gerald Devereux was that
derived from the power he seemed to possess over Isora.  Here, too, at
once, was explained the pretended Barnard's desire of concealment, and
the vigilance with which it had been effected.  It was so certain that
Gerald, if my rival, would seek to avoid me; it was so easy for him, who
could watch all my motions, to secure the power of doing so.  Then I
remembered Gerald's character through the country as a gallant and a
general lover; and I closed my eyes as if to shut out the vision when I
recalled the beauty of his form contrasted with the comparative
plainness of my own.

"There is no hope," I repeated; and an insensibility, rather than sleep,
crept over me.  Dreadful and fierce dreams peopled my slumbers; and,
when I started from them at a late hour the next day, I was unable to
rise from my bed: my agitation and my wanderings had terminated in a
burning fever.  In four days, however, I recovered sufficiently to mount
my horse: I rode to the Spaniard's house; I found there only the woman
who had been Don Diego's solitary domestic.  The morning before, Alvarez
and his daughter had departed, none knew for certain whither; but it was
supposed their destination was London.  The woman gave me a note: it was
from Isora; it contained only these lines:


Forget me: we are now parted forever.  As you value my peace of mind--of
happiness I do not speak--seek not to discover our next retreat.  I
implore you to think no more of what has been; you are young, very
young.  Life has a thousand paths for you; any one of them will lead you
from remembrance of me.  Farewell, again and again!

               ISORA D'ALVAREZ.


With this note was another, in French, from Don Diego: it was colder and
more formal than I could have expected; it thanked me for my attentions
towards him; it regretted that he could not take leave of me in person,
and it enclosed the sum by the loan of which our acquaintance had
commenced.

"It is well!" said I, calmly, to myself, "it is well; I will forget
her:" and I rode instantly home.  "But," I resumed in my soliloquy, "I
will yet strive to obtain confirmation to what perhaps needs it not.  I
will yet strive to see if Gerald can deny the depth of his injuries
towards me; there will be at least some comfort in witnessing either his
defiance or his confusion."

Agreeably to this thought, I hastened to seek Gerald.  I found him in
his apartment; I shut the door, and seating myself, with a smile thus
addressed him,--

"Dear Gerald, I have a favour to ask of you."

"What is it?"

"How long have you known a certain Mr. Barnard?"  Gerald changed colour;
his voice faltered as he repeated the name "Barnard!"

"Yes," said I, with affected composure, "Barnard! a great friend of Don
Diego D'Alvarez."

"I perceive," said Gerald, collecting himself, "that you are in some
measure acquainted with my secret: how far it is known to you I cannot
guess; but I tell you, very fairly, that from me you will not increase
the sum of your knowledge."

When one is in a good sound rage, it is astonishing how calm one can be!
I was certainly somewhat amazed by Gerald's hardihood and assurance, but
I continued, with a smile,

"And Donna Isora, how long, if not very intrusive on your confidence,
have you known her?"

"I tell you," answered Gerald, doggedly, "that I will answer no
questions."

"You remember the old story," returned I, "of the two brothers, Eteocles
and Polynices, whose very ashes refused to mingle; faith, Gerald, our
love seems much of the same sort.  I know not if our ashes will exhibit
so laudible an antipathy: but I think our hearts and hands will do so
while a spark of life animates them; yes, though our blood" (I added, in
a voice quivering with furious emotion) "prevents our contest by the
sword, it prevents not the hatred and the curses of the heart."

Gerald turned pale.  "I do not understand you," he faltered out,--"I
know you abhor me; but why, why this excess of malice?"

I cast on him a look of bitter scorn, and turned from the room.

It is not pleasing to place before the reader these dark passages of
fraternal hatred: but in the record of all passions there is a moral;
and it is wise to see to how vast a sum the units of childish animosity
swell, when they are once brought into a heap, by some violent event,
and told over by the nice accuracy of Revenge.

But I long to pass from these scenes, and my history is about to glide
along others of more glittering and smiling aspect.  Thank Heaven, I
write a tale, not only of love, but of a life; and that which I cannot
avoid I can at least condense.



CHAPTER X.

A VERY SHORT CHAPTER,--CONTAINING A VALET.

MY uncle for several weeks had flattered himself that I had quite
forgotten or foregone the desire of leaving Devereux Court for London.
Good easy man! he was not a little distressed when I renewed the subject
with redoubled firmness, and demanded an early period for that event.
He managed, however, still to protract the evil day.  At one time it was
impossible to part with me, because the house was so full; at another
time it was cruel to leave him, when the house was so empty.  Meanwhile,
a new change came over me.  As the first shock of Isora's departure
passed away, I began to suspect the purity of her feelings towards me.
Might not Gerald--the beautiful, the stately, the glittering
Gerald--have been a successful wooer under the disguised name of
Barnard, and /hence/ Isora's confusion when that name was mentioned, and
hence the power which its possessor exercised over her?

This idea, once admitted, soon gained ground.  It is true that Isora had
testified something of favourable feelings towards me; but this might
spring from coquetry or compassion.  My love had been a boy's love,
founded upon beauty and coloured by romance.  I had not investigated the
character of the object; and I had judged of the mind solely by the
face.  I might easily have been deceived: I persuaded myself that I was.
Perhaps Gerald had provided their present retreat for sire and daughter;
perhaps they at this moment laughed over my rivalry and my folly.
Methought Gerald's lip wore a contemptuous curve when we met.  "It shall
have no cause," I said, stung to the soul; "I will indeed forget this
woman, and yet, though in other ways, eclipse this rival.  Pleasure,
ambition, the brilliancy of a court, the resources of wealth, invite me
to a thousand joys.  I will not be deaf to the call.  Meanwhile I will
not betray to Gerald, to any one, the scar of the wound I have received;
and I will mortify Gerald, by showing him that, handsome as he is, he
shall be forgotten in my presence!"

Agreeably to this exquisite resolution, I paid incessant court to the
numerous dames by whom my uncle's mansion was thronged; and I resolved
to prepare, among them, the reputation for gallantry and for wit which I
proposed to establish in town.

"You are greatly altered since your love," said Aubrey, one day to me,
"but not by your love.  Own that I did right in dissuading you from its
indulgence!"

"Tell me!" said I, sinking my voice to a whisper, "do you think Gerald
was my rival?" and I recounted the causes of my suspicion.

Aubrey's countenance testified astonishment as he listened.  "It is
strange, very strange," said he; "and the evidence of the boat is almost
conclusive; still I do not think it quite sufficient to leave no
loop-hole of doubt.  But what matters it? you have conquered your love
now."

"Ay," I said, with a laugh, "I have conquered it, and I am now about to
find some other empress of the heart.  What think you of the Lady
Hasselton?--a fair dame and a sprightly.  I want nothing but her love to
be the most enviable of men, and a French /valet-de-chambre/ to be the
most irresistible."

"The former is easier to obtain than the latter, I fear," returned
Aubrey; "all places produce light dames, but the war makes a scarcity of
French valets."

"True," said I, "but I never thought of instituting a comparison between
their relative value.  The Lady Hasselton, no disparagement to her
merits, is but one woman; but a French valet who knows his /metier/ arms
one for conquest over a thousand;" and I turned to the saloon.

Fate, which had destined to me the valuable affections of the Lady
Hasselton, granted me also, at a yet earlier period, the greater boon of
a French valet.  About two or three weeks after this sapient
communication with Aubrey, the most charming person in the world
presented himself a candidate /pour le supreme bonheur de soigner
Monsieur le Comte/.  Intelligence beamed in his eye; a modest assurance
reigned upon his brow; respect made his step vigilant as a zephyr's; and
his ruffles were the envy of the world!

I took him at a glance; and I presented to the admiring inmates of the
house a greater coxcomb than the Count Devereux in the ethereal person
of Jean Desmarais.



CHAPTER XI.

THE HERO ACQUITS HIMSELF HONOURABLY AS A COXCOMB.--A FINE LADY OF THE
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, AND A FASHIONABLE DIALOGUE; THE SUBSTANCE OF
FASHIONABLE DIALOGUE BEING IN ALL CENTURIES THE SAME.

"I AM thinking, Morton," said my uncle, "that if you are to go to town,
you should go in a style suitable to your rank.  What say you to flying
along the road in my green and gold chariot?  'Sdeath!  I'll make you a
present of it.  Nay--no thanks; and you may have four of my black
Flanders mares to draw you."

"Now, my dear Sir William," cried Lady Hasselton, who, it may be
remembered, was the daughter of one of King Charles's Beauties, and who
alone shared the breakfast-room with my uncle and myself,--"now, my dear
Sir William, I think it would be a better plan to suffer the Count to
accompany us to town.  We go next week.  He shall have a seat in our
coach, help Lovell to pay our post-horses, protect us at inns, scold at
the drawers in the pretty oaths of the fashion, which are so innocent
that I will teach them to his Countship myself; and unless I am much
more frightful than my honoured mother, whose beauties you so gallantly
laud, I think you will own, Sir William, that this is better for your
nephew than doing solitary penance in your chariot of green and gold,
with a handkerchief tied over his head to keep away cold, and with no
more fanciful occupation than composing sonnets to the four Flanders
mares."

"'Sdeath, Madam, you inherit your mother's wit as well as beauty," cried
my uncle, with an impassioned air.

"And his Countship," said I, "will accept your invitation without asking
his uncle's leave."

"Come, that is bold for a gentleman of--let me see, thirteen--are you
not?"

"Really," answered I, "one learns to forget time so terribly in the
presence of Lady Hasselton that I do not remember even how long it has
existed for me."

"Bravo!" cried the knight, with a moistening eye; "you see, Madam, the
boy has not lived with his old uncle for nothing."

"I am lost in astonishment!" said the lady, glancing towards the glass;
"why, you will eclipse all our beaux at your first appearance;
but--but--Sir William--how green those glasses have become!  Bless me,
there is something so contagious in the effects of the country that the
very mirrors grow verdant.  But--Count--Count--where are you, Count?  [I
was exactly opposite to the fair speaker.]  Oh, there you are!  Pray, do
you carry a little pocket-glass of the true quality about you?  But, of
course you do; lend it me."

"I have not the glass you want, but I carry with me a mirror that
reflects your features much more faithfully."

"How!  I protest I do not understand you!"

"The mirror is here!" said I, laying my hand to my heart.

"'Gad, I must kiss the boy!" cried my uncle, starting up.

"I have sworn," said I, fixing my eyes upon the lady,--"I have sworn
never to be kissed, even by women.  You must pardon me, Uncle."

"I declare," cried the Lady Hasselton, flirting her fan, which was
somewhat smaller than the screen that one puts into a great hall, in
order to take off the discomfort of too large a room,--"I declare,
Count, there is a vast deal of originality about you.  But tell me, Sir
William, where did your nephew acquire, at so early an age--eleven, you
say, he is--such a fund of agreeable assurance?"

"Nay, Madam, let the boy answer for himself."

"/Imprimis/, then," said I, playing with the ribbon of my
cane,--"/imprimis/, early study of the best authors,--Congreve and
Farquhar, Etherege and Rochester; secondly, the constant intercourse of
company which gives one the spleen so overpoweringly that despair
inspires one with boldness--to get rid of them; thirdly, the personal
example of Sir William Devereux; and, fourthly, the inspiration of
hope."

"Hope, sir?" said the Lady Hasselton, covering her face with her fan, so
as only to leave me a glimpse of the farthest patch upon her left
cheek,--"hope, sir?"

