odds than we!"

But the murmur among the archers, the lealest part of the earl's
retainers, continued, till there stepped forth their captain, a gray
old man, but still sinewy and unbent, the iron relic of a hundred
battles.

"Back to your men, Mark Forester!" said the earl, sternly.

The old man obeyed not.  He came on to Warwick, and fell on his knees
beside his stirrup.

"Fly, my lord! escape is possible for you and your riders.  Fly
through the wood, we will screen your path with our bodies.  Your
children, father of your followers, your children of Middleham, ask no
better fate than to die for you!  Is it not so?" and the old man,
rising, turned to those in hearing.  They answered by a general
acclamation.

"Mark Forester speaks well," said Montagu.  "On yon depends the last
hope of Lancaster.  We may yet join Oxford and Somerset!  This way
through the wood,--come!" and he laid his hand on the earl's rein.

"Knights and sirs," said the earl, dismounting, and partially raising
his visor as he turned to the horsemen, "let those who will, fly with
Lord Montagu!  Let those who, in a just cause, never despair of
victory, nor, even at the worst, fear to face their Maker, fresh from
the glorious death of heroes, dismount with me!"  Every knight sprang
from his steed, Montagu the first. "Comrades!" continued the earl,
then addressing the retainers, "when the children fight for a father's
honour, the father flies not from the peril into which he has drawn
the children.  What to me were life, stained by the blood of mine own
beloved retainers, basely deserted by their chief?  Edward has
proclaimed that he will spare none.  Fool! he gives us, then, the
superhuman mightiness of despair!  To your bows!--one shaft--if it
pierce the joints of the tyrant's mail--one shaft may scatter yon army
to the winds!  Sir Marmaduke has gone to rally noble Somerset and his
riders; if we make good our defence one little hour, the foe may be
yet smitten in the rear, and the day retrieved!  Courage and heart
then!"  Here the earl lifted his visor to the farthest bar, and showed
his cheerful face--"Is this the face of a man who thinks all hope is
gone?"

In this interval, the sudden sunshine revealed to King Henry, where he
stood, the dispersion of his friends.  To the rear of the palisades,
which protected the spot where he was placed, already grouped "the
lookers-on and no fighters," as the chronicler [Fabyan] words it, who,
as the guns slackened, ventured forth to learn the news, and who now,
filling the churchyard of Hadley, strove hard to catch a peep of Henry
the saint, or of Bungey the sorcerer.  Mingled with these gleamed the
robes of the tymbesteres, pressing nearer and nearer to the barriers,
as wolves, in the instinct of blood, come nearer and nearer round the
circling watch-fire of some northern travellers.  At this time the
friar, turning to one of the guards who stood near him, said, "The
mists are needed no more now; King Edward hath got the day, eh?"

"Certes, great master," quoth the guard, "nothing now lacks to the
king's triumph except the death of the earl."

"Infamous nigromancer, hear that!" cried Bungey to Adam.  "What now
avail thy bombards and thy talisman!  Hark yet--tell me the secret of
the last,--of the damnable engine under my feet, and I may spare thy
life."

Adam shrugged his shoulders in impatient disdain.  "Unless I gave thee
my science, my secret were profitless to thee.  Villain and numskull,
do thy worst."

The friar made a sign to a soldier who stood behind Adam, and the
soldier silently drew the end of the rope which girded the scholar's
neck round a bough of the leafless tree.  "Hold!" whispered the friar,
"not till I give the word.  The earl may recover himself yet," he
added to himself; and therewith he began once more to vociferate his
incantations.  Meanwhile the eyes of Sibyll had turned for a moment
from her father; for the burst of sunshine, lighting up the valley
below, had suddenly given to her eyes, in the distance, the gable-ends
of the old farmhouse, with the wintry orchard,--no longer, alas!
smiling with starry blossoms.  Far remote from the battlefield was
that abode of peace,--that once happy home, where she had watched the
coming of the false one!

Loftier and holier were the thoughts of the fated king.  He had turned
his face from the field, and his eyes were fixed upon the tower of the
church behind.  And while he so gazed, the knoll from the belfry began
solemnly to chime.  It was now near the hour of the Sabbath prayers,
and amidst horror and carnage, still the holy custom was not
suspended.

"Hark!" said the king, mournfully, "that chime summons many a soul to
God!"

While thus the scene on the eminence of Hadley, Edward, surrounded by
Hastings, Gloucester, and his principal captains, took advantage of
the unexpected sunshine to scan the foe and its position, with the eye
of his intuitive genius for all that can slaughter man.  "This day,"
he said, "brings no victory, assures no crown, if Warwick escape
alive.  To you, Lovell and Ratcliffe, I intrust two hundred knights,--
your sole care the head of the rebel earl!"

"And Montagu?" said Ratcliffe.

"Montagu?  Nay, poor Montagu, I loved him as well once as my own
mother's son; and Montagu," he muttered to himself, "I never wronged,
and therefore him I can forgive.  Spare the marquis.--I mislike that
wood; they must have more force within than that handful on the skirts
betrays.  Come hither, D'Eyncourt."

And a few minutes afterwards, Warwick and his men saw two parties of
horse leave the main body, one for the right hand, one the left,
followed by long detachments of pikes, which they protected; and then
the central array marched slowly and steadily on towards the scanty
foe.  The design was obvious,--to surround on all sides the enemy,
driven to its last desperate bay.  But Montagu and his brother had not
been idle in the breathing-pause; they had planted the greater portion
of the archers skilfully among the trees.  They had placed their
pikemen on the verge of the barricades made by sharp stakes and fallen
timber, and where their rampart was unguarded by the pass which had
been left free for the horsemen, Hilyard and his stoutest fellows took
their post, filling the gap with breasts of iron.

And now, as with horns and clarions, with a sea of plumes and spears
and pennons, the multitudinous deathsmen came on, Warwick, towering in
the front, not one feather on his eagle crest despoiled or shorn,
stood, dismounted, his visor still raised, by his renowned steed.
Some of the men had by Warwick's order removed the mail from the
destrier's breast; and the noble animal, relieved from the weight,
seemed as unexhausted as its rider; save where the champed foam had
bespecked its glossy hide, not a hair was turned; and the on-guard of
the Yorkists heard its fiery snort as they moved slowly on.  This
figure of horse and horseman stood prominently forth amidst the little
band.  And Lovell, riding by Ratcliffe's side, whispered, "Beshrew me,
I would rather King Edward had asked for mine own head than that
gallant earl's!"

"Tush, youth," said the inexorable Ratcliffe, "I care not of what
steps the ladder of mine ambition may be made!"

While they were thus speaking, Warwick, turning to Montagu and his
knights, said,--

"Our sole hope is in the courage of our men.  And, as at Towton, when
I gave the throne to yon false man, I slew, with my own hand, my noble
Malech, to show that on that spot I would win or die, and by that
sacrifice so fired the soldiers, that we turned the day, so now--oh,
gentlemen, in another hour ye would jeer me, for my hand fails: this
hand that the poor beast hath so often fed from!  Saladin, last of thy
race, serve me now in death as in life.  Not for my sake, oh noblest
steed that ever bore a knight,--not for mine this offering!"

He kissed the destrier on his frontal, and Saladin, as if conscious of
the coming blow, bent his proud crest humbly, and licked his lord's
steel-clad hand.  So associated together had been horse and horseman,
that had it been a human sacrifice, the bystanders could not have been
more moved.  And when, covering the charger's eyes with one hand, the
earl's dagger descended, bright and rapid, a groan went through the
ranks.  But the effect was unspeakable!  The men knew at once that to
them, and them alone, their lord intrusted his fortunes and his life;
they were nerved to more than mortal daring.  No escape for Warwick--
why, then, in Warwick's person they lived and died!  Upon foe as upon
friend, the sacrifice produced all that could tend to strengthen the
last refuge of despair.  Even Edward, where he rode in the van, beheld
and knew the meaning of the deed.  Victorious Towton rushed back upon
his memory with a thrill of strange terror and remorse.

"He will die as he has lived," said Gloucester, with admiration.  "If
I live for such a field, God grant me such a death!"

As the words left the duke's lips, and Warwick, one foot on his dumb
friend's corpse, gave the mandate, a murderous discharge from the
archers in the covert rattled against the line of the Yorkists, and
the foe, still advancing, stepped over a hundred corpses to the
conflict.  Despite the vast preponderance of numbers, the skill of
Warwick's archers, the strength of his position, the obstacle to the
cavalry made by the barricades, rendered the attack perilous in the
extreme.

But the orders of Edward were prompt and vigorous.  He cared not for
the waste of life, and as one rank fell, another rushed on.  High
before the barricades stood Montagu, Warwick, and the rest of that
indomitable chivalry, the flower of the ancient Norman heroism.  As
idly beat the waves upon a rock as the ranks of Edward upon that
serried front of steel.  The sun still shone in heaven, and still
Edward's conquest was unassured.  Nay, if Marmaduke could yet bring
back the troops of Somerset upon the rear of the foe, Montagu and the
earl felt that the victory might be for them.  And often the earl
paused, to hearken for the cry of "Somerset" on the gale, and often
Montagu raised his visor to look for the banners and the spears of the
Lancastrian duke.  And ever, as the earl listened and Montagu scanned
the field, larger and larger seemed to spread the armament of Edward.
The regiment which boasted the stubborn energy of Alwyn was now in
movement, and, encouraged by the young Saxon's hardihood, the
Londoners marched on, unawed by the massacre of their predecessors.
But Alwyn, avoiding the quarter defended by the knights, defiled a
little towards the left, where his quick eye, inured to the northern
fogs, had detected the weakness of the barricade in the spot where
Hilyard was stationed; and this pass Alwyn (discarding the bow)
resolved to attempt at the point of the pike, the weapon answering to
our modern bayonet.  The first rush which he headed was so impetuous
as to effect an entry.  The weight of the numbers behind urged on the
foremost, and Hilyard had not sufficient space for the sweep of the
two-handed sword which had done good work that day.  While here the
conflict became fierce and doubtful, the right wing led by D'Eyncourt
had pierced the wood, and, surprised to discover no ambush, fell upon
the archers in the rear.  The scene was now inexpressibly terrific;
cries and groans, and the ineffable roar and yell of human passion,
resounded demonlike through the shade of the leafless trees.  And at
this moment, the provident and rapid generalship of Edward had moved
up one of his heavy bombards.  Warwick and Montagu and most of the
knights were called from the barricades to aid the archers thus
assailed behind; but an instant before that defence was shattered into
air by the explosion of the bombard.  In another minute horse and foot
rushed through the opening.  And amidst all the din was heard the
voice of Edward, "Strike, and spare not; we win the day!"  "We win the
day! victory! victory!" repeated the troops behind.  Rank caught the
sound from rank, and file from file; it reached the captive Henry, and
he paused in prayer; it reached the ruthless friar, and he gave the
sign to the hireling at his shoulder; it reached the priest as he
entered, unmoved, the church of Hadley.  And the bell, changing its
note into a quicker and sweeter chime, invited the living to prepare
for death, and the soul to rise above the cruelty and the falsehood,
and the pleasure and the pomp, and the wisdom and the glory of the
