"You have no right to be jealous.  De Mauldon has had experience and won
distinction in actual service, and from all I hear is doing wonders with
his men--has got them not only to keep but to love drill.  I heard no
less an authority than General V---- say that if all the officers of the
National Guard were like De Mauleon, that body would give an example of
discipline to the line."

"I say nothing as to the promotion of a real soldier like the Vicomte--
but a Parisian dandy like Euguerrand de Vande--"

"You forget that Enguerrand received a military education--an advantage
denied to you."

"What does that matter?  Who cares for education nowadays?  Besides, have
I not been training ever since the 4th of September, to say nothing of
the hard work on the ramparts?"

"_Parlez moi de cela_ it is indeed hard work on the ramparts. _Infandum
dolorem quorum pars magna fui_.  Take the day duty.  What with rising at
seven o'clock, and being drilled between a middle-aged and corpulent
grocer on one side and a meagre beardless barber's apprentice on the
other; what with going to the bastions at eleven, and seeing half one's
companions drunk before twelve; what with trying to keep their fists off
one's face when one politely asks them not to call one's general a
traitor or a poltroon,--the work of the ramparts would be insupportable,
if I did not take a pack of cards with me, and enjoy a quiet rubber with
three other heroes in some sequestered corner.  As for night work,
nothing short of the indomitable fortitude of a Parisian could sustain
it; the tents made expressly not to be waterproof, like the groves of the
Muses,

                                           "' per
                    Quos et aquea subeant et aurae.'

A fellow-companion of mine tucks himself up on my rug, and pillows his
head on my knapsack.  I remonstrate--he swears--the other heroes wake up
and threaten to thrash us both; and just when peace is made, and one
hopes for a wink of sleep, a detachment of spectators, chiefly gamins,
coming to see that all is safe in the camp, strike up the Marseillaise.
Ah, the world will ring to the end of time with the sublime attitude of
Paris in the face of the Vandal invaders, especially when it learns that
the very shoes we stand in are made of cardboard.  In vain we complain.
The contractor for shoes is a staunch Republican, and jobs by right
divine.  May I ask if you have dined yet?"

"Heavens! no, it is too early.  But I am excessively hungry.  I had only
a quarter of jugged cat for breakfast, and the brute was tough.  In reply
to your question, may I put another--Did you lay in plenty of stores?"

"Stores? no; I am a bachelor, and rely on the stores of my married
friends."

"Poor De Breze!  I sympathise with you, for I am in the same boat, and
dinner invitations have become monstrous rare."

"Oh, but you are so confoundedly rich!  What to you are forty francs for
a rabbit, or eighty francs for a turkey?"

"Well, I suppose I am rich, but I have no money, and the ungrateful
restautrants will not give me credit.  They don't believe in better
days."

"How can you want money?"

"Very naturally.  I had invested my capital famously-the best
speculations--partly in house rents, partly in company shares; and houses
pay no rents, and nobody will buy company shares.  I had 1,000 napoleons
on hand, it is true, when Duplessis left Paris--much more, I thought,
than I could possibly need, for I never believed in the siege.  But
during the first few weeks I played at whist with bad luck, and since
then so many old friends have borrowed of me that I doubt if I have 200
francs left.  I have despatched four letters to Duplessis by pigeon and
balloon, entreating him to send me 25,000 francs by some trusty fellow
who will pierce the Prussian lines.  I have had two answers: 1st, that he
will find a man; 2nd, that the man is found and on his way.  Trust to
that man, my dear friend, and meanwhile lend me 200 francs."

"_Mon cher, desole_ to refuse; but I was about to ask you to share your
200 francs with me who live chiefly by my pen; and that resource is cut
off.  Still, _il faut vivre_--one must dine."

"That is a fact, and we will dine together to-day at my expense; limited
liability, though--eight francs a head."

"Generous Monsieur, I accept.  Meanwhile let us take a turn towards the
Madeleine."

The two Parisians quit the cafe, and proceed up the Boulevard.  On their
way they encounter Savarin.  "Why," said De Breze, "I thought you had
left Paris with Madame."

"So I did, and deposited her safely with the Morleys at Boulogne.  These
kind Americans were going to England, and they took her with them.  But I
quit Paris!  No: I am old; I am growing obese.  I have always been
short-sighted.  I can neither wield a sword nor handle a musket.  But
Paris needs defenders; and every moment I was away from her I sighed to
myself, '_ il faut etre la_!'  I returned before the Vandals had
possessed themselves of our railways, the _convoi_ overcrowded with men
like myself, who had removed wives and families; and when we asked each
other why we went back, every answer was the same, '_il faut etre la_.'
No, poor child, no--I have nothing to give you."

These last words were addressed to a woman young and handsome, with a
dress that a few weeks ago might have been admired for taste and elegance
by the lady leaders of the ton, but was now darned, and dirty, and
draggled.

"Monsieur, I did not stop you to ask for alms.  You do not seem to
remember me, M. Savarin."

"But I do," said Lemercier, "surely I address Mademoiselle Julie
Caumartin."

"Ah, excuse me, _le petit_ Frederic," said Julie with a sickly attempt at
coquettish sprightliness; "I had no eyes except for M. Savarin."

"And why only for me, my poor child?" asked the kindhearted author.

"Hush!"  She drew him aside.  "Because you can give me news of that
monster Gustave.  It is not true, it cannot be true, that he is going to
be married?"

"Nay, surely, Mademoiselle, all connection between you and young Rameau
has ceased for months--ceased from the date of that illness in July which
nearly carried him off."

"I resigned him to the care of his mother," said the girl; "but when he
no longer needs a mother, he belongs to me.  Oh, consider, M. Savarin,
for his sake I refused the most splendid offers!  When he sought me, I
had my _coupe_, my opera-box, my _cachemires_, my jewels.  The Russians--
the English--vied for my smiles.  But I loved the man.  I never loved
before: I shall never love again; and after the sacrifices I have made
for him, nothing shall induce me to give him up.  Tell me, I entreat, my
dear M. Savarin, where he is hiding.  He has left the parental roof, and
they refused there to give me his address."

"My poor girl, don't be _mechante_.  It is quite true that Gustave Rameau
is engaged to be married; and any attempt of yours to create scandal--"

"Monsieur," interrupted Julie, vehemently, "don't talk to me about
scandal!  The man is mine, and no one else shall have him.  His address?"

"Mademoiselle," cried Savarin, angrily, "find it out for yourself."
Then--repentant of rudeness to one so young and so desolate--he added, in
mild expostulatory accents: "Come, come, _ma belle enfant_, be
reasonable: Gustave is no loss.  He is reduced to poverty."

"So much the better.  When he was well off I never cost him more than a
supper at the _Maison Doree_; and if he is poor he shall marry me, and I
will support him!"

"You!--and how?"

"By my profession when peace comes; and meanwhile I have offers from a
_cafe_ to recite warlike songs.  Ah!  you shake your head incredulously.
The ballet-dancer recite verses?  Yes!  he taught me to recite his own
_Soyez bon pour moi_.  M. Savarin! do say where I can find _mon homme_."

"No."

"That is your last word?"

"It is."

The girl drew her thin shawl round her and hurried off.  Savarin rejoined
his friends.  "Is that the way you console yourself for the absence of
Madame?" asked De Breze, drily.

"Fie!" cried Savarin, indignantly; "such bad jokes are ill-timed.  What
strange mixtures of good and bad, of noble and base, every stratum of
Paris life contains!  There is that poor girl, in one way contemptible,
no doubt, and yet in another way she has an element of grandeur.  On the
whole, at Paris, the women, with all their faults, are of finer mould
than the men."

"French gallantry has always admitted that truth," said Lemercier.  "Fox,
Fox, Fox."  Uttering this cry, he darted forward after the dog, who had
strayed a few yards to salute another dog led by a string, and caught the
animal in his arms.  "Pardon me," he exclaimed, returning to his friends,
"but there are so many snares for dogs at present.  They are just coming
into fashion for roasts, and Fox is so plump."

"I thought," said Savarin, "that it was resolved at all the sporting
clubs that, be the pinch of famine ever so keen, the friend of man should
not be eaten."

"That was while the beef lasted; but since we have come to cats, who
shall predict immunity to dogs?  _Quid intactum nefasti linquimus_?
Nothing is sacred from the hand of rapine."

The church of the Madeleine now stood before them. _Moblots_ were playing
pitch-and-toss on its steps.

"I don't wish you to accompany me, Messieurs," said Lemercier,
apologetically, "but I am going to enter the church."

"To pray?" asked De Breze, in profound astonishment.  "Not exactly; but I
want to speak to my friend Rochebriant, and I know I shall find him
there."

"Praying?" again asked De Breze.

"Yes."

"That is curious--a young Parisian exquisite at prayer--that is worth
seeing.  Let us enter, too, Savarin."

They enter the church.  It is filled, and even the sceptical De Breze is
impressed and awed by the sight.  An intense fervour pervades the
congregation.  The majority, it is true, are women, many of them in deep
mourning, and many of their faces mourning deeper than the dress.
Everywhere may be seen gushing tears, and everywhere faintly heard the
sound of stifled sighs.  Besides the women are men of all ages--young,
middle-aged, old, with heads bowed and hands clasped, pale, grave, and
earnest.  Most of them were evidently of the superior grade of life--
nobles, and the higher bourgeoisie: few of the _ouvrier_ class, very few,
and these were of an earlier generation.  I except soldiers, of whom
there were many, from the provincial Mobiles, chiefly Bretons; you know
the Breton soldiers by the little cross worn on their kepis.

Among them Lemercier at once distinguished the noble countenance of Alain
de Rochebriant.  De Breze and Savarin looked at each other with solemn
eyes.  I know not when either had last been within a church; perhaps both
were startled to find that religion still existed in Paris--and largely
exist it does, though little seen on the surface of society, little to be
estimated by the articles of journals and the reports of foreigners.
Unhappily, those among whom it exists are not the ruling class--are of
the classes that are dominated over and obscured in every country the
moment the populace becomes master.  And at that moment the journals
chiefly read were warring more against the Deity than the Prussians--were
denouncing soldiers who attended mass.  "The Gospel certainly makes a bad
soldier," writes the patriot Pyat.

Lemercier knelt down quietly.  The other two men crept noiselessly out,
and stood waiting for him on the steps, watching the _Moblots_ (Parisian
_Moblots_) at play.

"I should not wait for the _roturier_ if he had not promised me a
_roti_," said the Vicomte de Breze, with a pitiful attempt at the
patrician wit of the ancien regime.

Savarin shrugged his shoulders.  "I am not included in the invitation,"
said he, "and therefore free to depart.  I must go and look up a former
_confrere_ who was an enthusiastic Red Republican, and I fear does not
get so much to eat since he has no longer an Emperor to abuse."

So Savarin went away.  A few minutes afterwards Lemercier emerged from
the church with Alain.




CHAPTER XIV.

"I knew I should find you in the Madeleine," said Lemercier, "and I
wished much to know when you had news from Duplessis.  He and your fair
fiancee are with your aunt still staying at Rochebriant?"

"Certainly.  A pigeon arrived this morning with a few lines.  All well
there."

"And Duplessis thinks, despite the war, that he shall be able, when the
time comes, to pay Louvier the mortgage-sum?"

"He never doubts that.  His credit in London is so good.  But of course
all works of improvement are stopped."

"Pray did he mention me?--anything about the messenger who was to pierce
the Prussian lines?"

"What! has the man not arrived?  It is two weeks since he left."

"The Uhlans have no doubt shot him--the assassins, and drunk up my 25,000
francs--the thieves."

"I hope not.  But in case of delay, Duplessis tells me I am to remit to
you 2,000 francs for your present wants.  I will send them to you this
evening."

"How the deuce do you possess such a sum?"

"I came from Brittany with a purse well filled.  Of course I could have
no scruples in accepting money from my destined father-in-law."

"And you can spare this sum?"

"Certainly--the State now provides for me; I am in command of a Breton
company."

"True.  Come and dine with me and De Breze."

"Alas!  I cannot.  I have to see both the Vandemars before I return to
the camp for the night.  And now-hush--come this way (drawing Frederic
further from De Breze), I have famous news for you.  A sortie on a grand
scale is imminent; in a few days we may hope for it."

"I have heard that so often that I am incredulous."

"Take it as a fact now."

"What!  Trochu has at last matured his plan?"

"He has changed its original design, which was to cut through the
Prussian lines to Rouen, occupying there the richest country for
supplies, guarding the left bank of the Seine and a watercourse to convoy
them to Paris.  The incidents of war prevented that: he has a better plan
now.  The victory of the army of the Loire at Orleans opens a new
enterprise.  We shall cut our way through the Prussians, join that army,
and with united forces fall on the enemy at the rear.  Keep this a secret
as yet, but rejoice with me that we shall prove to the invaders what men
who fight for their native soil can do under the protection of Heaven."

"Fox, Fox, _mon cheri_," said Lemercier, as he walked towards the _cafe
Riche_ with De Breze; "thou shalt have a _festin de Balthazar_ under the
protection of Heaven."




CHAPTER XV.

On leaving Lemercier and De Breze, Savarin regained the Boulevard, and
pausing every now and then to exchange a few words with acquaintances--
the acquaintances of the genial author were numerous--turned into the
_quartier_ Chaussee d'Antin, and gaining a small neat house, with a
richly-ornamented _facade_, mounted very clean, well-kept stairs to a
third story.  On one of the doors on the landing-place was nailed a card,
inscribed, "Gustave Rameau, _homme de lettres_."  Certainly it is not
usual in Paris thus to _afficher_ one's self as a "man of letters"?  But
Genius scorns what is usual.  Had not Victor Hugo left in the hotel-books
on the Rhine his designation "homme de lettres"?  Did not the heir to one
of the loftiest houses in the peerage of England, and who was also a
first-rate amateur in painting, inscribe on his studio when in Italy, "--
_artiste_"?  Such examples, no doubt, were familiar to Gustave Rameau,
and "_homme de lettres_" was on the scrap of pasteboard nailed to his
door.

Savarin rang; the door opened, and Gustave appeared.  The poet was, of
course, picturesquely attired.  In his day of fashion he had worn within
doors a very pretty fanciful costume, designed after portraits of the
young Raffaelle; that costume he had preserved--he wore it now.  It
looked very threadbare, and the _pourpoint_ very soiled.  But the beauty
of the poet's face had survived the lustre of the garments.  True, thanks
to absinthe, the cheeks had become somewhat puffy and bloated.  Grey was
distinctly visible in the long ebon tresses.  But still the beauty of the
face was of that rare type which a Thorwaldsen or a Gibson seeking a
model for a Narcissus would have longed to fix into marble.

Gustave received his former chief with a certain air of reserved dignity;
led him into his chamber, only divided by a curtain from his
accommodation for washing and slumber, and placed him in an arm-chair
beside a drowsy fire--fuel had already become very dear.

"Gustave," said Savarin, "are you in a mood favourable to a little
serious talk?"

"Serious talk from M. Savarin is a novelty too great not to command my
profoundest interest."

"Thank you,--and to begin: I who know the world and mankind advise you,
who do not, never to meet a man who wishes to do you a kindness with an
ungracious sarcasm.  Irony is a weapon I ought to be skilled in, but
weapons are used against enemies, and it is only a tyro who flourishes
his rapier in the face of his friends."

"I was not aware that M. Savarin still permitted me to regard him as a
friend."

"Because I discharged the duties of friend--remonstrated, advised, and
warned.  However, let bygones be bygones.  I entreated you not to quit
the safe shelter of the paternal roof.  You insisted on doing so.  I
entreated you not to send to one of the most ferocious of the Red, or
rather, the Communistic, journals, articles, very eloquent, no doubt, but
which would most seriously injure you in the eyes of quiet, orderly
people, and compromise your future literary career for the sake of a
temporary flash in the pan during a very evanescent period of
revolutionary excitement.  You scorned my adjurations, but at all events
you had the grace not to append your true name to those truculent
effusions.  In literature, if literature revive in France, we two are
henceforth separated.  But I do not forego the friendly interest I took
in you in the days when you were so continually in my house.  My wife,
who liked you so cordially, implored me to look after you during her
absence from Paris, and, _enfin, mon pauvre garcon_, it would grieve me
very much if, when she comes back, I had to say to her, 'Gustave Rameau
has thrown away the chance of redemption and of happiness which you
deemed was secure to him.' _A l'oeil malade, la lumiere nuit_."

So saying, he held out his hand kindly.

Gustave, who was far from deficient in affectionate or tender impulses,
took the hand respectfully, and pressed it warmly.

"Forgive me if I have been ungracious, M. Savarin, and vouchsafe to hear
my explanation."

"Willingly, _mon garcon_."

"When I became convalescent, well enough to leave my father's house,
there were circumstances which compelled me to do so.  A young man
