and galloped back towards the party of citizens.

Proudfute, thus overthrown, began to cry for assistance in no very
manly voice, and almost in the same breath to whimper for mercy; for his
antagonist, dismounting almost as soon as he fell, offered a whinger,
or large wood knife, to his throat, while he rifled the pockets of the
unlucky citizen, and even examined his hawking bag, swearing two or
three grisly oaths, that he would have what it contained, since the
wearer had interrupted his sport. He pulled the belt rudely off,
terrifying the prostrate bonnet maker still more by the regardless
violence which he used, as, instead of taking the pains to unbuckle the
strap, he drew till the fastening gave way. But apparently it contained
nothing to his mind. He threw it carelessly from him, and at the
same time suffered the dismounted cavalier to rise, while he himself
remounted his hobbler, and looked towards the rest of Oliver's party,
who were now advancing.

When they had seen their delegate overthrown, there was some laughter;
so much had the vaunting humor of the bonnet maker prepared his friends
to rejoice when, as Henry Smith termed it, they saw the Oliver meet with
a Rowland. But when the bonnet maker's adversary was seen to bestride
him, and handle him in the manner described, the armourer could hold out
no longer.

"Please you, good Master Bailie, I cannot endure to see our townsman
beaten and rifled, and like to be murdered before us all. It reflects
upon the Fair Town, and if it is neighbour Proudfute's misfortune, it is
our shame. I must to his rescue."

"We will all go to his rescue," answered Bailie Craigdallie; "but let no
man strike without order from me. We have more feuds on our hands, it is
to be feared, than we have strength to bring to good end. And therefore
I charge you all, more especially you, Henry of the Wynd, in the name of
the Fair City, that you make no stroke but in self defence."

They all advanced, therefore, in a body; and the appearance of such a
number drove the plunderer from his booty. He stood at gaze, however, at
some distance, like the wolf, which, though it retreats before the dogs,
cannot be brought to absolute flight.

Henry, seeing this state of things, spurred his horse and advanced far
before the rest of the party, up towards the scene of Oliver Proudfute's
misfortune. His first task was to catch Jezabel by the flowing rein, and
his next to lead her to meet her discomfited master, who was crippling
towards him, his clothes much soiled with his fall, his eyes streaming
with tears, from pain as well as mortification, and altogether
exhibiting an aspect so unlike the spruce and dapper importance of
his ordinary appearance, that the honest smith felt compassion for
the little man, and some remorse at having left him exposed to such
disgrace. All men, I believe, enjoy an ill natured joke. The difference
is, that an ill natured person can drink out to the very dregs the
amusement which it affords, while the better moulded mind soon loses the
sense of the ridiculous in sympathy for the pain of the sufferer.

"Let me pitch you up to your saddle again, neighbour," said the smith,
dismounting at the same time, and assisting Oliver to scramble into his
war saddle, as a monkey might have done.

"May God forgive you, neighbour Smith, for not backing of me! I would
not have believed in it, though fifty credible witnesses had sworn it of
you."

Such were the first words, spoken in sorrow more than anger, by which
the dismayed Oliver vented his feelings.

"The bailie kept hold of my horse by the bridle; and besides," Henry
continued, with a smile, which even his compassion could not suppress,
"I thought you would have accused me of diminishing your honour, if I
brought you aid against a single man. But cheer up! the villain took
foul odds of you, your horse not being well at command."

"That is true--that is true," said Oliver, eagerly catching at the
apology.

"And yonder stands the faitour, rejoicing at the mischief he has done,
and triumphing in your overthrow, like the king in the romance, who
played upon the fiddle whilst a city was burning. Come thou with me, and
thou shalt see how we will handle him. Nay, fear not that I will desert
thee this time."

So saying, he caught Jezabel by the rein, and galloping alongside of
her, without giving Oliver time to express a negative, he rushed towards
the Devil's Dick, who had halted on the top of a rising ground at some
distance. The gentle Johnstone, however, either that he thought the
contest unequal, or that he had fought enough for the day, snapping his
fingers and throwing his hand out with an air of defiance, spurred his
horse into a neighbouring bog, through which he seemed to flutter like
a wild duck, swinging his lure round his head, and whistling to his hawk
all the while, though any other horse and rider must have been instantly
bogged up to the saddle girths.

"There goes a thoroughbred moss trooper," said the smith. "That fellow
will fight or flee as suits his humor, and there is no use to pursue
him, any more than to hunt a wild goose. He has got your purse, I doubt
me, for they seldom leave off till they are full handed."

"Ye--ye--yes," said Proudfute, in a melancholy tone, "he has got my
purse; but there is less matter since he hath left the hawking bag."

"Nay, the hawking bag had been an emblem of personal victory, to be
sure--a trophy, as the minstrels call it."

"There is more in it than that, friend," said Oliver, significantly.

"Why, that is well, neighbour: I love to hear you speak in your own
scholarly tone again. Cheer up, you have seen the villain's back, and
regained the trophies you had lost when taken at advantage."

"Ah, Henry Gow--Henry Gow--" said the bonnet maker, and stopped short
with a deep sigh, nearly amounting to a groan.

"What is the matter?" asked his friend--"what is it you vex yourself
about now?"

"I have some suspicion, my dearest friend, Henry Smith, that the villain
fled for fear of you, not of me."

"Do not think so," replied the armourer: "he saw two men and fled, and
who can tell whether he fled for one or the other? Besides, he knows
by experience your strength and activity: we all saw how you kicked and
struggled when you were on the ground."

"Did I?" said poor Proudfute. "I do not remember it, but I know it is my
best point: I am a strong dog in the loins. But did they all see it?"

"All as much as I," said the smith, smothering an inclination to
laughter.

"But thou wilt remind them of it?"

"Be assured I will," answered Henry, "and of thy desperate rally even
now. Mark what I say to Bailie Craigdallie, and make the best of it."

"It is not that I require any evidence in thy favour, for I am as brave
by nature as most men in Perth; but only--" Here the man of valour
paused.

"But only what?" inquired the stout armourer.

"But only I am afraid of being killed. To leave my pretty wife and my
young family, you know, would be a sad change, Smith. You will know this
when it is your own case, and will feel abated in courage."

"It is like that I may," said the armourer, musing.

"Then I am so accustomed to the use of arms, and so well breathed, that
few men can match me. It's all here," said the little man, expanding his
breast like a trussed fowl, and patting himself with his hands--"here is
room for all the wind machinery."

"I dare say you are long breathed--long winded; at least your speech
bewrays--"

"My speech! You are a wag--But I have got the stern post of a dromond
brought up the river from Dundee."

"The stern post of a Drummond!" exclaimed the armourer; "conscience,
man, it will put you in feud with the whole clan--not the least wrathful
in the country, as I take it."

"St. Andrew, man, you put me out! I mean a dromond--that is, a large
ship. I have fixed this post in my yard, and had it painted and carved
something like a soldan or Saracen, and with him I breathe myself, and
will wield my two handed sword against him, thrust or point, for an hour
together."

"That must make you familiar with the use of your weapon," said the
smith.

"Ay, marry does it; and sometimes I will place you a bonnet--an old one,
most likely--on my soldan's head, and cleave it with such a downright
blow that in troth, the infidel has but little of his skull remaining to
hit at."

"That is unlucky, for you will lose your practice," said Henry. "But how
say you, bonnet maker? I will put on my head piece and corselet one
day, and you shall hew at me, allowing me my broadsword to parry and pay
back? Eh, what say you?"

"By no manner of means, my dear friend. I should do you too much evil;
besides, to tell you the truth, I strike far more freely at a helmet or
bonnet when it is set on my wooden soldan; then I am sure to fetch it
down. But when there is a plume of feathers in it that nod, and two eyes
gleaming fiercely from under the shadow of the visor, and when the whole
is dancing about here and there, I acknowledge it puts out my hand of
fence."

"So, if men would but stand stock still like your soldan, you would play
the tyrant with them, Master Proudfute?"

"In time, and with practice, I conclude I might," answered Oliver. "But
here we come up with the rest of them. Bailie Craigdallie looks angry,
but it is not his kind of anger that frightens me."

You are to recollect, gentle reader, that as soon as the bailie and
those who attended him saw that the smith had come up to the forlorn
bonnet maker, and that the stranger had retreated, they gave themselves
no trouble about advancing further to his assistance, which they
regarded as quite ensured by the presence of the redoubted Henry Gow.
They had resumed their straight road to Kinfauns, desirous that nothing
should delay the execution of their mission. As some time had
elapsed ere the bonnet maker and the smith rejoined the party, Bailie
Craigdallie asked them, and Henry Smith in particular, what they meant
by dallying away precious time by riding uphill after the falconer.

"By the mass, it was not my fault, Master Bailie," replied the smith.
"If ye will couple up an ordinary Low Country greyhound with a Highland
wolf dog, you must not blame the first of them for taking the direction
in which it pleases the last to drag him on. It was so, and not
otherwise, with my neighbour Oliver Proudfute. He no sooner got up from
the ground, but he mounted his mare like a flash of lightning, and,
enraged at the unknightly advantage which yonder rascal had taken of
his stumbling horse, he flew after him like a dromedary. I could not but
follow, both to prevent a second stumble and secure our over bold friend
and champion from the chance of some ambush at the top of the hill. But
the villain, who is a follower of some Lord of the Marches, and wears a
winged spur for his cognizance, fled from our neighbour like fire from
flint."

The senior bailie of Perth listened with surprise to the legend which
it had pleased Gow to circulate; for, though not much caring for the
matter, he had always doubted the bonnet maker's romancing account
of his own exploits, which hereafter he must hold as in some degree
orthodox.

The shrewd old glover looked closer into the matter. "You will drive the
poor bonnet maker mad," he whispered to Henry, "and set him a-ringing
his clapper as if he were a town bell on a rejoicing day, when for order
and decency it were better he were silent."

"Oh, by Our Lady, father," replied the smith, "I love the poor little
braggadocio, and could not think of his sitting rueful and silent in
the provost's hall, while all the rest of them, and in especial that
venomous pottingar, were telling their mind."

"Thou art even too good natured a fellow, Henry," answered Simon. "But
mark the difference betwixt these two men. The harmless little bonnet
maker assumes the airs of a dragon, to disguise his natural cowardice;
while the pottingar wilfully desires to show himself timid, poor
spirited, and humble, to conceal the danger of his temper. The adder
is not the less deadly that he creeps under a stone. I tell thee, son
Henry, that, for all his sneaking looks and timorous talking, this
wretched anatomy loves mischief more than he fears danger. But here we
stand in front of the provost's castle; and a lordly place is Kinfauns,
and a credit to the city it is, to have the owner of such a gallant
castle for its chief magistrate."

"A goodly fortalice, indeed," said the smith, looking at the broad
winding Tay, as it swept under the bank on which the castle stood, like
its modern successor, and seemed the queen of the valley, although, on
the opposite side of the river, the strong walls of Elcho appeared to
dispute the pre-eminence. Elcho, however, was in that age a peaceful
nunnery, and the walls with which it was surrounded were the barriers of
secluded vestals, not the bulwarks of an armed garrison.

"'Tis a brave castle," said the armourer, again looking at the towers
of Kinfauns, "and the breastplate and target of the bonny course of the
Tay. It were worth lipping a good blade, before wrong were offered to
it."

The porter of Kinfauns, who knew from a distance the persons and
characters of the party, had already opened the courtyard gate for
their entrance, and sent notice to Sir Patrick Charteris that the eldest
bailie of Perth, with some other good citizens, were approaching the
castle. The good knight, who was getting ready for a hawking party,
heard the intimation with pretty much the same feelings that the modern
representative of a burgh hears of the menaced visitation of a party of
his worthy electors, at a time rather unseasonable for their reception.
That is, he internally devoted the intruders to Mahound and Termagaunt,
and outwardly gave orders to receive them with all decorum and civility;
commanded the sewers to bring hot venison steaks and cold baked meats
into the knightly hall with all despatch, and the butler to broach his
casks, and do his duty; for if the Fair City of Perth sometimes filled
his cellar, her citizens were always equally ready to assist at emptying
his flagons.

The good burghers were reverently marshalled into the hall, where the
knight, who was in a riding habit, and booted up to the middle of
his thighs, received them with a mixture of courtesy and patronising
condescension; wishing them all the while at the bottom of the Tay, on
account of the interruption their arrival gave to his proposed amusement
of the morning. He met them in the midst of the hall, with bare head and
bonnet in hand, and some such salutation as the following:

"Ha, my Master Eldest Bailie, and you, worthy Simon Glover, fathers of
the Fair City, and you, my learned pottingar, and you, stout smith, and
my slashing bonnet maker too, who cracks more skulls than he covers, how
come I to have the pleasure of seeing so many friends so early? I was
thinking to see my hawks fly, and your company will make the sport more
pleasant--(Aside, I trust in Our Lady they may break their necks!)--that
is, always, unless the city have any commands to lay on me. Butler
Gilbert, despatch, thou knave. But I hope you have no more grave errand
than to try if the malvoisie holds its flavour?"

The city delegates answered to their provost's civilities by
inclinations and congees, more or less characteristic, of which the
pottingar's bow was the lowest and the smith's the least ceremonious.
Probably he knew his own value as a fighting man upon occasion. To the
general compliment the elder bailie replied.

"Sir Patrick Charteris, and our noble Lord Provost," said Craigdallie,
gravely, "had our errand been to enjoy the hospitality with which we
have been often regaled here, our manners would have taught us to tarry
till your lordship had invited us, as on other occasions. And as to
hawking, we have had enough on't for one morning; since a wild fellow,
who was flying a falcon hard by on the moor, unhorsed and cudgelled our
worthy friend Oliver Bonnet Maker, or Proudfute, as some men call him,
merely because he questioned him, in your honour's name, and the town of
Perth's, who or what he was that took so much upon him."

"And what account gave he of himself?" said the provost. "By St. John! I
will teach him to forestall my sport!"

"So please your lordship," said the bonnet maker, "he did take me at
disadvantage. But I got on horseback again afterwards, and pricked after
him gallantly. He calls himself Richard the Devil."

"How, man! he that the rhymes and romances are made on?" said the
provost. "I thought that smaik's name had been Robert."

"I trow they be different, my lord. I only graced this fellow with the
full title, for indeed he called himself the Devil's Dick, and said he
was a Johnstone, and a follower of the lord of that name. But I put him
back into the bog, and recovered my hawking bag, which he had taken when
I was at disadvantage."

Sir Patrick paused for an instant. "We have heard," said he, "of the
Lord of Johnstone, and of his followers. Little is to be had by meddling
with them. Smith, tell me, did you endure this?"

"Ay, faith did I, Sir Patrick, having command from my betters not to
help."

"Well, if thou satst down with it," said the provost, "I see not why we
should rise up; especially as Master Oliver Proudfute, though taken at
advantage at first, has, as he has told us; recovered his reputation and
that of the burgh. But here comes the wine at length. Fill round to my
good friends and guests till the wine leap over the cup. Prosperity to
St. Johnston, and a merry welcome to you all, my honest friends! And
now sit you to eat a morsel, for the sun is high up, and it must be long
since you thrifty men have broken your fast."

"Before we eat, my Lord Provost," said the bailie, "let us tell you the
pressing cause of our coming, which as yet we have not touched upon."

"Nay, prithee, bailie," said the provost, "put it off till thou hast
eaten. Some complaint against the rascally jackmen and retainers of the
nobles, for playing at football on the streets of the burgh, or some
such goodly matter."

"No, my lord," said Craigdallie, stoutly and firmly. "It is the
jackmen's masters of whom we complain, for playing at football with the
honour of our families, and using as little ceremony with our daughters'
sleeping chambers as if they were in a bordel at Paris. A party of
reiving night walkers--courtiers and men of rank, as there is but too
much reason to believe--attempted to scale the windows of Simon Glover's
house last night; they stood in their defence with drawn weapons when
they were interrupted by Henry Smith, and fought till they were driven
off by the rising of the citizens."

"How!" said Sir Patrick, setting down the cup which he was about to
raise to his head. "Cock's body, make that manifest to me, and, by
the soul of Thomas of Longueville, I will see you righted with my best
power, were it to cost me life and land. Who attests this? Simon Glover,
you are held an honest and a cautious man--do you take the truth of this
charge upon your conscience?"

"My lord," said Simon, "understand I am no willing complainer in this
weighty matter. No damage has arisen, save to the breakers of the peace
themselves. I fear only great power could have encouraged such lawless
audacity; and I were unwilling to put feud between my native town and
some powerful nobleman on my account. But it has been said that, if I
hang back in prosecuting this complaint, it will be as much as admitting
that my daughter expected such a visit, which is a direct falsehood.
Therefore, my lord, I will tell your lordship what happened, so far as I
know, and leave further proceeding to your wisdom."

He then told, from point to point, all that he had seen of the attack.

Sir Patrick Charteris, listening with much attention, seemed
particularly struck with the escape of the man who had been made
prisoner.

"Strange," he said, "that you did not secure him when you had him. Did
you not look at him so as to know him again?"

"I had but the light of a lantern, my Lord Provost; and as to suffering
him to escape, I was alone," said the glover, "and old. But yet I might
have kept him, had I not heard my daughter shriek in the upper room;
and ere I had returned from her chamber the man had escaped through the
garden."

"Now, armourer, as a true man and a good soldier," said Sir Patrick,
"tell me what you know of this matter."

Henry Gow, in his own decided style, gave a brief but clear narrative of
the whole affair.

Honest Proudfute being next called upon, began his statement with an air
of more importance. "Touching this awful and astounding tumult within
the burgh, I cannot altogether, it is true, say with Henry Gow that I
saw the very beginning. But it will not be denied that I beheld a great
part of the latter end, and especially that I procured the evidence most
effectual to convict the knaves."

"And what is it, man?" said Sir Patrick Charteris. "Never lose time
fumbling and prating about it. What is it?"

"I have brought your lordship, in this pouch, what one of the rogues
left behind him," said the little man. "It is a trophy which, in good
faith and honest truth, I do confess I won not by the blade, but I
claim the credit of securing it with that presence of mind which few men
possess amidst flashing torches and clashing weapons. I secured it, my
lord, and here it is."

So saying, he produced, from the hawking pouch already mentioned, the
stiffened hand which had been found on the scene of the skirmish.

"Nay, bonnet maker," said the provost, "I'll warrant thee man enough to
secure a rogue's hand after it is cut from the body. What do you look so
busily for in your bag?"

"There should have been--there was--a ring, my lord, which was on the
knave's finger. I fear I have been forgetful, and left it at home, for
I took it off to show to my wife, as she cared not to look upon the dead
hand, as women love not such sights. But yet I thought I had put it on
the finger again. Nevertheless, it must, I bethink me, be at home. I
will ride back for it, and Henry Smith will trot along with me."

"We will all trot with thee," said Sir Patrick Charteris, "since I
am for Perth myself. Look you, honest burghers and good neighbours of
Perth; you may have thought me unapt to be moved by light complaints and
trivial breaches of your privileges, such as small trespasses on
your game, the barons' followers playing football in the street, and
suchlike. But, by the soul of Thomas of Longueville, you shall not find
Patrick Charteris slothful in a matter of this importance. This hand,"
he continued, holding up the severed joint, "belongs to one who hath
worked no drudgery. We will put it in a way to be known and claimed of
the owner, if his comrades of the revel have but one spark of honour in
them. Hark you, Gerard; get me some half score of good men instantly to
horse, and let them take jack and spear. Meanwhile, neighbours, if
feud arise out of this, as is most likely, we must come to each other's
support. If my poor house be attacked, how many men will you bring to my
support?"

The burghers looked at Henry Gow, to whom they instinctively turned when
such matters were discussed.

"I will answer," said he, "for fifty good fellows to be assembled ere
the common bell has rung ten minutes; for a thousand, in the space of an
hour."

"It is well," answered the gallant provost; "and in the case of need,
I will come to aid the Fair City with such men as I can make. And now,
good friends, let us to horse."



CHAPTER IX.

     If I know how to manage these affairs,
     Thus thrust disorderly upon my hands,
     Never believe me--

     Richard II.


It was early in the afternoon of St. Valentine's Day that the prior of
the Dominicans was engaged in discharge of his duties as confessor to
a penitent of no small importance. This was an elderly man, of a goodly
presence, a florid and healthful cheek, the under part of which was
shaded by a venerable white beard, which descended over his bosom. The
large and clear blue eyes, with the broad expanse of brow, expressed
dignity; but it was of a character which seemed more accustomed to
receive honours voluntarily paid than to enforce them when they were
refused. The good nature of the expression was so great as to approach
to defenceless simplicity or weakness of character, unfit, it might
be inferred, to repel intrusion or subdue resistance. Amongst the grey
locks of this personage was placed a small circlet or coronet of gold,
upon a blue fillet. His beads, which were large and conspicuous, were of
native gold, rudely enough wrought, but ornamented with Scottish pearls
of rare size and beauty. These were his only ornaments; and a long
crimson robe of silk, tied by a sash of the same colour, formed his
attire. His shrift being finished, he arose heavily from the embroidered
cushion upon which he kneeled during his confession, and, by the
assistance of a crutch headed staff of ebony, moved, lame and
ungracefully, and with apparent pain, to a chair of state, which,
surmounted by a canopy, was placed for his accommodation by the chimney
of the lofty and large apartment.

This was Robert, third of that name, and the second of the ill fated
family of Stuart who filled the throne of Scotland. He had many virtues,
and was not without talent; but it was his great misfortune that, like
others of his devoted line, his merits were not of a kind suited to the
part which he was called upon to perform in life. The king of so fierce
a people as the Scots then were ought to have been warlike, prompt, and
active, liberal in rewarding services, strict in punishing crimes, one
whose conduct should make him feared as well as beloved. The qualities
of Robert the Third were the reverse of all these. In youth he had
indeed seen battles; but, without incurring disgrace, he had never
manifested the chivalrous love of war and peril, or the eager desire to
distinguish himself by dangerous achievements, which that age expected
from all who were of noble birth and had claims to authority.

Besides, his military career was very short. Amidst the tumult of a
tournament, the young Earl of Carrick, such was then his title, received
a kick from the horse of Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith, in consequence
of which he was lame for the rest of his life, and absolutely disabled
from taking share either in warfare or in the military sports and
tournaments which were its image. As Robert had never testified much
predilection for violent exertion, he did not probably much regret
the incapacities which exempted him from these active scenes. But his
misfortune, or rather its consequences, lowered him in the eyes of
a fierce nobility and warlike people. He was obliged to repose the
principal charge of his affairs now in one member, now in another, of
his family, sometimes with the actual rank, and always with the power,
of lieutenant general of the kingdom. His paternal affection would have
induced him to use the assistance of his eldest son, a young man of
spirit and talent, whom in fondness he had created Duke of Rothsay, in
order to give him the present possession of a dignity next to that of
the throne. But the young prince's head was too giddy, and his hand
too feeble to wield with dignity the delegated sceptre. However fond of
power, pleasure was the Prince's favourite pursuit; and the court was
disturbed, and the country scandalised, by the number of fugitive amours
and extravagant revels practised by him who should have set an example
of order and regularity to the youth of the kingdom.

The license and impropriety of the Duke of Rothsay's conduct was the
more reprehensible in the public view, that he was a married person;
although some, over whom his youth, gaiety, grace, and good temper had
obtained influence, were of opinion that an excuse for his libertinism
might be found in the circumstances of the marriage itself. They
reminded each other that his nuptials were entirely conducted by his
uncle, the Duke of Albany, by whose counsels the infirm and timid King
was much governed at the time, and who had the character of managing the
temper of his brother and sovereign, so as might be most injurious to
the interests and prospects of the young heir. By Albany's machinations
the hand of the heir apparent was in a manner put up to sale, as it was
understood publicly that the nobleman in Scotland who should give the
largest dower to his daughter might aspire to raise her to the bed of
the Duke of Rothsay.

In the contest for preference which ensued, George Earl of Dunbar and
March, who possessed, by himself or his vassals, a great part of the
eastern frontier, was preferred to other competitors; and his daughter
was, with the mutual goodwill of the young couple, actually contracted
to the Duke of Rothsay.

But there remained a third party to be consulted, and that was no other
than the tremendous Archibald Earl of Douglas, terrible alike from the
extent of his lands, from the numerous offices and jurisdictions with
which he was invested, and from his personal qualities of wisdom and
valour, mingled with indomitable pride, and more than the feudal love
of vengeance. The Earl was also nearly related to the throne, having
married the eldest daughter of the reigning monarch.

After the espousals of the Duke of Rothsay with the Earl of March's
daughter, Douglas, as if he had postponed his share in the negotiation
to show that it could not be concluded with any one but himself, entered
the lists to break off the contract. He tendered a larger dower with his
daughter Marjory than the Earl of March had proffered; and, secured by
his own cupidity and fear of the Douglas, Albany exerted his influence
with the timid monarch till he was prevailed upon to break the contract
with the Earl of March, and wed his son to Marjory Douglas, a woman whom
Rothsay could not love. No apology was offered to the Earl of March,
excepting that the espousals betwixt the Prince and Elizabeth of Dunbar
had not been approved by the States of Parliament, and that till such
ratification the contract was liable to be broken off. The Earl deeply
resented the wrong done to himself and his daughter, and was generally
understood to study revenge, which his great influence on the English
frontier was likely to place within his power.

In the mean time, the Duke of Rothsay, incensed at the sacrifice of his
hand and his inclinations to this state intrigue, took his own mode
of venting his displeasure, by neglecting his wife, contemning his
formidable and dangerous father in law, and showing little respect
to the authority of the King himself, and none whatever to the
remonstrances of Albany, his uncle, whom he looked upon as his confirmed
enemy.

Amid these internal dissensions of his family, which extended themselves
through his councils and administration, introducing everywhere the
baneful effects of uncertainty and disunion, the feeble monarch had
for some time been supported by the counsels of his queen, Annabella, a
daughter of the noble house of Drummond, gifted with a depth of sagacity
and firmness of mind which exercised some restraint over the levities
of a son who respected her, and sustained on many occasions the wavering
resolution of her royal husband. But after her death the imbecile
sovereign resembled nothing so much as a vessel drifted from her
anchors, and tossed about amidst contending currents. Abstractedly
considered, Robert might be said to doat upon his son, to entertain
respect and awe for the character of his brother Albany, so much more
decisive than his own, to fear the Douglas with a terror which was
almost instinctive; and to suspect the constancy of the bold but fickle
Earl of March. But his feelings towards these various characters were
so mixed and complicated, that from time to time they showed entirely
different from what they really were; and according to the interest
which had been last exerted over his flexible mind, the King would
change from an indulgent to a strict and even cruel father, from a
confiding to a jealous brother, or from a benignant and bountiful to a
grasping and encroaching sovereign. Like the chameleon, his feeble mind
reflected the colour of that firmer character upon which at the time he
reposed for counsel and assistance. And when he disused the advice
of one of his family, and employed the counsel of another, it was no
unwonted thing to see a total change of measures, equally disrespectable
to the character of the King and dangerous to the safety of the state.

It followed as a matter of course that the clergy of the Catholic Church
acquired influence over a man whose intentions were so excellent, but
whose resolutions were so infirm. Robert was haunted, not only with a
due sense of the errors he had really committed, but with the tormenting
apprehensions of those peccadilloes which beset a superstitious
and timid mind. It is scarce necessary, therefore, to add, that the
churchmen of various descriptions had no small influence over this
easy tempered prince, though, indeed, theirs was, at that period, an
influence from which few or none escaped, however resolute and firm of
purpose in affairs of a temporal character. We now return from this long
digression, without which what we have to relate could not perhaps have
been well understood.

The King had moved with ungraceful difficulty to the cushioned chair
which, under a state or canopy, stood prepared for his accommodation,
and upon which he sank down with enjoyment, like an indolent man, who
had been for some time confined to a constrained position. When seated,
the gentle and venerable looks of the good old man showed benevolence.
The prior, who now remained standing opposite to the royal seat, with
an air of deep deference which cloaked the natural haughtiness of his
carriage, was a man betwixt forty and fifty years of age, but every one
of whose hairs still retained their natural dark colour. Acute features
and a penetrating look attested the talents by which the venerable
father had acquired his high station in the community over which he
presided; and, we may add, in the councils of the kingdom, in whose
service they were often exercised. The chief objects which his education
and habits taught him to keep in view were the extension of the dominion
and the wealth of the church, and the suppression of heresy, both of
which he endeavoured to accomplish by all the means which his situation
afforded him. But he honoured his religion by the sincerity of his own
belief, and by the morality which guided his conduct in all ordinary
situations. The faults of the Prior Anselm, though they led him into
grievous error, and even cruelty, were perhaps rather those of his age
and profession; his virtues were his own.

"These things done," said the King, "and the lands I have mentioned
secured by my gift to this monastery, you are of opinion, father, that
I stand as much in the good graces of our Holy Mother Church as to term
myself her dutiful son?"

"Surely, my liege," said the prior; "would to God that all her children
brought to the efficacious sacrament of confession as deep a sense of
their errors, and as much will to make amends for them. But I speak
these comforting words, my liege, not to Robert King of Scotland, but
