have drawn out all her soul from her breast and given it to him,
exulting in his desire; so wonderfully did love flash forth a sweet
flame from the golden head of Aeson's son; and he captivated her
gleaming eyes; and her heart within grew warm, melting away as the dew
melts away round roses when warmed by the morning's light. And now both
were fixing their eyes on the ground abashed, and again were throwing
glances at each other, smiling with the light of love beneath their
radiant brows. And at last and scarcely then did the maiden greet him:

(ll. 1026-1062) "Take heed now, that I may devise help for thee. When at
thy coming my father has given thee the deadly teeth from the dragon's
jaws for sowing, then watch for the time when the night is parted in
twain, then bathe in the stream of the tireless river, and alone, apart
from others, clad in dusky raiment, dig a rounded pit; and therein slay
a ewe, and sacrifice it whole, heaping high the pyre on the very edge
of the pit. And propitiate only-begotten Hecate, daughter of Perses,
pouring from a goblet the hive-stored labour of bees. And then, when
thou hast heedfully sought the grace of the goddess, retreat from the
pyre; and let neither the sound of feet drive thee to turn back, nor
the baying of hounds, lest haply thou shouldst maim all the rites and
thyself fail to return duly to thy comrades. And at dawn steep this
charm in water, strip, and anoint thy body therewith as with oil; and
in it there will be boundless prowess and mighty strength, and thou wilt
deem thyself a match not for men but for the immortal gods. And
besides, let thy spear and shield and sword be sprinkled. Thereupon the
spear-heads of the earthborn men shall not pierce thee, nor the flame of
the deadly bulls as it rushes forth resistless. But such thou shalt be
not for long, but for that one day; still never flinch from the contest.
And I will tell thee besides of yet another help. As soon as thou hast
yoked the strong oxen, and with thy might and thy prowess hast ploughed
all the stubborn fallow, and now along the furrows the Giants are
springing up, when the serpent's teeth are sown on the dusky clods, if
thou markest them uprising in throngs from the fallow, cast unseen among
them a massy stone; and they over it, like ravening hounds over their
food, will slay one another; and do thou thyself hasten to rush to the
battle-strife, and the fleece thereupon thou shalt bear far away from
Aea; nevertheless, depart wherever thou wilt, or thy pleasure takes
thee, when thou hast gone hence."

(ll. 1063-1068) Thus she spake, and cast her eyes to her feet in
silence, and her cheek, divinely fair, was wet with warm tears as she
sorrowed for that he was about to wander far from her side over the wide
sea: and once again she addressed him face to face with mournful words,
and took his right hand; for now shame had left her eyes:

(ll. 1069-1076) "Remember, if haply thou returnest to thy home, Medea's
name; and so will I remember thine, though thou be far away. And of thy
kindness tell me this, where is thy home, whither wilt thou sail hence
in thy ship over the sea; wilt thou come near wealthy Orchomenus, or
near the Aeaean isle? And tell me of the maiden, whosoever she be that
thou hast named, the far-renowned daughter of Pasiphae, who is kinswoman
to my father."

(ll. 1077-1078) Thus she spake; and over him too, at the tears of the
maiden, stole Love the destroyer, and he thus answered her:

(ll. 1079-1101) "All too surely do I deem that never by night and never
by day will I forget thee if I escape death and indeed make my way in
safety to the Achaean land, and Aeetes set not before us some other
contest worse than this. And if it pleases thee to know about my
fatherland, I will tell it out; for indeed my own heart bids me do
that. There is a land encircled by lofty mountains, rich in sheep and in
pasture, where Prometheus, son of Iapetus, begat goodly Deucalion, who
first founded cities and reared temples to the immortal gods, and first
ruled over men. This land the neighbours who dwell around call Haemonia.
And in it stands Ioleus, my city, and in it many others, where they have
not so much as heard the name of the Aeaean isle; yet there is a story
that Minyas starting thence, Minyas son of Aeolus, built long ago the
city of Orchomenus that borders on the Cadmeians. But why do I tell
thee all this vain talk, of our home and of Minos' daughter, far-famed
Ariadne, by which glorious name they called that lovely maiden of whom
thou askest me? Would that, as Minos then was well inclined to Theseus
for her sake, so may thy father be joined to us in friendship!"

(ll. 1102-1104) Thus he spake, soothing her with gentle converse. But
pangs most bitter stirred her heart and in grief did she address him
with vehement words:

(ll. 1105-1117) "In Hellas, I ween, this is fair to pay heed to
covenants; but Aeetes is not such a man among men as thou sayest was
Pasiphae's husband, Minos; nor can I liken myself to Ariadne; wherefore
speak not of guest-love. But only do thou, when thou hast reached
Iolcus, remember me, and thee even in my parents' despite, will
I remember. And from far off may a rumour come to me or some
messenger-bird, when thou forgettest me; or me, even me, may swift
blasts catch up and bear over the sea hence to Iolcus, that so I may
cast reproaches in thy face and remind thee that it was by my good will
thou didst escape. May I then be seated in thy halls, an unexpected
guest!"

(ll. 1118-1130) Thus she spake with piteous tears falling down her
cheeks, and to her Jason replied: "Let the empty blasts wander at will,
lady, and the messenger-bird, for vain is thy talk. But if thou comest
to those abodes and to the land of Hellas, honoured and reverenced shalt
thou be by women and men; and they shall worship thee even as a goddess,
for that by thy counsel their sons came home again, their brothers
and kinsmen and stalwart husbands were saved from calamity. And in our
bridal chamber shalt thou prepare our couch; and nothing shall come
between our love till the doom of death fold us round."

(ll. 1131-1136) Thus he spake; and her soul melted within her to hear
his words; nevertheless she shuddered to behold the deeds of destruction
to come. Poor wretch! Not long was she destined to refuse a home in
Hellas. For thus Hera devised it, that Aeaean Medea might come to Ioleus
for a bane to Pelias, forsaking her native land.

(ll. 1137-1145) And now her handmaids, glancing at them from a distance,
were grieving in silence; and the time of day required that the maiden
should return home to her mother's side. But she thought not yet of
departing, for her soul delighted both in his beauty and in his winsome
words, but Aeson's son took heed, and spake at last, though late: "It
is time to depart, lest the sunlight sink before we know it, and some
stranger notice all; but again will we come and meet here."

(ll. 1146-1162) So did they two make trial of one another thus far with
gentle words; and thereafter parted. Jason hastened to return in joyous
mood to his comrades and the ship, she to her handmaids; and they all
together came near to meet her, but she marked them not at all as they
thronged around. For her soul had soared aloft amid the clouds. And her
feet of their own accord mounted the swift chariot, and with one hand
she took the reins, and with the other the whip of cunning workmanship,
to drive the mules; and they rushed hasting to the city and the palace.
And when she was come Chalciope in grief for her sons questioned her;
but Medea, distraught by swiftly-changing thoughts, neither heard her
words nor was eager to speak in answer to her questions. But she sat
upon a low stool at the foot of her couch, bending down, her cheek
leaning on her left hand, and her eyes were wet with tears as she
pondered what an evil deed she had taken part in by her counsels.

(ll. 1163-1190) Now when Aeson's son had joined his comrades again in
the spot where he had left them when he departed, he set out to go with
them, telling them all the story, to the gathering of the heroes; and
together they approached the ship. And when they saw Jason they embraced
him and questioned him. And he told to all the counsels of the maiden
and showed the dread charm; but Idas alone of his comrades sat apart
biting down his wrath; and the rest joyous in heart, at the hour
when the darkness of night stayed them, peacefully took thought for
themselves. But at daybreak they sent two men to go to Aeetes and
ask for the seed, first Telamon himself, dear to Ares, and with him
Aethalides, Hermes' famous son. So they went and made no vain journey;
but when they came, lordly Aeetes gave them for the contest the fell
teeth of the Aonian dragon which Cadmus found in Ogygian Thebes when
he came seeking for Europa and there slew the--warder of the spring of
Ares. There he settled by the guidance of the heifer whom Apollo by his
prophetic word granted him to lead him on his way. But the teeth the
Tritonian goddess tore away from the dragon's jaws and bestowed as a
gift upon Aeetes and the slayer. And Agenor's son, Cadmus, sowed them on
the Aonian plains and founded an earthborn people of all who were left
from the spear when Ares did the reaping; and the teeth Aeetes then
readily gave to be borne to the ship, for he deemed not that Jason would
bring the contest to an end, even though he should cast the yoke upon
the oxen.

(ll. 1191-1224) Far away in the west the sun was sailing beneath the
dark earth, beyond the furthest hills of the Aethiopians; and Night was
laying the yoke upon her steeds; and the heroes were preparing their
beds by the hawsers. But Jason, as soon as the stars of Heliee, the
bright-gleaming bear, had set, and the air had all grown still under
heaven, went to a desert spot, like some stealthy thief, with all that
was needful; for beforehand in the daytime had he taken thought for
everything; and Argus came bringing a ewe and milk from the flock; and
them he took from the ship. But when the hero saw a place which was
far away from the tread of men, in a clear meadow beneath the open sky,
there first of all he bathed his tender body reverently in the sacred
river; and round him he placed a dark robe, which Hypsipyle of Lemnos
had given him aforetime, a memorial of many a loving embrace. Then he
dug a pit in the ground of a cubit's depth and heaped up billets of
wood, and over it he cut the throat of the sheep, and duly placed the
carcase above; and he kindled the logs placing fire beneath, and poured
over them mingled libations, calling on Hecate Brimo to aid him in the
contests. And when he had called on her he drew back; and she heard him,
the dread goddess, from the uttermost depths and came to the sacrifice
of Aeson's son; and round her horrible serpents twined themselves among
the oak boughs; and there was a gleam of countless torches; and sharply
howled around her the hounds of hell. All the meadows trembled at her
step; and the nymphs that haunt the marsh and the river shrieked, all
who dance round that mead of Amarantian Phasis. And fear seized Aeson's
son, but not even so did he turn round as his feet bore him forth, till
he came back to his comrades; and now early dawn arose and shed her
light above snowy Caucasus.

(ll. 1225-1245) Then Aeetes arrayed his breast in the stiff corslet
which Ares gave him when he had slain Phlegraean Mimas with his own
hands; and upon his head he placed a golden helmet with four plumes,
gleaming like the sun's round light when he first rises from Ocean.
And he wielded his shield of many hides, and his spear, terrible,
resistless; none of the heroes could have withstood its shock now that
they had left behind Heracles far away, who alone could have met it in
battle. For the king his well-fashioned chariot of swift steeds was held
near at hand by Phaethon, for him to mount; and he mounted, and held the
reins in his hands. Then from the city he drove along the broad highway,
that he might be present at the contest; and with him a countless
multitude rushed forth. And as Poseidon rides, mounted in his chariot,
to the Isthmian contest or to Taenarus, or to Lerna's water, or through
the grove of Hyantian Onchestus, and thereafter passes even to Calaureia
with his steeds, and the Haemonian rock, or well-wooded Geraestus; even
so was Aeetes, lord of the Colchians, to behold.

(ll. 1246-1277) Meanwhile, prompted by Medea, Jason steeped the charm in
water and sprinkled with it his shield and sturdy spear, and sword; and
his comrades round him made proof of his weapons with might and main,
but could not bend that spear even a little, but it remained firm in
their stalwart hands unbroken as before. But in furious rage with them
Idas, Aphareus' son, with his great sword hewed at the spear near the
butt, and the edge leapt back repelled by the shock, like a hammer
from the anvil; and the heroes shouted with joy for their hope in the
contest. And then he sprinkled his body, and terrible prowess entered
into him, unspeakable, dauntless; and his hands on both sides thrilled
vigorously as they swelled with strength. And as when a warlike steed
eager for the fight neighs and beats the ground with his hoof, while
rejoicing he lifts his neck on high with ears erect; in such wise did
Aeson's son rejoice in the strength of his limbs. And often hither
and thither did he leap high in air tossing in his hands his shield of
bronze and ashen spear. Thou wouldst say that wintry lightning flashing
from the gloomy sky kept on darting forth from the clouds what time they
bring with them their blackest rainstorm. Not long after that were the
heroes to hold back from the contests; but sitting in rows on their
benches they sped swiftly on to the plain of Ares. And it lay in
front of them on the opposite side of the city, as far off as is the
turning-post that a chariot must reach from the starting-point, when the
kinsmen of a dead king appoint funeral games for footmen and horsemen.
And they found Aeetes and the tribes of the Colchians; these were
stationed on the Caucasian heights, but the king by the winding brink of
the river.

(ll. 1278-1325) Now Aeson's son, as soon as his comrades had made the
hawsers fast, leapt from the ship, and with spear and shield came forth
to the contest; and at the same time he took the gleaming helmet of
bronze filled with sharp teeth, and his sword girt round his shoulders,
his body stripped, in somewise resembling Ares and in somewise Apollo
of the golden sword. And gazing over the field he saw the bulls' yoke
of bronze and near it the plough, all of one piece, of stubborn adamant.
Then he came near, and fixed his sturdy spear upright on its butt, and
taking his helmet, off leant it against the spear. And he went forward
with shield alone to examine the countless tracks of the bulls, and
they from some unseen lair beneath the earth, where was their strong
steading, wrapt in murky smoke, both rushed out together, breathing
forth flaming fire. And sore afraid were the heroes at the sight. But
Jason, setting wide his feet, withstood their onset, as in the sea a
rocky reef withstands the waves tossed by the countless blasts. Then in
front of him he held his shield; and both the bulls with loud bellowing
attacked him with their mighty horns; nor did they stir him a jot by
their onset. And as when through the holes of the furnace the armourers'
bellows anon gleam brightly, kindling the ravening flame, and anon cease
from blowing, and a terrible roar rises from the fire when it darts up
from below; so the bulls roared, breathing forth swift flame from
their mouths, while the consuming heat played round him, smiting like
lightning; but the maiden's charms protected him. Then grasping the tip
of the horn of the right-hand bull, he dragged it mightily with all his
strength to bring it near the yoke of bronze, and forced it down on to
its knees, suddenly striking with his foot the foot of bronze. So also
he threw the other bull on to its knees as it rushed upon him, and smote
it down with one blow. And throwing to the ground his broad shield, he
held them both down where they had fallen on their fore-knees, as
he strode from side to side, now here, now there, and rushed swiftly
through the flame. But Aeetes marvelled at the hero's might. And
meantime the sons of Tyndareus for long since had it been thus ordained
for them--near at hand gave him the yoke from the ground to cast round
them. Then tightly did he bind their necks; and lifting the pole of
bronze between them, he fastened it to the yoke by its golden tip. So
the twin heroes started back from the fire to the ship. But Jason took
up again his shield and cast it on his back behind him, and grasped
the strong helmet filled with sharp teeth, and his resistless spear,
wherewith, like some ploughman with a Pelasgian goad, he pricked the
bulls beneath, striking their flanks; and very firmly did he guide the
well fitted plough handle, fashioned of adamant.

(ll. 1326-1339) The bulls meantime raged exceedingly, breathing forth
furious flame of fire; and their breath rose up like the roar of
blustering winds, in fear of which above all seafaring men furl their
large sail. But not long after that they moved on at the bidding of the
spear; and behind them the rugged fallow was broken up, cloven by the
might of the bulls and the sturdy ploughman. Then terribly groaned the
clods withal along the furrows of the plough as they were rent, each a
man's burden; and Jason followed, pressing down the cornfield with firm
foot; and far from him he ever sowed the teeth along the clods as each
was ploughed, turning his head back for fear lest the deadly crop
of earthborn men should rise against him first; and the bulls toiled
onwards treading with their hoofs of bronze.

(ll. 1340-1407) But when the third part of the day was still left as
it wanes from dawn, and wearied labourers call for the sweet hour of
unyoking to come to them straightway, then the fallow was ploughed by
the tireless ploughman, four plough-gates though it was; and he loosed
the plough from the oxen. Them he scared in flight towards the plain;
but he went back again to the ship, while he still saw the furrows free
of the earthborn men. And all round his comrades heartened him with
their shouts. And in the helmet he drew from the river's stream and
quenched his thirst with the water. Then he bent his knees till they
grew supple, and filled his mighty heart with courage, raging like a
boar, when it sharpens its teeth against the hunters, while from its
wrathful mouth plenteous foam drips to the ground. By now the earthborn
men were springing up over all the field; and the plot of Ares, the
death-dealer, bristled with sturdy shields and double-pointed spears and
shining helmets; and the gleam reached Olympus from beneath, flashing
through the air. And as when abundant snow has fallen on the earth and
the storm blasts have dispersed the wintry clouds under the murky night,
and all the hosts of the stars appear shining through the gloom; so did
those warriors shine springing up above the earth. But Jason bethought
him of the counsels of Medea full of craft, and seized from the plain
a huge round boulder, a terrible quoit of Ares Enyalius; four stalwart
youths could not have raised it from the ground even a little. Taking
it in his hands he threw it with a rush far away into their midst; and
himself crouched unseen behind his shield, with full confidence. And the
Colchians gave a loud cry, like the roar of the sea when it beats upon
sharp crags; and speechless amazement seized Aeetes at the rush of the
sturdy quoit. And the Earthborn, like fleet-footed hounds, leaped upon
one another and slew with loud yells; and on earth their mother they
fell beneath their own spears, likes pines or oaks, which storms of wind
beat down. And even as a fiery star leaps from heaven, trailing a furrow
of light, a portent to men, whoever see it darting with a gleam through
the dusky sky; in such wise did Aeson's son rush upon the earthborn men,
and he drew from the sheath his bare sword, and smote here and there,
mowing them down, many on the belly and side, half risen to the air--and
some that had risen as far as the shoulders--and some just standing
upright, and others even now rushing to battle. And as when a fight is
stirred up concerning boundaries, and a husbandman, in fear lest they
should ravage his fields, seizes in his hand a curved sickle, newly
sharpened, and hastily cuts the unripe crop, and waits not for it to be
parched in due season by the beams of the sun; so at that time did Jason
cut down the crop of the Earthborn; and the furrows were filled with
blood, as the channels of a spring with water. And they fell, some on
their faces biting the rough clod of earth with their teeth, some on
their backs, and others on their hands and sides, like to sea-monsters
to behold. And many, smitten before raising their feet from the earth,
bowed down as far to the ground as they had risen to the air, and rested
there with the damp of death on their brows. Even so, I ween, when Zeus
has sent a measureless rain, new planted orchard-shoots droop to the
ground, cut off by the root the toil of gardening men; but heaviness
of heart and deadly anguish come to the owner of the farm, who planted
them; so at that time did bitter grief come upon the heart of King
Aeetes. And he went back to the city among the Colchians, pondering how
he might most quickly oppose the heroes. And the day died, and Jason's
contest was ended.




BOOK IV

(ll. 1-5) Now do thou thyself, goddess Muse, daughter of Zeus, tell of
the labour and wiles of the Colchian maiden. Surely my soul within me
wavers with speechless amazement as I ponder whether I should call it
the lovesick grief of mad passion or a panic flight, through which she
left the Colchian folk.

(ll. 6-10) Aeetes all night long with the bravest captains of his people
was devising in his halls sheer treachery against the heroes, with
fierce wrath in his heart at the issue of the hateful contest; nor did
he deem at all that these things were being accomplished without the
knowledge of his daughters.

(ll. 11-29) But into Medea's heart Hera cast most grievous fear; and
she trembled like a nimble fawn whom the baying of hounds hath terrified
amid the thicket of a deep copse. For at once she truly forboded that
the aid she had given was not hidden from her father, and that quickly
she would fill up the cup of woe. And she dreaded the guilty knowledge
of her handmaids; her eyes were filled with fire and her ears rung with
a terrible cry. Often did she clutch at her throat, and often did she
drag out her hair by the roots and groan in wretched despair. There on
that very day the maiden would have tasted the drugs and perished and so
have made void the purposes of Hera, had not the goddess driven her, all
bewildered, to flee with the sons of Phrixus; and her fluttering soul
within her was comforted; and then she poured from her bosom all the
drugs back again into the casket. Then she kissed her bed, and the
folding-doors on both sides, and stroked the walls, and tearing away
in her hands a long tress of hair, she left it in the chamber for her
mother, a memorial of her maidenhood, and thus lamented with passionate
voice:

(ll. 30-33) "I go, leaving this long tress here in my stead, O mother
mine; take this farewell from me as I go far hence; farewell Chalciope,
and all my home. Would that the sea, stranger, had dashed thee to
pieces, ere thou camest to the Colchian land!"

(ll. 34-56) Thus she spake, and from her eyes shed copious tears. And
as a bondmaid steals away from a wealthy house, whom fate has lately
severed from her native land, nor yet has she made trial of grievous
toil, but still unschooled to misery and shrinking in terror from
slavish tasks, goes about beneath the cruel hands of a mistress; even
so the lovely maiden rushed forth from her home. But to her the bolts of
the doors gave way self-moved, leaping backwards at the swift strains of
her magic song. And with bare feet she sped along the narrow paths, with
her left hand holding her robe over her brow to veil her face and fair
cheeks, and with her right lifting up the hem of her tunic. Quickly
along the dark track, outside the towers of the spacious city, did
she come in fear; nor did any of the warders note her, but she sped on
unseen by them. Thence she was minded to go to the temple; for well she
knew the way, having often aforetime wandered there in quest of corpses
and noxious roots of the earth, as a sorceress is wont to do; and her
soul fluttered with quivering fear. And the Titanian goddess, the moon,
rising from a far land, beheld her as she fled distraught, and fiercely
exulted over her, and thus spake to her own heart:

(ll. 57-65) "Not I alone then stray to the Latinian cave, nor do I alone
burn with love for fair Endymion; oft times with thoughts of love have I
been driven away by thy crafty spells, in order that in the darkness
of night thou mightest work thy sorcery at ease, even the deeds dear to
thee. And now thou thyself too hast part in a like mad passion; and some
god of affection has given thee Jason to be thy grievous woe. Well, go
on, and steel thy heart, wise though thou be, to take up thy burden of
pain, fraught with many sighs."

(ll. 66-82) Thus spake the goddess; but swiftly the maiden's feet bore
her, hasting on. And gladly did she gain the high-bank of the river and
beheld on the opposite side the gleam of fire, which all night long the
heroes were kindling in joy at the contest's issue. Then through the
gloom, with clear-pealing voice from across the stream, she called on
Phrontis, the youngest of Phrixus' sons, and he with his brothers and
Aeson's son recognised the maiden's voice; and in silence his comrades
wondered when they knew that it was so in truth. Thrice she called, and
thrice at the bidding of the company Phrontis called out in reply; and
meantime the heroes were rowing with swift-moving oars in search of her.
Not yet were they casting the ship's hawsers upon the opposite bank,
when Jason with light feet leapt to land from the deck above, and after
him Phrontis and Argus, sons of Phrixus, leapt to the ground; and she,
clasping their knees with both hands, thus addressed them:

(ll. 83-91) "Save me, the hapless one, my friends, from Aeetes, and
yourselves too, for all is brought to light, nor doth any remedy come.
But let us flee upon the ship, before the king mounts his swift chariot.
And I will lull to sleep the guardian serpent and give you the fleece of
gold; but do thou, stranger, amid thy comrades make the gods witness
of the vows thou hast taken on thyself for my sake; and now that I have
fled far from my country, make me not a mark for blame and dishonour for
want of kinsmen."

(ll. 92-98) She spake in anguish; but greatly did the heart of Aeson's
son rejoice, and at once, as she fell at his knees, he raised her gently
and embraced her, and spake words of comfort: "Lady, let Zeus of Olympus
himself be witness to my oath, and Hera, queen of marriage, bride of
Zeus, that I will set thee in my halls my own wedded wife, when we have
reached the land of Hellas on our return."

(ll. 99-108) Thus he spake, and straightway clasped her right hand in
his; and she bade them row the swift ship to the sacred grove near at
hand, in order that, while it was still night, they might seize and
carry off the fleece against the will of Aeetes. Word and deed were one
to the eager crew. For they took her on board, and straightway thrust
the ship from shore; and loud was the din as the chieftains strained
at their oars, but she, starting back, held out her hands in despair
towards the shore. But Jason spoke cheering words and restrained her
grief.

(ll. 109-122) Now at the hour when men have cast sleep from their
eyes~huntsmen, who, trusting to their bounds, never slumber away the
end of night, but avoid the light of dawn lest, smiting with its white
beams, it efface the track and scent of the quarry--then did Aeson's son
and the maiden step forth from the ship over a grassy spot, the "Ram's
couch" as men call it, where it first bent its wearied knees in rest,
bearing on its back the Minyan son of Athamas. And close by, all
smirched with soot, was the base of the altar, which the Aeolid Phrixus
once set up to Zeus, the alder of fugitives, when he sacrificed the
golden wonder at the bidding of Hermes who graciously met him on the
way. There by the counsels of Argus the chieftains put them ashore.

(ll. 123-161) And they two by the pathway came to the sacred grove,
seeking the huge oak tree on which was hung the fleece, like to a cloud
that blushes red with the fiery beams of the rising sun. But right in
front the serpent with his keen sleepless eyes saw them coming, and
stretched out his long neck and hissed in awful wise; and all round the
long banks of the river echoed and the boundless grove. Those heard
it who dwelt in the Colchian land very far from Titanian Aea, near the
outfall of Lycus, the river which parts from loud-roaring Araxes and
blends his sacred stream with Phasis, and they twain flow on together in
one and pour their waters into the Caucasian Sea. And through fear young
mothers awoke, and round their new-born babes, who were sleeping in
their arms, threw their hands in agony, for the small limbs started at
that hiss. And as when above a pile of smouldering wood countless eddies
of smoke roll up mingled with soot, and one ever springs up quickly
after another, rising aloft from beneath in wavering wreaths; so at that
time did that monster roll his countless coils covered with hard dry
scales. And as he writhed, the maiden came before his eyes, with sweet
voice calling to her aid sleep, highest of gods, to charm the monster;
and she cried to the queen of the underworld, the night-wanderer, to be
propitious to her enterprise. And Aeson's son followed in fear, but the
serpent, already charmed by her song, was relaxing the long ridge of
his giant spine, and lengthening out his myriad coils, like a dark wave,
dumb and noiseless, rolling over a sluggish sea; but still he raised
aloft his grisly head, eager to enclose them both in his murderous
jaws. But she with a newly cut spray of juniper, dipping and drawing
untempered charms from her mystic brew, sprinkled his eyes, while she
chanted her song; and all around the potent scent of the charm cast
sleep; and on the very spot he let his jaw sink down; and far behind
through the wood with its many trees were those countless coils
stretched out.

Hereupon Jason snatched the golden fleece from the oak, at the maiden
bidding; and she, standing firm, smeared with the charm the monster's
head, till Jason himself bade her turn back towards their ship, and she
left the grove of Ares, dusky with shade. And as a maiden catches on her
finely wrought robe the gleam of the moon at the full, as it rises above
her high-roofed chamber; and her heart rejoices as she beholds the fair
ray; so at that time did Jason uplift the mighty fleece in his hands;
and from the shimmering of the flocks of wool there settled on his fair
cheeks and brow a red flush like a flame. And great as is the hide of a
yearling ox or stag, which huntsmen call a brocket, so great in extent
was the fleece all golden above. Heavy it was, thickly clustered with
flocks; and as he moved along, even beneath his feet the sheen rose up
from the earth. And he strode on now with the fleece covering his left
shoulder from the height of his neck to his feet, and now again he
gathered it up in his hands; for he feared exceedingly, lest some god or
man should meet him and deprive him thereof.

(ll. 183-189) Dawn was spreading over the earth when they reached the
throng of heroes; and the youths marvelled to behold the mighty fleece,
which gleamed like the lightning of Zeus. And each one started up eager
to touch it and clasp it in his hands. But the son of Aeson restrained
them all, and threw over it a mantle newly-woven; and he led the maiden
to the stern and seated her there, and spake to them all as follows:

(ll. 190-205) "No longer now, my friends, forbear to return to your
fatherland. For now the task for which we dared this grievous voyage,
toiling with bitter sorrow of heart, has been lightly fulfilled by the
maiden's counsels. Her--for such is her will--I will bring home to be my
wedded wife; do ye preserve her, the glorious saviour of all Achaea and
of yourselves. For of a surety, I ween, will Aeetes come with his host
to bar our passage from the river into the sea. But do some of you toil
at the oars in turn, sitting man by man; and half of you raise your
shields of oxhide, a ready defence against the darts of the enemy, and
guard our return. And now in our hands we hold the fate of our children
and dear country and of our aged parents; and on our venture all Hellas
depends, to reap either the shame of failure or great renown."

(ll. 206-211) Thus he spake, and donned his armour of war; and they
cried aloud, wondrously eager. And he drew his sword from the sheath
and cut the hawsers at the stern. And near the maiden he took his stand
ready armed by the steersman Aneaeus, and with their rowing the ship
sped on as they strained desperately to drive her clear of the river.

(ll. 212-235) By this time Medea's love and deeds had become known
to haughty Aeetes and to all the Colchians. And they thronged to the
assembly in arms; and countless as the waves of the stormy sea when they
rise crested by the wind, or as the leaves that fall to the ground from
the wood with its myriad branches in the month when the leaves fall--who
could reckon their tale?--so they in countless number poured along the
banks of the river shouting in frenzy; and in his shapely chariot Aeetes
shone forth above all with his steeds, the gift of Helios, swift as the
blasts of the wind. In his left hand he raised his curved shield, and in
his right a huge pine-torch, and near him in front stood up his mighty
spear. And Apsyrtus held in his hands the reins of the steeds. But
already the ship was cleaving the sea before her, urged on by stalwart
oarsmen, and the stream of the mighty river rushing down. But the king
in grievous anguish lifted his hands and called on Helios and Zeus
to bear witness to their evil deeds; and terrible threats he uttered
against all his people, that unless they should with their own hands
seize the maiden, either on the land or still finding the ship on the
swell of the open sea, and bring her back, that so he might satisfy his
eager soul with vengeance for all those deeds, at the cost of their own
lives they should learn and abide all his rage and revenge.

(ll. 236-240) Thus spake Aeetes; and on that same day the Colchians
launched their ships and cast the tackle on board, and on that same day
sailed forth on the sea; thou wouldst not say so mighty a host was a
fleet of ships, but that a countless flight of birds, swarm on swarm,
was clamouring over the sea.

(ll. 241-252) Swiftly the wind blew, as the goddess Hera planned, so
that most quickly Aeaean Medea might reach the Pelasgian land, a bane to
the house of Pelias, and on the third morn they bound the ship's stern
cables to the shores of the Paphlagonians, at the mouth of the river
Halys. For Medea bade them land and propitiate Hecate with sacrifice.
Now all that the maiden prepared for offering the sacrifice may no man
know, and may my soul not urge me to sing thereof. Awe restrains my
lips, yet from that time the altar which the heroes raised on the beach
to the goddess remains till now, a sight to men of a later day.

(ll. 253-256) And straightway Aeson's son and the rest of the heroes
bethought them of Phineus, how that he had said that their course from
Aea should be different, but to all alike his meaning was dim. Then
Argus spake, and they eagerly hearkened:

(ll. 257-293) "We go to Orchomenus, whither that unerring seer, whom
ye met aforetime, foretold your voyage. For there is another course,
signified by those priests of the immortal gods, who have sprung from
Tritonian Thebes. As yet all the stars that wheel in the heaven were
not, nor yet, though one should inquire, could aught be heard of the
sacred race of the Danai. Apidanean Arcadians alone existed, Arcadians
who lived even before the moon, it is said, eating acorns on the hills;
nor at that time was the Pelasgian land ruled by the glorious sons of
Deucalion, in the days when Egypt, mother of men of an older time, was
called the fertile Morning-land, and the river fair-flowing Triton, by
which all the Morning-land is watered; and never does the rain from Zeus
moisten the earth; but from the flooding of the river abundant crops
spring up. From this land, it is said, a king [1401] made his way all
round through the whole of Europe and Asia, trusting in the might and
strength and courage of his people; and countless cities did he found
wherever he came, whereof some are still inhabited and some not; many
an age hath passed since then. But Aea abides unshaken even now and the
sons of those men whom that king settled to dwell in Aea. They preserve
the writings of their fathers, graven on pillars, whereon are marked
all the ways and the limits of sea and land as ye journey on all
sides round. There is a river, the uttermost horn of Ocean, broad and
exceeding deep, that a merchant ship may traverse; they call it Ister
and have marked it far off; and for a while it cleaves the boundless
tilth alone in one stream; for beyond the blasts of the north wind, far
off in the Rhipaean mountains, its springs burst forth with a roar.
But when it enters the boundaries of the Thracians and Scythians, here,
