  And their trust is in cable and cordage,
      too weak in the power of the blast,
  And frail are the links of the bridge
     whereby unto Hellas they passed.

  Therefore my gloom-wrapped heart
    is rent with sorrow
    For what may hap to-morrow!
  Alack, for all the Persian armament--
   Alack, lest there be sent
  Dread news of desolation, Susa's land
    Bereft, forlorn, unmanned--
  Lest the grey Kissian fortress echo back
    The wail, _Alack, Alack_!
  The sound of women's shriek, who wail and mourn,
    With fine-spun raiment torn!
  The charioteers went forth nor come again,
    And all the marching men
  Even as a swarm of bees have flown afar,
    Drawn by the king to war--
  Crossing the sea-bridge, linked from side to side,
    That doth the waves divide:
  And the soft bridal couch of bygone years
    Is now bedewed with tears,
  Each princess, clad in garments delicate,
    Wails for her widowed fate--

  _Alas my gallant bridegroom, lost and gone,
    And I am left alone_!

  But now, ye warders of the state,
  Here, in this hall of old renown,
  Behoves that we deliberate
  In counsel deep and wise debate,
    For need is surely shown!
  How fareth he, Darius' child,
  The Persian king, from Perseus styled?

  Comes triumph to the eastern bow,
  Or hath the lance-point conquered now?
                                                [_Enter_ ATOSSA.
  See, yonder comes the mother-queen,
  Light of our eyes, in godlike sheen,
  The royal mother of the king!--
  Fall we before her! well it were
  That, all as one, we sue to her,
  And round her footsteps cling!

  Queen, among deep-girded Persian dames thou highest and most royal,
  Hoary mother, thou, of Xerxes, and Darius' wife of old!
  To godlike sire, and godlike son, we bow us and are loyal--
  Unless, on us, an adverse tide of destiny has rolled!

ATOSSA

  Therefore come I forth to you, from chambers decked and golden,
    Where long ago Darius laid his head, with me beside,
  And my heart is torn with anguish, and with terror am I holden,
    And I plead unto your friendship and I bid you to my side.

  Darius, in the old time, by aid of some Immortal,
    Raised up the stately fabric, our wealth of long-ago:
  But I tremble lest it totter down, and ruin porch and portal,
    And the whirling dust of downfall rise above its overthrow!

  Therefore a dread unspeakable within me never slumbers, Saying,
    _Honour not the gauds of wealth if men have ceased to grow,
  Nor deem that men, apart from wealth,
       can find their strength in numbers_--
    We shudder for our light and king, though we have gold enow!

  _No light there is, in any house, save presence of the master_--
    So runs the saw, ye aged men! and truth it says indeed--
  On you I call, the wise and true, to ward us from disaster,
    For all my hope is fixed on you, to prop us in our need!

CHORUS

  Queen-Mother of the Persian land, to thy commandment bowing,
    Whate'er thou wilt, in word or deed, we follow to fulfil--
  Not twice we need thine high behest, our faith and duty knowing,
    In council and in act alike, thy loyal servants still!

ATOSSA

  Long while by various visions of the night
  Am I beset, since to Ionian lands
  With marshalled host my son went forth to war.
  Yet never saw I presage so distinct
  As in the night now passed.--Attend my tale!--
  A dream I had: two women nobly clad
  Came to my sight, one robed in Persian dress,
  The other vested in the Dorian garb,
  And both right stately and more tall by far
  Than women of to-day, and beautiful
  Beyond disparagement, and sisters sprung
  Both of one race, but, by their natal lot,
  One born in Hellas, one in Eastern land.
  These, as it seemed unto my watching eyes,
  Roused each the other to a mutual feud:
  The which my son perceiving set himself
  To check and soothe their struggle, and anon
  Yoked them and set the collars on their necks;
  And one, the Ionian, proud in this array,
  Paced in high quietude, and lent her mouth,
  Obedient, to the guidance of the rein.
  But restively the other strove, and broke
  The fittings of the car, and plunged away
  With mouth un-bitted: o'er the broken yoke
  My son was hurled, and lo! Darius stood
  In lamentation o'er his fallen child.
  Him Xerxes saw, and rent his robe in grief.

  Such was my vision of the night now past;
  But when, arising, I had dipped my hand
  In the fair lustral stream, I drew towards
  The altar, in the act of sacrifice,
  Having in mind to offer, as their due,
  The sacred meal-cake to the averting powers,
  Lords of the rite that banisheth ill dreams.
  When lo! I saw an eagle fleeing fast
  To Phoebus' shrine--O friends, I stayed my steps,
  Too scared to speak! for, close upon his flight,
  A little falcon dashed in winged pursuit,
  Plucking with claws the eagle's head, while he
  Could only crouch and cower and yield himself.
  Scared was I by that sight, and eke to you
  No less a terror must it be to hear!
  For mark this well--if Xerxes have prevailed,
  He shall come back the wonder of the world:
  If not, still none can call him to account--
  So he but live, he liveth Persia's King!

CHORUS

  Queen, it stands not with my purpose to abet these fears of thine,
  Nor to speak with glazing comfort! nay, betake thee to the shrine!
  If thy dream foretold disaster, sue to gods to bar its way,
  And, for thyself, son, state, and friends, to bring fair fate
       to-day.
  Next, unto Earth and to the Dead be due libation poured,
  And by thee let Darius' soul be wistfully implored--
  _I saw thee, lord, in last night's dream, a phantom from the grave,
  I pray thee, lord, from earth beneath come forth to help and save!
  To me and to thy son send up the bliss of triumph now,
  And hold the gloomy fates of ill, dim in the dark below_!
  Such be thy words! my inner heart good tidings doth foretell,
  And that fair fate will spring thereof, if wisdom guide us well.

ATOSSA

  Loyal thou that first hast read this dream, this vision of the
       night,
  With loyalty to me, the queen--be then thy presage right!
  And therefore, as thy bidding is, what time I pass within
  To dedicate these offerings, new prayers I will begin,
  Alike to gods and the great dead who loved our lineage well.
  Yet one more word--say, in what realm do the Athenians dwell?

CHORUS

  Far hence, even where, in evening land, goes down our Lord the Sun.

ATOSSA

  Say, had my son so keen desire, that region to o'errun?

CHORUS

  Yea--if she fell, the rest of Greece were subject to our sway!

ATOSSA

  Hath she so great predominance, such legions in array?

CHORUS

  Ay--such a host as smote us sore upon an earlier day.

ATOSSA

  And what hath she, besides her men? enow of wealth in store?

CHORUS

  A mine of treasure in the earth, a fount of silver ore!

ATOSSA

  Is it in skill of bow and shaft that Athens' men excel?

CHORUS

  Nay, they bear bucklers in the fight,
    and thrust the spear-point well.

ATOSSA

  And who is shepherd of their host and holds them in command?

CHORUS

  To no man do they bow as slaves, nor own a master's hand.

ATOSSA

  How should they bide our brunt of war, the East upon the West?

CHORUS

  That could Darius' valiant horde in days of yore attest!

ATOSSA

  A boding word, to us who bore the men now far away!

CHORUS

  Nay--as I deem, the very truth will dawn on us to-day.
  A Persian by his garb and speed, a courier draws anear--
  He bringeth news, of good or ill, for Persia's land to hear.
                                          [_Enter_ A MESSENGER.
MESSENGER

  O walls and towers of all the Asian realm,
  O Persian land, O treasure-house of gold!
  How, by one stroke, down to destruction, down,
  Hath sunk our pride, and all the flower of war
  That once was Persia's, lieth in the dust!
  Woe on the man who first announceth woe--
  Yet must I all the tale of death unroll!
  Hark to me, Persians! Persia's host lies low.

CHORUS

  O ruin manifold, and woe, and fear!
  Let the wild tears run down, for the great doom is here!

MESSENGER

  This blow hath fallen, to the utterance, And I, past hope, behold
my safe return!

CHORUS

  Too long, alack, too long this life of mine,
  That in mine age I see this sudden woe condign!

MESSENGER

  As one who saw, by no loose rumour led,
  Lords, I would tell what doom was dealt to us.

CHORUS

  Alack, how vainly have they striven!
  Our myriad hordes with shaft and bow
  Went from the Eastland, to lay low
    Hellas, beloved of Heaven!

MESSENGER

  Piled with men dead, yea, miserably slain,
  Is every beach, each reef of Salamis!

CHORUS

  Thou sayest sooth--ah well-a-day!
  Battered amid the waves, and torn,
  On surges hither, thither, borne,
  Dead bodies, bloodstained and forlorn,
  In their long cloaks they toss and stray!

MESSENGER

  Their bows availed not! all have perished, all,
  By charging galleys crushed and whelmed in death.

CHORUS

  Shriek out your sorrow's wistful wail!
    To their untimely doom they went;
  Ill strove they, and to no avail,
    And minished is their armament!

MESSENGER

  Out on thee, hateful name of Salamis,
  Out upon Athens, mournful memory!

CHORUS

  Woe upon this day's evil fame!
    Thou, Athens, art our murderess;
  Alack, full many a Persian dame
    Is left forlorn and husbandless!

ATOSSA

  Mute have I been awhile, and overwrought
  At this great sorrow, for it passeth speech,
  And passeth all desire to ask of it.
  Yet if the gods send evils, men must bear.
                                         (_To the_ MESSENGER)
  Unroll the record! stand composed and tell,
  Although thy heart be groaning inwardly,
  Who hath escaped, and, of our leaders, whom
  Have we to weep? what chieftains in the van
  Stood, sank, and died and left us leaderless?

MESSENGER

  Xerxes himself survives and sees the day.

ATOSSA

  Then to my line thy word renews the dawn
  And golden dayspring after gloom of night!

MESSENGER

  But the brave marshal of ten thousand horse,
  Artembares, is tossed and flung in death
  Along the rugged rocks Silenian.
  And Dadaces no longer leads his troop,
  But, smitten by the spear, from off the prow
  Hath lightly leaped to death; and Tenagon,
  In true descent a Bactrian nobly born,
  Drifts by the sea-lashed reefs of Salamis,
  The isle of Ajax. Gone Lilaeus too,
  Gone are Arsames and Argestes! all,
  Around the islet where the sea-doves breed,
  Dashed their defeated heads on iron rocks;
  Arcteus, who dwelt beside the founts of Nile,
  Adeues, Pheresseues, and with them
  Pharnuchus, from one galley's deck went down.
  Matallus, too, of Chrysa, lord and king
  Of myriad hordes, who led unto the fight
  Three times ten thousand swarthy cavaliers,
  Fell, with his swarthy and abundant beard
  Incarnadined to red, a crimson stain
  Outrivalling the purple of the sea!
  There Magian Arabus and Artames
  Of Bactra perished--taking up, alike,
  In yonder stony land their long sojourn.
  Amistris too, and he whose strenuous spear
  Was foremost in the fight, Amphistreus fell,
  And gallant Ariomardus, by whose death
  Broods sorrow upon Sardis: Mysia mourns
  For Seisames, and Tharubis lies low--
  Commander, he, of five times fifty ships,
  Born in Lyrnessus: his heroic form
  Is low in death, ungraced with sepulchre.
  Dead too is he, the lord of courage high,
  Cilicia's marshal, brave Syennesis,
  Than whom none dealt more carnage on the foe,
  Nor perished by a more heroic end.
  So fell the brave: so speak I of their doom,
  Summing in brief the fate of myriads!

ATOSSA

  Ah well-a-day! these crowning woes I hear,
  The shame of Persia and her shrieks of dole!
  But yet renew the tale, repeat thy words,
  Tell o'er the count of those Hellenic ships,
  And how they ventured with their beaked prows
  To charge upon the Persian armament.

MESSENGER

  Know, if mere count of ships could win the day,
  The Persians had prevailed. The Greeks, in sooth,
  Had but three hundred galleys at the most,
  And other ten, select and separate.
  But--I am witness--Xerxes held command
  Of full a thousand keels, and, those apart,
  Two hundred more, and seven, for speed renowned!--
  So stands the reckoning, and who shall dare
  To say we Persians had the lesser host?

ATOSSA

  Nay, we were worsted by an unseen power
  Who swayed the balance downward to our doom!

MESSENGER

  In ward of heaven doth Pallas' city stand.

ATOSSA

