     All on the fallen leaves so brown.

 "Good morrow, good brothers," said bold Robin
 Hood,
 "And what make you in the good greenwood,
     Singing hey down, ho down, down, derry down!
 Now give me, I pray you, wine and food;
 For none can I find in the good greenwood,
     All on the fallen leaves so brown."

 "Good brother," they said, "we would give you full fain,
 But we have no more than enough for twain,
     Singing, hey down, ho down, down, derry down."
 "Then give me some money," said bold Robin Hood,
 "For none can I find in the good greenwood,
 All on the fallen leaves so brown."

 "No money have we, good brother," said they:
 "Then," said he, "we three for money will pray:
     Singing, hey down, ho down, down, derry down:
 And whatever shall come at the end of our prayer,
 We three holy friars will piously share,
     All on the fallen leaves so brown."

 "We will not pray with thee, good brother, God wot:
 For truly, good brother, thou pleasest us not,
     Singing hey down, ho down, down, derry down:"
 Then up they both started from Robin to run,
 But down on their knees Robin pulled them each one,
     All on the fallen leaves so brown.

 The grey friars prayed with a doleful face,
 But bold Robin prayed with a right merry grace,
     Singing, hey down, ho down, down, derry down:
 And when they had prayed, their portmanteau he took,
 And from it a hundred good angels he shook,
     All on the fallen leaves so brown.

 "The saints," said bold Robin, "have hearkened  our prayer,
 And here's a good angel apiece for your share:
 If more you would have, you must win ere you wear:
     Singing hey down, ho down, down, derry down:"
 Then he blew his good horn with a musical cheer,
 And fifty green bowmen came trooping full near,
 And away the grey friars they bounded like deer,
     All on the fallen leaves so brown.




CHAPTER XIII

      What can a young lassie, what shall a young lassie,
      What can a young lassie do wi'an auld man?
      --BURNS.


"Here is but five shillings and a ring," said Little John, "and the
young man has spoken true."

"Then," said Robin to the stranger, "if want of money be the cause
of your melancholy, speak. Little John is my treasurer, and he shall
disburse to you."

"It is, and it is not," said the stranger; "it is, because, had I not
wanted money I had never lost my love; it is not, because, now that I
have lost her, money would come too late to regain her."

"In what way have you lost her?" said Robin: "let us clearly know that
she is past regaining, before we give up our wishes to restore her to
you."

"She is to be married this day," said the stranger, "and perhaps is
married by this, to a rich old knight; and yesterday I knew it not."

"What is your name?" said Robin.

"Allen," said the stranger.

"And where is the marriage to take place, Allen?" said Robin.

"At Edwinstow church," said Allen, "by the bishop of Nottingham."

"I know that bishop," said Robin; "he dined with me a month since, and
paid three hundred pounds for his dinner. He has a good ear and loves
music. The friar sang to him to some tune. Give me my harper's cloak,
and I will play a part at this wedding.

"These are dangerous times, Robin," said Marian, "for playing pranks out
of the forest."

"Fear not," said Robin; "Edwinstow lies not Nottingham-ward, and I will
take my precautions."

Robin put on his harper's cloak, while Little John painted his eyebrows
and cheeks, tipped his nose with red, and tied him on a comely beard.
Marian confessed, that had she not been present at the metamorphosis,
she should not have known her own true Robin. Robin took his harp and
went to the wedding.

Robin found the bishop and his train in the church porch, impatiently
expecting the arrival of the bride and bridegroom. The clerk was
observing to the bishop that the knight was somewhat gouty, and that
the necessity of walking the last quarter of a mile from the road to the
churchyard probably detained the lively bridegroom rather longer than
had been calculated upon.

"Oh! by my fey," said the music-loving bishop, "here comes a harper in
the nick of time, and now I care not how long they tarry. Ho! honest
friend, are you come to play at the wedding?"

"I am come to play anywhere," answered Robin, "where I can get a cup of
sack; for which I will sing the praise of the donor in lofty verse, and
emblazon him with any virtue which he may wish to have the credit of
possessing, without the trouble of practising.

"A most courtly harper," said the bishop; "I will fill thee with sack; I
will make thee a walking butt of sack, if thou wilt delight my ears with
thy melodies."

"That will I," said Robin; "in what branch of my art shall I exert my
faculty? I am passing well in all, from the anthem to the glee, and from
the dirge to the coranto."

"It would be idle," said the bishop, "to give thee sack for playing me
anthems, seeing that I myself do receive sack for hearing them sung.
Therefore, as the occasion is festive, thou shalt play me a coranto."

Robin struck up and played away merrily, the bishop all the while in
great delight, noddling his head, and beating time with his foot, till
the bride and bridegroom appeared. The bridegroom was richly apparelled,
and came slowly and painfully forward, hobbling and leering, and pursing
up his mouth into a smile of resolute defiance to the gout, and of
tender complacency towards his lady love, who, shining like gold at the
old knight's expense, followed slowly between her father and mother,
her cheeks pale, her head drooping, her steps faltering, and her eyes
reddened with tears.

Robin stopped his minstrelsy, and said to the bishop, "This seems to me
an unfit match."

"What do you say, rascal?" said the old knight, hobbling up to him.

"I say," said Robin, "this seems to me an unfit match. What, in the
devil's name, can you want with a young wife, who have one foot in
flannels and the other in the grave?"

"What is that to thee, sirrah varlet?" said the old knight; "stand away
from the porch, or I will fracture thy sconce with my cane."

"I will not stand away from the porch," said Robin, "unless the bride
bid me, and tell me that you are her own true love."

"Speak," said the bride's father, in a severe tone, and with a look of
significant menace. The girl looked alternately at her father and Robin.
She attempted to speak, but her voice failed in the effort, and she
burst into tears.

"Here is lawful cause and just impediment," said Robin, "and I forbid
the banns."

"Who are you, villain?" said the old knight, stamping his sound foot
with rage.

"I am the Roman law," said Robin, "which says that there shall not be
more than ten years between a man and his wife; and here are five times
ten: and so says the law of nature."

"Honest harper," said the bishop, "you are somewhat over-officious here,
and less courtly than I deemed you. If you love sack, forbear; for this
course will never bring you a drop. As to your Roman law, and your law
of nature, what right have they to say any thing which the law of Holy
Writ says not?"

"The law of Holy Writ does say it," said Robin; "I expound it so to say;
and I will produce sixty commentators to establish my exposition."

And so saying, he produced a horn from beneath his cloak, and blew three
blasts, and threescore bowmen in green came leaping from the bushes and
trees; and young Allen was the first among them to give Robin his sword,
while Friar Tuck and Little John marched up to the altar. Robin stripped
the bishop and clerk of their robes, and put them on the friar and
Little John; and Allen advanced to take the hand of the bride. Her
cheeks grew red and her eyes grew bright, as she locked her hand in her
lover's, and tripped lightly with him into the church.

"This marriage will not stand," said the bishop, "for they have not been
thrice asked in church."

"We will ask them seven times," said Little John, "lest three should not
suffice."

"And in the meantime," said Robin, "the knight and the bishop shall
dance to my harping."

So Robin sat in the church porch and played away merrily, while his
foresters formed a ring, in the centre of which the knight and bishop
danced with exemplary alacrity; and if they relaxed their exertions,
Scarlet gently touched them up with the point of an arrow.

The knight grimaced ruefully, and begged Robin to think of his gout.

"So I do," said Robin; "this is the true antipodagron: you shall dance
the gout away, and be thankful to me while you live. I told you," he
added to the bishop, "I would play at this wedding; but you did not tell
me that you would dance at it. The next couple you marry, think of the
Roman law."

The bishop was too much out of breath to reply; and now the young couple
issued from church, and the bride having made a farewell obeisance to
her parents, they departed together with the foresters, the parents
storming, the attendants laughing, the bishop puffing and blowing, and
the knight rubbing his gouty foot, and uttering doleful lamentations for
the gold and jewels with which he had so unwittingly adorned and cowered
the bride.




CHAPTER XIV

      As ye came from the holy land
          Of blessed Walsinghame,
      Oh met ye not with my true love,
          As by the way ye came?

      --Old Ballad.


In pursuance of the arrangement recorded in the twelfth chapter, the
baron, Robin, and Marian disguised themselves as pilgrims returned from
Palestine, and travelling from the sea-coast of Hampshire to their home
in Northumberland. By dint of staff and cockle-shell, sandal and scrip,
they proceeded in safety the greater part of the way (for Robin had many
sly inns and resting-places between Barnsdale and Sherwood), and were
already on the borders of Yorkshire, when, one evening, they passed
within view of a castle, where they saw a lady standing on a turret,
and surveying the whole extent of the valley through which they were
passing. A servant came running from the castle, and delivered to them
a message from his lady, who was sick with expectation of news from her
lord in the Holy Land, and entreated them to come to her, that she might
question them concerning him. This was an awkward occurrence: but there
was no presence for refusal, and they followed the servant into the
castle. The baron, who had been in Palestine in his youth, undertook to
be spokesman on the occasion, and to relate his own adventures to
the lady as having happened to the lord in question. This preparation
enabled him to be so minute and circumstantial in his detail, and so
coherent in his replies to her questions, that the lady fell implicitly
into the delusion, and was delighted to find that her lord was alive and
in health, and in high favour with the king, and performing prodigies
of valour in the name of his lady, whose miniature he always wore in his
bosom. The baron guessed at this circumstance from the customs of that
age, and happened to be in the right.

"This miniature," added the baron, "I have had the felicity to see, and
should have known you by it among a million." The baron was a little
embarrassed by some questions of the lady concerning her lord's personal
appearance; but Robin came to his aid, observing a picture suspended
opposite to him on the wall, which he made a bold conjecture to be that
of the lord in question; and making a calculation of the influences of
time and war, which he weighed with a comparison of the lady's age,
he gave a description of her lord sufficiently like the picture in its
groundwork to be a true resemblance, and sufficiently differing from
it in circumstances to be more an original than a copy. The lady was
completely deceived, and entreated them to partake her hospitality for
the night; but this they deemed it prudent to decline, and with many
humble thanks for her kindness, and representations of the necessity of
not delaying their homeward course, they proceeded on their way.

As they passed over the drawbridge, they met Sir Ralph Montfaucon and
his squire, who were wandering in quest of Marian, and were entering
to claim that hospitality which the pilgrims had declined. Their
countenances struck Sir Ralph with a kind of imperfect recognition,
which would never have been matured, but that the eyes of Marian, as
she passed him, encountered his, and the images of those stars of beauty
continued involuntarily twinkling in his sensorium to the exclusion of
all other ideas, till memory, love, and hope concurred with imagination
to furnish a probable reason for their haunting him so pertinaciously.
Those eyes, he thought, were certainly the eyes of Matilda Fitzwater;
and if the eyes were hers, it was extremely probable, if not logically
consecutive, that the rest of the body they belonged to was hers also.
Now, if it were really Matilda Fitzwater, who were her two companions?
The baron? Aye, and the elder pilgrim was something like him. And the
earl of Huntingdon? Very probably. The earl and the baron might be good
friends again, now that they were both in disgrace together. While he
was revolving these cogitations, he was introduced to the lady, and
after claiming and receiving the promise of hospitality, he inquired
what she knew of the pilgrims who had just departed? The lady told him
they were newly returned from Palestine, having been long in the Holy
Land. The knight expressed some scepticism on this point. The lady
replied, that they had given her so minute a detail of her lord's
proceedings, and so accurate a description of his person, that she could
not be deceived in them. This staggered the knight's confidence in
his own penetration; and if it had not been a heresy in knighthood to
suppose for a moment that there could be in rerum natura such another
pair of eyes as those of his mistress, he would have acquiesced
implicitly in the lady's judgment. But while the lady and the knight
were conversing, the warder blew his bugle-horn, and presently entered
a confidential messenger from Palestine, who gave her to understand
that her lord was well; but entered into a detail of his adventures
most completely at variance with the baron's narrative, to which not
the correspondence of a single incident gave the remotest colouring of
similarity. It now became manifest that the pilgrims were not true
men; and Sir Ralph Montfaucon sate down to supper with his head full
of cogitations, which we shall leave him to chew and digest with his
pheasant and canary.

Meanwhile our three pilgrims proceeded on their way. The evening set in
black and lowering, when Robin turned aside from the main track, to seek
an asylum for the night, along a narrow way that led between rocky and
woody hills. A peasant observed the pilgrims as they entered that narrow
pass, and called after them: "Whither go you, my masters? there are
rogues in that direction."

"Can you show us a direction," said Robin, "in which there are none? If
so we will take it in preference." The peasant grinned, and walked away
whistling.

The pass widened as they advanced, and the woods grew thicker and darker
around them. Their path wound along the slope of a woody declivity,
which rose high above them in a thick rampart of foliage, and descended
almost precipitously to the bed of a small river, which they heard
dashing in its rocky channel, and saw its white foam gleaming at
intervals in the last faint glimmerings of twilight. In a short time all
was dark, and the rising voice of the wind foretold a coming storm. They
turned a point of the valley, and saw a light below them in the depth
of the hollow, shining through a cottage-casement and dancing in its
reflection on the restless stream. Robin blew his horn, which was
answered from below. The cottage door opened: a boy came forth with a
torch, ascended the steep, showed tokens of great delight at meeting
with Robin, and lighted them down a flight of steps rudely cut in the
rock, and over a series of rugged stepping-stones, that crossed
the channel of the river. They entered the cottage, which exhibited
neatness, comfort, and plenty, being amply enriched with pots, pans,
and pipkins, and adorned with flitches of bacon and sundry similar
ornaments, that gave goodly promise in the firelight that gleamed upon
the rafters. A woman, who seemed just old enough to be the boy's mother,
had thrown down her spinning wheel in her joy at the sound of Robin's
horn, and was bustling with singular alacrity to set forth her festal
ware and prepare an abundant supper. Her features, though not beautiful,
were agreeable and expressive, and were now lighted up with such
manifest joy at the sight of Robin, that Marian could not help feeling a
momentary touch of jealousy, and a half-formed suspicion that Robin had
broken his forest law, and had occasionally gone out of bounds, as other
great men have done upon occasion, in order to reconcile the breach
of the spirit, with the preservation of the letter, of their own
legislation. However, this suspicion, if it could be said to exist in a
mind so generous as Marian's, was very soon dissipated by the entrance
of the woman's husband, who testified as much joy as his wife had done
at the sight of Robin; and in a short time the whole of the party were
amicably seated round a smoking supper of river-fish and wild wood fowl,
on which the baron fell with as much alacrity as if he had been a true
pilgrim from Palestine.

The husband produced some recondite flasks of wine, which were laid by
in a binn consecrated to Robin, whose occasional visits to them in his
wanderings were the festal days of these warm-hearted cottagers, whose
manners showed that they had not been born to this low estate. Their
story had no mystery, and Marian easily collected it from the tenour of
their conversation. The young man had been, like Robin, the victim of an
usurious abbot, and had been outlawed for debt, and his nut-brown maid
had accompanied him to the depths of Sherwood, where they lived an
unholy and illegitimate life, killing the king's deer, and never hearing
mass. In this state, Robin, then earl of Huntingdon, discovered them
in one of his huntings, and gave them aid and protection. When Robin
himself became an outlaw, the necessary qualification or gift of
continency was too hard a law for our lovers to subscribe to; and
as they were thus disqualified for foresters, Robin had found them a
retreat in this romantic and secluded spot. He had done similar service
to other lovers similarly circumstanced, and had disposed them in
various wild scenes which he and his men had discovered in their
flittings from place to place, supplying them with all necessaries and
comforts from the reluctant disgorgings of fat abbots and usurers. The
benefit was in some measure mutual; for these cottages served him as
resting-places in his removals, and enabled him to travel untraced and
unmolested; and in the delight with which he was always received he
found himself even more welcome than he would have been at an inn;
and this is saying very much for gratitude and affection together.
The smiles which surrounded him were of his own creation, and he
participated in the happiness he had bestowed.

The casements began to rattle in the wind, and the rain to beat upon
the windows. The wind swelled to a hurricane, and the rain dashed like
a flood against the glass. The boy retired to his little bed, the wife
trimmed the lamp, the husband heaped logs upon the fire: Robin broached
another flask; and Marian filled the baron's cup, and sweetened Robin's
by touching its edge with her lips.

"Well," said the baron, "give me a roof over my head, be it never so
humble. Your greenwood canopy is pretty and pleasant in sunshine; but if
I were doomed to live under it, I should wish it were water-tight."

"But," said Robin, "we have tents and caves for foul weather, good store
of wine and venison, and fuel in abundance."

"Ay, but," said the baron, "I like to pull off my boots of a night,
which you foresters seldom do, and to ensconce myself thereafter in
a comfortable bed. Your beech-root is over-hard for a couch, and your
mossy stump is somewhat rough for a bolster."

"Had you not dry leaves," said Robin, "with a bishop's surplice over
them? What would you have softer? And had you not an abbot's travelling
cloak for a coverlet? What would you have warmer?"

"Very true," said the baron, "but that was an indulgence to a guest, and
I dreamed all night of the sheriff of Nottingham. I like to feel myself
safe," he added, stretching out his legs to the fire, and throwing
himself back in his chair with the air of a man determined to be
comfortable. "I like to feel myself safe," said the baron.

At that moment the woman caught her husband's arm, and all the party
following the direction of her eyes, looked simultaneously to the
window, where they had just time to catch a glimpse of an apparition of
an armed head, with its plumage tossing in the storm, on which the light
shone from within, and which disappeared immediately.




CHAPTER XV


     O knight, thou lack'st a cup of canary.
     When did I see thee so put down?--Twelfth Night.


Several knocks, as from the knuckles of an iron glove, were given to the
door of the cottage, and a voice was heard entreating shelter from the
storm for a traveller who had lost his way. Robin arose and went to the
door.

"What are you?" said Robin.

"A soldier," replied the voice: "an unfortunate adherent of Longchamp,
flying the vengeance of Prince John."

"Are you alone?" said Robin.

"Yes," said the voice: "it is a dreadful night. Hospitable cottagers,
pray give me admittance. I would not have asked it but for the storm. I
would have kept my watch in the woods."

"That I believe," said Robin. "You did not reckon on the storm when you
turned into this pass. Do you know there are rogues this way?"

"I do," said the voice.

"So do I," said Robin.

A pause ensued, during which Robin listening attentively caught a faint
sound of whispering.

"You are not alone," said Robin. "Who are your companions?"

