"Retire, woman?" said Boabdil, sullenly.

"I will not, save by force! I resisted a fiercer soul than thine when I
saved thee from thy father."

"Remain, then, if thou wilt, and learn how kings can punish traitors.
Mesnour, admit the hero of Granada." Amine had vanished. Boabdil seated
himself on the cushions his face calm but pale. The queen stood erect
at a little distance, her arms folded on her breast, and her aspect knit
and resolute. In a few moments Muza entered alone. He approached the
king with the profound salutation of oriental obeisance; and then stood
before him with downcast eyes, in an attitude from which respect could
not divorce a natural dignity and pride of mien.

"Prince," said Boabdil, after a moment's pause, "yestermorn, when I
sent for thee thou didst brave my orders. Even in mine own Alhambra thy
minions broke out in mutiny; they surrounded the fortress in which thou
wert to wait my pleasure; they intercepted, they insulted, they drove
back my guards; they stormed the towers protected by the banner of
thy king. The governor, a coward or a traitor, rendered thee to the
rebellious crowd. Was this all? No, by the Prophet! Thou, by right my
captive, didst leave thy prison but to head mine armies. And this day,
the traitor subject--the secret foe--was the leader of a people who defy
a king. This night thou comest to me unsought. Thou feelest secure from
my just wrath, even in my palace. Thine insolence blinds and betrays
thee. Man, thou art in my power! Ho, there!"

As the king spoke, he rose; and, presently, the arcades at the back of
the pavilion were darkened by long lines of the Ethiopian guard, each of
height which, beside the slight Moorish race, appeared gigantic; stolid
and passionless machines, to execute, without thought, the bloodiest
or the slightest caprice of despotism. There they stood; their silver
breastplates and long earrings contrasting their dusky skins; and
bearing, over their shoulders, immense clubs studded with brazen nails.

A little advanced from the rest, stood the captain, with the fatal
bowstring hanging carelessly on his arm, and his eyes intent to catch
the slightest gesture of the king. "Behold!" said Boabdil to his
prisoner.

"I do; and am prepared for what I have foreseen." The queen grew pale,
but continued silent.

Muza resumed--

"Lord of the faithful!" said he, "if yestermorn I had acted otherwise,
it would have been to the ruin of thy throne and our common race. The
fierce Zegris suspected and learned my capture. They summoned the troops
they delivered me, it is true. At that time had I reasoned with them, it
would have been as drops upon a flame. They were bent on besieging thy
palace, perhaps upon demanding thy abdication. I could not stifle their
fury, but I could direct it. In the moment of passion, I led them from
rebellion against our common king to victory against our common foe.
That duty done, I come unscathed from the sword of the Christian to bare
my neck to the bowstring of my friend. Alone, untracked, unsuspected, I
have entered thy palace to prove to the sovereign of Granada, that
the defendant of his throne is not a rebel to his will. Now summon the
guards--I have done."

"Muza!" said Boabdil, in a softened voice, while he shaded his face with
his hand, "we played together as children, and I have loved thee well:
my kingdom even now, perchance, is passing from me, but I could almost
be reconciled to that loss, if I thought thy loyalty had not left me."

"Dost thou, in truth, suspect the faith of Muza Ben Abil Gazan?" said
the Moorish prince, in a tone of surprise and sorrow. "Unhappy king! I
deemed that my services, and not my defection, made my crime."

"Why do my people hate me? why do my armies menace?" said Boabdil,
evasively; "why should a subject possess that allegiance which a king
cannot obtain?"

"Because," replied Muza, boldly, "the king has delegated to a subject
the command he should himself assume. Oh, Boabdil!" he continued,
passionately--"friend of my boyhood, ere the evil days came upon
us,--gladly would I sink to rest beneath the dark waves of yonder river,
if thy arm and brain would fill up my place amongst the warriors of
Granada. And think not I say this only from our boyish love; think not
I have placed my life in thy hands only from that servile loyalty to a
single man, which the false chivalry of Christendom imposes as a sacred
creed upon its knights and nobles. But I speak and act but from one
principle--to save the religion of, my father and the land of my birth:
for this I have risked my life against the foe; for this I surrender my
life to the sovereign of my country. Granada may yet survive, if monarch
and people unite together. Granada is lost for ever, if her children, at
this fatal hour, are divided against themselves. If, then, I, O Boabdil!
am the true obstacle to thy league with thine own subjects, give me at
once to the bowstring, and my sole prayer shall be for the last remnant
of the Moorish name, and the last monarch of the Moorish dynasty."

"My son, my son! art thou convinced at last?" cried the queen,
struggling with her tears; for she was one who wept easily at heroic
sentiments, but never at the softer sorrows, or from the more womanly
emotions.

Boabdil lifted his head with a vain and momentary attempt at pride;
his eye glanced from his mother to his friend, and his better feelings
gushed upon him with irresistible force; he threw himself into Muza's
arms.

"Forgive me," he said, in broken accents, "forgive me! How could I have
wronged thee thus? Yes," he continued, as he started from the noble
breast on which for a moment he indulged no ungenerous weakness,--"yes,
prince, your example shames, but it fires me. Granada henceforth shall
have two chieftains; and if I be jealous of thee, it shall be from an
emulation thou canst not blame. Guards, retire. Mesnour! ho, Mesnour!
Proclaim at daybreak that I myself will review the troops in the
Vivarrambla. Yet"--and, as he spoke his voice faltered, and his brow
became overcast, "yet stay, seek me thyself at daybreak, and I will give
thee my commands."

"Oh, my son! why hesitate?" cried the queen, "why waver? Prosecute thine
own kingly designs, and--"

"Hush, madam," said Boabdil, regaining his customary cold composure;
"and since you are now satisfied with your son, leave me alone with
Muza."

The queen sighed heavily; but there was something in the calm of Boabdil
which chilled and awed her more than his bursts of passion. She drew her
veil around her, and passed slowly and reluctantly from the chamber.

"Muza," said Boabdil, when alone with the prince, and fixing his large
and thoughtful eyes upon the dark orbs of his companion,--"when, in
our younger days, we conversed together, do you remember how often that
converse turned upon those solemn and mysterious themes to which the
sages of our ancestral land directed their deepest lore; the enigmas
of the stars--the science of fate--the wild searches into the
clouded future, which hides the destines of nations and of men? Thou
rememberest, Muza, that to such studies mine own vicissitudes and
sorrows, even in childhood--the strange fortunes which gave me in my
cradle the epithet of El Zogoybi--the ominous predictions of santons
and astrologers as to the trials of my earthly fate,--all contributed to
incline my soul. Thou didst not despise those earnest musings, nor our
ancestral lore, though, unlike me, ever more inclined to action than
to contemplation, that which thou mightest believe had little influence
upon what thou didst design. With me it hath been otherwise; every event
of life hath conspired to feed my early prepossessions; and, in this
awful crisis of my fate, I have placed myself and my throne rather under
the guardianship of spirits than of men. This alone has reconciled me to
inaction--to the torpor of the Alhambra--to the mutinies of my people.
I have smiled, when foes surround and friends deserted me, secure of
the aid at last--if I bided but the fortunate hour--of the charms of
protecting spirits, and the swords of the invisible creation. Thou
wonderest what this should lead to. Listen! Two nights since (and the
king shuddered) I was with the dead! My father appeared before me--not
as I knew him in life--gaunt and terrible, full of the vigour of health,
and the strength of kingly empire, and of fierce passion--but wan, calm,
shadowy. From lips on which Azrael had set his livid seal, he bade me
beware of thee!"

The king ceased suddenly; and sought to read on the face of Muza the
effect his words produced. But the proud and swarthy features of the
Moor evinced no pang of conscience; a slight smile of pity might have
crossed his lip for a moment, but it vanished ere the king could detect
it. Boabdil continued:

"Under the influence of this warning, I issued the order for thy arrest.
Let this pass--I resume my tale. I attempted to throw myself at the
spectre's feet--it glided from me, motionless and impalpable. I asked
the Dead One if he forgave his unhappy son the sin of rebellion alas!
too well requited even upon earth. And the voice again came forth, and
bade me keep the crown that I had gained, as the sole atonement for the
past. Then again I asked, whether the hour for action had arrived! and
the spectre, while it faded gradually into air, answered, 'No!' 'Oh!'
I exclaimed, 'ere thou leavest me, be one sign accorded me, that I have
not dreamt this vision; and give me, I pray thee, note and warning,
when the evil star of Boabdil shall withhold its influence, and he may
strike, without resistance from the Powers above, for his glory and his
throne.' 'The sign and the warning are bequeathed thee,' answered the
ghostly image. It vanished,--thick darkness fell around; and, when once
more the light of the lamps we bore became visible, behold there stood
before me a skeleton, in the regal robe of the kings of Granada, and
on its grisly head was the imperial diadem. With one hand raised, it
pointed to the opposite wall, wherein burned, like an orb of gloomy
fire, a broad dial-plate, on which were graven these words, BEWARE--FEAR
NOT--ARM! The finger of the dial moved rapidly round, and rested at the
word beware. From that hour to the one in which I last beheld it, it
hath not moved. Muza, the tale is done; wilt thou visit with me this
enchanted chamber, and see if the hour be come?"

"Commander of the faithful," said Muza, "the story is dread and awful.
But pardon thy friend--wert thou alone, or was the santon Almamen thy
companion?"

"Why the question?" said Boabdil, evasively, and slightly colouring.

"I fear his truth," answered Muza; "the Christian king conquers more
foes by craft than force; and his spies are more deadly than his
warriors. Wherefore this caution against me, but (pardon me) for thine
own undoing? Were I a traitor, could Ferdinand himself have endangered
thy crown so imminently as the revenge of the leader of thine own
armies? Why, too, this desire to keep thee inactive? For the brave every
hour hath its chances; but, for us, every hour increases our peril. If
we seize not the present time,--our supplies are cut off,--and famine is
a foe all our valour cannot resist. This dervise--who is he? a stranger,
not of our race and blood. But this morning I found him without the
walls, not far from the Spaniard's camp."

"Ha!" cried the king, quickly, "and what said he?"

"Little, but in hints; sheltering himself, by loose hints, under thy
name."

"He! what dared he own?--Muza, what were those hints?"

The Moor here recounted the interview with Almamen, his detention, his
inactivity in the battle, and his subsequent capture by the Spaniards.
The king listened attentively, and regained his composure.

"It is a strange and awful man," said he after a pause. "Guards and
chains will not detain him. Ere long he will return. But thou, at least,
Muza, are henceforth free, alike from the suspicion of the living
and the warnings of the dead. No, my friend," continued Boabdil, with
generous warmth, "it is better to lose a crown, to lose life itself,
than confidence in a heart like thine. Come, let us inspect this magic
tablet; perchance--and how my heart bounds as I utter the hope!--the
hour may have arrived."




CHAPTER IV. A FULLER VIEW OF THE CHARACTER OF BOABDIL.--MUZA IN THE GARDENS OF HIS
BELOVED.

Muza Ben Abil Gazan returned from his visit to Boabdil with a thoughtful
and depressed spirit. His arguments had failed to induce the king to
disdain the command of the magic dial, which still forbade him to
arm against the invaders; and although the royal favour was no longer
withdrawn from himself, the Moor felt that such favour hung upon a
capricious and uncertain tenure so long as his sovereign was the slave
of superstition or imposture. But that noble warrior, whose character
the adversity of his country had singularly exalted and refined, even
while increasing its natural fierceness, thought little of himself in
comparison with the evils and misfortunes which the king's continued
irresolution must bring upon Granada.

"So brave, and yet so weak," thought he; "so weak, and yet so obstinate;
so wise a reasoner, yet so credulous a dupe! Unhappy Boabdil! the stars,
indeed, seem to fight against thee, and their influences at thy birth
marred all thy gifts and virtues with counteracting infirmity and
error."

Muza,--more perhaps than any subject in Granada,--did justice to the
real character of the king; but even he was unable to penetrate all its
complicated and latent mysteries. Boabdil el Chico was no ordinary man;
his affections were warm and generous, his nature calm and gentle; and,
though early power, and the painful experience of a mutinous people and
ungrateful court, had imparted to that nature an irascibility of temper
and a quickness of suspicion foreign to its earlier soil, he was easily
led back to generosity and justice; and, if warm in resentment, was
magnanimous in forgiveness. Deeply accomplished in all the learning
of his race and time, he was--in books, at least--a philosopher; and,
indeed, his attachment to the abstruser studies was one of the main
causes which unfitted him for his present station. But it was the
circumstances attendant on his birth and childhood that had perverted
his keen and graceful intellect to morbid indulgence in mystic
reveries, and all the doubt, fear, and irresolution of a man who pushes
metaphysics into the supernatural world. Dark prophecies accumulated
omens over his head; men united in considering him born to disastrous
destinies. Whenever he had sought to wrestle against hostile
circumstances, some seemingly accidental cause, sudden and unforeseen,
had blasted the labours of his most vigorous energy,--the fruit of his
most deliberate wisdom. Thus, by degrees a gloomy and despairing cloud
settled over his mind; but, secretly sceptical of the Mohammedan creed,
and too proud and sanguine to resign himself wholly and passively to the
doctrine of inevitable predestination, he sought to contend against
the machinations of hostile demons and boding stars, not by human but
spiritual agencies. Collecting around him the seers and magicians
of orient-fanaticism, he lived in the visions of another world; and,
flattered by the promises of impostors or dreamers, and deceived by his
own subtle and brooding tendencies of mind, it was amongst spells and
cabala that he thought to draw forth the mighty secret which was to free
him from the meshes of the preternatural enemies of his fortune, and
leave him the freedom of other men to wrestle, with equal chances,
against peril and adversities. It was thus, that Almamen had won the
mastery over his mind; and, though upon matters of common and earthly
import, or solid learning, Boabdil could contend with sages, upon those
of superstition he could be fooled by a child. He was, in this, a kind
of Hamlet: formed, under prosperous and serene fortunes, to render
blessings and reap renown; but over whom the chilling shadow of another
world had fallen--whose soul curdled back into itself--whose life had
been separated from that of the herd--whom doubts and awe drew back,
while circumstances impelled onward--whom a supernatural doom invested
with a peculiar philosophy, not of human effect and cause--and who, with
every gift that could ennoble and adorn, was suddenly palsied into that
mortal imbecility, which is almost ever the result of mortal visitings
into the haunted regions of the Ghostly and Unknown. The gloomier
colourings of his mind had been deepened, too, by secret remorse. For
the preservation of his own life, constantly threatened by his unnatural
predecessor, he had been early driven into rebellion against his father.
In age, infirmity, and blindness, that fierce king had been made a
prisoner at Salobrena by his brother, El Zagal, Boabdil's partner in
rebellion; and dying suddenly, El Zagal was suspected of his murder.
Though Boabdil was innocent of such a crime, he felt himself guilty
of the causes which led to it; and a dark memory, resting upon his
conscience, served to augment his superstition and enervate the vigour
of his resolves; for, of all things that make men dreamers, none is so
effectual as remorse operating upon a thoughtful temperament.

Revolving the character of his sovereign, and sadly foreboding the ruin
of his country, the young hero of Granada pursued his way, until his
steps, almost unconsciously, led him towards the abode of Leila. He
scaled the walls of the garden as before--he neared the house. All
was silent and deserted; his signal was unanswered--his murmured song
brought no grateful light to the lattice, no fairy footstep to the
balcony. Dejected, and sad of heart, he retired from the spot; and,
returning home, sought a couch, to which even all the fatigue and
excitement he had undergone, could not win the forgetfulness of slumber.
The mystery that wrapt the maiden of his homage, the rareness of their
interviews, and the wild and poetical romance that made a very principle
of the chivalry of the Spanish Moors, had imparted to Muza's love for
Leila a passionate depth, which, at this day, and in more enervated
climes, is unknown to the Mohammedan lover. His keenest inquiries had
been unable to pierce the secret of her birth and station. Little of the
inmates of that guarded and lonely house was known in the neighbourhood;
the only one ever seen without its walls was an old man of the Jewish
faith, supposed to be a superintendent of the foreign slaves (for no
Mohammedan slave would have been subjected to the insult of submission
to a Jew); and though there were rumours of the vast wealth and gorgeous
luxury within the mansion, it was supposed the abode of some Moorish
emir absent from the city--and the interest of the gossips was at this
time absorbed in more weighty matters than the affairs of a neighbour.
But when, the next eve, and the next, Muza returned to the spot equally
in vain, his impatience and alarm could no longer be restrained; he
resolved to lie in watch by the portals of the house night and day,
until, at least, he could discover some one of the inmates, whom he
could question of his love, and perhaps bribe to his service. As with
this resolution he was hovering round the mansion, he beheld, stealing
from a small door in one of the low wings of the house, a bended and
decrepit form: it supported its steps upon a staff; and, as now entering
the garden, it stooped by the side of a fountain to cull flowers and
herbs by the light of the moon, the Moor almost started to behold a
countenance which resembled that of some ghoul or vampire haunting the
places of the dead. He smiled at his own fear; and, with a quick and
stealthy pace, hastened through the trees, and, gaining the spot where
the old man bent, placed his hand on his shoulder ere his presence was
perceived.

Ximen--for it was he--looked round eagerly, and a faint cry of terror
broke from his lips.

