cavalry regiments of the continental army were led and officered by
gentlemen from the South. The high and haughty courage of the commanders
had communicated itself to the privates, who were men selected with care
and great attention to the service they were intended to perform.

While the British were confined to their empty conquests in the
possession of a few of the larger towns, or marched through counties
that were swept of everything like military supplies, the light troops
of their enemies had the range of the whole interior.

The sufferings of the line of the American army were great beyond
example; but possessing the power, and feeling themselves engaged in a
cause which justified severity, the cavalry officers were vigilant in
providing for their wants, and the horse were well mounted, well fed,
and consequently eminently effective. Perhaps the world could not
furnish more brave, enterprising, and resistless corps of light cavalry,
than a few that were in the continental service at the time of which
we write.

Dunwoodie's men had often tried their prowess against the enemy, and
they now sat panting to be led once more against foes whom they seldom
charged in vain. Their wishes were soon to be gratified; for their
commander had scarcely time to regain his seat in the saddle, before a
body of the enemy came sweeping round the base of the hill, which
intersected the view to the south. A few minutes enabled the major to
distinguish their character. In one troop he saw the green coats of the
Cowboys, and in the other the leathern helmets and wooden saddles of the
yagers. Their numbers were about equal to the body under his
immediate orders.

On reaching the open space near the cottage of Harvey Birch, the enemy
halted and drew up his men in line, evi dently making preparations for
a charge. At this moment a column of foot appeared in the vale, and
pressed forward to the bank of the brook we have already mentioned.

Major Dunwoodie was not less distinguished by coolness and judgment,
than, where occasion offered, by his dauntless intrepidity. He at once
saw his advantage, and determined to profit by it. The column he led
began slowly to retire from the field, when the youthful German, who
commanded the enemy's horse, fearful of missing an easy conquest, gave
the word to charge. Few troops were more hardy than the Cowboys; they
sprang eagerly forward in the pursuit, with a confidence created by the
retiring foe and the column in their rear; the Hessians followed more
slowly, but in better order. The trumpets of the Virginians now sounded
long and lively; they were answered by a strain from the party in ambush
that went to the hearts of their enemies. The column of Dunwoodie
wheeled in perfect order, opened, and, as the word to charge was given,
the troops of Lawton emerged from their cover, with their leader in
advance, waving his saber over his head, and shouting, in a voice that
was heard above the clangor of the martial music.

The charge threatened too much for the refugee troop. They scattered in
every direction, flying from the field as fast as their horses, the
chosen beasts of Westchester, could carry them. Only a few were hurt;
but such as did meet the arms of their avenging countrymen never
survived the blow, to tell who struck it. It was upon the poor vassals
of the German tyrant that the shock fell. Disciplined to the most exact
obedience, these ill-fated men met the charge bravely, but they were
swept before the mettled horses and nervous arms of their antagonists
like chaff before the wind. Many of them were literally ridden down, and
Dunwoodie soon saw the field without an opposing foe. The proximity of
the infantry prevented pursuit, and behind its column the few Hessians
who escaped unhurt sought protection.

The more cunning refugees dispersed in small bands, taking various and
devious routes back to their old station in front of Harlem. Many was
the sufferer, in cattle, furniture, and person, that was created by this
rout; for the dispersion of a troop of Cowboys was only the extension
of an evil.

Such a scene could not be expected to be acted so near them, and the
inmates of the cottage take no interest in the result. In truth, the
feelings it excited pervaded every bosom, from the kitchen to the
parlor. Terror and horror had prevented the ladies from being
spectators, but they did not feel the less. Frances continued lying in
the posture we have mentioned, offering up fervent and incoherent
petitions for the safety of her countrymen, although in her inmost heart
she had personified her nation by the graceful image of Peyton
Dunwoodie. Her aunt and sister were less exclusive in their devotions;
but Sarah began to feel, as the horrors of war were thus brought home to
her senses, less pleasure in her anticipated triumphs.

The inmates of Mr. Wharton's kitchen were four, namely, Caesar and his
spouse, their granddaughter, a jet-black damsel of twenty, and the boy
before alluded to. The blacks were the remnants of a race of negroes
which had been entailed on his estate from Mr. Wharton's maternal
ancestors, who were descended from the early Dutch colonists. Time,
depravity, and death had reduced them to this small number; and the boy,
who was white, had been added by Miss Peyton to the establishment, as an
assistant, to perform the ordinary services of a footman. Caesar, after
first using the precaution to place himself under the cover of an angle
in the wall, for a screen against any roving bullet which might be
traversing the air, became an amused spectator of the skirmish. The
sentinel on the piazza was at the distance of but a few feet from him,
and he entered into the spirit of the chase with all the ardor of a
tried bloodhound. He noticed the approach of the black, and his
judicious position, with a smile of contempt, as he squared himself
towards the enemy, offering his unprotected breast to any dangers which
might come.

After considering the arrangement of Caesar, for a moment, with
ineffable disdain, the dragoon said, with great coolness,--

"You seem very careful of that beautiful person of yours, Mr. Blueskin."

"A bullet hurt a colored man as much as a white," muttered the black,
surlily, casting a glance of much satisfaction at his rampart.

"Suppose I make the experiment," returned the sentinel. As he spoke, he
deliberately drew a pistol from his belt, and leveled it at the black.
Caesar's teeth chattered at the appearance of the dragoon, although he
believed nothing serious was intended. At this moment the column of
Dunwoodie began to retire, and the royal cavalry commenced their charge.

"There, Mister Light-Horseman," said Caesar eagerly, who believed the
Americans were retiring in earnest; "why you rebels don't
fight--see--see how King George's men make Major Dunwoodie run! Good
gentleman, too, but he don't like to fight a rig'lar."

"Damn your regulars," cried the other, fiercely. "Wait a minute,
blackey, and you'll see Captain Jack Lawton come out from behind yonder
hill, and scatter these Cowboys like wild geese who've lost
their leader."

Caesar supposed the party under Lawton to have sought the shelter of the
hill from motives similar to that which had induced him to place the
wall between himself and the battle ground; but the fact soon verified
the trooper's prophecy, and the black witnessed with consternation the
total rout of the royal horse.

The sentinel manifested his exultation at the success of his comrades
with loud shouts, which soon brought his companion, who had been left in
the more immediate charge of Henry Wharton, to the open window of
the parlor.

"See, Tom, see," cried the delighted trooper, "how Captain Lawton makes
that Hessian's leather cap fly; and now the major has killed the
officer's horse--zounds, why didn't he kill the Dutchman and save
the horse?"

A few pistols were discharged at the flying Cowboys, and a spent bullet
broke a pane of glass within a few feet of Caesar. Imitating the posture
of the great tempter of our race, the black sought the protection of the
inside of the building, and immediately ascended to the parlor.

The lawn in front of the Locusts was hidden from the view of the road by
a close line of shrubbery, and the horses of the two dragoons had been
left, linked together, under its shelter, to await the movements of
their masters.

At this moment two Cowboys, who had been cut off from a retreat to their
own party, rode furiously through the gate, with an intention of
escaping to the open wood in the rear of the cottage.

The victorious Americans pressed the retreating Germans until they had
driven them under the protection of the fire of the infantry; and
feeling themselves, in the privacy of the lawn, relieved from any
immediate danger, the predatory warriors yielded to a temptation that
few of the corps were ever known to resist--opportunity and horseflesh.
With a hardihood and presence of mind that could only exist from long
practice in similar scenes, they made towards their intended prizes, by
an almost spontaneous movement. They were busily engaged in separating
the fastenings of the horses, when the trooper on the piazza discharged
his pistols, and rushed, sword in hand, to the rescue.

The entrance of Caesar into the parlor had induced the wary dragoon
within to turn his attention more closely on his prisoner; but this new
interruption drew him again to the window. He threw his body out of the
building, and with dreadful imprecations endeavored, by his threats and
appearance, to frighten the marauders from their prey. The moment was
enticing. Three hundred of his comrades were within a mile of the
cottage; unridden horses were running at large in every direction, and
Henry Wharton seized the unconscious sentinel by his legs, and threw him
headlong into the lawn. Caesar vanished from the room, and drew a bolt
of the outer door.

The fall of the soldier was not great, and recovering his feet, he
turned his fury for a moment on his prisoner. To scale the window in the
face of such an enemy, was, however, impossible, and on trial he found
the main entrance barred.

His comrade now called loudly upon him for aid, and forgetful of
everything else, the discomfited trooper rushed to his assistance. One
horse was instantly liberated, but the other was already fastened to the
saddle of a Cowboy, and the four retired behind the building, cutting
furiously at each other with their sabers, and making the air resound
with their imprecations. Caesar threw the outer door open, and pointing
to the remaining horse, that was quietly biting the faded herbage of the
lawn, he exclaimed,--

"Run--now--run--Massa Harry, run."

"Yes," cried the youth as he vaulted into the saddle, "now, indeed, my
honest fellow, is the time to run." He beckoned hastily to his father,
who stood at the window in speechless anxiety, with his hands extended
towards his child in the attitude of benediction, and adding, "God bless
you, Caesar, salute the girls," he dashed through the gate with the
rapidity of lightning.

The African watched him with anxiety as he gained the highway, saw him
incline to the right, and riding furiously under the brow of some rocks,
which on that side rose perpendicularly, disappear behind a projection,
which soon hid him from view.

The delighted Caesar closed the door, pushing bolt after bolt, and
turning the key until it would turn no more, soliloquizing the whole
time on the happy escape of his young master.

"How well he ride--teach him good deal myself--salute a young
lady--Miss Fanny wouldn't let old colored man kiss a red cheek."

When the fortune of the day was decided, and the time arrived for the
burial of the dead, two Cowboys and a Virginian were found in the rear
of the Locusts, to be included in the number.

Happily for Henry Wharton, the searching eyes of his captors were
examining, through a pocket glass, the column of infantry that still
held its position on the bank of the stream, while the remnants of the
Hessian yagers were seeking its friendly protection. His horse was of
the best blood of Virginia, and carried him with the swiftness of the
wind along the Valley; and the heart of the youth was already beating
tumultuously with pleasure at his deliverance, when a well-known voice
reached his startled ear, crying aloud,--

"Bravely done, captain! Don't spare the whip, and turn to your left
before you cross the brook."

Wharton turned his head in surprise, and saw, sitting on the point of a
jutting rock that commanded a bird's-eye view of the valley, his former
guide, Harvey Birch. His pack, much diminished in size, lay at the feet
of the peddler, who waved his hat to the youth, exultingly, as the
latter flew by him. The English captain took the advice of this
mysterious being, and finding a good road, which led to the highway,
that intersected the valley, turned down its direction, and was soon
opposite to his friends. The next minute he crossed the bridge, and
stopped his charger before his old acquaintance, Colonel Wellmere.

"Captain Wharton!" exclaimed the astonished commander of the English
troops, "dressed in mohair, and mounted on a rebel dragoon horse! Are
you from the clouds in this attire, and in such a style?"

"Thank God!" cried the youth, recovering his breath, "I am safe, and
have escaped from the hands of my enemies; but five minutes since and I
was a prisoner, and threatened with the gallows."

"The gallows, Captain Wharton! surely those traitors to the king would
never dare to commit another murder in cold blood; is it not enough that
they took the life of Andre? Wherefore did they threaten you with a
similar fate?"

"Under the pretense of a similar offense," said the captain, briefly
explaining to the group of listeners the manner of his capture, the
grounds of his personal apprehensions, and the method of his escape. By
the time he had concluded his narration, the fugitive Germans were
collected in the rear of the column of infantry, and Colonel Wellmere
cried aloud,--

"From my soul I congratulate you, my brave friend; mercy is a quality
with which these traitors are unacquainted, and you are doubly fortunate
in escaping from their hands uninjured. Prepare yourself to grant me
your assistance and I will soon afford you a noble revenge."

"I do not think there was danger of personal outrage to any man, Colonel
Wellmere, from a party that Major Dunwoodie commands," returned young
Wharton, with a slight glow on his face. "His character is above the
imputation of such an offense; neither do I think it altogether prudent
to cross this brook into the open plain, in the face of those Virginian
horse, flushed as they must be with the success they have just
obtained."

"Do you call the rout of those irregulars and these sluggish Hessians a
deed to boast of?" said the other with a contemptuous smile. "You speak
of the affair, Captain Wharton, as if your boasted Mr. Dunwoodie, for
major he is none, had discomfited the bodyguards of your king."

"And I must be allowed to say, Colonel Wellmere, that if the bodyguards
of my king were in yon field, they would meet a foe that it would be
dangerous to despise. Sir, my boasted Mr. Dunwoodie is the pride of
Washington's army as a cavalry officer," cried Henry with warmth.

"Dunwoodie, Dunwoodie!" repeated the colonel slowly, "surely I have met
the gentleman before."

"I have been told you once saw him for a moment, at the town residence
of my sisters," replied Wharton, with a lurking smile.

"Ah! I do remember me of such a youth; and does the most potent congress
of these rebellious colonies intrust their soldiers to the leading of
such a warrior!"

"Ask the commander of yon Hessian horse, whether he thinks Major
Dunwoodie worthy of the confidence."

Colonel Wellmere was far from wanting that kind of pride which makes a
man bear himself bravely in the presence of his enemies. He had served
in America a long time, without ever meeting with any but new raised
levies, or the militia of the country. These would sometimes fight, and
that fearlessly, but they as often chose to run away without pulling a
trigger. He was too apt to judge from externals, and thought it
impossible for men whose gaiters were so clean, whose tread so regular,
and who wheeled with so much accuracy, to be beaten. In addition to all
these, they were Englishmen, and their success was certain. Colonel
Wellmere had never been kept much in the field, or these notions, which
he had brought with him from home, and which had been greatly increased
by the vaporing of a garrisoned town, would have long since vanished. He
listened to the warm reply of Captain Wharton with a supercilious smile,
and then inquired,--

"You would not have us retire, sir, before these boasted horsemen,
without doing something that may deprive them of part of the glory which
you appear to think they have gained!"

"I would have you advised, Colonel Wellmere, of the danger you are about
to encounter."

"Danger is but an unseemly word for a soldier," continued the British
commander with a sneer.

"And one as little dreaded by the 60th, as any corps who wear the royal
livery," cried Henry Wharton, fiercely. "Give but the word to charge,
and let our actions speak."

"Now again I know my young friend," cried Wellmere, soothingly; "but if
you have anything to say before we fight, that can in any manner help us
in our attack, we'll listen. You know the force of the rebels; are there
more of them in ambush?"

"Yes," replied the youth, chafing still under the other's sneers, "in
the skirt of this wood on our right are a small party of foot; their
horse are all before you."

"Where they will not continue long," cried Wellmere, turning to the few
officers around him. "Gentlemen, we will cross the stream in column, and
deploy on the plain beyond, or else we shall not be able to entice these
valiant Yankees within the reach of our muskets. Captain Wharton, I
claim your assistance as an aid-de-camp."

The youth shook his head in disapprobation of a movement which his good
sense taught him was rash, but prepared with alacrity to perform his
duty in the impending trial.

During this conversation, which was held at a small distance in advance
of the British column, and in full view of the Americans, Dunwoodie had
been collecting his scattered troops, securing his few prisoners, and
retiring to the ground where he had been posted at the first appearance
of his enemy. Satisfied with the success he had already obtained, and
believing the English too wary to give him an opportunity of harassing
them further, he was about to withdraw the guides; and, leaving a strong
party on the ground to watch the movements of the regulars, to fall back
a few miles, to a favorable place for taking up his quarters for the
night. Captain Lawton was reluctantly listening to the reasoning of his
commander, and had brought out his favorite glass, to see if no opening
could be found for an advantageous attack, when he suddenly exclaimed,--

"How's this! a bluecoat among those scarlet gentry? As I hope to live to
see old Virginia, it is my masquerading friend of the 6oth, the
handsome Captain Wharton, escaped from two of my best men!"

He had not done speaking when the survivor of these heroes joined his
troop, bringing with him his own horse and those of the Cowboys; he
reported the death of his comrade, and the escape of his prisoner. As
the deceased was the immediate sentinel over the person of young
Wharton, and the other was not to be blamed for defending the horses,
which were more particularly under his care, his captain heard him with
uneasiness but without anger.

This intelligence made an entire change in the views of Major Dunwoodie.
He saw at once that his own reputation was involved in the escape of his
prisoner. The order to recall the guides was countermanded, and he now
joined his second in command, watching as eagerly as the impetuous
Lawton himself, for some opening to assail his foe to advantage.

But two hours before, and Dunwoodie had felt the chance which made Henry
Wharton his captive, as the severest blow he had ever sustained. Now he
panted for an opportunity in which, by risking his own life, he might
recapture his friend. All other considerations were lost in the goadings
of a wounded spirit, and he might have soon emulated Lawton in
hardihood, had not Wellmere and his troops at this moment crossed the
brook into the open plain.

"There," cried the delighted captain, as he pointed out the movement
with his finger, "there comes John Bull into the mousetrap, and with
eyes wide open."

"Surely," said Dunwoodie eagerly, "he will not deploy his column on that
flat. Wharton must tell him of the ambush. But if he does--"

"We will not leave him a dozen sound skins in his battalion,"
interrupted the other, springing into his saddle.

The truth was soon apparent; for the English column, after advancing for
a short distance on the level land, deployed with an accuracy that
would have done them honor on a field day in their own Hyde Park.

"Prepare to mount-mount!" cried Dunwoodie; the last word being repeated
by Lawton in a tone that rang in the ears of Caesar, who stood at the
open window of the cottage. The black recoiled in dismay, having lost
all his confidence in Captain Lawton's timidity; for he thought he yet
saw him emerging from his cover and waving his sword on high.

As the British line advanced slowly and in exact order, the guides
opened a galling fire. It began to annoy that part of the royal troops
which was nearest to them. Wellmere listened to the advice of the
veteran, who was next to him in rank, and ordered two companies to
dislodge the American foot from their hiding place. The movement created
a slight confusion; and Dunwoodie seized the opportunity to charge. No
ground could be more favorable for the maneuvers of horse, and the
attack of the Virginians was irresistible. It was aimed chiefly at the
bank opposite to the wood, in order to clear the Americans from the fire
of their friends who were concealed; and it was completely successful.
Wellmere, who was on the left of his line, was overthrown by the
impetuous fury of his assailants. Dunwoodie was in time to save him from
the impending blow of one of his men, and raised him from the ground,
had him placed on a horse, and delivered to the custody of his orderly.
The officer who had suggested the attack upon the guides had been
intrusted with its execution, but the menace was sufficient for these
irregulars. In fact, their duty was performed, and they retired along
the skirt of the wood, with intent to regain their horses, which had
been left under a guard at the upper end of the valley.

The left of the British line was outflanked by the Americans, who
doubled in their rear, and thus made the rout in that quarter total. But
the second in command, perceiving how the battle went, promptly wheeled
his party, and threw in a heavy fire on the dragoons, as they passed
him to the charge; with this party was Henry Wharton, who had
volunteered to assist in dispersing the guides. A ball struck his bridle
arm, and compelled him to change hands. As the dragoons dashed by them,
rending the air with their shouts, and with trumpets sounding a lively
strain, the charger ridden by the youth became ungovernable--he plunged,
reared, and his rider being unable with his wounded arm, to manage the
impatient animal, Henry Wharton found himself, in less than a minute,
unwillingly riding by the side of Captain Lawton. The dragoon
comprehended at a glance the ludicrous situation of his new comrade, but
had only time to cry aloud, before they plunged into the English line,--

"The horse knows the righteous cause better than his rider. Captain
Wharton, you are welcome to the ranks of freedom."

No time was lost, however, by Lawton, after the charge was completed, in
securing his prisoner again; and perceiving him to be hurt, he directed
him to be conveyed to the rear.

The Virginian troopers dealt out their favors, with no gentle hands, on
that part of the royal foot who were thus left in a great measure at
their mercy. Dunwoodie, observing that the remnant of the Hessians had
again ventured on the plain, led on in pursuit, and easily overtaking
their light and half-fed horses, soon destroyed the remainder of the
detachment.

In the meanwhile, great numbers of the English, taking advantage of the
smoke and confusion in the field, were enabled to get in the rear of the
body of their countrymen, which still preserved its order in a line
parallel to the wood, but which had been obliged to hold its fire, from
the fear of injuring friends as well as foes. The fugitives were
directed to form a second line within the wood itself, and under cover
of the trees. This arrangement was not yet completed, when Captain
Lawton called to a youth, who commanded the other troop left with that
part of the force which remained on the ground, and proposed charging
the unbroken line of the British. The proposal was as promptly accepted
as it had been made, and the troops were arrayed for the purpose. The
eagerness of their leader prevented the preparations necessary to insure
success, and the horse, receiving a destructive fire as they advanced,
were thrown into additional confusion. Both Lawton and his more juvenile
comrade fell at this discharge. Fortunately for the credit of the
Virginians, Major Dunwoodie reentered the field at this critical
instant; he saw his troops in disorder; at his feet lay weltering in
blood George Singleton, a youth endeared to him by numberless virtues,
and Lawton was unhorsed and stretched on the plain. The eye of the
youthful warrior flashed fire. Riding between this squadron and the
enemy, in a voice that reached the hearts of his dragoons, he recalled
them to their duty. His presence and word acted like magic. The clamor
of voices ceased; the line was formed promptly and with exactitude; the
charge sounded; and, led on by their commander, the Virginians swept
across the plain with an impetuosity that nothing could withstand, and
the field was instantly cleared of the enemy; those who were not
destroyed sought a shelter in the woods. Dunwoodie slowly withdrew from
the fire of the English who were covered by the trees, and commenced the
painful duty of collecting his dead and wounded.

The sergeant charged with conducting Henry Wharton to a place where he
might procure surgical aid, set about performing his duty with alacrity,
in order to return as soon as possible to the scene of strife. They had
not reached the middle of the plain, before the captain noticed a man
whose appearance and occupation forcibly arrested his attention. His
head was bald and bare, but a well-powdered wig was to be seen,
half-concealed, in the pocket of his breeches. His coat was off, and his
arms were naked to the elbow; blood had disfigured much of his dress,
and his hands, and even face, bore this mark of his profession; in his
mouth was a cigar; in his right hand some instruments of strange
formation, and in his left the remnants of an apple, with which he
occasionally relieved the duty of the before-mentioned cigar. He was
standing, lost in the contemplation of a Hessian, who lay breathless
before him. At a little distance were three or four of the guides,
leaning on their muskets, and straining their eyes in the direction of
the combatants, and at his elbow stood a man who, from the implements in
his hand, seemed an assistant.

"There, sir, is the doctor," said the attendant of Henry very coolly.
"He will patch up your arm in the twinkling of an eye"; and beckoning to
the guides to approach, he whispered and pointed to his prisoner, and
then galloped furiously towards his comrades.

Wharton advanced to the side of this strange figure, and observing
himself to be unnoticed, was about to request his assistance, when the
other broke silence in a soliloquy:--

"Now, I know this man to have been killed by Captain Lawton, as well as
if I had seen him strike the blow. How often have I strove to teach him
the manner in which he can disable his adversary, without destroying
life! It is cruel thus unnecessarily to cut off the human race, and
furthermore, such blows as these render professional assistance
unnecessary; it is in a measure treating the lights of science with
disrespect."

"If, sir, your leisure will admit," said Henry Wharton, "I must beg your
attention to a slight hurt."

"Ah!" cried the other, starting, and examining him from head to foot,
"you are from the field below. Is there much business there, sir?"

"Indeed," answered Henry, accepting the offer of the surgeon to assist
in removing his coat, "'tis a stirring time."

"Stirring!" repeated the surgeon, busily employed with his dressings;
"you give me great pleasure, sir; for so long as they can stir there
must be life; and while there is life, you know, there is hope; but here
my art is of no use. I did put in the brains of one patient, but I
rather think the man must have been dead before I saw him. It is a
curious case, sir; I will take you to see it--only across the fence
there, where you may perceive so many bodies together. Ah! the ball has
glanced around the bone without shattering it; you are fortunate in
falling into the hands of an old practitioner, or you might have lost
this limb."

"Indeed!" said Henry, with a slight uneasiness. "I did not apprehend the
injury to be so serious."

"Oh, the hurt is not bad, but you have such a pretty arm for an
operation; the pleasure of the thing might have tempted a novice."

"The devil!" cried the captain. "Can there be any pleasure in mutilating
a fellow creature?"

"Sir," said the surgeon, with gravity, "a scientific amputation is a
very pretty operation, and doubtless might tempt a younger man, in the
hurry of business, to overlook all the particulars of the case."

Further conversation was interrupted by the appearance of the dragoons,
slowly marching towards their former halting place, and new applications
from the slightly wounded soldiers, who now came riding in, making hasty
demands on the skill of the doctor.

The guides took charge of Wharton, and, with a heavy heart, the young
man retraced his steps to his father's cottage.

The English had lost in the several charges about one third of their
foot, but the remainder were rallied in the wood; and Dunwoodie,
perceiving them to be too strongly posted to assail, had left a strong
party with Captain Lawton, with orders to watch their motions, and to
seize every opportunity to harass them before they reembarked.

Intelligence had reached the major of another party being out, by the
way of the Hudson, and his duty required that he should hold himself in
readiness to defeat the intentions of these also. Captain Lawton
received his orders with strong injunctions to make no assault on the
foe, unless a favorable chance should offer.

The injury received by this officer was in the head, being stunned by a
glancing bullet; and parting with a laughing declaration from the major,
