
  [Illustration: A VIEW OF CONSTANTINOPLE]

THE ROMAN EMPIRE BECOMES CHRISTIAN ABOUT 325 A.D. Constantine was
  the first emperor to become Christian. He was the one who made the Greek
  city Byzantium the capital of the empire and for whom it was renamed
  Constantinople. For a time both the old Roman religion and the Christian
  religion were favored by the emperors, but before the fourth century
  closed the old religion was forbidden. In later days worshipers of the
  Roman gods were mostly country people, called in Latin _pagani_, and
  therefore their religion was called "paganism."

HOW THE CHURCH WAS RULED. One of the reasons why the Christians had
  been successful in their struggle with the Roman emperors was that they
  were united under wise and brave leaders. The Christians in each large
  city were ruled by a bishop, and the bishops of several cities were
  directed by an archbishop. In the western part of the empire the bishop
  of Rome, who was called the pope, was honored as the chief of the
  bishops and archbishops, and the successor of the Apostle Peter. In the
  eastern part the archbishops or patriarchs of Constantinople and
  Alexandria and Jerusalem honored the pope, but claimed to be equal in
  authority with him.

  There were also two kinds of clergy, parish priests and monks. The
  priests were pastors of ordinary parishes, but the monks lived in groups
  in buildings called monasteries. Sometimes their purpose was to dwell
  far from the bustle and wrongs of ordinary life and give themselves to
  prayer and fasting; sometimes they acted as a brotherhood of teachers in
  barbarous communities, teaching the people better methods of farming,
  and carrying the arts of civilized life beyond the borders of
  the empire.


    QUESTIONS

    1. Where did the Jews live in Ancient Times?

    2. Do you remember any of the stories of David?

    3. What finally became of the kingdom over which David ruled?

    4. What era in the history of the world begins with the birth of
    Jesus Christ?

    5. Why did the Romans forbid the Christians to worship? How did the
    Romans punish them? How long after the birth of Christ before the
    emperors allowed the Christians to worship undisturbed?

    [Illustration: A MONASTERY IN THE MIDDLE AGES Abbey of
    Saint-Germain des Pres as it appeared in 1361 with wall, towers, and
    moat or ditch]

    6. What is the name of the first Roman emperor who became a
    Christian? What name was soon given to the worshipers of the old
    Roman gods?

    7. By what titles were the leaders of the Christians named? What two
    kinds of clergy were there?

    _Important date_: 325 A.D., when the Roman Empire became Christian.




CHAPTER X


EMIGRANTS A THOUSAND YEARS AGO

THE MIDDLE AGES. It was more than a thousand years from the time of
  Constantine to the time of Columbus. This period is called "Mediaeval,"
  or the "Middle Ages." During these long centuries the ancient civilized
  world of the Roman Empire was much changed. The Roman or Greek cities on
  the southern shores of the Mediterranean were captured by Arabs or
  Moors. The Moors conquered the larger part of Spain. The eastern lands
  of Palestine and Asia Minor fell into the hands of the Turks. The Turks,
  the Moors, and the Arabs were followers of the "prophet" Mohammed, who
  died in the year 632. The Mohammedans were enemies of the Christians.

WESTERN EUROPE. The other part of the European world was also
  changed. The countries on the shores of the Atlantic were now more
  important than those on the shores of the Mediterranean. The names of
  the different countries were changed. Instead of Gallia or Gaul, there
  was France; instead of Britannia, England; for Hispania, Spain; for
  Germania, Deutschland or Germany. Italy, the center of the old empire,
  was finally divided into several states--city republics like Genoa and
  Venice, provinces ruled by the pope, and other territories ruled by
  dukes, princes, or kings.

FATE OF CIVILIZATION. The most important question to ask is, How
  much of the manner of living or civilization of the Greeks and the
  Romans did the later Europeans still retain? The answer is found in the
  history of the Middle Ages. In this history is also found what men added
  to that which they had learned from the Greeks and the Romans. The
  emigrants to America were to carry with them knowledge which not even
  the wisest men of the ancient world had possessed.

  [Illustration: WALL OF AURELIAN This wall enclosed the ancient
  city of Rome. It was about thirteen miles in circumference, fifty-five
  feet high, and had three hundred towers]

MEDIAEVAL GERMAN EMIGRANTS. The first part of the history of the
  Middle Ages explains how the German peoples from whom most of our
  forefathers were descended began to move from the northern forests
  towards the borders of the Roman Empire. Many thousand men had already
  crossed the Rhine and the Danube to serve in the Roman armies. Sometimes
  an unusually strong and skilful warrior would be made a general. Germans
  had also crossed the Rhine to work as farmers on the estates of the rich
  Gallic nobles. Other Germans, called Goths, worked in Constantinople and
  the cities of the East as masons, porters, and water-carriers. The
  Romans had owned so many slaves that they had lost the habit of work and
  were glad to hire these foreigners.

STORY OF ULFILAS. Many of the Goths who lived north of the Danube
  had forsaken their old gods and become Christians. They were taught by
  Bishop Ulfilas, once a captive among them, afterward a missionary. He
  translated the Bible into the Gothic language, and this translation is
  the most ancient specimen of German that we possess. Many of the other
  German tribes learned about Christianity from the Goths, and although
  they might be enemies of the Roman government, they were not enemies of
  the Church.

THE GOTHS INVADE THE ROMAN EMPIRE. The Roman emperors tried to
  prevent the northern tribes from crossing the frontier in great numbers,
  because, once across, if they did not find work and food, they became
  plunderers. Not many years after Constantine's death, a million Goths
  had passed the Danube and had plundered the country almost to the walls
  of Constantinople. This was not like the invasion of a regular army,
  which comes to fight battles and to arrange terms of peace.

  The Goths, and the Germans who soon followed their example, moved as a
  whole people, with their wives and children, their cattle, and the few
  household goods they owned. Wherever they wished to settle they demanded
  of the Romans one third, sometimes two thirds, of the land. They soon
  learned to be good neighbors of the older inhabitants, although at first
  they were little better than robbers. Alaric, one of the leaders of the
  Goths, led them into Italy and in the year 410 captured Rome. Alaric did
  not injure the buildings much, and he kept his men from robbing the
  churches. Some of the other barbarous tribes who roamed about plundering
  villages and attacking cities did far greater damage. The Roman
  government grew weaker and weaker, until one by one the provinces fell
  into the hands of German kings.

BEGINNINGS OF ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND GERMANY. Britain was attacked by
  the Angles and Saxons from the shores of Germany across the North Sea.
  They drove away the inhabitants or made slaves of
  them and settled upon the lands they had seized. The country was then
  called Angle-land or England, and the people Anglo-Saxons or Englishmen.

  The Roman provinces in Gaul were gradually conquered by the Franks from
  the borders of the Rhine, and they gave the name France to the land.

  At about the same time the other German tribes that had remained in
  Germany united under one king.

THE RESULT OF BARBARIAN ATTACKS. The part of the ancient world
  which lay about Constantinople was less changed than the rest during the
  Middle Ages. The walls of Constantinople were high and thick, and they
  withstood attack after attack until 1453. Within their shelter men
  continued to live much as they had lived in Ancient Times. A few
  delighted to study the writings of the ancient Greeks. In Italy and the
  other countries of western Europe most of the cities were in ruins. The
  ancient baths, amphitheaters, aqueducts, and palaces of Rome crumbled
  and fell. The mediaeval Romans also used huge buildings like the
  Colosseum as quarries of cut stone and burned the marble for lime. This
  was done in every country where Roman buildings existed.

  [Illustration: THE AMPHITHEATER AT ARLES]

  The amphitheater at Arles in southern France had a still stranger
  fortune. It was used at one time as a citadel, at another as a prison
  and gradually became the home of hundreds of the criminals and the poor
  of the city. "Every archway held its nest of human outcasts. From stone
  to stone they cast their rotting beams and plaster and burrowed into the
  very entrails of the enormous building to seek a secure retreat from the
  pursuit of the officers of the law."

  Few persons traveled from Constantinople to Italy or France, and few
  from western Europe visited Constantinople. The men of Italy and France
  and England did not know how to read Greek. Many of them also ceased to
  read the writings of the ancient Romans.

  [Illustration: ST. MARTIN'S CHURCH, CANTERBURY, ENGLAND This
  church is on the site of a chapel built in the sixth century. Its walls
  show some of the bricks of the original chapel]

THE ENGLISH BECOME CHRISTIANS, 597 A.D. Christianity had spread
  throughout the Roman Empire, and it became the religion of all the
  tribes who founded kingdoms of their own upon the ruins of the Empire.
  The Angles and Saxons, when they invaded Britain, were still worshipers
  of the gods Wodan and Thor. They had never learned from the Goths of
  Ulfilas anything about Christianity.

  One day in the slave market at Rome three fair-haired boys were offered
  for sale. Gregory, a noble Roman, who had become a monk and was the
  abbot of his monastery, happened to be passing and asked who they were.
  He was told they were Angles. "Angels," he cried, "yes, they have faces
  like angels, and should become companions of the angels in heaven." When
  this good abbot became pope, he sent missionaries to Angle-land and they
  established themselves at Canterbury.

  [Illustration: GREGORY AND THE LITTLE ENGLISH SLAVES]

MISSIONARIES TO THE GERMANS AND THE SLAVS. The conversion of the
  English helped in the spread of Christianity on the Continent, for
  Boniface, an English monk, was the greatest missionary to the Germans.
  He won thousands from the worship of their ancient gods and founded many
  churches. The Slavs, who lived east of the Germans, were taught by
  missionaries from Constantinople instead of from Rome.

THE EDUCATED MEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES. The missionaries and teachers
  of the Church had been educated like the older Romans. They read Roman
  books, and tried to preserve the knowledge which both Greeks and Romans
  had gathered. Influenced by them, the emigrants and conquerors from the
  north also tried to be like the Romans. Educated men, and especially the
  priests of the Church, used Latin as their language. In this way some
  parts of the old Roman and Greek civilization were preserved, although
  the Roman government had fallen and many beautiful cities were mere
  heaps of ruins.

THE VIKINGS. The emigration of whole peoples from one part of
  Europe to another did not stop when the Roman Empire was overrun. New
  peoples appeared and sought to plunder or crowd out the tribes which had
  already settled within its boundaries and were learning the ways of
  civilization.

  One of these peoples came from the regions now known as Norway, Sweden,
  and Denmark. They were called Danes by the English, and Northmen or
  Normans by other Europeans. They had another name, Vikings, which was
  their word for sea-rovers.

  It was their custom to sail the seas and rivers rather than march on the
  land. They were a hardy and daring people, who liked nothing better than
  to fight and conquer and rob in other countries. There was not a land in
  western Europe, even as far south as Sicily, that they did not visit.
  Wherever they went they plundered and burned and murdered, leaving a
  blackened trail.

THE DANES IN ENGLAND. The Danes ravaged the eastern and southern
  shores of England, and after they were tired of robbery, partly because
  there was little left to take, they began to settle in the land. Alfred,
  the greatest of the early English kings, was driven by them into the
  swamps for a while, but in the year 878 A.D. he conquered an army of
  them in battle and persuaded one of their kings to be baptized as a
  Christian. Alfred was obliged to allow them to keep the eastern portion
  of England, a region called Danelaw, because the law of the Danes was
  obeyed there.

  [Illustration: A VIKING SHIP AT SEA]

THE DANES BECOME NORMANS. No more Danes or Northmen came to trouble
  England for a time, but instead they crossed the Channel to France and
  rowed up the Seine and tried to capture Paris. A few years later a
  Frankish king gave them the city of Rouen, further down the Seine, and
  the region about it which was called Normandy. These Normans also
  accepted Christianity.

THE VIKINGS BECOME DISCOVERERS. Before another hundred years had
  passed the Northmen performed a feat more difficult than sailing up
  rivers and burning towns. They were the first to venture far out of
  sight of land, though their ships were no larger than our fishing boats.
  These bold sailors visited the Orkney and the Shetland Islands, north of
  Scotland, and finally reached Iceland. In Iceland their sheep and cattle
  flourished, and a lively trade in fish, oil, butter, and skins sprang up
  with the old homeland and with the British islands.

  Before long one of the settlers, named Eric the Red, led a colony to
  Greenland, the larger and more desolate island further west. He called
  it Greenland because, he said, men would be more easily persuaded to go
  there if the land had a good name. This was probably in the year 985.

  [Illustration: LEIF ERICSON From the statue in Boston]

DISCOVERY OF VINLAND. Eric had a son, called Leif Ericson, or Leif
  the Lucky, who visited Norway and was well received at the court of King
  Olaf. Not long before missionaries had persuaded Olaf and his people to
  give up their old gods and accept Christianity, and Leif followed their
  example. Leif set out in the early summer of the year 1000 to carry the
  new religion to his father, Eric the Red, to his father's people, and to
  his neighbors. The voyage was a long one, lasting all the summer, for on
  the way his ship was driven out of its course and came upon strange
  lands where wild rice and grape-vines and large trees grew. The milder
  climate and stories of large trees useful for building ships aroused the
  curiosity of the Greenlanders.

  They sent exploring expeditions, and found the coast of North America at
  places which they called Helluland, that is, the land of flat stones;
  Markland, the land of forests; and Vinland, where the grape-vines grow.
  Helluland was probably on the coast of Labrador, Markland somewhere on
  the shores of Newfoundland, and Vinland in Nova Scotia.

THE SETTLEMENT IN VINLAND. Thornfinn Karlsefni, a successful trader
  between Iceland and Greenland, attempted to plant a colony in the new
  lands. Karlsefni and his friends, to the number of one hundred and sixty
  men and several women, set out in 1007 with three or four ships, loaded
  with supplies and many cattle. They built huts and remained three or
  four winters in Vinland, but all trace of any settlement
  disappeared long ago.

  They found, their stories tell us, swarthy, rough-looking Indians, with
  coarse hair, large eyes, and broad cheeks, with whom they traded red
  cloth for furs. Trouble broke out between the Northmen and the Indians,
  who outnumbered them. So many Northmen were killed that the survivors
  became alarmed and returned to Greenland.

  [Illustration: DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN The American lands
  they found are marked with diagonal lines]

VINLAND FORGOTTEN. The voyages to Vinland soon ceased and the
  discoveries of Leif and his followers were only remembered in the songs
  or "sagas" of the people. They thought of Vinland mainly as a land of
  flat stones, great trees, and fierce natives. Nor did the wise men of
  Europe who heard the Northmen's story guess that a New World had been
  discovered. It was probably fortunate that five hundred years were to go
  by before Europeans settled in America, for within that time they were
  to learn a great deal and to find again many things which the Romans had
  left but which in the year 1000 were hidden away, either in the ruins of
  the ancient cities or in libraries and treasure-houses, where few knew
  of them. The more Europeans possessed before they set out, the more
  Americans would have to start with.

  [Illustration: FACSIMILE OF A BIT OF AN OLD SAGA MANUSCRIPT]


    QUESTIONS

    1. What is meant by the "Middle Ages" or the "Mediaeval" period?

    2. Show on the map, what part of the Roman Empire was
    conquered by the Mohammedans.

    3. Mention the Roman names of England, France, Germany, and Spain,
    Why were they changed to what they are now?

    4. What people early in the Middle Ages began to emigrate from their
    homes to the Roman Empire? What did they do for a living?

    5. Where did the Goths live? Who taught them the Christian religion?
    When the Goths entered the Roman Empire what did they ask of the
    inhabitants? Did they destroy much? How many years separated the
    capture of Rome by Alaric from its capture by the Gauls?

    6. What tribes conquered England or Britain? What tribes conquered
    Roman Gaul or France? How long before Constantinople was captured?

    7. What was the effect of these raids and wars upon many cities? Who
    tried to keep fresh the memory of what the Greeks and the Romans had
    done? Who used the language of the Romans?

    8. Tell the story of the way the English became Christians. Who
    taught the Christian religion to many Germans? From what city did
    the Slavs receive missionaries?

    9. What different names are given to the inhabitants of Denmark,
    Norway, and Sweden who became rovers over the seas? Where did they
    make settlements?

    10. Tell the story of how Leif the Lucky discovered America. Why did
    the Northmen leave Vinland?



    EXERCISES

    1. Point out on the map all the places mentioned in this chapter.
