
'Why for yours?' I asked in surprise, for she had stopped in
embarrassment.

'You have told me that your heart is another's.  I may tell you that my
hand is also promised, and that my love has gone with it.'

'May all happiness attend it!' said I.  'But why should this make my
coming unwelcome?'

'That thick English air has dimmed your wits, cousin,' said she, shaking
her stately head at me.  'But I can speak freely now that I know that
this plan would be as hateful to you as to me.  You must know, then,
that if my father could have married us he would have united all claims
to the succession of Grosbois.  Then, come what might--Bourbon or
Buonaparte--nothing could shake his position.'

I thought of the solicitude which he had shown over my toilet in the
morning, his anxiety that I should make a favourable impression, his
displeasure when she had been cold to me, and the smile upon his face
when he had seen us hand in hand.

'I believe you are right!' I cried.

'Right!  Of course I am right!  Look at him watching us now.'

We were walking on the edge of the dried moat, and as I looked up there,
sure enough, was the little yellow face toned towards us in the angle of
one of the windows.  Seeing that I was watching him, he rose and waved
his hand merrily.

'Now you know why he saved your life--since you say that he saved it,'
said she.  'It would suit his plans best that you should marry his
daughter, and so he wished you to live.  But when once he understands
that that is impossible, why then, my poor Cousin Louis, his only way of
guarding against the return of the de Lavals must lie in ensuring that
there are none to return.'

It was those words of hers, coupled with that furtive yellow face still
lurking at the window, which made me realise the imminence of my danger.
No one in France had any reason to take an interest in me.  If I were to
pass away there was no one who could make inquiry--I was absolutely in
his power.  My memory told me what a ruthless and dangerous man it was
with whom I had to deal.

'But,' said I, 'he must have known that your affections were already
engaged.'

'He did,' she answered; 'it was that which made me most uneasy of all.
I was afraid for you and afraid for myself, but, most of all, I was
afraid for Lucien.  No man can stand in the way of his plans.'

'Lucien!  'The name was like a lightning flash upon a dark night.  I had
heard of the vagaries of a woman's love, but was it possible that this
spirited woman loved that poor creature whom I had seen grovelling last
night in a frenzy of fear?  But now I remembered also where I had seen
the name Sibylle.  It was upon the fly-leaf of his book.  'Lucien, from
Sibylle,' was the inscription.  I recalled also that my uncle had said
something to him about his aspirations.

'Lucien is hot-headed, and easily carried away,' said she.  'My father
has seen a great deal of him lately.  They sit for hours in his room,
and Lucien will say nothing of what passes between them.  I fear that
there is something going forward which may lead to evil.  Lucien is a
student rather than a man of the world, but he has strong opinions about
politics.'

I was at my wit's ends what to do, whether to be silent, or to tell her
of the terrible position in which her lover was placed; but, even as I
hesitated, she, with the quick intuition of a woman, read the doubts
which were in my mind.

'You know something of him,' she cried.  'I understood that he had gone
to Paris.  For God's sake tell me what you know about him!'

'His name is Lesage?'

'Yes, yes.  Lucien Lesage.'

'I have--I have seen him,' I stammered.

'You have seen him!  And you only arrived in France last night.
Where did you see him? What has happened to him?'  She gripped me by the
wrist in her anxiety.

It was cruel to tell her, and yet it seemed more cruel still to keep
silent.  I looked round in my bewilderment, and there was my uncle
himself coming along over the close-cropped green lawn.  By his side,
with a merry clashing of steel and jingling of spurs, there walked a
handsome young hussar--the same to whom the charge of the prisoner had
been committed upon the night before.  Sibylle never hesitated for an
instant, but, with a set face and blazing eyes, she swept towards them.

'Father,' said she, 'what have you done with Lucien?'

I saw his impassive face wince for a moment before the passionate hatred
and contempt which he read in her eyes.  'We will discuss this at some
future time,' said he.

'I will know here and now,' she cried.  'What have you done with
Lucien?'

'Gentlemen,' said he, turning to the young hussar and me,' I am sorry
that we should intrude our little domestic differences upon your
attention.  You will, I am sure, make allowances, lieutenant, when I
tell you that your prisoner of last night was a very dear friend of my
daughter's.  Such family considerations do not prevent me from doing my
duty to the Emperor, but they make that duty more painful than it would
otherwise be.'

'You have my sympathy, mademoiselle,' said the young hussar.

It was to him that my cousin had now turned.

'Do I understand that you took him prisoner?' she asked.

'It was unfortunately my duty.'

'From you I will get the truth.  Whither did you take him?'

'To the Emperor's camp.'

'And why?'

'Ah, mademoiselle, it is not for me to go into politics.  My duties are
but to wield a sword, and sit a horse, and obey my orders.  Both these
gentlemen will be my witnesses that I received my instructions from
Colonel Lasalle.'

'But on what charge was he arrested?'

'Tut, tut, child, we have had enough of this!' said my uncle harshly.
'If you insist upon knowing I will tell you once and for all, that
Monsieur Lucien Lesage has been seized for being concerned in a plot
against the life of the Emperor, and that it was my privilege to
denounce the would-be assassin.'

'To denounce him!' cried the girl.  'I know that it was you who set him
on, who encouraged him, who held him to it whenever he tried to draw
back.  Oh, you villain! you villain!  What have I over done, what sin of
my ancestors am I expiating, that I should be compelled to call such a
man Father?'

My uncle shrugged his shoulders as if to say that it was useless to
argue with a woman's tantrums.  The hussar and I made as if we would
stroll away, for it was embarrassing to stand listening to such words,
but in her fury she called to us to stop and be witnesses against him.
Never have I seen such a recklessness of passion as blazed in her dry
wide-opened eyes.

'You have deceived others, but you have never deceived me,' she cried.
'I know you as your own conscience knows you.  You may murder me, as you
murdered my mother before me, but you can never frighten me into being
your accomplice.  You proclaimed yourself a Republican that you might
creep into a house and estate which do not belong to you.  And now you
try to make a friend of Buonaparte by betraying your old associates, who
still trust in you.  And you have sent Lucien to his death!  But I know
your plans, and my Cousin Louis knows them also, and I can assure you
that there is just as much chance of his agreeing to them as there is of
my doing so.  I'd rather lie in my grave than be the wife of any man but
Lucien.'

'If you had seen the pitiful poltroon that he proved himself you would
not say so,' said my uncle coolly.  'You are not yourself at present,
but when you return to your right mind you will be ashamed of having
made this public exposure of your weakness.  And now, lieutenant, you
have something to say.'

'My message was to you, Monsieur de Laval,' said the young hussar,
turning his back contemptuously upon my uncle.  'The Emperor has sent me
to bring you to him at once at the camp at Boulogne.'

My heart leapt at the thought of escaping from my uncle.

'I ask nothing better,' I cried.

'A horse and an escort are waiting at the gates.'

'I am ready to start at this instant.'

'Nay, there can be no such very great hurry,' said my uncle.  'Surely
you will wait for luncheon, Lieutenant Gerard.'

'The Emperor's commissions, sir, are not carried out in such a manner,'
said the young hussar sternly.  'I have already wasted too much time.
We must be upon our way in five minutes.'

My uncle placed his hand upon my arm and led me slowly towards the
gateway, through which my cousin Sibylle had already passed.

'There is one matter that I wish to speak to you about before you go.
Since my time is so short you will forgive me if I introduce it without
preamble.  You have seen your cousin Sibylle, and though her behaviour
this morning is such as to prejudice you against her, yet I can assure
you that she is a very amiable girl.  She spoke just now as if she had
mentioned the plan which I had conceived to you.  I confess to you that
I cannot imagine anything more convenient than that we should unite in
order to settle once for all every question as to which branch of the
family shall hold the estates.'

'Unfortunately,' said I, 'there are objections.'

'And pray what are they?'

'The fact that my cousin's hand, as I have just learned, is promised to
another.'

'That need not hinder us,' said he, with a sour smile; 'I will undertake
that he never claims the promise.'

'I fear that I have the English idea of marriage, that it should go by
love and not by convenience.  But in any case your scheme is out of the
question, for my own affections are pledged to a young lady in England.'

He looked wickedly at me out of the corners of his grey eyes.

'Think well what you are doing, Louis,' said he, in a sibilant whisper
which was as menacing as a serpent's hiss.  'You are deranging my plans,
and that is not done with impunity.'

'It is not a matter in which I have any choice.'

He gripped me by the sleeve, and waved his hand round as Satan may have
done when he showed the kingdoms and principalities.  'Look at the
park,' he cried, 'the fields, the woods.  Look at the old castle in
which your fathers have lived for eight hundred years.  You have but to
say the word and it is all yours once more.'

There flashed up into my memory the little red-brick house at Ashford,
and Eugenie's sweet pale face looking over the laurel bushes which grew
by the window.

'It is impossible!' said I.

There must have been something in my manner which made him comprehend
that it really was so, for his face darkened with anger, and his
persuasion changed in an instant to menace.

'If I had known this they might have done what they wished with you last
night,' said he, 'I would never have put out a finger to save you.'

'I am glad to hear you say so,' I answered, 'for it makes it easier for
me to say that I wish to go my own way, and to have nothing more to do
with you.  What you have just said frees me from the bond of gratitude
which held me back.'

'I have no doubt that you would like to have nothing more to do with
me,' he cried.  'You will wish it more heartily still before you finish.
Very well, sir, go your own way and I will go mine, and we shall see who
comes out the best in the end.'

A group of hussars were standing by their horses' heads in the gateway.
In a few minutes I had packed my scanty possessions, and I was hastening
with them down the corridor when a chill struck suddenly through my
heart at the thought of my cousin Sibylle.  How could I leave her alone
with this grim companion in the old castle?  Had she not herself told me
that her very life might be at stake?  I had stopped in my perplexity,
and suddenly there was a patter of feet, and there she was running
towards me.

'Good-bye, Cousin Louis,' she cried, with outstretched hands.

'I was thinking of you,' said I; 'your father and I have had an
explanation and a quarrel.'

'Thank God!' she cried.  'Your only chance was to get away from him.
But beware, for he will do you an injury if he can!'

'He may do his worst; but how can I leave you here in his power?'

'Have no fears about me.  He has more reason to avoid me than I him.
But they are calling for you, Cousin Louis.  Good-bye, and God be with
you!'



CHAPTER IX


THE CAMP OF BOULOGNE

My uncle was still standing at the castle gateway, the very picture of a
usurper, with our own old coat-of-arms of the bend argent and the three
blue martlets engraved upon the stones at either side of him.  He gave
me no sign of greeting as I mounted the large grey horse which was
awaiting me, but he looked thoughtfully at me from under his down-drawn
brows, and his jaw muscles still throbbed with that stealthy rhythmical
movement.  I read a cold and settled malice in his set yellow face and
his stern eyes.  For my own part I sprang readily enough into the
saddle, for the man's presence had, from the first, been loathsome to
me, and I was right glad to be able to turn my back upon him.  And so,
with a stern quick order from the lieutenant and a jingle and clatter
from the troopers, we were off upon our journey.  As I glanced back at
the black keep of Grosbois, and at the sinister figure who stood looking
after us from beside the gateway, I saw from over his head a white
handkerchief gleam for an instant in a last greeting from one of the
gloomy meurtriere windows, and again a chill ran through me as I thought
of the fearless girl and of the hands in which we were leaving her.

But sorrow clears from the mind of youth like the tarnish of breath upon
glass, and who could carry a heavy heart upon so lightfooted a horse and
through so sweet an air?  The white glimmering road wound over the downs
with the sea far upon the left, and between lay that great salt-marsh
which had been the scene of our adventures.  I could even see, as I
fancied, a dull black spot in the distance to mark the position of that
terrible cottage.  Far away the little clusters of houses showed the
positions of Etaples, Ambleterre, and the other fishing villages, whilst
I could see that the point which had seemed last night to glow like a
half-forged red-hot sword-blade was now white as a snow-field with the
camp of a great army.  Far, far away, a little dim cloud upon the water
stood for the land where I had spent my days--the pleasant, homely land
which will always rank next to my own in my affections.

And now I turned my attention from the downs and the sea to the hussars
who rode beside me, forming, as I could perceive, a guard rather than an
escort.  Save for the patrol last night, they were the first of the
famous soldiers of Napoleon whom I had ever seen, and it was with
admiration and curiosity that I looked upon men who had won a world-wide
reputation for their discipline and their gallantry.  Their appearance
was by no means gorgeous, and their dress and equipment was much more
modest than that of the East Kent Yeomanry, which rode every Saturday
through Ashford; but the stained tunics, the worn leathers, and the
rough hardy horses gave them a very workmanlike appearance.  They were
small, light, brown-faced fellows, heavily whiskered and moustached,
many of them wearing ear-rings in their ears.  It surprised me that even
the youngest and most boyish-looking of them should be so bristling with
hair, until, upon a second look, I perceived that his whiskers were
formed of lumps of black wax stuck on to the sides of his face.   The
tall young lieutenant noticed the astonishment with which I gazed at his
boyish trooper.

'Yes, yes,' said he, 'they are artificial, sure enough; but what can you
expect from a lad of seventeen?  On the other hand, we cannot spoil the
appearance of the regiment upon parade by having a girl's cheeks in the
ranks.'

'It melts terribly in this warm weather, lieutenant,' said the hussar,
joining in the conversation with the freedom which was one of the
characteristics of Napoleon's troops.
