entrance just as they were into the palace while a number of the senators
were dining there with Otho. before departing they rushed into the
banquet-room itself, killing those that strove to bar their progress. And
they would have slaughtered everybody found there had not the guests
jumped up and hid themselves prior to their irruption. For this behavior
the men received money, it being assumed that their act was due to their
liking for Otho.

About this time also a man was caught pretending to be Nero. His name was
unknown to Dio. And at last he paid the penalty.

[Sidenote:--10--] Otho, not succeeding by frequent invitations in
persuading Vitellius to come and share the imperial office, eventually
plunged into open war against him. And he sent soldiers whom he put in
charge of several different leaders; this fact was largely responsible for
his reverses.

Valens was so eager for money and gathered it so assiduously from every
source that he put to death the decurion, who had concealed him and had
saved his life, on account of a thousand denarii which he thought had been
purloined from his possessions.

Otho declined battle, saying that he could not see a battle fought between
kindred, just as if he had become emperor in some legitimate fashion and
had not killed the consuls and the Caesar [Footnote: Piso and Galba are
meant.] and the emperor [Footnote: Piso and Galba are meant.] in Rome
itself. There fell in the battles which took place near Cremona four
myriads of men on both sides. Here, they say, various omens appeared
before the battle, most noteworthy being an unusual bird, such as men had
never before beheld, that was seen for a number of days.

[Sidenote:--11--] After the forces of Otho had been worsted, a certain
horseman brought word of the disaster to Otho. When the bystanders refused
to credit his report--it chanced that there were many gathered there--and
some set to calling him "renegade" and others "enemy," he exclaimed:
"Would that this news were false, Caesar: for most gladly would I have
died to secure thy victory. As it is, my demise is determined, that no one
may think I fled hither to secure my own safety. But do thou be assured
that the enemy will ere long arrive, and debate what must be done." Having
finished these words, he despatched himself. [Sidenote:--12--] This act
caused all to believe him, and they were ready to renew the conflict.
Those present formed a numerous body and there were not a few others at
hand from Pannonia. But the most important consideration, as usual in such
cases, was that they loved Otho and were quite devoted to him, not in word
but in their hearts. When, however, they besought him not to abandon
either himself or them, he waited until the rest, at report of the news,
had come running together, and then, after some muttered words to himself,
he delivered to the soldiers a speech, from which the following is a brief
excerpt:

[Sidenote:--13--] "Enough, quite enough, has already been done. I hate a
civil war, even though I conquer: and I love all Romans, even though they
do not side with me. Let Vitellius be victor, since this has pleased the
gods; and let the lives of his soldiers also be spared, since this pleases
me. It is far better and more just that one should perish for all, rather
than many for one, and that I should refuse on account of one single man
to embroil the Roman people and cause so great a mass of human beings to
perish. I certainly should prefer to be a Mucius, a Decius, a Curtius, a
Regulus, rather than a Marius, a Cinna, or a Sulla,--not to mention other
names. Therefore do not force me to become one of these men I hate, nor
grudge me the privilege of imitating one of those whom I commend. Do you
depart to meet the conqueror and do him reverence. As for me, I shall find
means to free myself, that all men may be taught by the event that you
have chosen such an emperor as has not given you up to save himself but
himself to save you."

[Sidenote:--14--] Of this nature were the words of Otho. Falling upon the
ears of the soldiers they aroused both admiration of the man and pity for
what might befall him: his troops shed tears of lamentation and mourning,
calling him father and terming him dearer than children and parents.
["Upon thee our lives depend," they said, "and for thee we will all die."]
This argument continued so for most of the day, Otho begging to be allowed
to die and the soldiers refusing to permit him to carry out his wish.
Finally, he reduced them to silence and said: "It can not be that I should
show myself inferior to this soldier, whom you have seen kill himself for
the single reason that he had borne news of defeat to his own emperor. I
shall certainly follow in his footsteps, that I may cease to see or hear
aught any longer. And you, if you love me in reality, let me die as I
desire and do not compel me to live against my will, but take your way to
the victor and gain his good graces."

[Sidenote:--15--] At the close of this speech he retired into his
apartments and after sending some messages to his intimate friends and
some to Vitellius in their behalf he burned all the letters which anybody
had written to him containing hostile statements about Vitellius, not
wanting them to serve as damaging evidence against anybody. Then he called
each one of the persons that were at hand, greeted them, and gave them
money. Meantime there was a disturbance made by the soldiers, so that he
was obliged to go out and quiet them, and he did not come back until he
had sent them to a place of safety, some here, some there. So then, when
quiet had been permanently restored, taking a short sword he killed
himself. The grief-stricken soldiery took up his body and buried it, and
some slew themselves upon his grave. This was the end that befell Otho,
after he had lived thirty-seven years lacking eleven days and had reigned
ninety days, and it overshadowed the impiety and wickedness of his active
career. In life the basest of men he died most nobly. He had seized the
empire by the most villainous trick, but took leave of it most creditably.

A series of brawls among the soldiers immediately ensued, and a number of
them were slain by one another; afterwards they reached an agreement and
set out to meet the victorious party.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY
65

Vitellius is proclaimed emperor: feasts his eyes on gladiators and
slaughters: drives astrologers from Italy (chapter 1).

Vitellius's excess in banquets, in his home, in furniture, in his almost
absurd magnificence (chapters 2-5).

Praiseworthy points in his character (chapters 6, 7).

Portents of ill omen: the soldiers declare Vespasian emperor (chapter 8).

Mucianus is sent by Vespasian against Vitellius: Primus of his own accord
takes the lead against Vitellius (chapter 9).

Alienus, put in charge of the war by Vitellius, is the author of a
desertion, but is in turn seized by his followers, who change their minds
(chapter 10).

The adherents of Vitellius are conquered in battle (chapters 11-14).

Catastrophe befalls the dwellers in Cremona (chapter 15).

Wavering on the part of Vitellius: the Capitol is burned in the course of
a siege by Sabinus (chapters 16, 17).

Disaster to the city of Rome, taken by Vespasian's captains (chapters 18,
19).

How Vitellius was taken and perished (chapters 20, 21).

How a brother and son of Vitellius met their fate (chapter 22).


DURATION OF TIME.

(Galba (II) and T. Vinius Coss.): A.D. 69 = a.u. 822, from January 15th.
The following _Consules Suffecti_ took office:

On the Calends of March--T. Virginius Rufus, Vopiscus Pompeius.

On the Calends of May--Caelius Sabinus, T. Flavins Sabinus.

On the Calends of July--T. Arrius Antoninus, P. Marius Celsus (II).

On the Calends of September--C. Fabius Valens, A. Alienus Caecinna (also
Roscius Regulus, as Caecinna was condemned on the last day of October).

On the Calends of November--Cn. Caecilius Simplex, C. Quintius Atticus.


[Sidenote: A.D. 69 (a.u. 822)] [Sidenote:--1--] The population of Rome
when it heard of the downfall of Otho naturally transferred its allegiance
immediately. Otho, whom people previously praised and for whose victory
they prayed, they now abused as an enemy, and Vitellius, upon whom they
had been invoking curses, they praised and declared emperor. So truly
there is nothing constant in human affairs. Those who flourish most and
those who are lowliest alike choose unstable standards, and construct
their praises and their censures, their honors and their degradations to
conform to the accidents of their situation.

News of the death of Otho was brought to him [Vitellius] while in Gaul.
There he was joined by his wife and child, whom he placed on a platform
and saluted as Germanicus and imperator, though the boy was only six years
old.

[Vitellius witnessed gladiatorial combats at Lugdunum and again at
Cremona, as if the crowds of men who had perished in the battles and were
even then exposed unburied to the elements did not suffice. He beheld the
slain with his own eyes, for he traversed all the ground where they lay
and gloated over the spectacle as if he were still in the moment of
victory; and not even after that did he order them to be buried.] Upon
reaching Rome and adjusting affairs to suit him, he issued a bulletin
banishing the astrologers and commanding them by this particular day
(mentioning a given date) to leave the whole country of Italy. They by
night put up in turn another document, in which they announced that he
should lose his life by the day on which he actually died. So accurate was
their previous knowledge of what should come to pass.

[Sidenote:--2--] Vitellius was fond of luxury and licentiousness and cared
for nothing else human or divine. He had always been the kind of man that
would spend his time in taverns and gaming houses, over dancers and
charioteers. Incalculable were the sums he spent on such pursuits, and the
consequence was that he had many creditors. Now, when he attained to so
great authority, his wantonness only increased, and his expenditures went
on most of the day and night alike. He was insatiate in filling himself,
yet kept constantly vomiting what he ate, apparently living on the mere
passage of food. Yet that was what enabled him to hold out; for his fellow
banqueters fared very badly. [He was always inviting numbers of the
foremost men to his table and he was frequently entertained at their
houses.]

[Sidenote:--3--] On this point one of them, Vibius Crispus, [Footnote:
_Q. Vibius Crispus._] was the author of a most witty remark. Having been
compelled for some days by sickness to absent himself from the convivial
board, he said: "If I had not fallen ill, I should certainly have died."
The entire period of his reign consisted in nothing but carousals and
revels. All the most valuable food products were brought together from the
ocean itself (not to go farther) from the earth and from the
Mediterranean, and were prepared in so costly a fashion that even now some
cakes and other dishes are named Vitellian, after him. Why should one go
into the details of these affairs? It is admitted by quite everybody that
during the period of his reign he expended on dinners two hundred million
two thousand five hundred denarii. There came very near being a famine in
all costly articles of food, yet it was imperative that they should be
provided. Once he had a dish made that cost twenty-five myriads, into
which he put a mixture of tongues and brains and livers of fish and
certain kinds of birds. As it was impossible to make so large a vessel of
pottery, it was made of silver and remained extant for some time, regarded
somewhat in the light of a votive offering, until Hadrian finally set eyes
on it and had it melted down.

[Sidenote:--4--] Since I have mentioned this fact, I will also add
another, namely that not even Nero's Golden House would satisfy Vitellius.
He delighted in and commended the name and the life and all the practices
of its former owner, yet he found fault with the structure itself, saying
that it had been badly built and was scantily and meanly equipped. When he
fell ill one time he looked about for a room to afford him an abode; so
little did even Nero's surroundings satisfy him. His wife Galeria
ridiculed the small amount of decoration found in the royal apartments.
This pair, as they spent other people's money, never stopped to count the
cost of anything; but those who invited them to meals found themselves in
great trouble [save a few whom he compensated for it]. Yet the same
persons would not regularly entertain him the entire day, but one set of
men furnished breakfast, another lunch, another dinner, and still another
certain viands for dessert calculated to stimulate a jaded appetite.
[Footnote: This little phrase is taken direct from Plato's
_Critias_, 115 B.] [For all who were able were eager to entertain him.]
It is said that after the elapse of a few days he spent a hundred myriads
upon a dinner. [His birthday celebration lasted over two days and numbers
of beasts and of men were slain.]

[Sidenote:--6--] [Though his life was of this kind he was not entirely
without good deeds. For example, he retained the coinage minted under Nero
and Galba and Otho, evincing no displeasure at their images; and whatever
gifts had been bestowed upon any persons he held to be valid and deprived
no one of any such possession. He did not collect any sums still owing of
former public contributions, and he confiscated no one's property. A very
few of those who sided with Otho he put to death but did not withhold even
the property of these from their relatives. Upon the kinsmen of those
previously executed he bestowed all the funds that were found in the
public treasury. He did not obstruct the execution of the wills of such as
had fought against him and had fallen in the battles. Furthermore he
forbade the senators and the knights to fight as gladiators or to appear
in any spectacle in the orchestra. And for these measures he was
commended.]

[Sidenote:--7--] He was a constant attendant of the theatres, and this won
the attachment of the populace. He ate with the most influential men on
free and easy terms, and this gained their favor to an even greater
degree. His old companions he never failed to remember and honored them
greatly, not (like some others) disdaining to appear to recognize any of
them. Many persons have unexpectedly attained to great power feel hate for
those who are acquainted with their former humble state. [Vitellius, when
Priscus opposed him in the senate and denounced one of the soldiers,
called the tribunes to his side as if he had some need of their
assistance. He did not himself do Priscus any harm and did not allow the
officials to hurt him, but merely said: "Be not indignant, Conscript
Fathers, that we two out of your number have had a little dispute with
each other." This act seemed to have been due to a kindly disposition. The
fact, however, that he wished to imitate Nero and offered sacrifices to
his Manes, and that he spent so great sums on dinners, though it caused
joy to some, made the sensible grieve, since they were fully aware that
not all the money in the whole world would be sufficient for him.]

[Sidenote:--8--] While he was behaving in this way, evil omens occurred. A
comet star was seen, and the moon contrary to precedent appeared to have
had two eclipses, being obscured by shadows on the fourth and on the
seventh day. Also people saw two suns at once, one in the west weak and
pale, and one in the east brilliant and powerful. On the Capitol many huge
footprints were seen, presumably of some spirits that had descended that
hill. The soldiers who had slept there the night in question said that the
temple of Jupiter had opened of itself with great clangor and some of the
guards were so terrified that they expired. At the same time that this
happened Vespasian, engaged in warfare with the Jews, [sent his son Titus
to the emperor Galba to give him a message. But when Titus returned,
having learned on the way] of the rebellion of Vitellius and of Otho, he
deliberated what ought to be done. [For Vespasian was in general not
rashly inclined and he hesitated very much about involving himself in such
troublous affairs.]

[Sidenote:--9--] But people favored him greatly: his reputation won in
Britain, his fame derived from the war under way, his kindheartedness and
prudence, all led them to desire to have him at their head. Likewise
Mucianus urged him strongly, hoping that Vespasian should get the name of
emperor and that he as a result of the other's good nature should enjoy an
equal share of power. Vespasian's soldiers on ascertaining all these facts
surrounded his tent and hailed him as emperor. Portents and dreams
pointing him out as sovereign long before had also fallen to the lot of
Vespasian, and these will be recited in the story of his life. For the
time being he sent Mucianus to Italy against Vitellius, while he himself,
after taking a look at affairs in Syria and entrusting to others the
conduct of the war against the Jews, proceeded to Egypt. There he
collected money, of which of course he needed a great deal, and grin,
which he desired to send in as large quantities as possible to Rome. The
soldiers in Moesia, hearing how matters stood with him, would not wait for
Mucianus,--they had learned that he was _en route_,--and chose as
their general Antonius Primus, [Footnote: _M. Antonius Primus._] who
had suffered sentence of exile in Nero's reign but had been restored by
Galba and was commander of the legion in Pannonia. This man held supreme
authority, although not chosen by the emperor nor by the senate. So great
was the soldiers' anger at Vitellius and their zest for plunder. They were
doing this for no other purpose except to pillage Italy. And their
intention was realized.

[Sidenote:--10--] Vitellius when he heard about it remained where he was
and went on with his luxurious living even to the extent of arranging
gladiatorial combats. In the course of these it was proposed that Sporus
portray the role of a maiden being ravished, but he would not endure the
shame and committed suicide. Vitellius gave the charge of the war to
Alienus [Footnote: _A. Caevina Alienus._] and certain others. Alienus
reached Cremona and occupied the town, but seeing that his own soldiers
were out of training as a result of their luxurious life in Rome and
impaired by lack of practice, whereas the others were physically well
exercised and stout of heart, he was afraid. Subsequently, when friendly
proposals came to him from Primus, he called the soldiers together and by
indicating the weakness of Vitellius and the strength of Vespasian
together with the character of the two men he persuaded them to revolt.
