Oakland First Presbyterian Church 1,800 were fed and 1,000 people were
provided with sleeping accommodations. Pews were turned into beds. Cots
stood in the aisles, in the gallery and in the Sunday school room. Every
available inch of space was occupied by some substitute for a bed.

As the days wore on the number of refugees somewhat decreased. Although
they still came in large numbers, many left on every train for different
points. Requests for free transportation were investigated as closely
as possible and all the deserving were sent away. Women and children and
married men who wished to join their families in different parts of the
State were given preference. The transportation bureau was on a street
corner, where a man stood on a box and called the names of those
entitled to passes.

Along the principal streets of Oakland there was a picturesque
pilgrimage of former householders, who dragged or carried the meagre
effects they had been able to save. The refugees who could not be cared
for in Oakland made an exodus to Berkeley and other surrounding cities,
where relief committees were actively at work. Utter despair was
pictured on many faces, which showed the effects of sleepless days and
nights, and the want of proper food.

Oakland was only one of the outside camps of refuge. At Berkeley
over 6,000 refugees sought quarters, the big gymnasium of the State
University being turned into a lodging house, while hundreds were
provided with blankets to sleep in the open air under the University
oaks. The students and professors of the University did all they could
for their relief, and the Citizens' Relief Committee supplied them with
food.

The same benevolent sympathy was manifested at all the places near the
ruined city which had escaped disaster, this aid materially reducing
that needed within San Francisco itself.


WORSHIP IN THE OPEN AIR.


Sunday dawned in San Francisco; Sunday in the camp of the refugees. On a
green knoll in Golden Gate Park, between the conservatory and the tennis
courts, a white-haired minister of the Gospel gathered his flock. It was
the Sabbath day and in the turmoil and confusion the minister did not
forget his duty. Two upright stakes and a cross-piece gave him a rude
pulpit, and beside him stood a young man with a battered brass cornet.
Far over the park stole a melody that drew hundreds of men and women
from their tents. Of all denominations and all creeds, they gathered on
that green knoll, and the men uncovered while the solemn voice repeated
the words of a grand old hymn, known wherever men and women meet to
worship the Lord:


"Other refuge have I none, hangs my helpless soul on Thee; Leave, oh,
leave me not alone, still support and comfort me!"


A moment before there had been shouting and confusion in the
driveway where some red-striped artillerymen were herding a squad of
gesticulating Chinamen as men herd sheep. The shouting died away as the
minister's voice rose and fell and out of the stillness came the sobs of
women. One little woman in blue was making no sound, but the tears were
streaming down her cheeks. Her husband, a sturdy young fellow in his
shirt sleeves, put his arm about her shoulders and tried to comfort her
as the reading went on.


"All my trust on Thee is stayed; all my help from Thee I bring; Cover my
defenseless head with the shadow of Thy wing."


Then the cornet took up the air again and those helpless persons
followed it in quivering tones, the white-haired man of God leading them
with closed eyes. When the last verse was over, the minister raised his
hands.

"Let us pray," said he, and his congregation sank down in the grass
before him. It was a simple prayer, such a prayer as might be offered by
a man without a home or a shelter over his head--and nothing left to him
but an unshaken faith in his Creator.

"Oh, Lord, Thy ways are past finding out, but we still have faith in
Thee. We know not why Thou hast visited these people and left them
homeless. Thou knowest the reason of this desolation and of our utter
helplessness. We call on Thee for help in the hour of our great need.
Bless the people of this city, the sorrowing ones, the bereaved, gather
them under Thy mighty wing and soothe aching hearts this day."

The women were crying again, and one big man dug his knuckles into his
eyes without shame. The man who could have listened to such a prayer
unmoved was not in Golden Gate Park that day.



CHAPTER VII.

The Frightful Loss of Life and Wealth.


While multitudes escaped from toppling buildings and crashing walls in
the dread disaster of that fatal Wednesday morning of April 18th in San
Francisco, hundreds of the less fortunate met their death in the ruins,
and horrifying scenes were witnessed by the survivors. Many of those who
escaped had tales of terror to tell. Mr. J. P. Anthony, as he fled from
the Ramona Hotel, saw a score or more of people crushed to death, and
as he walked the streets at a later hour saw bodies of the dead being
carried in garbage wagons and all kinds of vehicles to the improvised
morgues, while hospitals and storerooms were already filled with the
injured. Mr. G. A. Raymond, of Tomales, Cal., gives evidence to the same
effect. As he rushed into the street, he says that the air was filled
with falling stones and people around him were crushed to death on all
sides.

Others gave testimony to the same effect. Samuel Wolf, of Salt Lake
City, tells us that he saved one woman from death in the hotel. She was
rushing blindly toward an open window, from which she would have fallen
fifty feet to the stone pavement below. "On my way down Market Street,"
he says, "the whole side of a building fell out and came so near me that
I was covered and blinded by the dust. Then I saw the first dead come
by. They were piled up in an automobile like carcasses in a butcher's
wagon, all bloody, with crushed skulls, broken limbs and bloody faces."

These are frightful stories, exaggerated probably from the nervous
excitement of those terrible moments, as are also the following
statements, which form part of the early accounts of the disaster. Thus
we are told that "from a three-story lodging house at Fifth and Minna
Streets, which collapsed Wednesday morning, more than seventy-five
bodies were taken to-day. There are fifty other bodies in sight in the
ruins. This building was one of the first to take fire on Fifth Street.
At least 100 persons are said to have been killed in the Cosmopolitan,
on Fourth Street. More than 150 persons are reported dead in the
Brunswick Hotel, at Seventh and Mission Streets."

Another statement is to the effect that "at Seventh and Howard Streets
a great lodging house took fire after the first shock, before the guests
had escaped. There were few exits and nearly all the lodgers perished.
Mrs. J. J. Munson, one of those in the building, leaped with her child
in her arms from the second floor to the pavement below and escaped
unhurt. She says she was the only one who escaped from the house. Such
horrors as this were repeated at many points. B. Baker was killed while
trying to get a body from the ruins. Other rescuers heard the pitiful
wail of a little child, but were unable to get near the point from which
the cry issued. Soon the onrushing fire ended the cry and the men turned
to other tasks."


ESTIMATES OF THE DEATH LIST.


The questionable point in those statements is that the numbers of dead
spoken of in these few instances exceed the whole number given in the
official records issued two weeks after the disaster. Yet they go to
illustrate the actual horrors of the case, and are of importance for
this reason. As regards the whole number killed, in fact, there is not,
and probably never will be, a full and accurate statement. While about
350 bodies had been recovered at the end of the second week, it was
impossible to estimate how many lay buried under the ruins, to be
discovered only as the work of excavation went on, and how many more
had been utterly consumed by the flames, leaving no trace of their
existence. The estimates of the probable loss of life ran up to 1,500
and more, while the injured were very numerous.

The shock of the earthquake, the pulse of deep horror to which it gave
rise, the first wild impulse to flee for life, gave way in the minds of
many to a feeling of intense sympathy as agonized cries came from those
pinned down to the ruins of buildings or felled by falling bricks or
stones, and as the sight of dead bodies incrimsoned with blood met the
eyes of the survivors in the streets. From wandering aimlessly about,
many of these went earnestly to work to rescue the wounded and recover
the bodies of the slain. In this merciful work the police and the
soldiers lent their aid, and soon there was a large corps of rescuers
actively engaged.


BURYING THE DEAD.


Soon numbers were taken, alive or dead, from the ruins, passing vehicles
were pressed into the service, and the labor of mercy went on rapidly,
several buildings being quickly converted into temporary hospitals,
while the dead were conveyed to the Mechanics' Pavilion and other
available places. Portsmouth Square became for a time a public morgue.
Between twenty and thirty corpses were laid side by side upon the
trodden grass in the absence of more suitable accommodations. It is said
that when the flames threatened to reach the square, the dead, mostly
unknown, were removed to Columbia Square, where they were buried when
danger threatened that quarter. Others were taken to the Presidio, and
here the soldiers pressed into service all men who came near and forced
them to labor at burying the dead, a temporary cemetery being opened
there. So thick were the corpses piled up that they were becoming a
menace, and early in the day the order was issued to bury them at any
cost. The soldiers were needed for other work, so, at the point of
rifles, the citizens were compelled to take to the work of burying. Some
objected at first, but the troops stood no trifling, and every man
who came within reach was forced to work. Rich men, unused to physical
exertion, labored by the side of the workingmen digging trenches in
which to bury the dead. The able-bodied being engaged in fighting the
flames, General Funston ordered that the old men and the weaklings
should take the work in hand. They did it willingly enough, but had they
refused the troops on guard would have forced them. It was ruled that
every man physically capable of handling a spade or a pick should dig
for an hour. When the first shallow graves were ready the men, under the
direction of the troops, lowered the bodies, several in a grave, and
a strange burial began. The women gathered about crying. Many of them
knelt while a Catholic priest read the burial service and pronounced
absolution. All Thursday afternoon this went on.

In this connection the following stories are told:

Dr. George V. Schramm, a young medical graduate, said:

"As I was passing down Market Street with a new-found friend, an
automobile came rushing along with two soldiers in it. My doctor's badge
protected me, but the soldiers invited my companion, a husky six-footer,
to get into the automobile. He said:

"'I don't want to ride, and have plenty of business to attend to.'

"Once more they invited him, and he refused. One of the soldiers pointed
a gun at him and said:

"'We need such men as you to save women and children and to help fight
the fire.'

"The man was on his way to find his sister, but he yielded to the
inevitable. He worked all day with the soldiers, and when released to
get lunch he felt that he could conscientiously desert to go and find
his own loved ones."

"Half a block down the street the soldiers were stopping all pedestrians
without the official pass which showed that they were on relief
business, and putting them to work heaving bricks off the pavement. Two
dapper men with canes, the only clean people I saw, were caught at the
corner by a sergeant, who showed great joy as he said:

"'I give you time to git off those kid gloves, and then hustle, damn
you, hustle!' The soldiers took delight in picking out the best dressed
men and keeping them at the brick piles for long terms. I passed them
in the shelter of a provision wagon, afraid that even my pass would not
save me. Two men are reported shot because they refused to turn in and
help."

Many of the dead, of course, will never be identified, though the names
were taken of all who were known and descriptions written of the others.
A story comes to us of one young girl who had followed for two days the
body of her father, her only relative. It had been taken from a house
on Mission Street to an undertaker's shop just after the quake. The fire
drove her out with her charge, and it was placed in Mechanics' Pavilion.
That went, and the body rested for a day at the Presidio, waiting
burial. With many others, she wept on the border of the burned area,
while the women cared for her.


VICTIMS TAKEN FROM THE RUINS.


On Friday eleven postal clerks, all alive, were taken from the debris of
the Post Office. All at first were thought to be dead, but it was found
that, although they were buried under the stone and timber, every one
was alive. They had been for three days without food or water.

Two theatrical people were in a hotel in Santa Rosa when the shock came.
The room was on the fourth floor. The roof collapsed. One of them was
thrown from the bed and both were caught by the descending timbers and
pinned helplessly beneath the debris. They could speak to each other and
could touch one another's hands, but the weight was so great that they
could do nothing to liberate themselves. After three hours rescuers
came, cut a hole in the roof and both were released uninjured.

Even the docks were converted into hospitals in the stringent exigency
of the occasion, about 100 patients being stretched on Folsom street
dock at one time. In the evening tugs conveyed them to Goat Island,
where they were lodged in the hospital. The docks from Howard Street to
Folsom Street had been saved, the fire at this point not being permitted
to creep farther east than Main Street. Another series of fatalities
occurred, caused by the stampeding of a herd of cattle at Sixth and
Folsom Streets. Three hundred of the panic-stricken animals ran amuck
when they saw and felt the flames and charged wildly down the street,
trampling under foot all who were in the way. One man was gored through
and through by a maddened bull. At least a dozen persons', it is said,
were killed, though probably this is an overestimate. One observer tells
us that "the first sight I saw was a man with blood streaming from his
wounds, carrying a dead woman in his arms. He placed the body on the
floor of the court at the Palace Hotel, and then told me he was the
janitor of a big building. The first he knew of the catastrophe he found
himself in the basement, his dead wife beside him. The building had
simply split in two, and thrown them down."

In the camps of refuge the deaths came frequently. Physicians were
everywhere in evidence, but, without medicine or instruments, were
fearfully handicapped. Men staggered in from their herculean efforts at
the fire lines, only to fall gasping on the grass. There was nothing to
be done. Injured lay groaning. Tender hands were willing, but of water
there was none. "Water, water, for God's sake get me some water," was
the cry that struck into thousands of souls of San Francisco.

The list of dead was not confined to San Francisco, but extended to many
of the neighboring towns, especially to Santa Rosa, where sixty were
reported dead and a large number missing, and to the insane asylum in
its vicinity, from the ruins of which a hundred or more of dead bodies
were taken.


THE FREE USE OF RIFLES.


A citizen tells us that "in the early part of the evening, and while
the twilight lasts, there is a good deal of trafficking up and down
the sidewalks. Having finished their dinners of government provisions,
cooked on the street or in the parks, the people promenade for half an
hour or so. By half-past eight the town is closed tight. A rat scurrying
in the street will bring a soldier's rifle to his shoulder. Any one not
wearing a uniform or a Red Cross badge is a suspicious character and may
be shot unless he halts at command. Even the men in uniform do well to
stop still, for it is hard to tell a uniform in the half light thrown up
by the burning town and the great shadows.

"Last night two of us ventured out on Van Ness Avenue a little late.
There came up the noise of some kind of a shooting scrape far down
the street. We hurried in that direction to see what was doing. An
eighteen-year-old boy in a uniform barred the way, levelled his rifle
and said in a peremptory way:

"'Go home.'

"We took a course down the block, where an older soldier, more
communicative but equally peremptory, informed us that we were trifling
with our lives, news or no news.

"'We've shot about 300 people for one thing or another,' he said. 'Now,
dodge trouble. Git!' That ended the expedition."


THE LOSS IN WEALTH.


If we pass now from the record of the loss of lives to that of the
destruction of wealth, the estimates exceed by far any fire losses
recorded in history.

The truth is that when flames eat out the heart of a great city, devour
its vast business establishments, storehouses and warehouses, sweep
through its centres of opulence, destroy its wharves with their
accumulation of goods, spread ruin and havoc everywhere, it is
impossible at first to estimate the loss. Only gradually, as time goes
on, is the true loss discovered, and never perhaps very accurately,
since the owners and the records of riches often disappear with the
wealth itself. In regard to San Francisco, the early estimate was that
three-fourths of the city, valued at $500,000,000, was destroyed.

But early estimates are apt to be exaggerated, and on Friday, two days
after the disaster, we find this estimate reduced to $250,000,000. A few
more days passed and these figures shrunk still further, though it was
still largely conjectural, the means of making a trustworthy estimate
being very restricted. Later on the pendulum swung upward again, and two
weeks after the fire the closest estimates that could be made fixed the
property loss at close to $350,000,000, or double that of the Chicago
fire. But as the actual loss in the latter case proved considerably
below the early estimates, the same may prove to be the case with San
Francisco.

Special personal losses were in many cases great. Thus the Palace Hotel
was built at a cost of $6,000,000, and the St. Francis, which originally
cost $4,000,000, was being enlarged at great expense. Several of the
great mansions on Nob's Hill cost a million or more, the City Hall was
built at a cost of $7,000,000, the new Post Office was injured to the
extent of half a million, while a large number of other buildings might
be named whose value, with their contents, was measured in the millions.

It was not until May 3d that news came over the wires of another serious
item of loss. The merchants had waited until then for their fire-proof
safes and vaults to cool off before attempting to open them. When this
was at length done the results proved disheartening. Out of 576 vaults
and safes opened in the district east of Powell and north of Market
Street, where the flames had raged with the greatest fury, it was found
that fully forty per cent. had not performed their duty. When opened
they were found to contain nothing but heaps of ashes. The valuable
account books, papers and in some cases large sums of money had
vanished, the loss of the accounts being a severe calamity in a business
sense. As all the banks were equipped with the best fire-proof vaults,
no fear was felt for the safety of their contents.


LOOTERS IN CHINATOWN.


Chinatown suffered severely, the merchants of that locality possessing
large stocks of valuable goods, many of which were looted by seemingly
respectable sightseers after the ruins had cooled off, bronze, porcelain
and other valuable goods being taken from the ruins. One example
consisted in a mass of gold and silver valued at $2,500, which had been
melted by the fire in the store of Tai Sing, a Chinese merchant. This
was found by the police on May 3d in a place where it had been hidden by
looters.

But with all its losses San Francisco does not despair. The spirit of
its citizens is heroic, and there are some hopeful signs in the air. The
insurances due are estimated to approximate $175,000,000, and there
are other moneys likely to be spent on building during the coming year,
making a total of over $200,000,000. Eastern capitalists also talk of
investing $100,000,000 of new capital in the rebuilding of the
city, while the San Francisco authorities have a project of issuing
$200,000,000 of municipal bonds, the payment to be guaranteed by the
United States Government. Thus, two weeks after the earthquake, daylight
was already showing strongly ahead and hope was fast beginning to
replace despair.



CHAPTER VIII.

Wonderful Record of Thrilling Escapes.


Shuddering under the memories of what seems more like a nightmare than
actual reality to the survivors of this frightful calamity, they have
tried to picture in words far from adequate the days of terror and the
nights of horror that fell to the lot of the people of the Golden Gate
city and their guests.

They recount the roar of falling structures and the groans and pitiful
cries of those pinned beneath the timbers of collapsing buildings. They
speak of their climbing over dead bodies heaped in the streets, and of
following tortuous ways to find the only avenue of escape--the ferry,
where men and women fought like infuriated animals, bent on escape from
a fiery furnace.

These refugees tell of the great caravan composed of homeless persons
in its wild flight to the hills for safety, and in that great procession
women, harnessed to vehicles, trudging along and tugging at the shafts,
hauling all that was left of their earthly belongings, and a little food
that foresight told them would be necessary to stay the pangs of hunger
in the hours of misery that must follow.

We give below an especially accurate picture from the description of the
well-known writer, Jane Tingley, who, an eye-witness of it all, did so
much to help the sufferers, and who, with all the unselfishness of true
American womanhood, sacrificed her own comfort and needs for those of
others.

"May God be merciful to the women and children in this land of
desolation and despair!" she wrote on April 21st.

"Men have done, are doing such deeds of sublime self-sacrifice, of
magnificent heroism, that deserve to make the title of American manhood
immortal in the pages of history. The rest lies with the Almighty.

"I spent all of last night and to-day in that horror city across the
bay. I went from this unharmed city of plenty, blooming with abounding
health, thronged with happy mothers and joyous children, and spent hours
among the blackened ruins and out on the windswept slopes of the sand
hills by the sea, and I heard the voice of Rachel weeping for her
