
In the last-named stronghold, tradition still points out a little dark
chamber in the Eagle Tower, more like a state-prison cell than a royla
apartment, where Edward's second son was born (1284).  Years afterward
the King created him the first Prince of Wales (1301).  The Welsh had
vowed that they would never accept an Englishman as King; but the
young Prince was a native of the soil, and certainly in his cradle, at
least, spoke as good Welsh as their own children of the same age.  No
objection, therefore, could be made to him; by this happy compromise,
it is said, Wales became a principality joined to the English
Crown.[4]

[4] Wales was not wholly incorporated with England until more than two
centuries later, namely in 1536, in the reign of Henry VIII.  It then
obtained local self-government and representation in Parliament.

219. Conquest of Scotland (1290-1296); the Stone of Scone.

An opportunity now presented itself for Edward to assert his power in
Scotland.  Two claimants, both of Norman descent, had come forward
demanding the crown.[1]  One was John Baliol; the other, Robert Bruce,
an ancestor of the famous Scottish King and general of that name, who
will come prominently forward in the next reign.  He decided in
Baliol's favor, but insisted, before doing so, that the latter should
acknowledge the overlordship of England, as the King of Scotland had
done to William I.

[1] Scotland: At the time of the Roman conquest of Britain, Scotland
was inhabited by a Celtic race nearly akin to the primitive Irish, and
more distantly so to the Britons.  In time, the Saxons from the
Continent invaded the country, and settled on the lowlands of the
east, driving back the Celts to the western highlands.  Later, many
English emigrated to Scotland, especially at the time of the Norman
Conquest, where they found a hearty welcome.
   In 1072 William the Conqueror compelled the Scottish King to
acknowledge him as Overlord, and eventually so many Norman nobles
established themselves in Scotland that they constituted the chief
landed aristocracy of the country.  The modern Scottish nation, though
it keeps its Celtic name (Scotland), is made up in great measure of
inhabitants of English descent, the pure Scotch being confined mostly
to the Highlands, and ranking in population only as about one to three
of the former.

Baliol made a virtue of necessity, and agreed to the terms; but
shortly after formed a secret alliance with France against Edward,
which was renewed from time to time, and kept up between the two
countries for three hundred years.  It is the key to most of the wars
in which England was involved during that period.  Having made this
treaty, Baliol now openly renounced his allegiance to the English
King.  Edward at once organized a force, attacked Baliol, and at the
battle of Dunbar (1296) compelled the Scottish nobleman to acknowledge
him as ruler.

At the Abbey of Scone, near Perth, the English seized the famous
"Stone of Destiny," the palladium of Scotland, on which her Kings were
crowned.  (See map facing p. 120.)  Carrying the trophy to Westminster
Abbey, Edward enclosed it in that ancient coronation chair which has
been used by every sovereign since, from his son's accession (1307)
down to the present day.

220. Confirmation of the Charters, 1297.

Edward next prepared to attack France.  In great need of money, he
demanded a large sum from the clergy, and seized a quantity of wool in
the hands of the merchants.  The barons, alarmed at these arbitrary
measures, insisted on the King's confirming all previous charters of
liberties, including the Great Charter (SS135, 160, 199).  This
confirmation expressly forbade that the Crown should take the people's
money or goods except by the consent of Parliament.  Thus out of the
war England gained the one thing it needed to give the finishing touch
to the building up of Parliamentary power (SS213, 217); namely, a
solemn acknowledgement by the King that the nation alone had the right
to levy taxes.[1]  (See Summary of Constitutional History in the
Appendix, p. xi, S12.)

[1] Professor Stubbs says in his works (i.e. "Constitutional History
of England," and "Select Charters"), that the Confirmation of the
Charters "established the principle that for all taxation, direct and
indirect, the consent of the nation must be asked, and made it clear
that all transgressions of that principle, whether within the latter
of the law or beyond it, were evasions of the spirit of the
Constitution."  See also J. Rowley's "Rise of the English People."

221. Revolt and Death of Wallace (1303).

A new revolt now broke out in Scotland (S219).  The patriot, William
Wallace, rose and led his countrymen against the English,--led them
with that impetuous valor which breathes in Burns's lines:

                "Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled."

Fate, however, was against him.  After eight years of desperate
fighting, the valiant soldier was captured, executed on Tower Hill in
London as a traitor, and his head, crowned in mockery with a wreath of
laurel, was set on a pike on London Bridge.

But though the hero who perished on the scaffold could not prevent his
country from becoming one day a part of England, he did hinder its
becoming so on unfair and tyrannical terms.  "Scotland," says Carlyle,
"is not Ireland.  No; because brave men arose there, and said,
`Behold, ye must not tread us down like slaves,--and ye shall
not,--and ye cannot!'"  But Ireland failed, not for any lack of brave
men, but for lack of unity among them.

222. Expulsion of the Jews, 1290.

The darkest stain on Edward's reign was his treatment of the Jews
(S119).  Up to this period that unfortunate race had been protected by
the Kings of England as men protect the cattle which they fatten for
slaughter.  So long as they accumulated money, and so long as the
sovereign could extort from them whatever portion of their
accumulations he saw fit to demand, they were worth guarding.  A time
had now come when the populace clamored for their expulsion from the
island, on the ground that their usury and rapacity was ruining the
country.

Edward yielded to the clamor, and first stripping the Jews of their
possessions, he prepared to drive them into exile.  It is said that
even their books were taken from them and given to the libraries of
Oxford.  Thus pillaged, they were forced to leave the realm,--a
miserable procession, numbering some sixteen thousand.  Many perished
on the way, and so few ventured to return that for three centuries and
a half, until Cromwell came to power, they disappear from English
history (S458).

223. Death of Queen Eleanor.

Shortly after this event, Queen Eleanor died (S216).  The King showed
the devoted love he bore her in the beautiful crosses of carved stone
that he raised to her memory, three of which still stand.[1]  These
were erected at the places where her coffin was set down, in its
transit from Grantham, in Lincolnshire, where she died, to the little
village of Charing (now Charing Cross, the geographical center of
London).  This was the last station before her body reached its final
resting place, in that abbey at Westminster which holds such wealth of
historic dust.  Around Queen Eleanor's tomb wax lights were kept
constantly burning, until the Protestant Reformation extinguished
them, nearly three hundred years later.

[1] Originally there were thirteen of these crosses.  Of these, three
remain: namely, at Northampton, at Geddington, near by, and at
Waltham, about twelve miles northeast of London.

224. Edward's Reforms; Statute of Winchester (1285).

The condition of England when Edward came to the throne was far from
settled.  The country was overrun with marauders.  To suppress these,
the Statute of Winchester made the inhabitants of every district
punishable by fines for crimes committed within their limits.  Every
walled town had to close its gates at sunset, and no stranger could be
admitted during the night unless some citizen would be responsible for
him.

In addition, both sides of the main roads were cleared of bushes in
order that desperadoes might not lie in wait for travelers.
Furthermore, every citizen was required to keep arms and armor,
according to his condition in life, and to join in the pursuit and
arrest of criminals.

225. Land Legislation, 1285, 1290.

Two very important statutes were passed during this reign, respecting
the free sale or transfer of land.[1]

[1] These laws may be regarded as the foundation of the English system
of landed property; they completed the feudal claim to the soil
established by William the Conqueror.  They are known as the Second
Statute of Westminster (De Donis, or Entail, 1285) and the Third
Statute of Westminster (Quia Emptores, 1290).  See S264 and Summary of
Constitutional History in the Appendix, p. xi, S11.

The effect of these statutes was to confine the great estates to the
hands of their owners and direct descendants, or, when land changed
hands, to keep alive the claims of the great lords or the Crown upon
it.  These laws rendered it difficult for landholders to evade their
feudal duties to the King (S150) by the sale or subletting of
estates.  Hence, while they often built up the strength of the great
families, they also operated to increase the power of the Crown at the
very time when the growing influence of Parliament and the people was
beginning to act as a check upon the royal authority.

226. Legislation respecting the Church; Statute of Mortmain, 1279.

A third enactment checked the undue increase of Church property.
Through gifts and bequests the clergy had become owners of a very
large part of the most fertile soil of the realm.  No farms, herds of
cattle, or flocks of sheep compared with theirs.  These lands were
said to be in mortmain, or "dead hands"; since the Church, being a
corporation, never let go its hold, but kept its property with the
tenacity of a dead man's grasp.

The clergy constantly strove to get these Church lands exempted from
furnishing soldiers, or paying taxes to the King (S136).  Instead of
men or money they offered prayers.  Practically, the Crown succeeded
from time to time in compelling them to do considerably more than
this, but seldom without a violent struggle, as in the case of Henry
II and Becket (S165).

On account of these exemptions it had become the practice with many
persons who wished to escape bearing their just share of the support
of the King, to give their lands to the Church, and then receive them
again as tenants of some abbot or bishop.  In this way they evaded
their military and pecuniary obligations to the Crown.  To put a stop
to this practice, and so make all landed proprietors do their part,
the Statute of Mortmain was passed, 1279.  It required the donor of an
estate to the Church to obtain a royal license, which, it is perhaps
needless to say, was not readily granted.[1]

[1] See p. 76, note 1, on Clergy; and see Summary of Constitutional
History in the Appendix, p. xi, S11.

227. Death of Edward I.

Edward died while endeavoring to subdue a revolt in Scotland, in which
Robert Bruce, grandson of the first of that name (S219), had seized
the throne.  His last request was that his son Edward should continue
the war.  "Carry my bones before you on your march," said the dying
King, "for the rebels will not endure the sight of me, alive or dead!"

Not far from the beautiful effigy of Queen Eleanor in Westminster Abey
(S223), "her husband rests in a severely simple tomb.  Pass it not by
for its simplicity; few tombs hold nobler dust."[2]

[2] Goldwin Smith's "History of the United Kingdom."

228. Summary.

During Edward I's reign the following changes took place:

1. Wales and Scotland were conquered, and the first remained
permanently a part of the English kingdom.
2. The landed proprietors of the whole country were made more directly
responsible to the Crown.
3. The excessive growth of Church property was checked.
4. Laws for the better suppression of acts of violence were enacted
and rigorously enforced.
5. The Great Charter, with additional articles for the protection of
the people, was confirmed by the King, and the power of taxation
expressly acknowledged to reside in Parliament only.
6. Parliament, a legislative body now representing all classes of the
nation, was permanently organized, and for the first time regularly
and frequently summoned by the King.[1]

[1] It will be remembered that De Montfort's Parliament in 1265 (S213)
was not regularly and legally summoned, since the King (Henry III) was
at that time a captive.  The first Parliament (consisting of a House
of Commons and House of Lords, including the upper Clergy), convened
by the Crown, was that called by Edward I in 1295 (S217).

Edward II--1307-1327

229. Accession and Character.

The son to whom Edward I left his power was in every respect his
opposite.  The old definition of the word "king" was "the man who
CAN," or the able man.  The modern explanation usually makes him "the
chief or head of a people."  Edward II would satisfy neither of these
definitions.  He lacked all disposition to do anything himself; he
equally lacked power to incite others to do.  By nature he was a
jester, trifler, and waster of time.

Being such, it is hardly necessary to say that he did not push the war
with Scotland.  Robert Bruce (S227) did not expect that he would; that
valiant fighter, indeed, held the new English sovereign in utter
contempt, saying that he feared the dead father, Edward I, much more
than the living son.

230. Piers Gaveston; the Lords Ordainers; Articles of Reform.

During his first five years of his reign, Edward II did little more
than lavish wealth and honors on his chief favorite and adviser, Piers
Gaveston, a Frenchman who had been his companion and playfellow from
childhood.  While Edward I was living, Parliament had with his
sanction banished Gaveston from the kingdom, as a man of corrupt
practices; but Edward II was no sooner crowned than he recalled him,
and gave him the government of the realm during his absence in France,
on the occasion of his marriage.

On Edward's return, the barons protested against the monopoly of
privileges by a foreigner, and the King was obliged to consent to
Gaveston's banishment.  He soon came back, however, and matters went
on from bad to worse.  Finally, the indignation of the nobles rose to
such a pitch that at a council held at Westminster the government was
virtually taken from the King's hands and vested in a body of barons
and bishops.

The head of this committee was the King's cousin, the Earl of
Lancaster; and from the Ordinances or Articles of Reform which the
committee drew up for the management of affairs they got the name of
the Lords Ordainers.  Gaveston was now sent out of the country for a
third time; but the King persuaded him to return, and gave him the
office of Secretary of State.  This last insult--for so the Lords
Ordainers regareded it--was too much for the nobility to bear.

They resolved to exile the hated favorite once more, but this time to
send him to that "undiscovered country" from which "no traveler
returns."  Edward, taking alarm, placed Gaveston in Scarborough
Castle, on the coast of Yorkshire, thinking that he would be safe
there.  The barons besieged the castle, starved Gaveston into
surrender, and beheaded him forthwith.  Thus ended the first favorite.

231. Scotland regains its Independence; Bannockburn, 1314.

Seeing Edward's lack of manly fiber, Robert Bruce (S229), who had been
crowned King of the Scots, determined to make himself ruler in fact as
well as in name.  He had suffered many defeats; he had wandered a
fugitive in forests and glens; he had been hunted with bloodhounds
like a wild beast; but he had never lost courage or hope.  On the
field of Bannockburn, northwest of Edinburgh (1314), he once again met
the English, and in a bloody and decisive battle drove them back like
frightened sheep into their own country.  (See map facing p. 120.)  By
this victory, Bruce reestablished the independence of Scotland,--an
independence which continued until the rival kingdoms were peacefully
united under one crown, by the accession of the Scottish King, James,
to the English throne (1603).

232. The New Favorites; the King made Prisoner (1314-1326).

For the next seven years the Earl of Lancaster (S23) had his own way
in England.  During this time Edward, whose weak nature needed some
one to lean on, had got two new favorites,--Hugh Despenser and his
son.  They were men of more character than Gaveston (S230), but as
they cared chiefly for their own interests, they incurred the hatred
of the baronage.

The King's wife, Isabelle of France, now turned against him.  She had
formerly acted as a peacemaker, but from this time she did all in her
power to make trouble.  Roger Mortimer, one of the leaders of the
barons, was the sworn enemy of the Despensers.  The Queen had formed a
guilty attachment for him.  The reign of Mortimer and Isabelle was "a
reign of terror."  Together they plotted the ruin of Edward and his
favorites.  They raised a force, seized and executed the Despensers
(1326), and then took the King prisoner.

233. Deposition and Murder of the King (1327).

Having locked up Edward in Kenilworth Castle, Warwickshire, the barons
now resolved ot remove him from the throne.  Parliament drew up
articles of deposition against him, and appointed commissioners to
demand his resignation of the throne.

When they went to the castle, Edward appeared before them clad in deep
mourning.  Presently he sank fainting to the floor.  On his recovery
he burst into a fit of weeping.  But, checking himself, he thanked
Parliament through the commissioners for having chosen his eldest son
Edward, a boy of fourteen, to rule over the nation.

Sir William Trussel then stepped forward and said: "Unto thee, O King,
I, William Trussel, in the name of all men of this land of England and
Speaker of this Parliament, renounce to you, Edward, the homage [oath
of allegiance] that was made to you some time; and from this time
forth I defy thee and deprive thee of all royal power, and I shall
never be attendant on thee as King from this time."

Then Sir Thomas Blount, steward of the King's household; advanced,
broke his staff of office before the King's face, and proclaimed the
royal household dissolved.

Edward was soon after committed to Berkeley Castle,[1] in
Gloucestershire.  There, by the order of Mortimer, with the connivance
of Queen Isabelle, the "she-wolf of France," who acted as his
companion in iniquity (S232), the King was secretly and horribly
murdered.

[1] Berkeley Castle is considered one of the finest examples of feudal
architecture now remaining in England.  Over the stately structure
still floats the standard borne in the Crusades by an ancestor of the
present Lord Berkeley.

234. Summary.

The lesson of Edward II's career is found in its culmination.  Other
sovereigns had been guilty of misgovernment, others had put unworthy
and grasping favorites in power, but he was the first King whom
Parliament had deposed.

By that act it became evident that great as was the power of the King,
there had now come into existence a greater still, which could not
only make but unmake him who sat on the throne.

Edward III--1327-1377

235. Edward's Accession; Execution of Mortimer.

Edward III, son of Edward II, was crowned at fourteen.  Until he
became of age, the government was nominally in the hands of a council,
but really in the control of Queen Isabelle and her "gentle Mortimer,"
the two murderers of his father (S233).

Early in his reign Edward attempted to reconquer Scotland (S219), but
failing in his efforts, made a peace acknowledging the independence of
that country.  At home, however, he now gained a victory which
compensated him for his disappointment in not subduing the Scots.

Mortimer was staying with Queen Isabelle at Nottingham Castle.  Edward
obtained entrance by a secret passage, carried him off captive, and
soon after brought him to the gallows.  He next seized his mother, the
Queen, and kept her in confinement for the rest of her life in Castle
Rising, Norfolk.

236. The Rise of English Commerce; Wool Manufacture, 1336.

The reign of Edward III is directly connected with the rise of a
flourishing commerce with the Continent.  In the early ages of its
history England was almost wholly an agricultural country.  At length
the farmers in the eastern counties began to turn their attention to
wool growing.  They exported the fleeces, which were considered the
finest in the world, to the Flemish cities of Ghent and Bruges.  There
they were woven into cloth and returned to be sold in the English
market; for, as an old writer quaintly remarks, "The English people at
that time knew no more what to do with the wool than the sheep on
whose backs it grew."[1]

[1] Thomas Fuller.  This remark applies to the production of fine
woolens only.  The English had long manufactured common grades of
woolen cloth to some extent.

Edward's wife, Queen Philippa, was a native of a French province
adjoining Flanders, which was also engaged in the production of
cloth.  (See map facing p. 128.)  She used her influence in behalf of
the establishment of woolen factories at Norwich, and other towns in
the east of England, in 1336.  Skilled Flemish workmen were induced to
come over, and by their help England successfully laid the foundation
of one of her greatest and most lucrative industries.

From that time wool was considered a chief source of the national
wealth.  Later, that the fact might be kept constantly in mind, a
square crimson bag filled with it--the "Woolsack"--became, and still
continues to be, the seat of the Lord Chancellor in the House of
Lords.

237. The Beginning of the Hundred Years' War, 1338.

Indirectly, this trade between England and Flanders helped to bring on
a war of such duration that it received the name of the Hundred Years'
War.

Flanders was at that time a dependency of France (see map facing
p. 128), but its great commercial towns were rapidly rising in power,
and were restive and rebellious under the exactions and extortion of
their feudal master, Count Louis.  Their business interests bound them
strongly to England; and they were anxious to form an alliance with
Edward against Philip VI of France, who was determined to bring the
Flemish cities into absolute subjection.

Philip was by no means unwilling to begin hostilities with England.
He had long looked with a greedy eye on the tract of country south of
the Loire,[2] which remained in possession of the English kings, and
only wanted a pretext for annexing.  Through his alliance with
Scotland, he threatened to attack Edward's kingdom on the north.
Again, Philip's war vessels had been seizing English ships laden with
wool, so that intercourse with Flanders was maintained with difficulty
and peril.

[2] Names Aquitaine (with the exception of Poitou).  At a later period
the province got the name of Guienne, which was a part of it.  (See
map facing p. 128.)

Edward remonstrated in vain against these outrages.  At length, having
concluded an alliance with Ghent, the chief Flemish city, he boldly
claimed the crown of France as his lawful right,[1] and followed the
demand with a declaration of war.  Edward based his claim on the fact
that through his mother Isabelle he was nephew to the late French
King, Charles IV, whereas the reigning monarch was only cousin of that
monarch.  To this the French replied that since their law excluded
women from the throne, Edward's claim was worthless, because he could
not inherit the crown of France from one who could not herself have
worn it.

[1] Claim of Edward III to the French Crown

                          Philip III (of France)*
                                (1270-1285)
                                     H
                        =============H------------------
                        H                              |
                    Philip IV                    Charles, Count of
                   (1285-1314)                    Valois, d. 1325
                        H                              H
        ==========================------             Philip VI
        H          H        H          |            (of Valois)
    Louis X    Philip V  Charles IV  Isabelle       (1328-1350)
 (1314-1316) (1316-1322) (1322-1328) m. Edward II      H
        H                            of England        H
     John I                            |             John II
 (15 No.-19 Nov. 1316)             Edward III       (1350-1364)
                                  of England, 1327

*The heavy lines indicate the direct succession.

238. Battle of Cr'ecy; the "Black Prince," 1346.

For the next eight years, fighting between the two countries was going
on pretty constantly on both land and sea, but without decisive
results.  Edward was pressed for money and had to resort to all sorts
of expedients to get it, even to pawning his own and the Queen's
crown, to raise enough to pay his troops.  At last he succeeded in
equipping a strong force, and with his son, Prince Edward, a lad of
fifteen, invaded Normandy.

His plan seems to have been to attack the French army in the south of
France; but after landing he changed his mind, and determined to
ravage Normandy, and then march north to meet his Flemish allies, who
were advancing to join him.  King Edward halted on a little rise of
ground not far from Cr'ecy (or Cressy), near the coast, on the way to
Calais.  There a desperate battle took place.  (See map facing
p. 128.)

The French had the larger force, but Edward the better position.
Philip's army included a number of hired Genoese crossbowmen, on whom
he placed great dependence; but a thunderstorm had wet their
bowstrings, which rendered them nearly useless, and, as they advanced
toward the English, the afternoon sun shone so brightly in their eyes
that they could not take accurate aim.  The English archers, on the
other hand, had kept their long bows in their cases, so that the
strings were dry and ready for action (S270).

In the midst of the fight, the Earl of Warwick, who was hard pressed
by the enemy, became alarmed for the safety of young King Edward.  He
sent to the King, asking reenforcements.

"Is my son killed?" asked the King.  "No, sire, please God!"  "Is he
wounded?"  "No, sire."  "Is he thrown to the ground?"  "No, sire; but
he is in great danger."  "Then," said the King, "I shall send no aid.
Let the boy win his spurs[1]; for I wish, if God so order it, that the
honor of victory shall be his."  The father's wish was gratified.
From that time the "Black Prince," as the French called Prince Edward,
from the color of his armor, became a name renowned throughout Europe.

[1] Spurs were the especial badge of knighthood.  It was expected of
every one who attained that honor that he should do some deed of
valor; this was called "winning his spurs."

The battle, however, was gained, not by his bravery, or that of the
nobles who supported him, but by the sturdy English yeomen armed with
their long bows.  With these weapons they shot their keen white arrows
so thick and fast, and with such deadly aim, that a writer who was
present on the field compared them to a shower of snow.  It was that
fatal snowstorm which won the day.[2]  We shall see presently (S240)
that the great importance of this victory to the English turned on the
fact that by it King Edward was able to move on Calais and secure
possession of that port.

[2] The English yeomen, or country people, excelled in the use of the
long bow.  They probably learned its value from their Norman
conquerors, who empoyed it with great effect at the battle of
Hastings.  Writing at a much later period, Bishop Latimer said: "In my
tyme my poore father was as diligent to teach me to shote as to learne
anye other thynge....He taught me how to drawe, how to laye my bodye
in my bowe, and not to drawe wyth strength of armes as other nacions
do, but wyth strength of the bodye.  I had bowes broughte me accordyng
to my age and strength; as I encreased in them, so my bowes were made
bigger, and bigger, for men shal neuer shot well, excepte they be
broughte up in it."  The advantage of this weapon over the steel
crossbow (used by the Genoese) lay in the fact that it could be
discharged much more rapidly, the latter being a cumbrous affair,
which had to be wound up with a crank for each shot.  Hence the
English long bow was to that age what the revolver is to ours.  It
sent an arrow with such force that only the best armor could withstand
it.  The French peasantry at that period had no skill with this
weapon, and about the only part they took in a battle was to stab
horses and despatch wounded men.
   Scott, in the Archery Contest in "Ivanhoe" (Chapter XIII), has
given an excellent picture of the English bowman.

239. Use of Cannon, 1346; Chivalry.

At Cre'cy (S238) small cannon appear to have been used for the first
time in field warfare, though gunpowder was probably known to the
English friar, Roger Bacon (S208), a hundred years before.  The object
of the cannon was to frighten and annoy the horses of the French
cavalry.  They were laughed at as ingenious toys; but in the course of
the next two centuries those toys revolutionized warfare (S270) and
made the steel-clad knight little more than a tradition and a name.

In its day, however, knighthood (S153) did the world a good service.
Chivalry aimed to make the profession of arms a noble instead of a
brutal calling.  It gave it somewhat of a religious character.

It taught the warrior the worth of honor, truthfulness, and courtesy,
as well as valor,--qualities which still survive in the best type of
the modern gentleman.  We owe, therefore, no small debt to that
military brotherhood of the past, and may join the English poet in his
epitaph on the order:

        "The Knights are dust,
         Their good swords rust;
         Their souls are with the saints, we trust."[1]

[1] Coleridge; see Scott's "Ivanhoe."

240. Edward III takes Calais, 1347.

King Edward now marched against Calais.  He was particularly anxious
to take the place: first, because it was a favorite resort of
desperate pirates; secondly, because such a fortified port on the
Strait of Dover, within sight of the chalk cliffs of England, would
give him at all times "an open doorway into France."

After besieging it for nearly a year, the garrison was starved into
submission and prepared to open the gates.  Edward was so exasperated
with the stubborn resistance the town had made, that he resolved to
put the entire population to the sword.  But at last he consented to
spare them, on condition that six of the chief men should give
themselves up to be hanged.  A meeting was called, and St. Pierre, the
wealthiest citizen of the place, volunteered, with five others, to go
forth and die.  Bareheaded, barefooted, with halters round their
necks, they silently went out, carrying the keys of the city.  When
they appeared before the English King, he ordered the executioner, who
was standing by, to seize them and carry out the sentence forthwith.
But Queen Philippa (S236), who had accompanied her husband, now fell
on her knees before him, and with tears begged that they might be
forgiven.  For a long time Edward was inexorable, but finally, unable
to resist her entreaties, he granted her request, and the men who had
dared to face death for others found life both for themselves and
their fellow citizens.[1]  Calais now became an English town and the
English kept it for more than two hundred years (S373).  This gave
them the power to invade France whenever it seemed for their interest
to do so.

[1] Froissart's "Chronicles."

241. Victory of Poitiers (1356).

After a long truce, war again broke out.  Philip VI had died, and his
son, John II, now sat on the French throne.  Edward, during this
campaign, ravaged northern France.  The next year his son, the Black
Prince (S238), marched from Bordeaux into the heart of the country.

Reaching Poitiers with a force of ten thousand men, he found himself
nearly surrounded by a French army of sixty thousand.  The Prince so
placed his troops amidst the narrow lanes and vineyards, that the
enemy could not attack him with their full strength.  Again the
English archers gained the day (S238), and King John himself was taken
prisoner and carried in triumph to England.  (See map facing p. 128.)

242. Peace of Bre'tigny, 1360.

The victory of Poitiers was followed by another truce; then war began
again.  Edward intended besieging Paris, but was forced to retire to
obtain provisions for his troops.  Negotiations were now opened by the
French.  While these great negotiations were going on, a terrible
thunderstorm destroyed great numbers of men and horses in Edward's
camp.

Edward, believing it a sign of the displeasure of Heaven against his
expedition, fell on his knees, and within sight of the Cathedral of
Chartres vowed to make peace.  A treaty was accordingly signed at
Bre'tigny near by.  By it, Edward renounced his claim to Normandy and
the French crown.  But notwithstanding that fact, all English
sovereigns insisted on retaining the title of "King of France" down to
a late period of the reign of George III.  France, on the other hand,
acknowledged the right of England, in full sovereignty, to the country
south of the Loire, together with Calais, and agreed to pay an
enormous ransom in pure gold for the restoration of King John.

243. Effects of the French Wars in England.

The great gain to England from these wars was not in the territory
conquered, but in the new feeling of unity they aroused among all
classes.  The memory of the brave deeds achieved in those fierce
contests on a foreign soil never faded out.  The glory of the Black
Prince (SS238, 241), whose rusted helmet and dented shield still hang
above his tomb in Canterbury Cathedral,[1] became one with the glory
of the plain bowmen, whose names are found only in country
churchyards.

[1] This is probably the oldest armor of the king in Great Britain.
See Stothard's "Monumental Effigies."

Henceforth, whatever lingering feeling of jealousy and hatred had
remained in England, between the Norman and the Englishman (S192), now
gradually melted away.  An honest, patriotic pride made both feel that
at last they had become a united and homogeneous people.

The second effect of the wars was political.  In order to carry them
on, the King had to apply constantly to Parliament for money (SS217,
220).  Each time that body granted a supply, they insisted on some
reform which increased their strength, and brought the Crown more and
more under the influence of the nation.  (See Summary of
Constitutional History in the Appendix, p. xii, S13.)

The it came to be clearly understood that though the King held the
sword, the people held the purse; and that the ruler who made the
greatest concessions got the largest grants.

It was also in this reign that the House of Commons (SS213, 217, 262),
which now sat as a separate body, obtained the important power of
impeaching, or bringing to trial before the upper House, any of the
King's ministers or council who should be accused of misgovernment
(1376).  (See S247, and Summary of Constitutional History in the
Appendix, p. xii, S13.)

About this time, also, statutes were passed which forbade appeals from
the King's courts of justice to that of the Pope,[1] who was then a
Frenchman, and was believed to be under French political influence.
Furthermore, all foreign Church officials were prohibited from asking
or taking money from the English Church, or interfering in any way
with its management.[2]

[1] First Statute of Provisors (1351) and of Praemunire (1353)
(S265).  The first Statute of Praemunire did not mention the Pope or
the Court of Rome by name; the second, or Great Statute of Praemunire
of 1393, expressly mentioned them in the strongest terms.  See
Constitutionals Documents in the Appendix, p. xxxii.
[2] Statute of Provisors (1351), and see S265.

244. The Black Death, or Plague, 1349.

Shortly after the first campaign in France, a frightful pestilence
broke out in London, which swept over the country, destroying upwards
of half the population.  The disease, which was known as the Black
Death, had already traversed Europe, where it had proved equally
fatal.

"How many amiable young persons," said a noted writer of that period,
"breakfasted with their friends in the morning, who, when evening
came, supped with their ancestors!"  In Bristol and some other English
cities, the mortality was so great that the living were hardly able to
bury the dead; so that all business, and for a time even war, came to
a standstill.

245. Effect of the Plague on Labor, 1349.

