character. She is remarkable for _decency_ and _propriety_ of conduct--and
her _delicacy_, even in trifling minutiae, has been a trait of special
remark by the females of my family. This trait, which is obviously quite
unaffected, would be a most inexplicable anomaly, if her former habits had
been so indecent and depraved as Mr. Wood alleges. Her chief faults, so
far as we have discovered them, are, a somewhat violent and hasty temper,
and a considerable share of natural pride and self-importance; but these
defects have been but rarely and transiently manifested, and have scarcely
occasioned an hour's uneasiness at any time in our household. Her
religious knowledge, notwithstanding the pious care of her Moravian
instructors in Antigua, is still but very limited, and her views of
christianity indistinct; but her profession, whatever it may have of
imperfection, I am convinced, has nothing of insincerity. In short, we
consider her on the whole as respectable and well-behaved a person in her
station, as any domestic, white or black, (and we have had ample
experience of both colours,) that we have ever had in our service.

But after all, Mary's character, important though its exculpation be to
her, is not really the point of chief practical interest in this case.
Suppose all Mr. Wood's defamatory allegations to be true--suppose him to
be able to rake up against her out of the records of the Antigua police,
or from the veracious testimony of his brother colonists, twenty stories
as bad or worse than what he insinuates--suppose the whole of her own
statement to be false, and even the whole of her conduct since she came
under our observation here to be a tissue of hypocrisy;--suppose all
this--and leave the negro woman as black in character as in
complexion,[21]--yet it would affect not the main facts--which are
these.--1. Mr. Wood, not daring in England to punish this woman
arbitrarily, as he would have done in the West Indies, drove her out of
his house, or left her, at least, only the alternative of returning
instantly to Antigua, with the certainty of severe treatment there, or
submitting in silence to what she considered intolerable usage in his
household. 2. He has since obstinately persisted in refusing her
manumission, to enable her to return home in security, though repeatedly
offered more than ample compensation for her value as a slave; and this on
various frivolous pretexts, but really, and indeed not unavowedly, in
order to _punish_ her for leaving his service in England, though he
himself had professed to give her that option. These unquestionable facts
speak volumes.[22]

[Footnote 21: If it even were so, how strong a plea of palliation might not
the poor negro bring, by adducing the neglect of her various owners to
afford religious instruction or moral discipline, and the habitual
influence of their evil _example_ (to say the very least,) before her
eyes? What moral good could she possibly learn--what moral evil could she
easily escape, while under the uncontrolled power of such masters as she
describes Captain I---- and Mr. D---- of Turk's Island? All things
considered, it is indeed wonderful to find her such as she now is. But as
she has herself piously expressed it, "that God whom then she knew not
mercifully preserved her for better things."]

[Footnote 22: Since the preceding pages were printed off, I have been
favoured with a communication from the Rev. J. Curtin, to whom among other
acquaintances of Mr. Wood's in this country, the entire proof sheets of
this pamphlet had been sent for inspection. Mr. Curtin corrects some
omissions and inaccuracies in Mary Prince's narrative (see page 17,) by
stating, 1. That she was baptized, not in August, but on the 6th of April,
1817; 2. That sometime before her baptism, on her being admitted a
catechumen, preparatory to that holy ordinance, she brought a note from
her owner, Mr. Wood, recommending her for religious instruction, &c.; 3.
That it was his usual practice, when any adult slaves came on _week days_
to school, to require their owners' permission for their attendance; but
that on _Sundays_ the chapel was open indiscriminately to all.--Mary,
after a personal interview with Mr. Curtin, and after hearing his letter
read by me, still maintains that Mr. Wood's note recommended her for
baptism merely, and that she never received any religious instruction
whatever from Mr. and Mrs. Wood, or from any one else at that period
beyond what she has stated in her narrative. In regard to her
non-admission to the Sunday school without permission from her owners, she
admits that she may possibly have mistaken the clergyman's meaning on that
point, but says that such was certainly her impression at the time, and
the actual cause of her non-attendance.

Mr. Curtin finds in his books some reference to Mary's connection with a
Captain ----, (the individual, I believe, alluded to by Mr. Phillips at
page 32); but he states that when she attended his chapel she was always
decently and becomingly dressed, and appeared to him to be in a situation
of trust in her mistress's family.

Mr. Curtin offers no comment on any other part of Mary's statement; but he
speaks in very favourable, though general terms of the respectability of
Mr. Wood, whom he had known for many years in Antigua; and of Mrs. Wood,
though she was not personally known to him, he says, that he had "heard
her spoken of by those of her acquaintance, as a lady of very mild and
amiable manners."

Another friend of Mr. and Mrs. Wood, a lady who had been their guest both
in Antigua and England, alleges that Mary has grossly misrepresented them
in her narrative; and says that she "can vouch for their being the most
benevolent, kind-hearted people that can possibly live." She has declined,
however, to furnish me with any written correction of the
misrepresentations she complains of, although I offered to insert her
testimony in behalf of her friends, if sent to me in time. And having
already kept back the publication a fortnight waiting for communications
of this sort, I will not delay it longer. Those who have withheld their
strictures have only themselves to blame.

Of the general character of Mr. and Mrs. Wood, I would not designedly give
any _unfair_ impression. Without implicitly adopting either the _ex parte_
view of Mary Prince, or the unmeasured encomiums of their friends, I am
willing to believe them to be, on the whole, fair, perhaps favourable,
specimens of colonial character. Let them even be rated, if you will, in
the very highest and most benevolent class of slave-holders; and, laying
everything else entirely out of view, let Mr. Wood's conduct in this
affair be tried exclusively by the facts established beyond dispute, and
by his own statement of the case in his letter to Mr. Taylor. But then, I
ask, if the very _best_ and _mildest_ of your slave-owners can act as Mr.
Wood is proved to have acted, what is to be expected of persons whose
mildness, or equity, or common humanity no one will dare to vouch for? If
such things are done in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?--And
what else then can Colonial Slavery possibly be, even in its best estate,
but a system incurably evil and iniquitous?--I require no other data--I
need add no further comment.]

The case affords a most instructive illustration of the true spirit of the
slave system, and of the pretensions of the slave-holders to assert, not
merely their claims to a "vested right" in the _labour_ of their bondmen,
but to an indefeasible property in them as their "absolute chattels." It
furnishes a striking practical comment on the assertions of the West
Indians that self-interest is a sufficient check to the indulgence of
vindictive feelings in the master; for here is a case where a man (a
_respectable_ and _benevolent_ man as his friends aver,) prefers losing
entirely the full price of the slave, for the mere satisfaction of
preventing a poor black woman from returning home to her husband! If the
pleasure of thwarting the benevolent wishes of the Anti-Slavery Society in
behalf of the deserted negro, be an additional motive with Mr. Wood, it
will not much mend his wretched plea.

       *       *       *       *       *

I may here add a few words respecting the earlier portion of Mary Prince's
narrative. The facts there stated must necessarily rest entirely,--since
we have no collateral evidence,--upon their intrinsic claims to
probability, and upon the reliance the reader may feel disposed, after
perusing the foregoing pages, to place on her veracity. To my judgment,
the internal evidence of the truth of her narrative appears remarkably
strong. The circumstances are related in a tone of natural sincerity, and
are accompanied in almost every case with characteristic and minute
details, which must, I conceive, carry with them full conviction to every
candid mind that this negro woman has actually seen, felt, and suffered
all that she so impressively describes; and that the picture she has given
of West Indian slavery is not less true than it is revolting.

But there may be some persons into whose hands this tract may fall, so
imperfectly acquainted with the real character of Negro Slavery, as to be
shocked into partial, if not absolute incredulity, by the acts of inhuman
oppression and brutality related of Capt. I---- and his wife, and of Mr.
D----, the salt manufacturer of Turk's Island. Here, at least, such
persons may be disposed to think, there surely must be _some_
exaggeration; the facts are too shocking to be credible. The facts are
indeed shocking, but unhappily not the less credible on that account.
Slavery is a curse to the oppressor scarcely less than to the oppressed:
its natural tendency is to brutalize both. After a residence myself of six
years in a slave colony, I am inclined to doubt whether, as regards its
_demoralizing_ influence, the master is not even a greater object of
compassion than his bondman. Let those who are disposed to doubt the
atrocities related in this narrative, on the testimony of a sufferer,
examine the details of many cases of similar barbarity that have lately
come before the public, on unquestionable evidence. Passing over the
reports of the Fiscal of Berbice,[23] and the Mauritius horrors recently
unveiled,[24] let them consider the case of Mr. and Mrs. Moss, of the
Bahamas, and their slave Kate, so justly denounced by the Secretary for
the Colonies;[25]--the cases of Eleanor Mead,[26]--of Henry
Williams,[27]--and of the Rev. Mr. Bridges and Kitty Hylton,[28] in
Jamaica. These cases alone might suffice to demonstrate the inevitable
tendency of slavery as it exists in our colonies, to brutalize the master
to a truly frightful degree--a degree which would often cast into the
shade even the atrocities related in the narrative of Mary Prince; and
which are sufficient to prove, independently of all other evidence, that
there is nothing in the revolting character of the facts to affect their
credibility; but that on the contrary, similar deeds are at this very time
of frequent occurrence in almost every one of our slave colonies. The
system of coercive labour may vary in different places; it may be more
destructive to human life in the cane culture of Mauritius and Jamaica,
than in the predial and domestic bondage of Bermuda or the Bahamas,--but
the spirit and character of slavery are every where the same, and cannot
fail to produce similar effects. Wherever slavery prevails, there will
inevitably be found cruelty and oppression. Individuals who have preserved
humane, and amiable, and tolerant dispositions towards their black
dependents, may doubtless be found among slave-holders; but even where a
happy instance of this sort occurs, such as Mary's first mistress, the
kind-hearted Mrs. Williams, the favoured condition of the slave is still
as precarious as it is rare: it is every moment at the mercy of events;
and must always be held by a tenure so proverbially uncertain as that of
human prosperity, or human life. Such examples, like a feeble and
flickering streak of light in a gloomy picture, only serve by contrast to
exhibit the depth of the prevailing shades. Like other exceptions, they
only prove the general rule: the unquestionable tendency of the system is
to vitiate the best tempers, and to harden the most feeling hearts. "Never
be kind, nor speak kindly to a slave," said an accomplished English lady
in South Africa to my wife: "I have now," she added, "been for some time a
slave-owner, and have found, from vexatious experience in my own
household, that nothing but harshness and hauteur will do with slaves."

[Footnote 23: See Anti-Slavery Reporter, Nos. 5 and 16.]

[Footnote 24: Ibid, No. 44.]

[Footnote 25: Ibid, No. 47.]

[Footnote 26: Ibid, No. 64, p. 345; No. 71, p. 481.]

[Footnote 27: Ibid, No. 65, p. 356; No. 69, p. 431.]

[Footnote 28: Anti-Slavery Reporter, Nos. 66, 69, and 76.]

I might perhaps not inappropriately illustrate this point more fully by
stating many cases which fell under my own personal observation, or became
known to me through authentic sources, at the Cape of Good Hope--a colony
where slavery assumes, as it is averred, a milder aspect than in any other
dependency of the empire where it exists; and I could shew, from the
judicial records of that colony, received by me within these few weeks,
cases scarcely inferior in barbarity to the worst of those to which I have
just specially referred; but to do so would lead me too far from the
immediate purpose of this pamphlet, and extend it to an inconvenient
length. I shall therefore content myself with quoting a single short
passage from the excellent work of my friend Dr. Walsh, entitled "Notices
of Brazil,"--a work which, besides its other merits, has vividly
illustrated the true spirit of Negro Slavery, as it displays itself not
merely in that country, but wherever it has been permitted to open its
Pandora's box of misery and crime.

Let the reader ponder on the following just remarks, and compare the facts
stated by the Author in illustration of them, with the circumstances
related at pages 6 and 7 of Mary's narrative:--

     "If then we put out of the question the injury inflicted on
     others, and merely consider the deterioration of feeling and
     principle with which it operates on ourselves, ought it not
     to be a sufficient, and, indeed, unanswerable argument,
     against the permission of Slavery?

     "The exemplary manner in which the paternal duties are
     performed at home, may mark people as the most fond and
     affectionate parents; but let them once go abroad, and come
     within the contagion of slavery, and it seems to alter the
     very nature of a man; and the father has sold, and still
     sells, the mother and his children, with as little
     compunction as he would a sow and her litter of pigs; and he
     often disposes of them together.

     "This deterioration of feeling is conspicuous in many ways
     among the Brazilians. They are naturally a people of a
     humane and good-natured disposition, and much indisposed to
     cruelty or severity of any kind. Indeed, the manner in which
     many of them treat their slaves is a proof of this, as it is
     really gentle and considerate; but the natural tendency to
     cruelty and oppression in the human heart, is continually
     evolved by the impunity and uncontrolled licence in which
     they are exercised. I never walked through the streets of
     Rio, that some house did not present to me the semblance of
     a bridewell, where the moans and the cries of the sufferers,
     and the sounds of whips and scourges within, announced to me
     that corporal punishment was being inflicted. Whenever I
     remarked this to a friend, I was always answered that the
     refractory nature of the slave rendered it necessary, and no
     house could properly be conducted unless it was practised.
     But this is certainly not the case; and the chastisement is
     constantly applied in the very wantonness of barbarity, and
     would not, and dared not, be inflicted on the humblest
     wretch in society, if he was not a slave, and so put out of
     the pale of pity.

     "Immediately joining our house was one occupied by a
     mechanic, from which the most dismal cries and moans
     constantly proceeded. I entered the shop one day, and found
     it was occupied by a saddler, who had two negro boys working
     at his business. He was a tawny, cadaverous-looking man,
     with a dark aspect; and he had cut from his leather a
     scourge like a Russian knout, which he held in his hand, and
     was in the act of exercising on one of the naked children in
     an inner room: and this was the cause of the moans and cries
     we heard every day, and almost all day long.

     "In the rear of our house was another, occupied by some
     women of bad character, who kept, as usual, several negro
     slaves. I was awoke early one morning by dismal cries, and
     looking out of the window, I saw in the back yard of the
     house, a black girl of about fourteen years old; before her
     stood her mistress, a white woman, with a large stick in her
     hand. She was undressed except her petticoat and chemise,
     which had fallen down and left her shoulders and bosom bare.
     Her hair was streaming behind, and every fierce and
     malevolent passion was depicted in her face. She too, like
     my hostess at Governo [another striking illustration of the
     _dehumanizing_ effects of Slavery,] was the very
     representation of a fury. She was striking the poor girl,
     whom she had driven up into a corner, where she was on her
     knees appealing for mercy. She shewed her none, but
     continued to strike her on the head and thrust the stick
     into her face, till she was herself exhausted, and her poor
