



BOOK FOUR


ARGUMENT

Dido opens her heart to her sister. But for her promised loyalty to
the dead Sychaeus, she must have yielded (1-36). Anna pleads for
AEneas, and Dido half-yielding sacrifices to the marriage-gods. The
growth of her passion is described (37-104). Venus feigns assent to
Juno's proposal that AEneas shall marry Dido and be king of Carthage.
At a hunting Juno will send a storm and the lovers will shelter in
a cave, and there plight their vows (105-144). The plot is
consummated. Dido yields (145-198). Description of Rumour, who
bruits abroad the story and rouses the jealous Iarbas to conjure his
father, Jupiter, to interpose (199-248). Jupiter sends Mercury to
remind AEneas of his mission (249-298). AEneas, terrified by the
message, prepares for instant flight, to the delight of his followers
and the despair of Dido (299-342), who entreats him to stay, and
rehearses the dangers to which he is leaving her (343-374). AEneas
is obdurate. Although he loves Dido, he is the slave of a destiny
which he must at all costs fulfil (375-410). After calling down a
solemn curse upon him Dido swoons, but crushing the impulse to
comfort her, he hastens his preparations for departure (411-468).
Dido sends Anna with a last appeal to AEneas, who nevertheless, in
spite of struggles, obeys the gods (469-513). In utter misery Dido,
on pretext of burning all AEneas' love-gifts, prepares a pyre and
summons a sorceress. Her preparations complete, she utters her last
lament (514-639). Mercury repeats his warning to AEneas, who sails
forthwith (640-671). Daybreak reveals his flight, and Dido--cursing
her betrayer--falls by her own hand, to the despair of her sister
and the consternation of her subjects (672-837).


I.  Long since a prey to passion's torturing pains,
    The Queen was wasting with the secret flame,
    The cruel wound was feeding on her veins.
    Back to the fancy of the lovelorn dame
    Came the chief's valour and his country's fame.
    His looks, his words still lingered in her breast,
    Deep-fixt. And now the dewy Dawn upcame,
    And chased the shadows, when her love's unrest
Thus to her sister's soul responsive she confessed:

II. "What dreams, dear Anna, fill me with alarms;
    What stranger guest is this? like whom in face?
    How proud in portance, how expert in arms!
    In sooth I deem him of celestial race;
    Fear argues souls degenerate and base;
    But he--how oft by danger sore bestead,
    What warlike exploits did his lips retrace.
    Were not my purpose steadfast, ne'er to wed,
Since love first played me false, and mocked me with the dead,

III. "Were I not sick of bridal torch and bower,
    This once, perchance, I had been frail again.
    Anna--for I will own it--since the hour
    When, poor Sychaeus miserably slain,
    A brother's murder rent a home in twain,
    He, he alone my stubborn will could tame,
    And stir the balance of my soul. Too plain
    I know the traces of the long-quenched flame;
The sparks of love revive, rekindled, but the same.

IV. "But O! gape Earth, or may the Sire of might
    Hurl me with lightning to the Shades amain,
    Pale shades of Erebus and abysmal Night,
    Ere, wifely modesty, thy name I stain,
    Or dare thy sacred precepts to profane.
    Nay, he whose love first linked us long ago,
    Took all my love, and he shall still retain
    And guard it with him in the grave below."
She spake, and o'er her lap the gushing tears outflow.

V.  Then Anna: "Sister, dearer than the day,
    Why thus in loneliness and endless woe
    Wilt thou for ever wear thy youth away?
    Nor care sweet sons, fair Venus' gifts to know?
    Think'st thou such grief concerns the shades below?
    What though no husband, Libyan or of Tyre,
    Could bend a heart made desolate; what though
    In vain Iarbas did thy love desire,
And Africa's proud chiefs, why quench a pleasing fire?

VI. "Think too, whose lands surround thee: on this side,
    Gaetulian cities, an unconquered race,
    Numidians, reinless as the steeds they ride,
    And cheerless Syrtis hold thee in embrace;
    There fierce Barcaeans and a sandy space
    Wasted by drought. Why tell of wars from Tyre,
    A brother's threats? Well know I Juno's grace
    And heaven's propitious auspices conspire
To find for Trojans here the home of their desire.

VII. "Sister, how glorious even now these towers,
    What realm shall rise, with such a wondrous pair
    When Teucrian arms join fellowship with ours,
    What glory shall the Punic state upbear!
    Pray thou to heaven and, having gained thy prayer,
    Indulge thy welcome, and thy guest entreat
    To tarry. Bid him winter's storms beware;
    Point to Orion's watery star, the fleet
Still shattered, and the skies for mariners unmeet."

VIII. So fanned, her passion kindled into flame:
    Hope scattered scruples, and her doubts gave way,
    And loosed were all the lingering ties of shame.
    First to the fane the sisters haste away,
    And there for peace at every shrine they pray,
    And chosen ewes, as ancient rites ordain,
    To Sire Lyaeus, to the God of Day,
    And Ceres, giver of the law, are slain,
And most to Juno's power, who guards the nuptial chain.

IX. Herself, the lovely Dido, bowl in hand,
    O'er a white heifer's forehead pours the wine,
    Or by the Gods' rich altars takes her stand,
    And piles the gifts, and o'er the slaughtered kine
    Pores, from the quivering heartstrings to divine
    The doom of Fate. Blind seers, alas! what art
    To calm her frenzy, now hath vow or shrine?
    Deep in her marrow feeds the tender smart,
Unseen, the silent wound is festering in her heart.

X.  Poor Dido burns, and roams from street to street,
    Wild as a doe, whom heedless, far away,
    Some swain hath pierced amid the woods of Crete,
    And left, unware, the flying steel to stay,
    While through the forests and the lawns his prey
    Roams, with the death-bolt clinging to her side.
    Now to AEneas doth the queen display
    Her walls and wealth, the dowry of his bride;
Oft she essays to speak, so oft the utterance died.

XI. Again, when evening steals upon the light,
    She seeks the feast, again would fain give ear
    To Troy's sad tale and, ravished with delight,
    Hangs on his lips; and when the hall is clear,
    And the moon sinks, and drowsy stars appear,
    Alone she mourns, clings to the couch he pressed,
    Him absent sees, his absent voice doth hear,
    Now, fain to cheat her utter love's unrest,
Clasps for his sire's sweet sake Ascanius to her breast.

XII. No longer rise the growing towers, nor care
    The youths in martial exercise to vie,
    Nor ports nor bulwarks for defence prepare.
    The frowning battlements neglected lie,
    And lofty scaffolding that threats the sky.
    Her, when Saturnian Juno saw possessed
    With love so tameless, as would dare defy
    The shame that whispers in a woman's breast,
Forthwith the queen of Jove fair Venus thus addressed:

XIII. "Fine spoils, forsooth, proud triumph ye have won,
    Thou and thy boy,--vast worship and renown!
    Two gods by fraud one woman have undone.
    But well I know ye fear the rising town,
    The homes of Carthage offered for your own.
    When shall this end? or why a feud so dire?
    Let lasting peace and plighted wedlock crown
    The compact. See, thou hast thy heart's desire,
Poor Dido burns with love, her blood is turned to fire.

XIV. "Come then and rule we, each with equal power,
    These folks as one. Let Tyrian Dido bear
    A Phrygian's yoke, and Tyrians be her dower."
    Then Venus, for she marked the Libyan snare
    To snatch Italia's lordship, "Who would care
    To spurn such offer, or with thee contend,
    Should fortune follow on a scheme so fair?
    'Tis Fate, I doubt, if Jupiter intend
The sons of Tyre and Troy in common league to blend.

XV. "Thou art his consort; 'tis thy right to learn
    By prayer the counsels of his breast. Lead thou,
    I follow." Quickly Juno made return:
    "Be mine that task. Now briefly will I show
    What means our purpose shall achieve, and how.
    Soon as to-morrow's rising sun is seen,
    And Titan's rays unveil the world below,
    Forth ride AEneas and the love-sick Queen,
With followers to the chase, to scour the woodland green.

XVI. "While busy beaters round the lawns prepare
    Their feathered nets, thick sleet-storms will I shower
    And rend all heaven with thunder. Here and there
    The rest shall fly, and in the darkness cower.
    One cave shall screen both lovers in that hour.
    There will I be, if thou approve, meanwhile
    And make her his in wedlock. Hymen's power
    Shall seal the rite."--Not adverse, with a smile
Sweet Venus nods assent, and gladdens at the guile.

XVII. Meanwhile Aurora o'er the deep appears.
    At daybreak, issuing from the gates is seen
    A chosen train, with nets and steel-tipt spears
    And wide-meshed toils; and sleuth-hounds, staunch and keen,
    Mixed with Massylian riders, scour the green.
    Each on his charger, by the doorway sit
    The princes, waiting for the lingering Queen.
    Her steed, with gold and purple housings fit,
Impatient paws the ground, and champs the foaming bit.

XVIII. Now forth at length, with numbers in her train,
    She comes in state, majestic to behold,
    Wrapped in a purpled scarf of Tyrian grain.
    All golden is her quiver; knots of gold
    Confine her hair; a golden clasp doth hold
    Her purple cloak. Behind her throng amain
    The Trojans, with Iulus, blithe and bold,
    And good AEneas, with the rest, as fain,
Joins in, and steps along, the comeliest of the train.

XIX. As when from wintry Lycia and the shore
    Of Xanthus, to his mother's Delian seat
    Apollo comes, the dances to restore.
    Around his shrines Dryopians, sons of Crete,
    And tattooed Agathyrsians shouting meet.
    He, on high Cynthus moving, binds around
    His flowing locks the foliage soft and sweet,
    And braids with gold: his arms behind him sound,
So firm AEneas strode, such grace his features crowned.

XX. The hill-tops and the pathless lairs they gain.
    Lo! from the rocks dislodged, the goats in fear
    Bound o'er the crags. In dust-clouds o'er the plain
    Down from the mountains rush the frightened deer.
    On mettled steed the boy, in wild career,
    Outrides them, glorying in the chase. No more
    He heeds such timid prey, but longs to hear
    The tawny lion, issuing with a roar
Forth from the lofty hills, and front the foaming boar.

XXI. Meanwhile deep mutterings vex the louring sky,
    And, mixt with hail, in torrents comes the rain.
    Scar'd, o'er the fields to diverse shelter fly
    Troy's sons, Ascanius, and the Tyrian train.
    Down from the hills the deluge pours amain.
    One cave protects the pair. Earth gives the sign,
    With Juno, mistress of the nuptial chain.
    And heaven bears witness, and the lightnings shine,
And from the crags above shriek out the Nymphs divine.

XXII. Dark day of fate, and dismal hour of sin!
    Then first disaster did the gods ordain,
    And death and woe were destined to begin.
    Nor shame nor scandal now the Queen restrain,
    No more she meditates to hide the stain,
    No longer chooses to conceal her flame.
    Marriage she calls it, but the fraud is plain,
    And pretexts weaves, and with a specious name
Attempts to veil her guilt, and sanctify her shame.

XXIII. Fame with the news through Libya's cities hies,
    Fame, far the swiftest of all mischiefs bred;
    Speed gives her force; she strengthens as she flies.
    Small first through fear, she lifts a loftier head,
    Her forehead in the clouds, on earth her tread.
    Last sister of Enceladus, whom Earth
    Brought forth, in anger with the gods, 'tis said,
    Swift-winged, swift-footed, of enormous girth,
Huge, horrible, deformed, a giantess from birth.

XXIV. As many feathers as her form surround,
    Strange sight! peep forth so many watchful eyes,
    So many mouths and tattling tongues resound,
    So many ears among the plumes uprise.
    By night with shrieks 'twixt heaven and earth she flies,
    Nor suffers sleep her eyelids to subdue;
    By day, the terror of great towns, she spies
    From towers and housetops, perched aloft in view,
Fond of the false and foul, yet herald of the true.

XXV. So now, exulting, with a mingled hum
    Of truth and falsehood, through the crowd she sped;
    How one AEneas hath from Ilion come,
    A Dardan guest, whom Dido deigns to wed.
    Now, lapt in dalliance and with ease o'erfed,
    All winter long they revel in their shame,
    Lost to their kingdoms. Such the tale she spread;
    And straight the demon to Iarbas came,
And wrath on wrath upheaped, and fanned his soul to flame.

XXVI. Born of a nymph, by Ammon's forced embrace,
    A hundred temples and in each a shrine
    He built to Jove, the father of his race,
    And lit the sacred fires, that sleepless shine,
    The Gods' eternal watches. Slaughtered kine
    Smoke on the teeming pavement, garlands fair
    Of various hues the stately porch entwine.
    Stung by the bitter tidings, in despair
Before the gods he kneels, and pours a suppliant's prayer.

XXVII. "Great Jove, to whom our Moorish tribes, reclined
    On broidered couch, the votive wine-cup drain,
    See'st thou or, Father, are thy bolts but blind,
    Mere noise thy thunder, and thy lightnings vain?
    This woman here, who, wandering on the main,
    Bought leave to build and govern as her own
    Her puny town, and till the sandy plain,
    Our proffered love hath ventured to disown,
And takes a Trojan lord, AEneas, to her throne.

XXVIII. "And now that Paris, tricked in Lydian guise,
    With perfumed locks and bonnet, and his crew
    Of men half-women, gloats upon the prize,
    While vainly at thy so-called shrines we sue,
    And nurse a faith as empty as untrue."
    He prayed and clasped the altar. His request
    Jove heard, and to the city bent his view,
    And saw the guilty lovers, lapt in rest
And lost to shame, and thus Cyllenius he addressed:

XXIX. "Go, son, the Zephyrs call, and wing thy flight
    To Carthage. Call the Dardan chief away,
    Who, deaf to Fate, his destined walls doth slight.
    This mandate through the wafting air convey,
    Not such fair Venus did her son pourtray,
    Nor twice for _this_ from Grecian swords reclaim
    One born to rule Italia, big with sway
    And fierce for war, and spread the Teucrian name
Through Teucer's sons, and laws to conquered earth proclaim.

XXX. "If glory cannot tempt him, nor inflame
    His soul to win such greatness, if indeed
    He takes no trouble for his own fair fame,
    Shall he, a father, envy to his seed
    The towers of Rome, by destiny decreed?
    What schemes he now? what hope the chief constrains
    To linger 'mid a hostile race, nor heed
    Ausonia's sons and the Lavinian plains?
Go, bid him sail; enough; that word the sum contains."

XXXI. Jove spake. Cyllenius to his feet binds fast
    His golden sandals, that aloft in flight
    O'er sea and shore upbear him with the blast,
    Then takes his rod--the rod of mystic might,
    That calls from Hell or plunges into night
    The pallid ghosts, gives sleep or bids it fly,
    And lifts the dead man's eyelids to the light.
    Armed with that rod, he rules the clouds on high,
And drives the scattered gales, and sails the stormy sky.

XXXII. Now, borne along, beneath him he espies
    The sides precipitous and towering peak
    Of rugged Atlas, who upholds the skies.
    Round his pine-covered forehead, wild and bleak,
    The dark clouds settle and the storm-winds shriek.
    His shoulders glisten with the mantling snow,
    Dark roll the torrents down his aged cheek,
    Seamed with the wintry ravage, and below,
Stiff with the gathered ice his hoary beard doth show.

XXXIII. Poised on his wings, here first Cyllenius stood,
    Then downward shot, and in the salt sea spray
    Dipped like a sea-gull, who, in quest of food,
    Searches the teeming shore-cliffs for his prey,
    And scours the rocks and skims along the bay.
    So swiftly now, between the earth and skies,
    Leaving his mother's sire, his airy way
    Cyllene's god on cleaving pinions plies,
As o'er the Libyan sands along the wind he flies.

XXXIV. Scarce now at Carthage had he stayed his feet,
    Among the huts AEneas he espied,
    Planning new towers and many a stately street.
    A sword-hilt, starred with jasper, graced his side,
    A scarf, gold-broidered by the queen, and dyed
    With Tyrian hues, was o'er his shoulders thrown.
    "What, thou--wilt thou build Carthage?" Hermes cried,
    "And stay to beautify thy lady's town,
And dote on Tyrian realms, and disregard thine own?

XXXV. "Himself, the Sire, who rules the earth and skies,
    Sends me from heaven his mandate to proclaim.
    What scheme is thine? what hope allures thine eyes,
    To loiter thus in Libya? If such fame
    Nowise can move thee, nor thy soul inflame,
    If loth to labour for thine own renown,
    Think of thy young Ascanius; see with shame
    His rising promise, scarce to manhood grown,
Hope of the Roman race, and heir of Latium's throne."

XXXVI. He spake and, speaking, vanished into air.
    Dumb stood AEneas, by the sight unmann'd:
    Fear stifled speech and stiffened all his hair.
    Fain would he fly, and quit the tempting land,
    Surprised and startled by the god's command.
    Ah! what to do? what opening can he find
    To break the news, the infuriate Queen withstand?
    This way and that dividing his swift mind,
All means in turns he tries, and wavers like the wind.

XXXVII. This plan prevails; he bids a chosen few
    Collect the crews in silence, arm the fleet
    And hide the purport of these counsels new,
    Himself, since Dido dreams not of deceit,
    Nor thinks such passion can be frail or fleet,
    Some avenue of access will essay,
    Some tender moment for soft speeches meet,
    And wit shall find, and cunning smooth the way.
With joy the captains hear, and hasten to obey.

XXXVIII. But Dido--who can cheat a lover's care?
    Could guess the fraud, the coming change descry,
    And in the midst of safety feared a snare.
    Now wicked Fame hath bid the rumour fly
    Of mustering crews. Poor Dido, crazed thereby,
    Raves like a Thyiad, when the frenzied rout
    With orgies hurry to Cithaeron high,
    And "Bacchus! Bacchus" through the night they shout.
At length the chief she finds, and thus her wrath breaks out:

XXXIX. "Thought'st thou to steal in silence from the land,
    False wretch! and cloak such treason with a lie?
    Can neither love, nor this my plighted hand,
    Nor dying Dido keep thee? Must thou fly,
    When North-winds howl, and wintry waves are high?
    O cruel! what if home before thee lay,
    Not lands unknown, beneath an alien sky,
    If Troy were standing, as in ancient day,
Would'st thou for Troy's own sake this angry deep essay?

XL. "_Me_ dost thou fly? O, by these tears, thy hand
    Late pledged, since madness leaves me naught beside,
    But lovers' vows and wedlock's sacred band,
    Scarce knit and now too soon to be untied;
    If aught were pleasing in a new-won bride,
    If sweet the memory of our marriage day,
    O by these prayers--if place for prayer abide--
    In mercy put that cruel mind away.
Pity a falling house, now hastening to decay.

XLI. "For thee the Libyans and each Nomad lord
    Hate me, and Tyrians would their queen disown.
    My wifely honour is a name abhorred,
    And that chaste fame has perished, which alone
    Perchance had raised me to a starry throne.
    O think with whom thou leav'st me to thy fate,
    Dear guest, no longer as a husband known.
    Why stay I? till Pygmalion waste my state,
Or on Iarbas' wheels, a captive queen, to wait?

XLII. "Ah! if at least, ere thou had'st sailed away,
    Some babe, the token of thy love, were born,
    Some child AEneas, in my halls to play,
    Like thee at least in look, I should not mourn
    As altogether captive and forlorn."
    She paused, but he, at Jove's command, his eyes
    Keeps still unmoved, and, though with anguish torn,
    Strives with his love, nor suffers it to rise,
But checks his heaving heart, and thus at length replies:

XLIII. "Never, dear Queen, will I disown the debt,
    Thy love's deserts, too countless to repeat,
    Nor ever fair Elissa's name forget,
    While memory shall last, or pulses beat.
    Few words are mine, for fewest words are meet.
    Think not I meant--the very thought were shame--
    Thief-like to veil my going with deceit.
    I gave no promise of a husband's name,
Nor talked of ties like that, or wedlock's sacred flame.

XLIV. "Did Fate but let me shape my life at will,
    And rest at pleasure, Ilion, first of all,
    And Troy's sweet relics would I cling to still,
    And Pergama and Priam's stately hall
    Once more should cheer the vanquished for their fall.
    But now Grynoean Phoebus bids me fare
    To great Italia; to Italia call
    The Lycian lots, and so the Fates declare.
There lies the land I love, my destined home is there.

XLV. "If thee, Tyre-born, a Libyan town detain,
    What grudge to Troy Ausonia's land denies?
    We too may seek a foreign realm to gain.
    Me, oft as Night's damp shadows from the skies
    Have shrouded Earth, and fiery stars arise,
    My sire Anchises' troubled ghost in sleep
    Upbraids and scares, and ever louder cries
    The wrong, that on Ascanius' head I heap,
Whom from Hesperia's plains, his destined realms, I keep.

XLVI. "Now, too, Jove's messenger himself comes down--
    Bear witness both--I heard the voice divine,
    I saw the God just entering the town.
    Cease then to vex me, nor thyself repine.
    Heaven's will to Latium summons me, not mine."
    Him, speaking thus and pleading but in vain,
    She viewed askance, rolling her restless eyne,
    Then scanned him o'er, long silent, in disdain,
And thus at length broke out, and gave her wrath the rein.

XLVII. "False traitor! Goddess never gave thee birth,
    Nor of thy race was Dardanus the first.
    Thy limbs were fashioned in the womb of Earth,
    The rugged rocks of Caucasus accurst.
    Hyrcanian tigresses thy childhood nursed.
    Why fawn and feign? what more have I to fear,
