as I saw her last by the murky torchlight, wrapped in grave clothes and
standing in the coffin-shaped niche, proud and defiant to the end, her
child clasped to her with one arm while the other was outstretched to
take the draught of death. Few have seen such a sight, for the Holy
Office and its helpers do not seek witnesses to their dark deeds, and
none would wish to see it twice. If I have described it ill, it is not
that I have forgotten, but because even now, after the lapse of some
seventy years, I can scarcely bear to write of it or to set out its
horrors fully. But of all that was wonderful about it perhaps the most
wonderful was that even to the last this unfortunate lady should still
have clung to her love for the villain who, having deceived her by a
false marriage, deserted her, leaving her to such a doom. To what end
can so holy a gift as this great love of hers have been bestowed on such
a man? None can say, but so it was. Yet now that I think of it, there is
one thing even stranger than her faithfulness.

It will be remembered that when the fanatic priest struck her she prayed
that he also might die at such hands and more terribly than she must do.
So it came about. In after years that very man, Father Pedro by name,
was sent to convert the heathen of Anahuac, among whom, because of his
cruelty, he was known as the 'Christian Devil.' But it chanced that
venturing too far among a clan of the Otomie before they were finally
subdued, he fell into the hands of some priests of the war god Huitzel,
and by them was sacrificed after their dreadful fashion. I saw him as he
went to his death, and without telling that I had been present when
it was uttered, I called to his mind the dying curse of Isabella de
Siguenza. Then for a moment his courage gave way, for seeing in me
nothing but an Indian chief, he believed that the devil had put the
words into my lips to torment him, causing me to speak of what I knew
nothing. But enough of this now; if it is necessary I will tell of it in
its proper place. At least, whether it was by chance, or because she had
a gift of vision in her last hours, or that Providence was avenged on
him after this fashion, so it came about, and I do not sorrow for it,
though the death of this priest brought much misfortune on me.

This then was the end of Isabella de Siguenza who was murdered by
priests because she had dared to break their rule.


So soon as I could clear my mind somewhat of all that I had seen and
heard in that dreadful vault, I began to consider the circumstances in
which I found myself. In the first place I was now a rich man, and if it
pleased me to go back to Norfolk with my wealth, as Fonseca had pointed
out, my prospects were fair indeed. But the oath that I had taken hung
like lead about my neck. I had sworn to be avenged upon de Garcia, and
I had prayed that the curse of heaven might rest upon me till I was so
avenged, but in England living in peace and plenty I could scarcely come
by vengeance. Moreover, now I knew where he was, or at least in what
portion of the world I might seek him, and there where white men are few
he could not hide from me as in Spain. This tidings I had gained from
the doomed lady, and I have told her story at some length because it
was through it and her that I came to journey to Hispaniola, as it was
because of the sacrifice of her tormentor, Father Pedro, by the priests
of the Otomie that I am here in England this day, since had it not been
for that sacrifice the Spaniards would never have stormed the City of
Pines, where, alive or dead, I should doubtless have been to this hour;
for thus do seeming accidents build up the fates of men. Had those words
never passed Isabella's lips, doubtless in time I should have wearied
of a useless search and sailed for home and happiness. But having heard
them it seemed to me, to my undoing, that this would be to play the
part of a sorry coward. Moreover, strange as it may look, now I felt
as though I had two wrongs to avenge, that of my mother and that of
Isabella de Siguenza. Indeed none could have seen that young and lovely
lady die thus terribly and not desire to wreak her death on him who had
betrayed and deserted her.

So the end of it was that being of a stubborn temper, I determined to do
violence to my own desires and the dying counsels of my benefactor, and
to follow de Garcia to the ends of the earth and there to kill him as I
had sworn to do.

First, however, I inquired secretly and diligently as to the truth of
the statement that de Garcia had sailed for the Indies, and to be brief,
having the clue, I discovered that two days after the date of the duel I
had fought with him, a man answering to de Garcia's description, though
bearing a different name, had shipped from Seville in a carak bound for
the Canary Islands, which carak was there to await the arrival of the
fleet sailing for Hispaniola. Indeed from various circumstances I had
little doubt that the man was none other than de Garcia himself, which,
although I had not thought of it before, was not strange, seeing that
then as now the Indies were the refuge of half the desperadoes and
villains who could no longer live in Spain. Thither then I made up my
mind to follow him, consoling myself a little by the thought that at
least I should see new and wonderful countries, though how new and
wonderful they were I did not guess.


Now it remained for me to dispose of the wealth which had come to me
suddenly. While I was wondering how I could place it in safety till my
return, I heard by chance that the 'Adventuress' of Yarmouth, the same
ship in which I had come to Spain a year before, was again in the port
of Cadiz, and I bethought me that the best thing I could do with the
gold and other articles of value would be to ship them to England, there
to be held in trust for me. So having despatched a message to my friend
the captain of the 'Adventuress,' that I had freight of value for him, I
made my preparations to depart from Seville with such speed as I might,
and to this end I sold my benefactor's house, with many of the effects,
at a price much below their worth. The most of the books and plate,
together with some other articles, I kept, and packing them in cases,
I caused them to be transported down the river to Cadiz, to the care
of those same agents to whom I had received letters from the Yarmouth
merchants.

This being done I followed thither myself, taking the bulk of my fortune
with me in gold, which I hid artfully in numerous packages. And so it
came to pass that after a stay of a year in Seville, I turned my back on
it for ever. My sojourn there had been fortunate, for I came to it
poor and left it a rich man, to say nothing of what I had gained in
experience, which was much. Yet I was glad to be gone, for here Juan de
Garcia had escaped me, here I had lost my best friend and seen Isabella
de Siguenza die.


I came to Cadiz in safety and without loss of any of my goods or gold,
and taking boat proceeded on board the 'Adventuress,' where I found her
captain, whose name was Bell, in good health and very glad to see me.
What pleased me more, however, was that he had three letters for me, one
from my father, one from my sister Mary, and one from my betrothed, Lily
Bozard, the only letter I ever received from her. The contents of these
writings were not altogether pleasing however, for I learned from them
that my father was in broken health and almost bedridden, and indeed,
though I did not know it for many years after, he died in Ditchingham
Church upon the very day that I received his letter. It was short and
sad, and in it he said that he sorrowed much that he had allowed me
to go upon my mission, since he should see me no more and could only
commend me to the care of the Almighty, and pray Him for my safe return.
As for Lily's letter, which, hearing that the 'Adventuress' was to sail
for Cadiz, she had found means to despatch secretly, though it was not
short it was sad also, and told me that so soon as my back was turned on
home, my brother Geoffrey had asked her in marriage from her father, and
that they pushed the matter strongly, so that her life was made a misery
to her, for my brother waylaid her everywhere, and her father did
not cease to revile her as an obstinate jade who would fling away her
fortune for the sake of a penniless wanderer.

'But,' it went on, 'be assured, sweetheart, that unless they marry me by
force, as they have threatened to do, I will not budge from my promise.
And, Thomas, should I be wedded thus against my will, I shall not be
a wife for long, for though I am strong I believe that I shall die of
shame and sorrow. It is hard that I should be thus tormented, and for
one reason only, that you are not rich. Still I have good hope that
things may better themselves, for I see that my brother Wilfred is
much inclined towards your sister Mary, and though he also urges this
marriage on me to-day, she is a friend to both of us and may be in
the way to make terms with him before she accepts his suit.' Then the
writing ended with many tender words and prayers for my safe return.

As for the letter from my sister Mary it was to the same purpose. As
yet, she said, she could do nothing for me with Lily Bozard, for my
brother Geoffrey was mad with love for her, my father was too ill
to meddle in the matter, and Squire Bozard was fiercely set upon the
marriage because of the lands that were at stake. Still, she hinted,
things might not always be so, as a time might come when she could speak
up for me and not in vain.

Now all this news gave me much cause for thought. More indeed, it awoke
in me a longing for home which was so strong that it grew almost to a
sickness. Her loving words and the perfume that hung about the letter
of my betrothed brought Lily back to me in such sort that my heart ached
with a desire to be with her. Moreover I knew that I should be welcome
now, for my fortune was far greater than my brother's would ever be,
and parents do not show the door to suitors who bring more than twelve
thousand golden pieces in their baggage. Also I wished to see my father
again before he passed beyond my reach. But still between me and
my desire lay the shadow of de Garcia and my oath. I had brooded on
vengeance for so long that I felt even in the midst of this strong
temptation that I should have no pleasure in my life if I forsook my
quest. To be happy I must first kill de Garcia. Moreover I had come to
believe that did I so forsake it the curse which I had invoked would
surely fall upon me.

Meanwhile I did this. Going to a notary I caused him to prepare a deed
which I translated into English. By this deed I vested all my fortune
except two hundred pesos that I kept for my own use, in three persons to
hold the same on my behalf till I came to claim it. Those three persons
were my old master, Doctor Grimstone of Bungay, whom I knew for the
honestest of men, my sister Mary Wingfield, and my betrothed, Lily
Bozard. I directed them by this deed, which for greater validity I
signed upon the ship and caused to be witnessed by Captain Bell and
two other Englishmen, to deal with the property according to their
discretion, investing not less than half of it in the purchase of lands
and putting the rest out to interest, which interest with the rent of
the lands was to be paid to the said Lily Bozard for her own use for so
long as she remained unmarried.

Also with the deed I executed a will by which I devised the most of my
property to Lily Bozard should she be unmarried at the date of my death,
and the residue to my sister Mary. In the event of the marriage or death
of Lily, then the whole was to pass to Mary and her heirs.

These two documents being signed and sealed, I delivered them, together
with all my treasure and other goods, into the keeping of Captain Bell,
charging him solemnly to hand them and my possessions to Dr. Grimstone
of Bungay, by whom he would be liberally rewarded. This he promised to
do, though not until he had urged me almost with tears to accompany them
myself.

With the gold and the deeds I sent several letters; to my father, my
sister, my brother, Dr. Grimstone, Squire Bozard, and lastly to Lily
herself. In these letters I gave an account of my life and fortunes
since I had come to Spain, for I gathered that others which I had sent
had never reached England, and told them of my resolution to follow de
Garcia to the ends of the earth.

'Others,' I wrote to Lily, 'may think me a madman thus to postpone, or
perchance to lose, a happiness which I desire above anything on earth,
but you who understand my heart will not blame me, however much you may
grieve for my decision. You will know that when once I have set my mind
upon an object, nothing except death itself can turn me from it, and
that in this matter I am bound by an oath which my conscience will
not suffer me to break. I could never be happy even at your side if I
abandoned my search now. First must come the toil and then the rest,
first the sorrow and then the joy. Do not fear for me, I feel that I
shall live to return again, and if I do not return, at least I am
able to provide for you in such fashion that you need never be married
against your will. While de Garcia lives I must follow him.'

To my brother Geoffrey I wrote very shortly, telling him what I thought
of his conduct in persecuting an undefended maiden and striving to do
wrong to an absent brother. I have heard that my letter pleased him very
ill.


And here I may state that those letters and everything else that I
sent came safely to Yarmouth. There the gold and goods were taken to
Lowestoft and put aboard a wherry, and when he had discharged his ship,
Captain Bell sailed up the Waveney with them till he brought them to
Bungay Staithe and thence to the house of Dr. Grimstone in Nethergate
Street. Here were gathered my sister and brother, for my father was then
two months buried--and also Squire Bozard and his son and daughter, for
Captain Bell had advised them of his coming by messenger, and when all
the tale was told there was wonder and to spare. Still greater did it
grow when the chests were opened and the weight of bullion compared with
that set out in my letters, for there had never been so much gold at
once in Bungay within the memory of man.

And now Lily wept, first for joy because of my good fortune, and then
for sorrow because I had not come with my treasure, and when he had seen
all and heard the deeds read by virtue of which Lily was a rich woman
whether I lived or died, the Squire her father swore aloud and said that
he had always thought well of me, and kissed his daughter, wishing her
joy of her luck. In short all were pleased except my brother, who left
the house without a word and straightway took to evil courses. For
now the cup was dashed from his lips, seeing that having come into my
father's lands, he had brought it about that Lily was to be married to
him by might if no other means would serve. For even now a man can force
his daughter into marriage while she is under age, and Squire Bozard
was not one to shrink from such a deed, holding as he did that a woman's
fancies were of no account. But on this day, so great is the power of
gold, there was no more talk of her marrying any man except myself,
indeed her father would have held her back from such a thing had she
shown a mind to it, seeing that then Lily would have lost the wealth
which I had settled on her. But all talked loudly of my madness because
I would not abandon the chase of my enemy but chose to follow him to
the far Indies, though Squire Bozard took comfort from the thought that
whether I lived or died the money was still his daughter's. Only Lily
spoke up for me, saying 'Thomas has sworn an oath and he does well to
keep it, for his honour is at stake. Now I go to wait until he comes to
me in this world or the next.'


But all this is out of place, for many a year passed away before I heard
of these doings.



CHAPTER XI

THE LOSS OF THE CARAK


On the day after I had given my fortune and letters into the charge of
Captain Bell, I watched the 'Adventuress' drop slowly round the mole
of Cadiz, and so sad was I at heart, that I am not ashamed to confess
I wept. I would gladly have lost the wealth she carried if she had but
carried me. But my purpose was indomitable, and it must be some other
ship that would bear me home to the shores of England.

As it chanced, a large Spanish carak named 'Las Cinque Llagas,' or 'The
Five Wounds,' was about to sail for Hispaniola, and having obtained a
licence to trade, I took passage in her under my assumed name of d'Aila,
passing myself off as a merchant. To further this deception I purchased
goods the value of one hundred and five pesos, and of such nature as I
was informed were most readily saleable in the Indies, which merchandise
I shipped with me. The vessel was full of Spanish adventurers, mostly
ruffians of varied career and strange history, but none the less
good companions enough when not in drink. By this time I could speak
Castilian so perfectly, and was so Spanish in appearance, that it was
not difficult for me to pass myself off as one of their nation and this
I did, inventing a feigned tale of my parentage, and of the reasons
that led me to tempt the seas. For the rest, now as ever I kept my own
counsel, and notwithstanding my reserve, for I would not mingle in their
orgies, I soon became well liked by my comrades, chiefly because of my
skill in ministering to their sicknesses.

Of our voyage there is little to tell except of its sad end. At the
Canary Isles we stayed a month, and then sailed away for Hispaniola,
meeting with fine weather but light winds. When, as our captain
reckoned, we were within a week's sail of the port of San Domingo for
which we were bound, the weather changed, and presently gathered to a
furious tempest from the north that grew more terrible every hour. For
three days and nights our cumbrous vessel groaned and laboured beneath
the stress of the gale, that drove us on rapidly we knew not whither,
till at length it became clear that, unless the weather moderated,
we must founder. Our ship leaked at every seam, one of our masts was
carried away, and another broken in two, at a height of twenty feet from
the deck. But all these misfortunes were small compared to what was to
come, for on the fourth morning a great wave swept off our rudder, and
we drifted helpless before the waves. An hour later a green sea came
aboard of us, washing away the captain, so that we filled and settled
down to founder.

Then began a most horrid scene. For several days both the crew and
passengers had been drinking heavily to allay their terror, and now that
they saw their end at hand, they rushed to and fro screaming, praying,
and blaspheming. Such of them as remained sober began to get out the two
boats, into which I and another man, a worthy priest, strove to place
the women and children, of whom we had several on board. But this was no
easy task, for the drunken sailors pushed them aside and tried to spring
into the boats, the first of which overturned, so that all were lost.
Just then the carak gave a lurch before she sank, and, seeing that
everything was over, I called to the priest to follow me, and springing
into the sea I swam for the second boat, which, laden with some
shrieking women, had drifted loose in the confusion. As it chanced I
reached it safely, being a strong swimmer, and was able to rescue the
priest before he sank. Then the vessel reared herself up on her stern
and floated thus for a minute or more, which gave us time to get out the
oars and row some fathoms further away from her. Scarcely had we done
so, when, with one wild and fearful scream from those on board of her,
she rushed down into the depths below, nearly taking us with her. For
a while we sat silent, for our horror overwhelmed us, but when the
whirlpool which she made had ceased to boil, we rowed back to where the
carak had been. Now all the sea was strewn with wreckage, but among it
we found only one child living that had clung to an oar. The rest,
some two hundred souls, had been sucked down with the ship and perished
miserably, or if there were any still living, we could not find them in
that weltering sea over which the darkness was falling.

Indeed, it was well for our own safety that we failed in so doing, for
the little boat had ten souls on board in all, which was as many as she
could carry--the priest and I being the only men among them. I have said
that the darkness was falling, and as it chanced happily for us, so was
the sea, or assuredly we must have been swamped. All that we could
do was to keep the boat's head straight to the waves, and this we did
through the long night. It was a strange thing to see, or rather to
hear, that good man the priest my companion, confessing the women one
by one as he laboured at his oar, and when all were shriven sending up
prayers to God for the salvation of our souls, for of the safety of our
bodies we despaired. What I felt may well be imagined, but I forbear
to describe it, seeing that, bad as was my case, there were worse ones
before me of which I shall have to tell in their season.

At length the night wore away, and the dawn broke upon the desolate sea.
Presently the sun came up, for which at first we were thankful, for we
were chilled to the bone, but soon its heat grew intolerable, since we
had neither food nor water in the boat, and already we were parched with
thirst. But now the wind had fallen to a steady breeze, and with the
help of the oars and a blanket, we contrived to fashion a sail that drew
us through the water at a good speed. But the ocean was vast, and we
did not know whither we were sailing, and every hour the agony of thirst
pressed us more closely. Towards mid-day a child died suddenly and was
thrown into the sea, and some three hours later the mother filled a
bailing bowl and drank deep of the bitter water. For a while it seemed
to assuage her thirst, then suddenly a madness took her, and springing
up she cast herself overboard and sank. Before the sun, glowing like a
red-hot ball, had sunk beneath the horizon, the priest and I were the
only ones in that company who could sit upright--the rest lay upon the
bottom of the boat heaped one on another like dying fish groaning in
their misery. Night fell at last and brought us some relief from our
sufferings, for the air grew cooler. But the rain we prayed for did
not fall, and so great was the heat that, when the sun rose again in a
cloudless sky, we knew, if no help reached us, that it must be the last
which we should see.

An hour after dawn another child died, and as we were in the act of
casting the body into the sea, I looked up and saw a vessel far away,
that seemed to be sailing in such fashion that she would pass within two
miles of where we were. Returning thanks to God for this most blessed
sight, we took to the oars, for the wind was now so light that our
clumsy sail would no longer draw us through the water, and rowed feebly
so as to cut the path of the ship. When we had laboured for more than an
hour the wind fell altogether and the vessel lay becalmed at a distance
of about three miles. So the priest and I rowed on till I thought that
we must die in the boat, for the heat of the sun was like that of a
flame and there came no wind to temper it; by now, too, our lips were
cracked with thirst. Still we struggled on till the shadow of the ship's
masts fell athwart us and we saw her sailors watching us from the deck.
Now we were alongside and they let down a ladder of rope, speaking to us
in Spanish.

How we reached the deck I cannot say, but I remember falling beneath
the shade of an awning and drinking cup after cup of the water that was
brought to me. At last even my thirst was satisfied, and for a while I
grew faint and dizzy, and had no stomach for the meat which was thrust
into my hand. Indeed, I think that I must have fainted, for when I came
to myself the sun was straight overhead, and it seemed to me that I had
dreamed I heard a familiar and hateful voice. At the time I was alone
beneath the awning, for the crew of the ship were gathered on the
foredeck clustering round what appeared to be the body of a man. By my
side was a large plate of victuals and a flask of spirits, and feeling
stronger I ate and drank of them heartily. I had scarcely finished my
meal when the men on the foredeck lifted the body of the man, which I
saw was black in colour, and cast it overboard. Then three of them, whom
from their port I took to be officers, came towards me and I rose to my
feet to meet them.

'Senor,' said the tallest of them in a soft and gentle voice, 'suffer
me to offer you our felicitations on your wonderful--' and he stopped
suddenly.

Did I still dream, or did I know the voice? Now for the first time I
could see the man's face--it was that of JUAN DE GARCIA! But if I knew
him he also knew me.

'Caramba!' he said, 'whom have we here? Senor Thomas Wingfield I salute
you. Look, my comrades, you see this young man whom the sea has brought
to us. He is no Spaniard but an English spy. The last time that I saw
him was in the streets of Seville, and there he tried to murder me
because I threatened to reveal his trade to the authorities. Now he is
here, upon what errand he knows best.'

'It is false,' I answered; 'I am no spy, and I am come to these seas for
one purpose only--to find you.'

'Then you have succeeded well, too well for your own comfort, perhaps.
Say now, do you deny that you are Thomas Wingfield and an Englishman?'

'I do not deny it. I--'

'Your pardon. How comes it then that, as your companion the priest tells
me, you sailed in Las Cinque Llagas under the name of D'AILA?'

'For my own reasons, Juan de Garcia.'

'You are confused, senor. My name is Sarceda, as these gentlemen can
bear me witness. Once I knew a cavalier of the name of de Garcia, but he
is dead.'

'You lie,' I answered; whereon one of De Garcia's companions struck me
across the mouth.

'Gently, friend,' said de Garcia; 'do not defile your hand by striking
such rats as this, or if you must strike, use a stick. You have
heard that he confesses to passing under a false name and to being an
Englishman, and therefore one of our country's foes. To this I add
upon my word of honour that to my knowledge he is a spy and a would-be
murderer. Now, gentlemen, under the commission of his majesty's
representative, we are judges here, but since you may think that, having
been called a liar openly by this English dog, I might be minded to deal
unjustly with him, I prefer to leave the matter in your hands.'

Now I tried to speak once more, but the Spaniard who had struck me, a
ferocious-looking villain, drew his sword and swore that he would run me
through if I dared to open my lips. So I thought it well to keep silent.

'This Englishman would grace a yardarm very well,' he said.

De Garcia, who had begun to hum a tune indifferently, smiled, looking
first at the yard and then at my neck, and the hate in his eyes seemed
to burn me.

'I have a better thought than that,' said the third officer. 'If we hung
him questions might be asked, and at the least, it would be a waste of
good money. He is a finely built young man and would last some years in
the mines. Let him be sold with the rest of the cargo, or I will take
him myself at a valuation. I am in want of a few such on my estate.'

At these words I saw de Garcia's face fall a little, for he wished to
be rid of me for ever. Still he did not think it politic to interfere
beyond saying with a slight yawn:

'So far as I am concerned, take him, comrade, and free of cost. Only I
warn you, watch him well or you will find a stiletto in your back.'

The officer laughed and said: 'Our friend will scarcely get a chance at
me, for I do not go a hundred paces underground, where he will find his
quarters. And now, Englishman, there is room for you below I think;'
and he called to a sailor bidding him bring the irons of the man who had
died.

This was done, and after I had been searched and a small sum in gold
that I had upon my person taken from me--it was all that remained to me
of my possessions--fetters were placed upon my ankles and round my neck,
and I was dragged into the hold. Before I reached it I knew from
various signs what was the cargo of this ship. She was laden with slaves
captured in Fernandina, as the Spaniards name the island of Cuba, that
were to be sold in Hispaniola. Among these slaves I was now numbered.


How to tell the horrors of that hold I know not. The place was low, not
