and I navigated all that day with light winds. I could not arrive in time
to be able to see the bottom, so as to drop the anchor on a clear place,
for it is necessary to be very careful not to lose the anchors. So I
stood off and on all that night until day, when I came to an inhabited
place where I anchored, and whence that man had come that I found
yesterday in the canoe in mid channel. He had given such a good report of
us that there was no want of canoes alongside the ship all that night,
which brought us water and what they had to offer. I ordered each one to
be given something, such as a few beads, ten or twelve of those made of
glass on a thread, some timbrels made of brass such as are worth a
maravedi in Spain, and some straps, all which they looked upon as most
excellent. I also ordered them to be given treacle to eat when they came
on board. At three o'clock[118-1] I sent the ship's boat on shore for
water, and the natives with good will showed my people where the water
was, and they themselves brought the full casks down to the boat, and did
all they could to please us.

"This island is very large, and I have determined to sail round it,
because, so far as I can understand, there is a mine in or near it. The
island is eight leagues from Santa Maria, nearly east and west; and this
point I had reached, as well as all the coast, trends N.N.W. and S.S.E. I
saw at least 20 leagues of it, and then it had not ended. Now, as I am
writing this, I made sail with the wind at the south, to sail round the
island, and to navigate until I find Samaot, which is the island or city
where there is gold, as all the natives say who are on board, and as
those of San Salvador and Santa Maria told us. These people resemble
those of the said islands, with the same language and customs, except
that these appear to me a rather more domestic and tractable people, yet
also more subtle. For I observed that those who brought cotton and other
trifles to the ship, knew better than the others how to make a bargain.
In this island I saw cotton cloths made like mantles. The people were
better disposed, and the women wore in front of their bodies a small
piece of cotton which scarcely covered them.

"It is a very green island, level and very fertile, and I have no doubt
that they sow and gather corn[119-1] all the year round, as well as other
things. I saw many trees very unlike those of our country. Many of them
have their branches growing in different ways and all from one trunk, and
one twig is one form, and another in a different shape, and so unlike
that it is the greatest wonder in the world to see the great diversity;
thus one branch has leaves like those of a cane, and others like those of
a mastick tree: and on a single tree there are five or six different
kinds. Nor are these grafted, for it may be said that grafting is
unknown, the trees being wild, and untended by these people. They do not
know any religion, and I believe they could easily be converted to
Christianity, for they are very intelligent. Here the fish are so unlike
ours that it is wonderful. Some are the shape of dories, and of the
finest colors in the world, blue, yellow, red, and other tints, all
painted in various ways, and the colors are so bright that there is not a
man who would not be astonished, and would not take great delight in
seeing them. There are also whales. I saw no beasts on the land of any
kind, except parrots and lizards. A boy told me that he saw a large
serpent. I saw neither sheep, nor goats, nor any other quadruped. It is
true I have been here a short time, since noon,[120-1] yet I could not
have failed to see some if there had been any. I will write respecting
the circuit of this island after I have been round it."


_Wednesday, 17th of October_

"At noon I departed from the village off which I was anchored, and where
I took in water, to sail round this island of Fernandina. The wind was
S.W. and South. My wish was to follow the coast of this island to the
S.E., from where I was, the whole coast trending N.N.W. and S.S.E.;
because all the Indians I bring with me, and others, made signs to this
southern quarter, as the direction of the island they call Samoet, where
the gold is. Martin Alonso Pinzon, captain of the caravel _Pinta_, on
board of which I had three of the Indians, came to me and said that one
of them had given him to understand very positively that the island might
be sailed round much quicker by shaping a N.N.W. course. I saw that the
wind would not help me to take the course I desired, and that it was fair
for the other, so I made sail to the N.N.W. When I was two leagues from
the cape of the island, I discovered a very wonderful harbor.[120-2] It
has one mouth, or, rather, it may be said to have two, for there is an
islet in the middle. Both are very narrow, and within it is wide enough
for a hundred ships, if there was depth and a clean bottom, and the
entrance was deep enough. It seemed desirable to explore it and take
soundings, so I anchored outside, and went in with all the ship's boats,
when we saw there was insufficient depth. As I thought, when I first saw
it, that it was the mouth of some river, I ordered the water-casks to be
brought. On shore I found eight or ten men, who presently came to us and
showed us the village, whither I sent the people for water, some with
arms, and others with the casks; and, as it was some little distance, I
waited two hours for them.

"During that time I walked among the trees, which was the most beautiful
thing I had ever seen, beholding as much verdure as in the month of May
in Andalusia. The trees are unlike ours as night from day, as are the
fruits, the herbs, the stones, and everything. It is true that some of
the trees bore some resemblance to those in Castile, but most of them are
very different, and some were so unlike that no one could compare them to
anything in Castile. The people were all like those already mentioned:
like them naked, and the same size. They give what they possess in
exchange for anything that may be given to them. I here saw some of the
ship's boys bartering broken bits of glass and crockery for darts. The
men who went for water told me that they had been in the houses of the
natives, and that they were very plain and clean inside. Their beds and
bags for holding things[121-1] were like nets of cotton.[121-2] The
houses are like booths, and very high, with good chimneys.[121-3] But,
among many villages that I saw, there was none that consisted of more
than from twelve to fifteen houses. Here they found that the married
women wore clouts of cotton, but not the young girls, except a few who
were over eighteen years of age. They had dogs, mastiffs, and
hounds;[121-4] and here they found a man who had a piece of gold in his
nose, the size of half a _castellano_,[121-5] on which they saw letters.
I quarrelled with these people because they would not exchange or give
what was required; as I wished to see what and whose this money was; and
they replied that they were not accustomed to barter.

"After the water was taken I returned to the ship, made sail, and shaped
a course N.W., until I had discovered all the part of the coast of the
island which trends east to west. Then all the Indians turned round and
said that this island was smaller than Samoet, and that it would be well
to return back so as to reach it sooner. The wind presently went down and
then sprang up from W.N.W., which was contrary for us to continue on the
previous course. So I turned back, and navigated all that night to
E.S.E., sometimes to east and to S.E. This course was steered to keep me
clear of the land, for there were very heavy clouds and thick weather,
which did not admit of my approaching the land to anchor. On that night
it rained very heavily from midnight until nearly dawn, and even
afterwards the clouds threatened rain. We found ourselves at the S.W. end
of the island, where I hoped to anchor until it cleared up, so as to see
the other island whither I have to go. On all these days, since I arrived
in these Indies, it has rained more or less. Your Highnesses may believe
that this land is the best and most fertile, and with a good climate,
level, and as good as there is in the world."


_Thursday, 18th of October_

"After it had cleared up I went before the wind, approaching the island
as near as I could, and anchored when it was no longer light enough to
keep under sail. But I did not go on shore, and made sail at dawn...."


_Friday, 19th of October_

"I weighed the anchors at daylight, sending the caravel _Pinta_ on an
E.S.E. course, the caravel _Nina_ S.S.E., while I shaped a S.E. course,
giving orders that these courses were to be steered until noon, and that
then the two caravels should alter course so as to join company with me.
Before we had sailed for three hours we saw an island to the east, for
which we steered, and all three vessels arrived at the north point before
noon. Here there is an islet, and a reef of rocks to seaward of it,
besides one between the islet and the large island. The men of San
Salvador, whom I bring with me, called it Saomete, and I gave it the name
of Isabella.[123-1] The wind was north and the said islet bore from the
island of Fernandina, whence I had taken my departure, east and west.
Afterwards we ran along the coast of the island, westward from the islet,
and found its length to be 12 leagues as far as a cape, which I named
Cabo Hermoso, at the western end. The island is beautiful, and the coast
very deep, without sunken rocks off it. Outside the shore is rocky, but
further in there is a sandy beach, and here I anchored on that Friday
night until morning. This coast and the part of the island I saw is
almost flat, and the island is very beautiful; for if the other islands
are lovely, this is more so. It has many very green trees, which are very
large. The land is higher than in the other islands, and in it there are
some hills, which cannot be called mountains: and it appears that there
is much water inland. From this point to the N.E. the coast makes a great
angle, and there are many thick and extensive groves. I wanted to go and
anchor there, so as to go on shore and see so much beauty; but the water
was shallow, and we could only anchor at a distance from the land. The
wind also was fair for going to this cape, where I am now anchored, to
which I gave the name of Cabo Hermoso,[123-2] because it is so. Thus it
was that I do not anchor in that angle, but as I saw this cape so green
and so beautiful, like all the other lands of these islands, I scarcely
knew which to visit first; for I can never tire my eyes in looking at
such lovely vegetation, so different from ours. I believe that there are
many herbs and many trees that are worth much in Europe for dyes and for
medicines; but I do not know them, and this causes me great sorrow.
Arriving at this cape, I found the smell of the trees sand flowers so
delicious that it seemed the pleasantest thing in the world. To-morrow,
before I leave this place, I shall go on shore to see what there is at
this cape. There are no people, but there are villages in the interior,
where, the Indians I bring with me say, there is a king who has much
gold. To-morrow I intend to go so far inland as to find the village, and
see and have some speech with this king, who, according to the signs they
make, rules over all the neighboring islands, goes about clothed, and
wears much gold on his person. I do not give much faith to what they say,
as well because I do not understand them well as because they are so poor
in gold that even a little that this king may have would appear much to
them. This cape, to which I have given the name of Cabo Fermoso, is, I
believe, on an island separated from Saometo, and there is another small
islet between them. I did not try to examine them in detail, because it
could not be done in 50 years. For my desire is to see and discover as
much as I can before returning to your Highnesses, our Lord willing, in
April. It is true that in the event of finding places where there is gold
or spices in quantity I should stop until I had collected as much as I
could. I, therefore, proceed in the hope of coming across such places."


_Saturday, 20th of October_

"To-day, at sunrise, I weighed the anchors from where I was with the
ship, and anchored off the S.W. point of the island of Saometo, to which
I gave the name of Cabo de la Laguna, and to the island Isabella. My
intention was to navigate to the north-east and east from the south-east
and south, where, I understood from the Indians I brought with me, was
the village of the king. I found the sea so shallow that I could not
enter nor navigate in it, and I saw that to follow a route by the
south-east would be a great round. So I determined to return by the route
that I had taken from the N.N.E. to the western part, and to sail round
this island to [reconnoitre it].

"I had so little wind that I never could sail along the coast, except
during the night. As it was dangerous to anchor off these islands except
in the day, when one can see where to let the anchor, for the bottom is
all in patches, some clear and some rocky, I lay to all this Sunday
night. The caravels anchored because they found themselves near the
shore, and they thought that, owing to the signals that they were in the
habit of making, I would come to anchor, but I did not wish to do so."


_Sunday, 21st of October_

"At ten o'clock I arrived here, off this islet, and anchored, as well as
the caravels. After breakfast I went on shore, and found only one house,
in which there was no one, and I supposed they had fled from fear,
because all their property was left in the house. I would not allow
anything to be touched, but set out with the captains and people to
explore the island. If the others already seen are very beautiful, green,
and fertile, this is much more so, with large trees and very green. Here
there are large lagoons with wonderful vegetation on their banks.
Throughout the island all is green, and the herbage like April in
Andalusia. The songs of the birds were so pleasant that it seemed as if a
man could never wish to leave the place. The flocks of parrots concealed
the sun; and the birds were so numerous, and of so many different kinds,
that it was wonderful. There are trees of a thousand sorts, and all have
their several fruits; and I feel the most unhappy man in the world not to
know them, for I am well assured that they are all valuable. I bring home
specimens of them, and also of the land. Thus walking along round one of
the lakes I saw a serpent, which we killed, and I bring home the skin for
your Highnesses. As soon as it saw us it went into the lagoon, and we
followed, as the water was not very deep, until we killed it with lances.
It is 7 spans long, and I believe that there are many like it in these
lagoons.[125-1] Here I came upon some aloes, and I have determined to
take ten quintals on board to-morrow, for they tell me that they are
worth a good deal. Also, while in search of good water, we came to a
village about half a league from our anchorage. The people, as soon as
they heard us, all fled and left their houses, hiding their property in
the wood. I would not allow a thing to be touched, even the value of a
pin. Presently some men among them came to us, and one came quite close.
I gave him some bells and glass beads, which made him very content and
happy. That our friendship might be further increased, I resolved to ask
him for something; I requested him to get some water. After I had gone on
board, the natives came to the beach with calabashes full of water, and
they delighted much in giving it to us. I ordered another string of glass
beads to be presented to them, and they said they would come again
to-morrow. I wished to fill up all the ships with water at this place,
and, if there should be time, I intended to search the island until I had
had speech with the king, and seen whether he had the gold of which I had
heard. I shall then shape a course for another much larger island, which
I believe to be Cipango, judging from the signs made by the Indians I
bring with me. They call it Cuba, and they say that there are ships and
many skilful sailors there. Beyond this island there is another called
Bosio,[126-1] which they also say is very large, and others we shall see
as we pass, lying between. According as I obtain tidings of gold or
spices I shall settle what should be done. I am still resolved to go to
the mainland and the city of Guisay,[126-2] and to deliver the letters of
your Highnesses to the Gran Can, requesting a reply and returning with
it."


_Monday, 22nd of October_

"All last night and to-day I was here, waiting to see if the king or
other person would bring gold or anything of value. Many of these people
came, like those of the other islands, equally naked, and equally
painted, some white, some red, some black, and others in many ways. They
brought darts and skeins of cotton to barter, which they exchanged with
the sailors for bits of glass, broken crockery, and pieces of
earthenware. Some of them had pieces of gold fastened in their noses,
which they willingly gave for a hawk's bell and glass beads. But there
was so little that it counts for nothing. It is true that they looked
upon any little thing that I gave them as a wonder, and they held our
arrival to be a great marvel, believing that we came from heaven. We got
water for the ships from a lagoon which is near the Cabo del Isleo (Cape
of the Islet), as we named it. In the said lagoon Martin Alonso Pinzon,
captain of the _Pinta_, killed another serpent 7 _spans_ long, like the
one we got yesterday. I made them gather here as much of the aloe as they
could find."


_Tuesday, 23rd of October_

"I desired to set out to-day for the island of Cuba, which I think must
be Cipango, according to the signs these people make, indicative of its
size and riches, and I did not delay any more here nor [attempt to sail]
...[127-1] round this island to the residence of this king or lord, and
have speech with him, as I had intended. This would cause me much delay,
and I see that there is no gold mine here. To sail round would need
several winds, for it does not blow here as men may wish. It is better to
go where there is great entertainment, so I say that it is not reasonable
to wait, but rather to continue the voyage and inspect much land, until
some very profitable country is reached, my belief being that it will be
rich in spices. That I have no personal knowledge of these products
causes me the greatest sorrow in the world, for I see a thousand kinds of
trees, each one with its own special fruit, all green now as in Spain
during the months of May and June, as well as a thousand kinds of herbs
with their flowers; yet I know none of them except this aloe, of which I
ordered a quantity to be brought on board to bring to your Highnesses. I
have not made sail for Cuba because there is no wind, but a dead calm
with much rain. It rained a great deal yesterday without causing any
cold. On the contrary, the days are hot and the nights cool, like May in
Andalusia."


_Wednesday, 24th of October_

"At midnight I weighed the anchors and left the anchorage at Cabo del
Isleo, in the island of Isabella.[128-1] From the northern side, where I
was, I intended to go to the island of Cuba, where I heard of the people
who were very great, and had gold, spices, merchandise, and large ships.
They showed me that the course thither would be W.S.W., and so I hold.
For I believe that it is so, as all the Indians of these islands, as well
as those I brought with me in the ships, told me by signs. I cannot
understand their language, but I believe that it is of the island of
Cipango that they recount these wonders.[128-2] On the spheres I saw, and
on the delineations of the map of the world,[128-3] Cipango is in this
region. So I shaped a course W.S.W. until daylight, but at dawn it fell
calm and began to rain, and went on nearly all night. I remained thus,
with little wind, until the afternoon, when it began to blow fresh. I
set all the sails in the ship, the mainsail with two bonnets, the
foresail, spritsail, mizzen, main topsail, and the boat's sail on the
poop. So I proceeded until nightfall, when the Cabo Verde of the island
of Fernandina, which is at the S.W. end, bore N.W. distant 7 leagues. As
it was now blowing hard, and I did not know how far it was to this island
of Cuba, I resolved not to go in search of it during the night; all these
islands being very steep-to, with no bottom round them for a distance of
two shots of a lombard. The bottom is all in patches, one bit of sand and
another of rock, and for this reason it is not safe to anchor without
inspection with the eye. So I determined to take in all the sails except
the foresail, and to go on under that reduced canvas. Soon the wind
increased, while the route was doubtful, and there was very thick
weather, with rain. I ordered the foresail to be furled, and we did not
make two leagues during that night."


_Thursday, 25th of October_

"I steered W.S.W. from after sunset until 9 o'clock, making 5 leagues.
Afterwards I altered course to west, and went 8 miles an hour until one
in the afternoon; and from that time until three made good 44 miles. Then
land was sighted, consisting of 7 or 8 islands, the group running north
and south, distant from us 5 leagues."


_Friday, 26th of October_

"The ship was on the south side of the islands, which were all low,
distant 5 or 6 leagues. I anchored there. The Indians[129-1] on board
said that thence to Cuba was a voyage in their canoes of a day and a
half; these being small dug-outs without a sail. Such are their canoes. I
departed thence for Cuba, for by the signs the Indians made of its
greatness, and of its gold and pearls, I thought that it must be
Cipango."


_Saturday, 27th of October_

"I weighed from these islands at sunrise, and gave them the name of Las
Islas de Arena, owing to the little depth the sea had for a distance of 6
leagues to the southward of them. We went 8 miles an hour on a S.S.W.
course until one o'clock having made 40 miles. Until night we had run 28
miles on the same course, and before dark the land was sighted. At night
there was much rain. The vessels, on Saturday until sunset, made 17
leagues on a S.S.W. course."


_Sunday, 28th of October_

"I went thence in search of the island of Cuba on a S.S.W. course, making
for the nearest point of it, and entered a very beautiful river without
danger of sunken rocks or other impediments. All the coast was clear of
dangers up to the shore. The mouth of the river was 12 _brazas_ across,
and it is wide enough for a vessel to beat in.[130-1] I anchored about a
lombard-shot inside." The Admiral says that "he never beheld such a
beautiful place, with trees bordering the river, handsome, green, and
different from ours, having fruits and flowers each one according to its
nature. There are many birds, which sing very sweetly. There are a great
number of palm trees of a different kind from those in Guinea and from
ours, of a middling height, the trunks without that covering, and the
leaves very large, with which they thatch their houses. The country is
very level." The Admiral jumped into his boat and went on shore. He came
to two houses, which he believed to belong to fishermen who had fled from
fear. In one of them he found a kind of dog that never barks, and in both
there were nets of palm-fibre and cordage, as well as horn fish-hooks,
bone harpoons, and other apparatus "for fishing, and several hearths. He
believed that many people lived together in one house. He gave orders
that nothing in the houses should be touched, and so it was done." The
herbage was as thick as in Andalusia during April and May. He found much
purslane and wild amaranth.[131-1] He returned to the boat and went up
the river for some distance, and he says it was great pleasure to see the
bright verdure, and the birds, which he could not leave to go back. He
says that this island is the most beautiful that eyes have seen, full of
good harbors and deep rivers, and the sea appeared as if it never rose;
for the herbage on the beach nearly reached the waves, which does not
happen where the sea is rough. (Up to that time they had not experienced
a rough sea among all those islands.) He says that the island is full of
very beautiful mountains, although they are not very extensive as regards
length, but high; and all the country is high like Sicily. It is
abundantly supplied with water, as they gathered from the Indians they
had taken with them from the island of Guanahani. These said by signs
that there are ten great rivers, and that they cannot go round the island
in twenty days. When they came near land with the ships, two canoes came
out; and, when they saw the sailors get into a boat and row about to find
the depth of the river where they could anchor, the canoes fled. The
Indians say that in this island there are gold mines and pearls, and the
Admiral saw a likely place for them and mussel-shells, which are signs of
them. He understood that large ships of the Gran Can came here, and that
from here to the mainland was a voyage of ten days.[131-2] The Admiral
called this river and harbor San Salvador.[131-3]


_Monday, 29th of October_

The Admiral weighed anchor from this port and sailed to the westward, to
go to the city, where, as it seemed, the Indians said that there was a
king. They doubled a point six leagues to the N.W.,[132-1] and then
another point,[132-2] then east ten leagues. After another league he saw
a river with no very large entrance, to which he gave the name of Rio de
la Luna.[132-3] He went on until the hour of vespers. He saw another
river much larger than the others, as the Indians told him by signs, and
near he saw goodly villages of houses. He called the river Rio de
Mares.[132-4] He sent two boats on shore to a village to communicate, and
one of the Indians he had brought with him, for now they understood a
little, and show themselves content with Christians. All the men, women,
and children fled, abandoning their houses with all they contained. The
Admiral gave orders that nothing should be touched. The houses were
better than those he had seen before, and he believed that the houses
would improve as he approached the mainland. They were made like booths,
very large, and looking like tents in a camp without regular streets, but
one here and another there. Within they were clean and well swept, with
the furniture well made. All are of palm branches beautifully
constructed. They found many images in the shape of women, and many heads
like masks,[132-5] very well carved. It was not known whether these were
used as ornaments, or to be worshipped. They had dogs which never bark,
and wild birds tamed in their houses. There was a wonderful supply of
nets and other fishing implements, but nothing was touched. He believed
that all the people on the coast were fishermen, who took the fish
inland, for this island is very large, and so beautiful, that he is never
tired of praising it. He says that he found trees and fruits of very
marvellous taste; and adds that they must have cows or other cattle, for
he saw skulls which were like those of cows.[133-1] The songs of the
birds and the chirping of crickets throughout the night lulled everyone
to rest, while the air was soft and healthy, and the nights neither hot
nor cold. On the voyage through the other islands there was great heat
but here it is tempered like the month of May. He attributed the heat of
the other islands to their flatness, and to the wind coming from the
east, which is hot. The water of the rivers was salt at the mouth, and
they did not know whence the natives got their drinking-water, though
they have sweet water in their houses. Ships are able to turn in this
river, both entering and coming out, and there are very good
leading-marks. He says that all this sea appears to be constantly smooth,
like the river at Seville, and the water suitable for the growth of
pearls. He found large shells unlike those of Spain. Remarking on the
position of the river and port, to which he gave the name of San
Salvador,[133-2] he describes its mountains as lofty and beautiful, like
the Pena de las Enamoradas,[133-3] and one of them has another little
hill on its summit, like a graceful mosque. The other river and port, in
which he now was,[133-4] has two round mountains to the S.W., and a fine
low cape running out to the W.S.W.


_Tuesday, 30th of October_

He left the Rio de Mares and steered N.W., seeing a cape covered with
palm trees, to which he gave the name of Cabo de Palmas,[133-5] after
having made good 15 leagues. The Indians on board the caravel _Pinta_
said that beyond that cape there was a river,[134-1] and that from the
river to Cuba it was four days' journey. The captain of the _Pinta_
reported that he understood from that, that this Cuba was a city, and
that the land was a great continent trending far to the north. The king
of that country, he gathered, was at war with the Gran Can, whom they
called Cami, and his land or city Fava, with many other names. The
Admiral resolved to proceed to that river, and to send a present, with
the letter of the Sovereigns,[134-2] to the king of that land. For this
service there was a sailor who had been to Guinea, and some of the
Indians of Guanahani wished to go with him, and afterwards to return to
their homes. The Admiral calculated that he was forty-two degrees to the
north of the equinoctial line (but the handwriting is here
illegible).[134-3] He says that he must attempt to reach the Gran Can,
who he thought was here or at the city of Cathay,[134-4] which belongs to
him, and is very grand, as he was informed before leaving Spain. All this
land, he adds, is low and beautiful, and the sea deep.


_Wednesday, 31st of October_

All Tuesday night he was beating to windward, and he saw a river, but
could not enter it because the entrance was narrow. The Indians fancied
that the ships could enter wherever their canoes could go. Navigating
onwards, he came to a cape running out very far, and surrounded by sunken
rocks,[134-5] and he saw a bay where small vessels might take shelter.
He could not proceed because the wind had come round to the north, and
all the coast runs N.W. and S.E. Another cape further on ran out still
more.[135-1] For these reasons, and because the sky showed signs of a
gale, he had to return to the Rio de Mares.


_Thursday, November the 1st_

At sunrise the Admiral sent the boats on shore to the houses that were
there, and they found that all the people had fled. After some time a man
made his appearance. The Admiral ordered that he should be left to
himself, and the sailors returned to the boats. After dinner, one of the
Indians on board was sent on shore. He called out from a distance that
there was nothing to fear, because the strangers were good people and
would do no harm to anyone, nor were they people of the Gran Can, but
they had given away their things in many islands where they had been. The
Indian then swam on shore, and two of the natives took him by the arms
and brought him to a house, where they heard what he had to say. When
they were certain that no harm would be done to them they were reassured,
and presently more than sixteen canoes came to the ships with
cotton-thread and other trifles. The Admiral ordered that nothing should
be taken from them, that they might understand that he sought for nothing
but gold, which they call _nucay_.[135-2] Thus they went to and fro
between the ships and the shore all day, and they came to the Christians
on shore with confidence. The Admiral saw no gold whatever among them,
but he says that he saw one of them with a piece of worked silver
fastened to his nose. They said, by signs, that within three days many
merchants from inland would come to buy the things brought by the
Christians, and would give information respecting the king of that land.
So far as could be understood from their signs, he resided at a distance
of four days' journey. They had sent many messengers in all directions,
with news of the arrival of the Admiral. "These people," says the
Admiral, "are of the same appearance and have the same customs as those
of the other islands, without any religion so far as I know, for up to
this day I have never seen the Indians on board say any prayer; though
they repeat the _Salve_ and _Ave Maria_ with their hands raised to
heaven, and they make the sign of the cross. The language is also the
same, and they are all friends; but I believe that all these islands are
at war with the Gran Can, whom they called Cavila, and his province
Bafan. They all go naked like the others." This is what the Admiral says.
"The river," he adds, "is very deep, and the ships can enter the mouth,
going close to the shore. The sweet water does not come within a league
of the mouth. It is certain," says the Admiral, "that this is the
mainland, and that I am in front of Zayto and Guinsay, a hundred leagues,
a little more or less, distant the one from the other.[136-1] It is very
clear that no one before has been so far as this by sea. Yesterday, with
wind from the N.W., I found it cold."


_Friday, 2nd of November_

The Admiral decided upon sending two Spaniards, one named Rodrigo de
Jerez, who lived in Ayamonte, and the other Luis de Torres, who had
served in the household of the Adelantado of Murcia, and had been a Jew,
knowing Hebrew, Chaldee, and even some Arabic. With these men he sent two
Indians, one from among those he had brought from Guanahani and another a
native of the houses by the river-side. He gave them strings of beads
with which to buy food if they should be in need, and ordered them to
return in six days. He gave them specimens of spices, to see if any were
to be found. Their instructions were to ask for the king of that land,
and they were told what to say on the part of the Sovereigns of Castile,
how they had sent the Admiral with letters and a present, to inquire
after his health and establish friendship, favoring him in what he might
desire from them. They were to collect information respecting certain
provinces, ports, and rivers of which the Admiral had notice, and to
ascertain their distances from where he was.

This night the Admiral took an altitude with a quadrant, and found that
the distance from the equinoctial line was 42 degrees.[137-1] He says
that, by his reckoning, he finds that he has gone over 1142 leagues from
the island of Hierro.[137-2] He still believes that he has reached the
mainland.


_Saturday, 3rd of November_

In the morning the Admiral got into the boat, and, as the river is like a
great lake at the mouth, forming a very excellent port, very deep, and
clear of rocks, with a good beach for careening ships, and plenty of
fuel, he explored it until he came to fresh water at a distance of two
leagues from the mouth. He ascended a small mountain to obtain a view of
the surrounding country, but could see nothing, owing to the dense
foliage of the trees, which were very fresh and odoriferous, so that he
felt no doubt that there were aromatic herbs among them. He said that all
he saw was so beautiful that his eyes could never tire of gazing upon
such loveliness, nor his ears of listening to the songs of birds. That
day many canoes came to the ships, to barter with cotton threads and
with the nets in which they sleep, called _hamacas_.


_Sunday, 4th of November_

At sunrise the Admiral again went away in the boat, and landed to hunt
the birds he had seen the day before. After a time, Martin Alonso Pinzon
came to him with two pieces of cinnamon, and said that a Portuguese, who
was one of his crew, had seen an Indian carrying two very large bundles
of it; but he had not bartered for it, because of the penalty imposed by
the Admiral on any one who bartered. He further said that this Indian
carried some brown things like nutmegs. The master[138-1] of the _Pinta_
said that he had found the cinnamon trees. The Admiral went to the place,
and found that they were not cinnamon trees. The Admiral showed the
Indians some specimens of cinnamon and pepper he had brought from
