swallows up all the illusions of youth. I suppose you have understood
what I have been saying?"

"Madame, madame!"

"Not a word!"

"I am innocent of everything your majesty can suppose. Oh! madame! you
are a witness of my despair. I love, I respect your majesty so much!"

"It would be far better not to respect me at all," said the queen, with
a chilling irony of manner. "It would be far better if you were not
innocent. Do you presume to suppose that I should be satisfied simply to
leave you unpunished if you had committed the fault?"

"Oh, madame! you are killing me."

"No acting, if you please, or I will undertake the _denouement_ of the
comedy; leave the room; return to your own apartment, and I trust my
lesson may be of service to you."

"Madame!" said La Valliere to the Duchesse d'Orleans, whose hands she
seized in her own, "do you, who are so good, intercede for me."

"I!" replied the latter, with an insulting joy, "I--good!--Ah,
mademoiselle, you think nothing of the kind;" and with a rude, hasty
gesture, she repulsed the young girl's hand.

La Valliere, instead of giving way, as from her extreme pallor and from
her tears the two princesses might possibly have expected, suddenly
resumed her calm and dignified air; she bowed profoundly, and left the
room.

"Well!" said Anne of Austria to madame, "do you think she will begin
again?"

"I always suspect those gentle and patient characters," replied Madame.
"Nothing is more full of courage than a patient heart, nothing is more
self-reliant than a gentle spirit."

"I feel I may almost venture to assure you she will think twice before
she looks at the god Mars again."

"So long as she does not obtain the protection of his buckler I do not
care," retorted Madame.

A proud, defiant look of the queen-mother was the reply to this
objection, which was by no means deficient in _finesse_; and both of
them, almost sure of their victory, went to look for Maria-Theresa, who
had been engaged, while awaiting their arrival, in endeavoring to
disguise her impatience.

It was about half-past six in the evening, and the king had just
partaken of some refreshment. He lost no time: but no sooner was the
repast finished, and business matters settled, than he took Saint-Aignan
by the arm, and desired him to lead him to La Valliere's apartments. The
courtier uttered a loud exclamation.

"Well, what is that for? It is a habit you will have to adopt, and in
order to adopt a habit, you must begin by something or another at
first."

"Oh, sire!" said Saint-Aignan, "it is hardly possible, for every one can
be seen entering or leaving those apartments. If, however, some pretext
or other were made use of--if your majesty, for instance, would wait
until Madame were in her own apartments--"

"No pretexts; no delays. I have had enough of these impediments and
these mysteries; I cannot perceive in what respect the king of France
dishonors himself in conversing with an amiable and clever girl. Evil be
to him who evil thinks."

"Will your majesty forgive an excess of zeal on my part?"

"Speak freely."

"And the queen?"

"True, true; I always wish the most entire respect to be shown to her
majesty. Well, then, this evening only will I pay Mademoiselle de la
Valliere a visit, and after to-day I will make use of any pretext you
like. To-morrow we will devise all sorts of means; to-night I have not
the time."

Saint-Aignan did not reply; he descended the steps, preceding the king,
and crossed the different courtyards with a feeling of shame, which the
distinguished honor of accompanying the king did not remove. The reason
was, that Saint-Aignan wished to stand well with Madame, as well as the
two queens; and also, that he did not, on the other hand, wish to
displease Mademoiselle de la Valliere; and in order to carry out so many
promising affairs, it was difficult to avoid jostling against some
obstacle or other. Besides, the windows of the young queen's rooms,
those of the queen-mother's, and of Madame herself, looked out upon the
courtyard of the maids of honor. To be seen, therefore, accompanying the
king, would be effectually to quarrel with three great and influential
princesses--with three women whose authority was unbounded--for the
purpose of supporting the ephemeral credit of a mistress. The unhappy
Saint-Aignan, who had not displayed a very great amount of courage in
taking La Valliere's part in the park of Fontainebleau, did not feel
himself any braver in the broad daylight, and found a thousand defects
in the poor girl which he was most eager to communicate to the king. But
his trial soon finished--the courtyards were crossed; not a curtain was
drawn aside, nor a window opened. The king walked hastily, because of
his impatience, and then also because of the long legs of Saint-Aignan,
who preceded him. At the door, however, Saint-Aignan wished to retire,
but the king desired him to remain: this was a delicate consideration on
the king's part, which the courtier could very well have dispensed with.
He had to follow Louis into La Valliere's apartment. As soon as the king
arrived, the young girl dried her tears, but did it so precipitately
that the king perceived it. He questioned her most anxiously and
tenderly, and pressed her to tell him the cause of her emotion.

"I have nothing the matter with me, sire," she said.

"And yet you were weeping."

"Oh, no, indeed, sire."

"Look, Saint-Aignan, and tell me if I am mistaken."

Saint-Aignan ought to have answered, but he was greatly embarrassed.

"At all events, your eyes are red, mademoiselle," said the king.

"The dust of the road merely, sire."

"No, no; you no longer possess that air of supreme contentment which
renders you so beautiful and so attractive. You do not look at me. Why
avoid my gaze?" he said, as she turned aside her head. "In Heaven's
name, what is the matter?" he inquired, beginning to lose all command
over himself.

"Nothing at all, sire; and I am perfectly ready to assure your majesty
that my mind is as free from anxiety as you could possibly wish."

"Your mind at ease, when I see you are embarrassed at the slightest
thing. Has any one wounded or annoyed you?"

"No, no, sire."

"I insist upon knowing if such really be the case," said the young
prince, his eyes sparkling.

"No one, sire, no one has in any way offended me."

"In that case, do resume your gentle air of gayety, or that sweet
melancholy look which I so loved in you this morning; for pity's sake,
do so."

"Yes, sire, yes."

The king struck the ground impatiently with his foot, saying, "Such a
change is positively inexplicable." And he looked at Saint-Aignan, who
had also remarked La Valliere's heavy languor of manner, as well as the
king's impatience.

It was utterly useless for the king to entreat, and as useless for him
to try his utmost to overcome her positiveness, which was but too
apparent, and did not in reality exist; the poor girl was completely
overwhelmed--the aspect of death itself could not have awakened her from
her torpor. The king saw in her repeated negative replies a mystery full
of unkindness; he began to look all round the apartment with a
suspicious air. There happened to be in La Valliere's room a miniature
of Athos. The king remarked this portrait, which bore a considerable
resemblance to Bragelonne, for it had been taken when the comte was
quite a young man. He looked at it with a threatening air. La Valliere,
in her depressed state of mind, and very far indeed from thinking of
this portrait, could not conjecture the king's preoccupation. And yet
the king's mind was occupied with a terrible remembrance, which had more
than once taken possession of his mind, but which he had always driven
away. He recalled the intimacy which had existed between the two young
people from their birth; the engagement which had followed; and that
Athos had himself come to solicit La Valliere's hand for Raoul. He
therefore could not but suppose that, on her return to Paris, La
Valliere had found news from London awaiting her, and that this news had
counterbalanced the influence which he had been enabled to exert over
her. He immediately felt himself stung, as it were, by feelings of the
wildest jealousy; and he again questioned her, with increased
bitterness. La Valliere could not reply, unless she were to acknowledge
everything, which would be to accuse the queen, and Madame also; and the
consequence would be, that she would have to enter upon an open warfare
with these two great and powerful princesses. She thought within herself
that as she made no attempt to conceal from the king what was passing in
her own mind, the king ought to be able to read in her heart, in spite
of her silence; and that, if he really loved her, he would have
understood and guessed everything. What was sympathy, then, if it were
not that divine flame which possesses the property of enlightening the
heart, and of saving lovers the necessity of an expression of their
thoughts and feelings. She maintained her silence, therefore, satisfying
herself with sighing, weeping, and concealing her face in her hands.
These sighs and tears, which had at first distressed, and then
terrified, Louis XIV., now irritated him. He could not bear any
opposition--not the opposition which tears and sighs exhibited, any more
than opposition of any other kind. His remarks, therefore, became
bitter, urgent, and openly aggressive in their nature. This was a fresh
cause of distress for the poor girl. From that very circumstance,
therefore, which she regarded as an injustice on her lover's part, she
drew sufficient courage to bear, not only her other troubles, but even
this one also.

The king next began to accuse her in direct terms. La Valliere did not
even attempt to defend herself; she endured all his accusations without
according any other reply than that of shaking her head; without making
any other remark than that which escapes every heart in deep distress,
by a prayerful appeal to Heaven for help. But this ejaculation, instead
of calming the king's displeasure, rather increased it. He, moreover,
saw himself seconded by Saint-Aignan, for Saint-Aignan, as we have
observed, having seen the storm increasing, and not knowing the extent
of the regard of which Louis XIV. was capable, felt, by anticipation,
all the collected wrath of the three princesses, and the near approach
of poor La Valliere's downfall; and he was not true knight enough to
resist the fear that he himself might possibly be dragged down in the
impending ruin. Saint-Aignan did not reply to the king's questions
except by short, dry remarks, pronounced half-aloud; and by abrupt
gestures, whose object was to make things worse, and bring about a
misunderstanding, the result of which would be to free him from the
annoyance of having to cross the courtyards in broad open day, in order
to follow his illustrious companion to La Valliere's apartments. In the
meantime the king's anger momentarily increased; he made two or three
steps toward the door, as if to leave the room, but then returned; the
young girl did not, however, raise her head, although the sound of his
footsteps might have warned her that her lover was leaving her. He drew
himself up, for a moment, before her, with his arms crossed.

"For the last time, mademoiselle," he said, "will you speak? Will you
assign a reason for this change, for this fickleness, for this caprice?"

"What can I say?" murmured La Valliere. "Do you not see, sire, that I am
completely overwhelmed at this moment; that I have no power of will, or
thought, or speech?"

"Is it so difficult, then, to speak the truth? You would have told me
the truth in fewer words than those in which you have just now expressed
yourself."

"But the truth about what, sire?"

"About everything."

La Valliere was just on the point of revealing the whole truth to the
king; her arms made a sudden movement as if they were about to open, but
her lips remained silent, and her arms again fell listlessly by her
side. The poor girl had not yet endured sufficient unhappiness to risk
the necessary revelation. "I know nothing," she stammered out.

"Oh!" exclaimed the king, "this is no longer mere coquetry, or caprice,
it is treason."

And this time nothing could restrain him; the impulses of his heart were
not sufficient to induce him to turn back, and he darted out of the room
with a gesture full of despair. Saint-Aignan followed him, wishing for
nothing better than to leave the place.

Louis XIV. did not pause until he reached the staircase, and grasping
the balustrade, said: "You see how shamefully I have been duped."

"How, sire?" inquired the favorite.

"Guiche fought on the Vicomte de Bragelonne's account, and this
Bragelonne ... oh! Saint-Aignan, she still loves him. I vow to you,
Saint-Aignan, that, if in three day's hence, there were to remain but an
atom of affection for her in my heart, I should die from very shame."
And the king resumed his way to his own apartments.

"I assured your majesty how it would be," murmured Saint-Aignan,
continuing to follow the king, and timidly glancing up at the different
windows. Unfortunately their return was different to what their
departure had been. A curtain was stealthily drawn aside; Madame was
behind it. She had seen the king leave the apartments of the maids of
honor, and as soon as she observed that his majesty had passed, she left
her own apartments with hurried steps, and ran up the staircase, which
led to the room the king had just left.




CHAPTER XXXII.

DESPAIR.


As soon as the king had left her, La Valliere raised herself from the
ground, and extended her arms, as if to follow and detain him; but when,
having violently closed the door, the sound of his retreating footsteps
could be heard in the distance, she had hardly sufficient strength left
to totter toward and fall at the foot of her crucifix. There she
remained, brokenhearted, absorbed and overwhelmed by her grief,
forgetful of and indifferent to everything but her profound grief
itself--a grief which she could not comprehend otherwise than by
instinct and acute sensation. In the midst of the wild tumult of her
thoughts, La Valliere heard her door open again; she started, and turned
round, thinking that it was the king who had returned. She was deceived,
however, for it was Madame who appeared at the door. What did she now
care for Madame! Again she sank down, her head supported by her
_prie-dieu_ chair. It was Madame, agitated, irritated and threatening.
But what was that to her?

"Mademoiselle," said the princess, standing before La Valliere, "this is
very fine, I admit, to kneel, and pray, and make a pretense of being
religious; but however submissive you may be in your addresses to
Heaven, it is desirable that you should pay some little attention to the
wishes of those who reign and rule here below."

La Valliere raised her head painfully in token of respect.

"Not long since," continued Madame, "a certain recommendation was
addressed to you, I believe."

La Valliere's fixed and wild gaze showed how entire her forgetfulness or
her ignorance was.

"The queen recommended you," continued Madame, "to conduct yourself in
such a manner that no one could be justified in spreading any reports
about you."

La Valliere darted an inquiring look toward her.

"I will not," continued Madame, "allow my household, which is that of
the first princess of the blood, to set an evil example to the court;
you would be the cause of such an example. I beg you to understand,
therefore, in the absence of any witness of your shame, for I do not
wish to humiliate you, that you are from this moment at perfect liberty
to leave, and that you can return to your mother at Blois."

La Valliere could not sink lower, nor could she suffer more than she had
already suffered. Her countenance did not even change, but she remained
with her hands crossed over her knees like the figure of the Magdalen.

"Did you hear me?" said Madame.

A shiver, which passed through her whole frame, was La Valliere's only
reply; and as the victim gave no other sign of life, Madame left the
room. And then, her very respiration suspended, and her blood almost
congealed, as it were, in her veins, La Valliere by degrees felt that
the pulsations of her wrists, her neck, and temples began to throb more
and more heavily. These pulsations, as they gradually increased, soon
changed into a species of brain fever, and in her temporary delirium
she saw the figures of her friends contending with her enemies, floating
before her vision. She heard, too, mingled together in her deafened
ears, words of menace and words of fond affection; she seemed raised out
of her first existence as though it were upon the wings of a mighty
tempest, and in the dim horizon of the path along which her delirium
hurried her, she saw the stone which covered her tomb upraised, and the
dark and appalling interior of eternal night revealed to her distracted
gaze. But the horror of the dream which had possessed her senses soon
faded away, and she was again restored to the habitual resignation of
her character. A ray of hope penetrated her heart, as a ray of sunlight
streams into the dungeon of some unhappy captive. Her mind reverted to
the journey from Fontainebleau; she saw the king riding beside her
carriage, telling her that he loved her, asking for her love in return,
requiring her to swear, and himself swearing too, that never should an
evening pass by, if ever a misunderstanding were to arise between them,
without a visit, a letter, a sign of some kind, being sent, to replace
the troubled anxiety of the evening by the calm repose of the night. It
was the king who had suggested that, who had imposed a promise upon her,
who had himself sworn it also. It was impossible, therefore, she
reasoned, that the king should fail in keeping the promise which he had
himself exacted from her, unless, indeed, the king were a despot who
enforced love as he enforced obedience; unless, too, the king were truly
indifferent, that the first obstacle in his way were sufficient to
arrest his further progress. The king, that kind protector, who by a
word, by a single word, could relieve her distress of mind, the king
even joined her persecutors. Oh! his anger could not possibly last. Now
that he was alone, he would be suffering all that she herself was a prey
to. But he was not tied hand and foot as she was; he could act, could
move about, could come to her, while she could do nothing but wait. And
the poor girl waited, and waited, with breathless anxiety, for she
could not believe it possible that the king would not come.

It was now about half-past ten. He would either come to her, or write to
her, or send some kind word by M. de Saint-Aignan. If he were to come,
oh! how she would fly to meet him; how she would thrust aside that
excess of delicacy which she now discovered was misunderstood; how
eagerly she would explain: "It is not I who do not love you, it is the
fault of others who will not allow me to love you." And then it must be
confessed that as she reflected upon it, and also the more she
reflected, Louis appeared to her to be less guilty. In fact, he was
ignorant of everything. What must he have thought of the obstinacy with
which she remained silent? Impatient and irritable as the king was known
to be, it was extraordinary that he had been able to preserve his temper
so long. And yet, had it been her own case, she undoubtedly would not
have acted in such a manner; she would have understood everything, have
guessed everything. Yes, but she was nothing but a poor simple-minded
girl, and not a great and powerful monarch. Oh! if he did but come, if
he would but come!--how eagerly she would forgive him for all he had
just made her suffer! how much more tenderly she would love him because
she had so suffered! And so she sat, with her head bent forward in eager
expectation toward the door, her lips slightly parted, as if--and Heaven
forgive her for the thought, she mentally exclaimed--they were awaiting
the kiss which the king's lips had in the morning so sweetly indicated,
when he pronounced the word _love_! If the king did not come, at least
he would write! it was a second chance; a chance less delightful
certainly than the other, but which would show an affection just as
strong, but only more timorous in its nature. Oh! how she would devour
his letter, how eager she would be to answer it; and when the messenger
who had brought it had left her, how she would kiss, read over and over
again, press upon her heart the happy paper which would have brought her
ease of mind, tranquillity, and perfect happiness. At all events, if
the king did not come; if, however, the king did not write, he could not
do otherwise than send Saint-Aignan, or Saint-Aignan could not do
otherwise than come of his own accord. Even if it were a third person,
how openly she would speak to him; the royal presence would not be there
to freeze her words upon her tongue, and then no suspicious feeling
would remain a moment longer in the king's heart.

Everything with La Valliere, heart and look, body and mind, was
concentrated in eager expectation. She said to herself that there was an
hour left in which to indulge hope; that until midnight had struck, the
king might come, or write, or send; that at midnight only would every
expectation be useless, every hope lost. Whenever there was any noise in
the palace, the poor girl fancied she was the cause of it; whenever she
heard any one pass in the courtyard below, she imagined they were
messengers of the king coming to her. Eleven o'clock struck; then a
quarter past eleven: then half-past. The minutes dragged slowly on in
this anxiety, and yet they seemed to pass far too quickly. And now, it
struck a quarter to twelve. Midnight, midnight was near, the last, the
final hope which remained, came in its turn. With the last stroke of the
clock, the last ray of light seemed to fade away; and with the last ray,
so faded her final hope. And so, the king himself had deceived her; it
was he who had been the first to fail in keeping the oath which he had
sworn that very day; twelve hours only between his oath and his perjured
vow; it was not long, certainly, to have preserved the illusion. And so,
not only did the king not love her, but still more, he despised her whom
every one overwhelmed; he despised her to the extent even of abandoning
her to the shame of an expulsion which was equivalent to having an
ignominious sentence passed upon her; and yet, it was he, the king
himself, who was the first cause of this ignominy. A bitter smile, the
only symptom of anger which during this long conflict had passed across
the victim's angelic face, appeared upon her lips. What, in fact, now
remained on earth for her, after the king was lost to her? Nothing. But
Heaven still remained, and her thoughts flew thither. She prayed that
the proper course for her to follow might be suggested. "It is from
Heaven," she thought, "that I do expect everything; it is from Heaven I
ought to expect everything." And she looked at her crucifix with a
devotion full of tender love. "There," she said, "hangs before me a
Master who never forgets and never abandons those who do not abandon and
who do not forget Him; it is to Him alone that we must sacrifice
ourselves." And, thereupon, could any one have gazed into the recesses
of that chamber, they would have seen the poor despairing girl adopt a
final resolution, and determine upon one last plan in her mind.
Thereupon, and as her knees were no longer able to support her, she
gradually sank down upon the _prie-dieu_, and with her head pressed
against the wooden cross, her eyes fixed, and her respiration short and
quick, she watched for the earliest rays of approaching daylight. At two
o'clock in the morning she was still in the same bewilderment of mind,
or rather in the same ecstasy of feeling. Her thoughts had almost ceased
to hold any communion with the things of this world. And when she saw
the violet tints of early dawn visible upon the roofs of the palace, and
vaguely revealing the outlines of the ivory cross which she held
embraced, she rose from the ground with a new-born strength, kissed the
feet of the divine martyr, descended the staircase leading from the
room, and wrapped herself from head to foot in a mantle as she went
along. She reached the wicket at the very moment the guard of musketeers
opened the gate to admit the first relief-guard belonging to one of the
Swiss regiments. And then, gliding behind the soldiers, she reached the
street before the officer in command of the patrol had even thought of
asking who the young girl was who was making her escape from the palace
at so early an hour.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE FLIGHT.


La Valliere followed the patrol as it left the courtyard. The patrol
bent its steps toward the right, by the Rue St. Honore, and mechanically
La Valliere went to the left. Her resolution was taken--her
determination fixed: she wished to betake herself to the convent of the
Carmelites at Chaillot, the superior of which enjoyed a reputation for
severity which made the worldly minded people of the court tremble. La
Valliere had never seen Paris--she had never gone out on foot, and so
would have been unable to find her way, even had she been in a calmer
frame of mind than was then the case, and this may explain why she
ascended, instead of descending, the Rue St. Honore. Her only thought
was to get away from the Palais Royal, and this she was doing: she had
heard it said that Chaillot looked out upon the Seine, and she
accordingly directed her steps toward the Seine. She took the Rue du
Coq, and not being able to cross the Louvre, bore toward the church of
Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois, proceeding along the site of the colonnade
which was subsequently built there by Perrault. In a very short time she
reached the quays. Her steps were rapid and agitated; she scarcely felt
the weakness which reminded her of having sprained her foot when very
young, and which obliged her to limp slightly. At any other hour in the
day her countenance would have awakened the suspicions of the least
clear-sighted persons, or have attracted the attention of the most
indifferent passers-by. But at half-past two in the morning, the streets
of Paris are almost, if not quite, deserted, and scarcely any one is to
be seen but the hard-working artisan on his way to earn his daily bread,
or the dangerous idlers of the streets, who are returning to their homes
after a night of riot and debauchery: for the former the day was
beginning, for the latter it was just closing. La Valliere was afraid of
those faces, in which her ignorance of Parisian types did not permit her
to distinguish the type of probity from that of dishonesty. The
appearance of misery alarmed her, and all whom she met seemed wretched
and miserable. Her toilet, which was the same she had worn during the
previous evening, was elegant even in its careless disorder: for it was
the one in which she had presented herself to the queen-mother; and,
moreover, when she drew aside the mantle which covered her face in order
to enable her to see the way she was going, her pallor and her beautiful
eyes spoke an unknown language to the men she met, and, ignorantly, the
poor fugitive seemed to invite the brutal remarks of the one class, or
to appeal to the compassion of the other. La Valliere still walked on in
the same way, breathless and hurried, until she reached the top of the
Place de Greve. She stopped from time to time, placed her hand upon her
heart, leaned against a wall until she could breathe freely again, and
then continued her course more rapidly than before. On reaching the
Place de Greve, La Valliere suddenly came upon a group of three drunken
men, reeling and staggering along, who were just leaving a boat, which
they had made fast to the quay; the boat was freighted with wines, and
it was apparent that they had done complete justice to the merchandise.
They were singing their convivial exploits in three different keys, when
suddenly, as they reached the end of the railing leading down to the
quay, they found an obstacle in their path in the shape of this young
girl. La Valliere stopped; while they, on their side, at the appearance
of the young girl dressed in court costume, also halted, and, seizing
each other by the hand, they surrounded La Valliere, singing:

  "Oh! you who sadly are wandering alone,
  Come, come, and laugh with us."

La Valliere at once understood that the men were addressing her, and
wished to prevent her passing; she tried to do so several times, but all
her efforts were useless. Her limbs failed her; she felt she was on the
point of falling, and uttered a cry of terror. At the same moment, the
circle which surrounded her was suddenly broken through in a most
violent manner. One of her insulters was knocked to the left, another
fell rolling over and over to the right, close to the water's edge,
while the third could hardly keep his feet. An officer of the musketeers
stood face to face with the young girl, with threatening brow, and his
hand raised to carry out his threat. The drunken fellows, at the sight
of the uniform, made their escape with all dispatch, and the greater for
the proof of strength which the wearer of the uniform had just afforded
them.

"Is it possible," exclaimed the musketeer, "that it can be Mademoiselle
de la Valliere?"

La Valliere, bewildered by what had just happened, and confounded by
hearing her name pronounced, looked up and recognized D'Artagnan.

"Oh, M. d'Artagnan, it is indeed I!" and at the same moment she seized
hold of his arm. "You will protect me, will you not?" she added, in a
tone of entreaty.

"Most certainly I will protect you; but, in Heaven's name, where are you
going at this hour?"

"I am going to Chaillot."

"You're going to Chaillot by the way of La Rapee! Why, mademoiselle, you
are turning your back to it."

"In that case, monsieur, be kind enough to put me in the right way, and
to go with me a short distance."

"Most willingly."

"But how does it happen that I have found you here? By what merciful
direction were you so near at hand to come to my assistance? I almost
seem to be dreaming, or to be losing my senses."

"I happened to be here, mademoiselle, because I have a house in the
Place de Greve, at the sign of the 'Notre-Dame,' the rent of which I
went to receive yesterday, and where I, in fact, passed the night. And I
also wished to be at the palace early, for the purpose of inspecting my
posts."

"Thank you," said La Valliere.

"That is what _I_ was doing," said D'Artagnan to himself; "but what was
_she_ doing, and why was she going to Chaillot at such an hour?" And he
offered her his arm, which she took, and began to walk with increased
precipitation, which concealed, however, a great weakness. D'Artagnan
perceived it, and proposed to La Valliere that she should take a little
rest, which she refused.

"You are ignorant, perhaps, where Chaillot is?" inquired D'Artagnan.

"Quite so."

"It is a great distance."

"That matters very little."

"It is at least a league."

"I can walk it."

D'Artagnan did not reply; he could tell, merely by the tone of a voice,
when a resolution was real or not. He rather bore along than accompanied
La Valliere, until they perceived the elevated ground of Chaillot.

"What house are you going to, mademoiselle?" inquired D'Artagnan.

"To the Carmelites, monsieur."

"To the Carmelites?" repeated D'Artagnan, in amazement.

"Yes; and since Heaven has directed you toward me to give me your
support on my road, accept both my thanks and my adieux."

"To the Carmelites! Your adieux! Are you going to become a nun?"
exclaimed D'Artagnan.

"Yes, monsieur."

"What, you!!!" There was in this "you," which we have marked by three
notes of exclamation in order to render it as expressive as
possible--there was, we repeat, in this "you" a complete poem. It
recalled to La Valliere her old recollections of Blois, and her new
recollections of Fontainebleau; it said to her, "_You_, who might be
happy with Raoul--_you_, who might be powerful with Louis, _you_ about
to become a nun!"

"Yes, monsieur," she said; "I am going to devote myself to the service
of Heaven, and to renounce the world altogether."

"But are you not mistaken with regard to your vocation--are you not
mistaken in supposing it to be the will of Heaven?"

"No; since Heaven has been pleased to throw you in my way. Had it not
been for you, I should certainly have sunk from fatigue on the road; and
since Heaven, I repeat, has thrown you in my way, it is because it has
willed that I should carry out my intention."

"Oh!" said D'Artagnan, doubtingly, "that is a rather subtle distinction,
I think."

"Whatever it may be," returned the young girl, "I have acquainted you
with the steps I have taken, and with my fixed resolution. And now I
have one last favor to ask of you, even while I return you my thanks.
The king is entirely ignorant of my flight from the Palais Royal, and is
ignorant also of what I am about to do."

"The king ignorant, you say!" exclaimed D'Artagnan. "Take care,
mademoiselle; you are not aware of what you are doing. No one ought to
do anything with which the king is unacquainted, especially those who
belong to the court."

"I no longer belong to the court, monsieur."

D'Artagnan looked at the young girl with increasing astonishment.

"Do not be uneasy, monsieur," she continued; "I have well calculated
everything: and were it not so, it would now be too late to reconsider
my resolution--it is decided."

"Well, mademoiselle, what do you wish me to do?"

"In the name of that sympathy which misfortune inspires, by your
generous feelings, and by your honor as a gentleman, I entreat you to
swear to me one thing."

"Name it."

"Swear to me, Monsieur d'Artagnan, that you will not tell the king that
you have seen me, and that I am at the Carmelites."

"I will not swear that," said D'Artagnan, shaking his head.

"Why?"

"Because I know the king, I know you, I know myself, even, nay, the
whole human race, too well; no, no, I will not swear that."

"In that case," cried La Valliere, with an energy of which one would
hardly have thought her capable, "instead of the blessing which I should
have implored for you until my dying day, I will invoke a curse, for you
are rendering me the most miserable creature that ever lived."

We have already observed that D'Artagnan could easily recognize the
accents of truth and sincerity, and he could not resist this last
appeal. He saw by her face how bitterly she suffered from a feeling of
degradation, he remarked her trembling limbs, how her whole slight and
delicate frame was violently agitated by some internal struggle, and
clearly perceived that resistance might be fatal. "I will do as you
wish, then," he said. "Be satisfied, mademoiselle, I will say nothing to
the king."

"Oh! thanks, thanks," exclaimed La Valliere, "you are the most generous
man breathing."

And in her extreme delight she seized hold of D'Artagnan's hands and
pressed them between her own. D'Artagnan, who felt himself quite
overcome, said, "This is touching, upon my word; she begins where others
leave off."

And La Valliere, who, in the extremity of her distress, had sunk down
upon the ground, rose and walked toward the convent of the Carmelites,
which could now, in the dawning light, be perceived just before them.
D'Artagnan followed her at a distance. The entrance door was half open,
she glided in like a shadow, and thanking D'Artagnan by a parting
gesture, disappeared from his sight. When D'Artagnan found himself quite
alone, he reflected profoundly upon what had just taken place. "Upon my
word," he said, "this looks very much like what is called a false
position. To keep such a secret as that is to keep a burning coal in
one's breeches pocket, and trust that it may not burn the stuff. And
yet, not to keep it when I have sworn to do so, is dishonorable. It
generally happens that some bright idea or other occurs to me as I am
going along; but I am very much mistaken if I shall not now have to go a
long way in order to find the solution of this affair. Yes, but which
way to go? Oh! toward Paris, of course; that is the best way, after all.
Only one must make haste, and in order to make haste, four legs are
better than two, and I, unhappily, have only two. 'A horse, a horse,' as
I heard them say at the theater in London, 'my kingdom for a horse!' And
now I think of it, it need not cost me so much as that, for at the
Barriere de la Conference there is a guard of musketeers, and instead of
the one horse I need, I shall find ten there."

So, in pursuance of this resolution, which he had adopted with his usual
rapidity, D'Artagnan immediately turned his back upon the heights of
Chaillot, reached the guard-house, took the fastest horse he could find
there, and was at the palace in less than ten minutes. It was striking
five as he reached the Palais Royal. The king, he was told, went to bed
at his usual hour, after having been engaged with M. Colbert, and, in
all probability, was still fast asleep. "Come," said D'Artagnan, "she
spoke the truth, and the king is ignorant of everything; if he only knew
one half of what has happened, the Palais Royal by this time would be
turned upside down."




CHAPTER XXXIV.

SHOWING HOW LOUIS, ON HIS SIDE, HAD PASSED THE TIME FROM TEN TO
HALF-PAST TWELVE AT NIGHT.


When the king left the apartment of the maids of honor, he found Colbert
awaiting him to receive his directions with regard to the next day's
ceremony, as the king was then to receive the Dutch and Spanish
ambassadors. Louis XIV. had serious causes of dissatisfaction with the
Dutch; the States had already been guilty of many mean shifts, and
evasions with France, and without perceiving or without caring about the
chances of a rupture, they again abandoned the alliance with his Most
Christian Majesty, for the purpose of entering into all kinds of plots
with Spain. Louis XIV. at his accession, that is to say, at the death of
Cardinal Mazarin, had found this political question roughly sketched
out; the solution was difficult for a young man, but as, at that time,
the king represented the whole nation, anything that the head resolved
upon, the body would be found ready to carry out. Any sudden impulse of
anger, the reaction of young and hot blood to the brain, would be quite
sufficient to change an old form of policy and to create another and new
system altogether. The part that diplomatists had to play in those days
was that of arranging among themselves the different _coups-d'etat_
which their sovereign masters might wish to effect.

Louis was not in that calm state of mind which could make him capable of
determining upon a wise course of policy. Still much agitated from the
quarrel he had just had with La Valliere, he walked hastily into his
cabinet, exceedingly desirous of finding an opportunity of producing an
explosion after he had controlled himself for so long a time. Colbert,
as he saw the king enter, knew the position of affairs at a glance,
understood the king's intentions, and resolved therefore to maneuver a
little. When Louis requested to be informed what it would be necessary
to say on the morrow, Colbert began by expressing his surprise that his
majesty had not been properly informed, by M. Fouquet. "M. Fouquet," he
said, "is perfectly acquainted with the whole of this Dutch affair, he
receives the dispatches himself direct."

The king, who was accustomed to hear M. Colbert speak in not
overscrupulous terms of M. Fouquet, allowed this remark to pass by
unanswered, and merely listened. Colbert noticed the effect it had
produced, and hastened to back out, saying that M. Fouquet was not on
all occasions as blamable as at the first glance might seem to be the
case, inasmuch as at that moment he was greatly occupied. The king
looked up. "What do you allude to?" he said.

"Sire, men are but men, and M. Fouquet has his defects as well as his
great qualities."

"Ah! defects, who is without them, M. Colbert?"

"Your majesty is not," said Colbert, boldly; for he knew how to convey a
good deal of flattery in a light amount of blame, like the arrow which
cleaves the air notwithstanding its weight, thanks to the light feathers
which bear it up.

The king smiled. "What defect has M. Fouquet, then?" he said.

"Still the same, sire; it is said he is in love."

"In love! with whom?"

"I am not quite sure, sire; I have very little to do with matters of
gallantry."

"At all events you know, since you speak of it."

"I have heard a name mentioned."

"Whose?"

"I cannot now remember whose, but I think it is one of Madame's maids of
honor."

The king started. "You know more than you like to say, M. Colbert?" he
murmured.

"I assure you, no, sire."

"At all events, Madame's maids of honor are all known, and in mentioning
their names to you, you will perhaps recollect the one you allude to."

"No, sire."

"At least, try."

"It would be useless, sire. Whenever the name of any lady who runs the
risk of being compromised is concerned, my memory is like a coffer of
brass, the key of which I have lost."

A dark cloud seemed to pass over the mind as well as across the face of
the king; then, wishing to appear as if he were perfect master of
himself and of his feelings, he said: "And now for the affair concerning
Holland."

"In the first place, sire, at what hour will your majesty receive the
ambassadors?"

"Early in the morning."

"Eleven o'clock?"

"That is too late--say nine o'clock."

"That will be too early, sire."

"For friends, that would be a matter of no importance, one does what one
likes with one's friends; but for one's enemies, in that case nothing
could be better than if they were to feel hurt. I should not be sorry, I
confess, to have to finish altogether with these marsh-birds, who annoy
me with their cries."

"It shall be precisely as your majesty desires. At nine o'clock,
therefore--I will give the necessary orders. Is it to be a formal
audience?"

"No. I wish to have an explanation with them, and not to embitter
matters, as is always the case when many persons are present; but, at
the same time, I wish to clear everything with them, in order not to
have to begin over again."

"Your majesty will inform me of the persons whom you wish to be present
at the reception."

"I will draw out a list of them. Let us speak of the ambassadors; what
do they want?"

"Allies with Spain, they gain nothing; allies with France, they lose
much."

"How is that?"

"Allied with Spain, they see themselves bounded and protected by the
possessions of their allies; they cannot touch them, however anxious
they may be to do so. From Antwerp to Rotterdam is but a step, and that
by way of the Scheldt and the Meuse. If they wish to make a bite at the
Spanish cake, you, sire, the son-in-law of the king of Spain, could with
your cavalry go from your dominions to Brussels in a couple of days.
Their design is, therefore, only to quarrel so far with you, and only to
make you suspect Spain so far, as will be sufficient to induce you not
to interfere with their own affairs."

"It would be far more simple, I should think," replied the king, "to
form a solid alliance with me, by means of which I should gain
something, while they would gain everything."

"Not so; for if, by chance, they were to have you, or France rather, as
a boundary, your majesty is not an agreeable neighbor; young, ardent,
warlike, the king of France might inflict some serious mischief on
Holland, especially if he were to get near her."

"I perfectly understand, M. Colbert, and you have explained it very
clearly; but be good enough to tell me the conclusion you have arrived
at."

"Your majesty's own decisions are never deficient in wisdom."

"What will these ambassadors say to me?"

"They will tell your majesty that they are ardently desirous of forming
an alliance with you, which will be a falsehood; they will tell Spain
that the three powers ought to unite so as to check the prosperity of
England, and that will equally be a falsehood; for, at present, the
natural ally of your majesty is England, who has ships when you have
none; England, who can counteract Dutch influence in India; England, in
fact, a monarchical country, to which your majesty is attached by ties
of relationship."

"Good; but how would you answer?"

"I should answer, sire, with the greatest possible moderation of tone,
that the disposition of Holland does not seem friendly toward the king
of France; that the symptoms of public feeling among the Dutch are
alarming as regards your majesty; that certain medals have been struck
with insulting devices."

"Toward me!" exclaimed the young king, excitedly.

"Oh! no, sire, no: insulting is not the word; I was mistaken, I ought to
have said immeasurably flattering for the Dutch."

"Oh! if that be so, the pride of the Dutch is a matter of indifference
to me," said the king, sighing.

"Your majesty is right, a thousand times right. However, it is never a
mistake in politics, your majesty knows better than myself, to be unjust
in order to obtain a concession in your own favor. If your majesty were
to complain as if your susceptibility were offended, you will stand in a
far higher position with them."

"What are those medals you speak of?" inquired Louis; "for if I allude
to them, I ought to know what to say."

"Upon my word, sire I cannot very well tell you--some overweeningly
conceited device--that is the sense of it, the words have nothing to do
with the thing itself."

"Very good, I will mention the word 'medal,' and they can understand it
if they like."

"Oh! they will understand without a difficulty. Your majesty can also
slip in a few words about certain pamphlets which are being circulated."

"Never! Pamphlets befoul those who write them much more than those
against whom they are written. M. Colbert, I thank you, you can leave me
now. Do not forget the hour I have fixed, and be there yourself."

"Sire, I await your majesty's list."

"True," returned the king; and he began to meditate; he did not think of
the list in the slightest degree. The clock struck half-past eleven. The
king's face revealed a violent conflict between pride and love. The
political conversation had dispelled a good deal of the irritation which
Louis had felt, and La Valliere's pale, worn features, in his
imagination, spoke a very different language to that of the Dutch
medals, or the Batavian pamphlets. He sat for ten minutes debating
within himself whether he should or should not return to La Valliere;
but Colbert having with some urgency respectfully requested that the
list might be furnished him, the king blushed at thinking of mere
matters of affection when matters of business required his attention. He
therefore dictated: the queen-mother, the queen, Madame, Madame de
Motteville, Madame de Chatillon, Madame de Noailles; and, for the men,
M. le Prince, M. de Grammont, M. de Manicamp, M. de Saint-Aignan, and
the officers on duty.

"The ministers," said Colbert.

"As a matter of course, and the secretaries also."

"Sire, I will leave at once in order to get everything prepared; the
orders will be at the different residences to-morrow."

"Say rather to-day," replied Louis mournfully, as the clock struck
twelve. It was the very hour when poor La Valliere was almost dying from
anguish and bitter suffering. The king's attendants entered, it being
the hour of his retiring to rest; the queen, indeed, had been waiting
for more than an hour. Louis accordingly retired to his bedroom with a
sigh; but, as he sighed, he congratulated himself on his courage, and
applauded himself for having been as firm in love as in affairs of
state.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE AMBASSADORS.


D'Artagnan had, with very few exceptions, learned almost all the
particulars of what we have just been relating; for among his friends he
reckoned all the useful, serviceable people in the royal
household--officious attendants who were proud of being recognized by
the captain of the musketeers, for the captain's influence was very
great, and then, in addition to any ambitious views they may have
imagined he could promote, they were proud of being regarded as worth
being spoken to by a man as brave as D'Artagnan. In this manner
D'Artagnan learned every morning what he had not been able either to see
or to ascertain the night before, from the simple fact of his not being
ubiquitous; so that, with the information he had been able by his own
means to pick up during the day, and with what he had gathered from
others, he succeeded in making up a bundle of weapons, which he untied
as occasion might require. In this way D'Artagnan's two eyes rendered
him the same service as the hundred eyes of Argus. Political secrets,
bedside revelations, hints or scraps of conversation dropped by the
courtiers on the threshold of the royal antechamber, in this way
D'Artagnan managed to ascertain and to put away everything in the vast
and impenetrable tomb of his memory, by the side of those royal secrets
so dearly bought and faithfully preserved. He therefore knew of the
king's interview with Colbert, and of the appointment made for the
ambassadors in the morning, and consequently he knew that the question
of the medals would be brought under debate; and, while he was arranging
and constructing the conversation upon a few chance words which had
reached his ears, he returned to his post in the royal apartments, so as
to be there at the very moment the king would awake. It happened that
the king woke very early--proving thereby that he, too, on his side, had
slept but indifferently. Toward seven o'clock, he half-opened his door
very gently. D'Artagnan was at his post. His majesty was pale, and
seemed wearied; he had not, moreover, quite finished dressing.

"Send for M. de Saint-Aignan," he said.

Saint-Aignan very probably awaited a summons, for the messenger, when he
reached his apartment, found him already dressed. Saint-Aignan hastened
to the king in obedience to the summons. A moment afterward the king and
Saint-Aignan passed by together, but the king walking first. D'Artagnan
went to the window which looked out upon the courtyards; he had no need
to put himself to the trouble of watching in what direction the king
went, for he had no difficulty in guessing beforehand where his majesty
was going. The king, in fact, bent his steps toward the apartments of
the maids of honor--a circumstance which in no way astonished
D'Artagnan, for he more than suspected, although La Valliere had not
breathed a syllable on the subject, that the king had some kind of
reparation to make. Saint-Aignan followed him as he had done the
previous evening, rather less uneasy in his mind, though still slightly
agitated, for he fervently trusted that at seven o'clock in the morning
there might be only himself and the king awake among the august guests
at the palace. D'Artagnan stood at the window, careless and perfectly
calm in his manner. One could almost have sworn that he noticed nothing
and was utterly ignorant who were these two hunters after adventures,
who were passing across the courtyards, wrapped up in their cloaks. And
yet, all the while that D'Artagnan appeared not to be looking at them at
all, he did not for one moment lose sight of them, and while he whistled
that old march of the musketeers, which he rarely recalled except under
great emergencies, he conjectured and prophesied how terrible would be
the storm which would be raised on the king's return. In fact, when the
king entered La Vallieire's apartment and found the room empty and the
bed untouched, he began to be alarmed, and called out to Montalais, who
immediately answered the summons; but her astonishment was equal to the
king's. All that she could tell his majesty was, that she had fancied
she had heard La Valliere weep during a portion of the night, but,
knowing that his majesty had returned, she had not dared to inquire what
was the matter.

"But," inquired the king, "where do you suppose she is gone to?"

"Sire," replied Montalais, "Louise is of a very sentimental disposition,
and as I have often seen her rise at daybreak in order to go out into
the garden, she may perhaps be there now."

This appeared probable, and the king immediately ran down the staircase
in search of the fugitive. D'Artagnan saw him appear very pale, and
talking in an excited manner with his companion, as he went toward the
gardens; Saint-Aignan following him, out of breath. D'Artagnan did not
stir from the window, but went on whistling, looking as if he saw
nothing and yet seeing everything. "Come, come," he murmured, when the
king disappeared, "his majesty's passion is stronger than I thought; he
is now doing, I think, what he never did for Mademoiselle de Mancini."

In a quarter of an hour the king again appeared: he had looked
everywhere, was completely out of breath, and, as a matter of course,
had not discovered anything. Saint-Aignan, who still followed him, was
fanning himself with his hat, and, in a gasping voice, asking for
information about La Valliere from such of the servants as were about,
in fact, from every one he met. Among others he came across Manicamp,
who had arrived from Fontainebleau by easy stages; for while others had
performed the journey in six hours, he had taken four-and-twenty.

"Have you seen Mademoiselle de la Valliere?" Saint-Aignan asked him.

Whereupon Manicamp, dreamy and absent as usual, answered, thinking that
some one was asking him about De Guiche, "Thank you, the comte is a
little better."

And he continued on his way until he reached the antechamber where
D'Artagnan was, and whom he asked to explain how it was the king looked,
as he thought, so bewildered; to which D'Artagnan replied that he was
quite mistaken; that the king, on the contrary, was as lively and merry
as he could possibly be.

In the midst of all this, eight o'clock struck. It was usual for the
king to take his breakfast at this hour, for the code of etiquette
prescribed that the king should always be hungry at eight o'clock. His
breakfast was laid upon a small table in his bedroom, and he ate very
fast. Saint-Aignan, of whom he would not lose sight, held his napkin in
his hand. He then disposed of several military audiences, during which
he dispatched Saint-Aignan to see what he could find out. Then, still
occupied, still full of anxiety, still watching Saint-Aignan's return,
who had sent out his servants in every direction, to make inquiries, and
who had also gone himself, the hour of nine struck, and the king
forthwith passed into his large cabinet.

As the clock was striking nine the ambassadors entered, and as it
finished the two queens and Madame made their appearance. There were
three ambassadors from Holland, and two from Spain. The king glanced at
them, and then bowed: and, at the same moment, Saint-Aignan entered--an
entrance which the king regarded as far more important, in a different
sense, however, than that of the ambassadors, however numerous they
were, and from whatever country they came: and so, setting everything
else aside, the king made a sign of interrogation to Saint-Aignan, which
the latter answered by a most decisive negative. The king almost
entirely lost his courage; but as the queens, the members of the
nobility who were present, and the ambassadors, had their eyes fixed
upon him, he overcame his emotion by a violent effort, and invited the
latter to speak. Whereupon one of the Spanish deputies made a long
oration, in which he boasted the advantages which the Spanish alliance
would offer.

The king interrupted him, saying, "Monsieur, I trust that whatever is
advantageous for France must be exceedingly advantageous for Spain."

This remark, and particularly the peremptory tone in which it was
pronounced, made the ambassadors pale, and brought the color into the
cheeks of the two queens, who, being Spanish, felt wounded by this reply
in their pride of relationship and nationality.

The Dutch ambassador then began to address himself to the king, and
complained of the injurious suspicions which the king exhibited against
the government of his country.

The king interrupted him, saying, "It is very singular, monsieur, that
you should come with any complaint, when it is I rather who have reason
to be dissatisfied; and yet, you see, I do not complain."

"Complain, sire; and in what respect?"

The king smiled bitterly. "Will you blame me, monsieur," he said, "if I
should happen to entertain suspicions against a government which
authorizes and protects public insulters?"

"Sire!"

"I tell you," resumed the king, exciting himself by a recollection of
his own personal annoyance, rather than from political grounds, "that
Holland is a land of refuge for all who hate me, and especially for all
who malign me."

"Oh, sire!"

"You wish for proofs, perhaps? Very good: they can be had easily enough.
Whence proceed all those insulting pamphlets which represent me as a
monarch without glory and without authority; your printing-presses groan
under their number. If my secretaries were here, I would mention the
titles of the works as well as the names of the printers."

"Sire," replied the ambassador, "a pamphlet can hardly be regarded as
the work of a whole nation. Is it just, is it reasonable, that a great
and powerful monarch like your majesty should render a whole nation
responsible for the crime of a few madmen, who are starving or dying of
hunger?"

"That may be the case, I admit. But when the mint at Amsterdam strikes
off medals which reflect disgrace upon me, is that also the crime of a
few madmen?"

"Medals!" stammered out the ambassador.

"Medals," repeated the king, looking at Colbert.

"Your majesty," the ambassador ventured, "should be quite sure--"

The king still looked at Colbert; but Colbert appeared not to understand
him, and maintained an unbroken silence, notwithstanding the king's
repeated hints. D'Artagnan then approached the king, and taking a piece
of money out of his pocket, he placed it in the king's hands, saying,
"That is the medal your majesty alludes to."

The king looked at it, and with a glance which, ever since he had become
his own master, had been always soaring in its gaze, observed an
insulting device representing Holland arresting the progress of the sun,
with this inscription: "_In conspectu meo stetit sol._"

"'In my presence the sun stands still,'" exclaimed the king furiously.
"Ah! you will hardly deny it now, I suppose."

"And the sun," said D'Artagnan, "is this," as he pointed to the panels
of the cabinet, where the sun was brilliantly represented in every
direction with this motto, "_Nec pluribus impar._"

Louis' anger, increased by the bitterness of his own personal
sufferings, hardly required this additional circumstance to foment it.
Every one saw, from the kindling passion in the king's eyes, that an
explosion was most imminent. A look from Colbert kept back the storm
from bursting forth. The ambassador ventured to frame excuses by saying
that the vanity of nations was a matter of little consequence; that
Holland was proud that, with such limited resources, she had maintained
her rank as a great nation, even against powerful monarchs, and that if
a little smoke had intoxicated his country men, the king would be
kindly disposed, and would excuse this intoxication. The king seemed as
if he would be glad of some one's advice; he looked at Colbert, who
remained impassible; then at D'Artagnan, who simply shrugged his
shoulders, a movement which was like the opening of the flood-gates,
whereby the king's anger, which he had restrained for so long a period,
now burst forth. As no one knew what direction his anger might take, all
preserved a dead silence. The second ambassador took advantage of it to
begin his excuses also. While he was speaking, and while the king, who
had again gradually returned to his own personal reflections, listened
to the voice, full of nervous anxiety, with the air of an absent man
listening to the murmuring of a cascade, D'Artagnan, on whose left hand
Saint-Aignan was standing, approached the latter, and, in a voice which
was loud enough to reach the king's ears, said: "Have you heard the
news?"

"What news?" said Saint-Aignan.

"About La Valliere?"

The king started, and involuntarily advanced a step nearer to them.

"What has happened to La Valliere?" inquired Saint-Aignan, in a tone
which can very easily be imagined.

"Ah, poor girl! she is going to take the veil."

"The veil!" exclaimed Saint-Aignan.

"The veil!" cried the king, in the midst of the ambassador's discourse;
but then, mindful of the rules of etiquette, he mastered himself, still
listening, however, with rapt attention.

"What order?" inquired Saint-Aignan.

"The Carmelites of Chaillot."

"Who the deuce told you that?"

"She did herself."

"You have seen her, then?"

"Nay, I even went with her to the Carmelites."

The king did not lose a syllable of this conversation, and again he
could hardly control his feelings.

"But what was the cause of her flight?" inquired Saint-Aignan.

"Because the poor girl was driven away from the court yesterday,"
replied D'Artagnan.

He had no sooner said this, than the king, with an authoritative
gesture, said to the ambassador, "Enough, monsieur, enough!" Then,
advancing toward the captain, he exclaimed, "Who says that La Valliere
is going to take the religious vows?"

"M. d'Artagnan," answered the favorite.

"Is it true what you say?" said the king, turning toward the musketeer.

"As true as truth itself."

The king clenched his hands, and turned pale. "You have something
further to add, M. d'Artagnan?" he said.

"I know nothing more, sire."

"You added that Mademoiselle de la Valliere had been driven away from
the court."

"Yes, sire."

"Is that true also?"

"Ascertain it for yourself, sire."

"And from whom?"

"Oh!" said D'Artagnan, like a man declining to say anything further.

The king almost bounded from his seat, regardless of ambassadors,
ministers, courtiers, and politics. The queen-mother rose; she had heard
everything, or, if she had not heard everything, she had guessed it.
Madame, almost fainting from anger and fear, endeavored to rise as the
queen-mother had done; but she sank down again upon her chair, which, by
an instinctive movement, she made roll back a few paces.

"Gentlemen," said the king, "the audience is over; I will communicate my
answer, or rather my will, to Spain and to Holland;" and with a proud,
imperious gesture, he dismissed the ambassadors.

"Take care, my son," said the queen-mother, indignantly, "take care; you
are hardly master of yourself, I think."

"Ah, madame," returned the young lion, with a terrible gesture, "if I am
not master of myself, I will be, I promise you, of those who do me
outrage. Come with me, M. d'Artagnan, come." And he quitted the room in
the midst of a general stupefaction and dismay. The king hastily
descended the staircase, and was about to cross the courtyard.

"Sire," said D'Artagnan, "your majesty mistakes the way."

"No; I am going to the stables."

"That is useless, sire, for I have horses ready for your majesty."

The king's only answer was a look, but this look promised more than the
ambition of three D'Artagnans could have dared to hope.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

CHAILLOT.


Although they had not been summoned, Manicamp and Malicorne had followed
the king and D'Artagnan. They were both exceedingly intelligent men,
except that Malicorne was generally too precipitate, owing to his
ambition, while Manicamp was frequently too tardy, owing to his
idleness. On this occasion, however, they arrived at precisely the
proper moment. Five horses were waiting in readiness. Two were seized
upon by the king and D'Artagnan, two others by Manicamp and Malicorne,
while a groom belonging to the stables mounted the fifth. The whole
cavalcade set off at a gallop. D'Artagnan had been very careful in his
selection of the horses; they were the very horses for distressed
lovers--horses which did not simply run, but flew. Within ten minutes
after their departure, the cavalcade, amid a cloud of dust, arrived at
Chaillot. The king literally threw himself off his horse, but,
notwithstanding the rapidity with which he accomplished this maneuver,
he found D'Artagnan already holding his stirrup. With a sign of
acknowledgment to the musketeer, he threw the bridle to the groom, then
darted into the vestibule, violently pushed open the door, and entered
the reception-room. Manicamp, Malicorne, and the groom, remained
outside, D'Artagnan alone following him. When he entered the
reception-room, the first object which met his gaze was Louise herself,
not simply on her knees, but lying at the foot of a large stone
crucifix. The young girl was stretched upon the damp flag-stones,
scarcely visible in the gloom of the apartment, which was lighted only
by means of a narrow window, protected by bars, and completely shaded by
creeping plants. She was alone, inanimate, cold as the stone to which
she was clinging.

When the king saw her in this state, he thought she was dead, and
uttered a loud cry, which made D'Artagnan hurry into the room. The king
had already passed one of his arms round her body, and D'Artagnan
assisted him in raising the poor girl, whom the torpor of death seemed
already to have taken possession of. D'Artagnan seized hold of the
alarm-bell, and rang with all his might. The Carmelite sisters
immediately hastened at the summons, and uttered loud exclamations of
alarm and indignation at the sight of the two men holding a woman in
their arms. The superior also hurried to the scene of action; but, far
more a creature of the world than any of the female members of the
court, notwithstanding her austerity of manners, she recognized the king
at the first glance, by the respect which those present exhibited for
him, as well as by the imperious and authoritative way in which he had
thrown the whole establishment into confusion. As soon as she saw the
king, she retired to her own apartments, in order to avoid compromising
her dignity. But, by one of the nuns, she sent various cordials--Hungary
water, etc., etc.--and ordered that all the doors should be immediately
closed, a command which was just in time, for the king's distress was
fast becoming of a most clamorous and despairing character. He had
almost decided to send for his own physician, when La Valliere exhibited
signs of returning animation. The first object which met her gaze, as
she opened her eyes, was the king at her feet; in all probability she
did not recognize him, for she uttered a deep sigh full of anguish and
distress. Louis fixed his eyes devouringly upon her face; and when, in
the course of a few moments, she recognized the king, she endeavored to
tear herself from his embrace.

"Oh, heavens!" she murmured, "is not the sacrifice yet made?"

"No, no," exclaimed the king, "and it shall not be made, I swear."

Notwithstanding her weakness and utter despair, she rose from the
ground, saying, "It must be made, however; it must be; so do not stay me
in my purpose!"

"I leave you to sacrifice yourself! I! never, never!" exclaimed the
king.

"Well," murmured D'Artagnan, "I may as well go now. As soon as they
begin to speak, we may as well save their having any listeners." And he
quitted the room, leaving the two lovers alone.

"Sire," continued La Valliere, "not another word, I implore you. Do not
destroy the only future I can hope for--my salvation; do not destroy the
glory and brightness of your own future for a mere caprice."

"A caprice!" cried the king.

"Oh! sire, it is now only that I can clearly see into your heart."

"You, Louise, what mean you?"

"An inexplicable impulse, foolish and unreasonable in its nature, may
momentarily appear to offer a sufficient excuse for your conduct; but
there are duties imposed upon you which are incompatible with your
regard for a poor girl such as I am. So forget me."

"I forget you!"

"You have already done so."

"Rather would I die."

"You cannot love one whose peace of mind you hold so lightly, and whom
you so cruelly abandoned last night to the bitterness of death."

"What can you mean? Explain yourself. Louise."

"What did you ask me yesterday morning? To love you. What did you
promise me in return? Never to let midnight pass without offering me an
opportunity of reconciliation whenever your anger might be aroused
against me."

"Oh! forgive me, Louise, forgive me! I was almost mad from jealousy."

"Jealousy is an unworthy thought, sire. You may become jealous again,
and will end by killing me. Be merciful, then, and leave me now to die."

"Another word, mademoiselle, in that strain, and you will see me expire
at your feet."

"No, no, sire, I am better acquainted with my own demerits; and believe
me, that to sacrifice yourself for one whom all despise would be
needless."

"Give me the names of those you have cause to complain of."

"I have no complaints, sire, to prefer against any one--no one but
myself to accuse. Farewell, sire; you are compromising yourself in
speaking to me in such a manner."

"Oh! be careful, Louise, in what you say; for you are reducing me to the
very depths of despair."

"Oh! sire, sire, leave me to the protection of Heaven, I implore you."

"No, no; Heaven itself shall not tear you from me."

"Save me, then," cried the poor girl, "from those determined and
pitiless enemies who are thirsting to destroy my very life and honor
too. If you have courage enough to love me, show at least that you have
power enough to defend me. But no: she whom you say you love, others
insult and mock, and drive shamelessly away." And the gentle-hearted
girl, forced by her own bitter distress to accuse others, wrung her
hands in an uncontrollable agony of tears.

"You have been driven away!" exclaimed the king. "This is the second
time I have heard that said."

"I have been driven away with shame and ignominy, sire. You see, then,
that I have no other protector but Heaven, no consolation but prayer,
and this cloister is my only refuge."

"My palace, my whole court, shall be yours. Oh! fear nothing further
now, Louise: those, be they men or women, who yesterday drove you away,
shall to-morrow tremble before you--to-morrow, do I say? Nay, this very
day have I already shown my displeasure--have already threatened. It is
in my power, even now, to hurl the thunderbolt which I have hitherto
withheld. Louise, Louise, you shall be cruelly revenged; tears of blood
shall repay you for the tears you have shed. Give me only the names of
your enemies."

"Never, never."

"How can I show my anger, then?"

"Sire, those upon whom your anger would have to fall would force you to
draw back your hand upraised to punish."

"Oh! you do not know me," cried the king, exasperated. "Rather than draw
back, I would sacrifice my kingdom, and would curse my family. Yes, I
would strike until this arm had utterly annihilated all those who had
ventured to make themselves the enemies of the gentlest and best of
creatures." And, as he said these words, Louis struck his fist violently
against the oaken wainscoting with a force which alarmed La Valliere:
for his anger, owing to his unbounded power, had something imposing and
threatening in it, and like the tempest, might be mortal in its effects.
She, who thought that her own sufferings could not be surpassed, was
overwhelmed by a suffering which revealed itself by menace and by
violence.

"Sire," she said, "for the last time I implore you to leave me; already
do I feel strengthened by the calm seclusion of this asylum: and the
protection of Heaven has reassured me: for all the petty human
meannesses of this world are forgotten beneath the Divine protection.
Once more, then, sire, and for the last time, I again implore you to
leave me."

"Confess, rather," cried Louis, "that you have never loved me; admit
that my humility and my repentance are flattering to your pride: but
that my distress affects you not; that the king of this wide realm is no
longer regarded as a lover whose tenderness of devotion is capable of
working out your happiness: but that he is a despot whose caprice has
utterly destroyed in your heart the very last fiber of human feeling. Do
not say you are seeking Heaven, say rather that you are fleeing the
king."

Louise's heart was wrung within her, as she listened to his passionate
utterance, which made the fever of passion course through every vein in
her body. "But did you not hear me say that I, have been driven away,
scorned, despised?"

"I will make you the most respected, the most adored, and the most
envied of my whole court."

"Prove to me that you have not ceased to love me."

"In what way?"

"By leaving me."

"I will prove it to you by never leaving you again."

"But do you imagine, sire, that I shall allow that: do you imagine that
I will let you come to an open rupture with every member of your family:
do you imagine that, for my sake, you could abandon mother, wife, and
sister?"

"Ah? you have named them, then, at last: it is they, then, who have
wrought this grievous injury? By the heaven above us, then, upon them
shall my anger fall."

"That is the reason why the future terrifies me, why I refuse
everything, why I do not wish you to revenge me. Tears enough have
already been shed, sufficient sorrow and affliction have already been
occasioned. I, at least, will never be the cause of sorrow, or
affliction, or distress, to whomsoever it may be, for I have mourned and
suffered, and wept too much myself."

"And do you count my sufferings, my distress, and my tears, as nothing?"

"In Heaven's name, sire, do not speak to me in that manner. I need all
my courage to enable me to accomplish the sacrifice."

"Louise, Louise, I implore you! whatever you desire, whatever you
command, whether vengeance or forgiveness, your slightest wish shall be
obeyed, but do not abandon me."

"Alas! sire, we must part."

"You do not love me, then!"

"Heaven knows I do!"

"It is false, Louise; it is false."

"Oh! sire, if I did not love you I should let you do what you please: I
should let you revenge me, in return for the insult which has been
inflicted on me; I should accept the sweet triumph to my pride which you
propose: and yet, you cannot deny, that I reject even the sweet
compensation which your affection affords, that affection, which for me
is life itself, for I wished to die when I thought that you loved me no
longer."

"Yes, yes: I now know, I now perceive it; you are the holiest, the best,
the purest of women. There is no one so worthy as yourself, not alone of
my own respect and devotion, but also of the respect and devotion of all
who surround me: and therefore shall no one be loved like yourself: no
one shall ever possess the influence over me that you wield. You wish me
to be calm, to forgive: be it so, you shall find me perfectly unmoved.
You wish to reign by gentleness and clemency, I will be clement and
gentle. Dictate to me the conduct you wish me to adopt, and I will obey
blindly."

"In Heaven's name, no, sire; what am I, a poor girl, to dictate to so
great a monarch as yourself?"

"You are my life, the very spirit and principle of my being. Is it not
the spirit that rules the body?"

"You love me, then, sire?"

"On my knees, yes; with my hands upraised to you, yes; with all the
strength and power of my being, yes; I love you so deeply that I would
happily lay down my life for you, at your merest wish."

"Oh! sire, now that I know you love me, I have nothing to wish for in
the whole world. Give me your hand, sire; and then farewell! I have
enjoyed in this life all the happiness which I was destined to meet
with."

"Oh! no, no! your happiness is not a happiness of yesterday, it is of
to-day, of to-morrow, ever-enduring. The future is yours, everything
which is mine is yours too. Away with these ideas of separation, away
with these gloomy, despairing thoughts. You will live for me, as I will
live for you, Louise." And he threw himself at her feet, embracing her
knees with the wildest transports of joy and gratitude.

"Oh! sire, sire! all that is but a wild dream."

"Why a wild dream?"

"Because I cannot return to the court. Exiled, how can I see you again?
Would it not be far better to bury myself in a cloister for the rest of
my life, with the rich consolation that your affection gives me, with
the latest pulses of your heart beating for me, and your latest
confession of attachment still ringing in my ears?"

"Exiled, you!" exclaimed Louis XIV., "and who dares to exile, let me
ask, when I recall?"

"Oh! sire, something which is greater than and superior to kings
even--the world and public opinion. Reflect for a moment; you cannot
love a woman who has been ignominiously driven away--love one, whom your
mother has stained with suspicion; one, whom your sister has threatened
with disgrace; such a woman, indeed, would be unworthy of you."

"Unworthy! one who belongs to me?"

"Yes, sire, precisely on that account; from the very moment she belongs
to you, the character of your mistress renders her unworthy."

"You are right, Louise, every shade of delicacy of feeling is yours.
Very well, you shall not be exiled."

"Ah! from the tone in which you speak, you have not heard Madame, that
is very clear."

"I will appeal from her to my mother."

"Again, sire, you have not seen your mother."

"She, also! poor Louise! every one's hand, then, is against you."

"Yes, yes, poor Louise, who was already bending beneath the fury of the
storm, when you arrived and crushed her beneath the weight of your
displeasure."
