Armenian uplands applies itself to many that I visited." Houses on
exposed elevations he found to be still semisubterranean. Whatever
might be the kind of cottage used, domestic animals "participated with
the family in the warmth and protection thereof."]




III

THE BATTLE OF LEUCTRA[52]

(371 B.C.)


For the battle everything was adverse on the side of the
Lacedaemonians, while to the enemy everything was rendered favorable by
fortune. It was after dinner that the last council of war was held by
Cleombrotus; and, as the officers had drunk a little at noon, it was
said that the wine in some degree inspired them. And as, when both
sides were fully armed, and it was now evident that a battle would
take place, the people who had provisions for sale, with some of the
baggage-carriers and others who were unwilling to fight, were
proceeding first of all to quit the camp of the Boeotians, the
mercenaries under Hiero the Phocian peltasts, and the Heraclean and
Phliasian cavalry, making a circuit, fell upon them as they were going
off, turned them back, and pursued them to the Boeotian camp; so
that they made the army of the Boeotians larger and more numerous
than before.

Besides, as there was a plain between the armies, the Lacedaemonians
drew up their cavalry before their main body and the Thebans drew up
theirs over against them; but the cavalry of the Thebans had been
exercised in wars with the Orchomenians and Thespians, while that of
the Lacedaemonians was at that time in a very inefficient condition;
for the richest men maintained the horses, and, when notice of an
expedition was given, the men appointed came to ride them, and each
taking his horse, and whatever arms were given him, proceeded at once
to the field; and thus the weakest and least spirited of all the men
were mounted on horseback. Such was the cavalry on either side. Of the
foot, it was said that the Lacedaemonians advanced with each enomoty
drawn up three deep, this arrangement making them not more than twelve
deep in all. The Theban infantry, in close array, were not less than
fifty deep, considering that if they could defeat the body of the
enemy posted around the king, the rest of the army would be an easy
conquest.

As soon as Cleombrotus began to lead forward against the enemy, and
even before the troops about him were aware that he was putting them
in motion, the cavalry had already engaged, and those of the
Lacedaemonians were at once defeated, who, as they fled, fell in among
their own heavy-armed infantry, on which the troops of the Thebans
were also pressing. But that the troops round Cleombrotus had at first
the advantage in the contest, any one may be convinced by certain
proof; for they would not have been able to take him and carry him off
alive unless those who fought in front of him had been at that time
victorious. When, however, Deimon the polemarch, Sphodrias, one of the
attendants at the royal tent, and Cleonymus, his son, were killed, and
the horse-guard, those who are called supporters of the polemarch,
and the rest, being overpowered by the mass of the enemy, were forced
to fall back, the Lacedaemonians on the left, seeing the right wing
thus repulsed, also gave way; yet, tho many were killed, and they were
quite defeated, they were able, when they had repassed the trench
which was in front of the camp, to form themselves under arms in the
place from which they had set out. Their camp was nevertheless not on
level ground, but rather somewhat on an acclivity.

Some of the Lacedaemonians, at the time, who thought their disaster an
insupportable disgrace, exclaimed that they ought to prevent the enemy
from erecting a trophy, and endeavor to recover the dead, not by
making a truce, but by fighting another battle. However, the
polemarchs, seeing that of the Lacedaemonians in all nearly a thousand
had lost their lives; and that of the Spartans, who were in the field
to the number of about seven hundred, about four hundred had fallen;
and observing, also, that all the auxiliaries were too dispirited to
renew the combat, and some of them not even concerned at what had
happened, called a council of the chief officers, and deliberated what
course they ought to pursue; and as all were of opinion that "they
ought to fetch off the dead by truce," they accordingly despatched a
herald to treat respecting a truce. The Thebans soon afterward erected
a trophy, and gave up the dead under truce.

After these occurrences, the messenger who was sent with the news of
the calamity to Lacedaemon arrived there on the last day of the
gymnopaediae and after the chorus of men had made their entry. The
ephors, when they heard of the calamity, were greatly concerned, as, I
think, they naturally must have been; yet they did not order that
chorus to withdraw, but allowed them to finish the entertainment. They
then sent the names of the dead to their several relatives, and gave
notice to the women to make no lamentations, but to bear their
affliction in silence. The day after, a person might have seen those
whose relatives had died appearing in public with looks of
cheerfulness and joy; however, of those whose relatives were said to
be alive, he would have seen but few, and those going about with
gloomy and dejected countenances.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 52: From Book VI of the "Hellenica." At Leuctra, which lies
near Thebes in Boetia, Epaminondas commanding the Boeotians,
overwhelmed the Spartans under Cleombrotus. From this event dates the
decline of Sparta.]




IV

OF THE ARMY OF THE SPARTANS[53]


The regulations which I have mentioned are beneficial alike in peace
and in war; but if any one wishes to learn what the lawgiver contrived
better than other legislators with reference to military proceedings,
he may attend to the following particulars:

In the first place, then, the ephors give the cavalry and infantry
public notice of the years during which they must join the army, as
well as the artizans; for the Lacedaemonians provide themselves in the
field with an abundance of all those things which people use in a
city; and of whatever instruments an army may require in common,
orders are given to bring some on wagons and others on beasts of
burden, as by this arrangement anything left behind is least likely to
escape notice.

For engagements in the field he made the following arrangements: He
ordered that each soldier should have a purple robe and a brazen
shield; for he thought that such a dress had least resemblance to that
of women, and was excellently adapted for the field of battle, as it
is soonest made splendid, and is longest in growing soiled. He
permitted also those above the age of puberty to let their hair grow,
as he thought that they thus appeared taller, more manly, and more
terrible in the eyes of the enemy.

When they were thus equipped, he divided them into six morae of cavalry
and heavy-armed infantry. Each of these morae of the citizens has one
polemarch, four centurions, eight captains of fifty, and sixteen
enomotarchs. The men of these morae are sometimes, according to the
command issued, formed in enomotiae, sometimes by threes, sometimes by
sixes. As to what most people imagine, that the arrangement of the
Lacedaemonians under arms is extremely complex, they conceive the exact
contrary to what is the fact; for in the Lacedaemonian order the
officers are placed in the front ranks, and each rank is in a
condition to perform everything which it is necessary for it to
perform. So easy is it to understand this arrangement that no one who
can distinguish one man from another would fail of learning it; for it
is assigned to some to lead, and enjoined on others to follow.
Shiftings of place, by which the companies are extended or deepened,
are ordered by the word of the enomotarch, as by a herald; and in
these there is nothing in the least difficult to learn.

But how it is possible for men in this arrangement, even if they are
thrown into confusion, to fight with an enemy presenting themselves on
any quarter alike, it is not so easy to understand, except for those
who have been brought up under the institution of Lycurgus. The
Lacedaemonians do with the greatest ease what appears extremely
difficult to other men that are even accustomed to arms. For when they
march in column, one enomotia follows in the rear of another; and if,
when they are in this order, a body of the enemy shows itself in
front, orders are given to each enomotarch to bring up his enomotia to
the front on the left; and this movement is made throughout the whole
army, until it presents itself in full array against the enemy. But if
again, while they are in this order, the enemy should show themselves
in the rear, each rank performs the evolution, that the strongest may
always be presented to the enemy.

But when the commander is on the left, they do not in that case
consider themselves in a worse condition, but sometimes even in a
better; for if an enemy should attempt to encompass them, he would
come round, not on the defenseless, but on the armed side. If on any
occasion, again, it should appear advantageous, for any particular
object, that the commander should occupy the right wing, they wheel
the troop toward the wing, and maneuver the main body until the
commander is on the right, and the rear becomes the left. But if,
again, the body of the enemy appear on the right, marching in column,
they do nothing else but turn each century round, like a ship, so as
to front the enemy; and thus the century which was in the rear comes
to the right. But if the enemy approach on the left, they do not allow
them to come near, but repulse them, or turn their centuries round to
face the enemy; and thus again the century that was in the rear takes
its place on the left.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 53: From the treatise on "The Government of Lacedaemon."
Translated by J. S. Watson. This work is believed to be the earliest
extant specimen of Attic prose. Mahaffy describes it as "one of the
most interesting and instructive documents of the age, very remarkable
for its Machiavellian tone, in its calm ignoring of the right and
wrong of the case as irrelevant."]




V

HOW TO CHOOSE AND MANAGE SADDLE-HORSES[54]


When a person would buy a horse that has been already ridden, we shall
subjoin some admonitions which he ought to bear in mind, if he would
not be cheated in his purchase. In the first place, then, let it not
escape his notice what the _age_ is; for a horse that has no longer
the marks in his teeth neither delights the buyer with hope nor is so
easy to be exchanged.

It is also necessary to see how he takes the rider on his back;[55]
for many horses reluctantly receive on them anything which it is plain
to them that they can not receive without being compelled to work. It
must likewise be observed whether, when he is mounted, he wishes to
separate himself from other horses, or whether, if he be ridden near
horses standing by, he carries off his rider toward them. There are
some horses too that, from bad training, run off from the place of
exercise to their stalls at home.

As for horses whose jaws are not alike, that sort of riding which is
called the _pede_ exposes them, and, still more, a change in the
direction in which they are ridden; for many horses will not attempt
to run away with their riders unless a hard jaw, and their course
directed homeward, concur to stimulate them. We ought to ascertain,
also, whether the horse, being put to his speed, is readily pulled up,
and whether he submits to be turned about.

It is good for a purchaser not to be too ignorant, moreover, whether a
horse is equally willing to obey when he is roused with a blow; for a
servant and an army, if disobedient, are useless, but a disobedient
horse is not only useless, but often plays the traitor.

However, when we take upon ourselves to purchase a warhorse, we must
make trial of him in all things in which war will make trial of him;
and these are leaping across ditches, springing over walls, jumping on
to mounds, and jumping down from them; and we must try him in riding
up and down steep places, and along them; for all such efforts show
his spirit, whether it is bold and whether his body is sound. Yet we
must not at once reject a horse that does not accomplish all these
feats perfectly; for many fail, not from being unable, but from want
of training; and if they are taught, and used, and exercised in such
performances, they will execute them all well, provided they are sound
in other respects, and not wanting in spirit.

We must, however, be cautious of having anything to do with horses
that are naturally shy; for horses that are excessively timorous will
not only not allow the rider on their back to harm the enemy, but will
often take him by surprize, and expose him to great danger. We must
also learn whether the horse has anything of vice either toward other
horses or toward men, and whether he is averse to being handled; for
all such defects are troublesome to his owner.

As to any reluctance to being bridled and mounted, and other tricks, a
person will much sooner discover them if, when the horse has been
thoroughly exercised, he attempt to do to him what he did before he
began to ride him; since horses that, after having been exercised, are
ready to submit to exercise again give sufficient proofs of a
mettlesome spirit.

To sum up all in a few words, whatever horse has good feet, is
mild-tempered, sufficiently swift, is willing and able to endure
fatigue, and is in the highest degree obedient will probably give
least trouble to his rider, and contribute most to his safety in
military occupations. But horses that from sluggishness require a
great deal of driving or, from excess of mettle, much coaxing and
care, afford plenty of employment to the rider, as well as much
apprehension in time of danger....

We shall now show how a man may groom a horse with least danger to
himself and most benefit to the animal. If, when he cleans him, he
look the same way as the horse, there is danger that he may be struck
in the face with his knee or his hoof. But if he look in the opposite
direction to the horse when he cleans him, keeping himself out of the
reach of his leg, and rubs gradually down by the shoulder, he will
thus receive no injury, and may clean the frog of the horse's foot by
turning up the hoof. In like manner let him clean the hind legs.

But whoever is employed about a horse ought to know that to do these
things, and everything else that he has to do, he must come as little
as possible near the face and the tail; for if a horse be inclined to
be vicious, he has in both these parts the advantage of the man. But a
person who approaches him at the side may manage the horse with least
danger to himself, and with most power over the beast.

When we have to lead a horse, we do not approve of the practise of
leading from behind, for these reasons: that the person leading the
horse is thus least able to keep on his guard against him, and the
horse has most liberty to do what he pleases. To the mode, again, of
conducting him with a long rein, to teach him to go forward and take
the lead, we object for the following reasons: that the horse can do
mischief on whichever side he pleases, and that, by turning himself
round, he can set himself opposite his leader. When there are a number
of horses together, too, how, if they are thus led, can they be
prevented from annoying one another? But a horse that is accustomed to
be led at the side will be least in a condition to molest either other
horses or men, and will be readiest at hand for his rider whenever he
may require to mount in haste.

That the groom may put on the bridle properly, let him first approach
the horse on the left side, and then throwing the reins over the
horse's head, let him suffer them to rest on the point of the
shoulder; and next let him take the headpiece in his right hand, and
apply the bit with his left. If the horse take the bit into his mouth,
the man has nothing to do but to put on the headpiece; but if the
horse will not open his mouth, the man must hold the bit to his teeth,
and insert the middle finger of his left hand between the horse's
bars; for most horses, when this is done, open their mouths; should
the horse, however, not even then receive the bit, let him press the
lip against the dog-tooth or tusk, and there are very few horses that,
on feeling this, will not admit it....

But never to approach a horse in a fit of anger is the one great
precept and maxim of conduct in regard to the treatment of a horse;
for anger is destitute of forethought, and consequently often does
that of which the agent must necessarily repent.

When a horse is shy of any object, and reluctant to approach it, the
rider must try to make him feel that there is nothing terrible in it,
especially to a horse of spirit; but if he can not succeed, the rider
must himself touch that which appears so alarming, and lead the horse
up gently to it. As to those who force horses forward with blows in
such a case they merely inspire the animals with greater terror; for
they imagine when they suffer any pain at such a time, that what they
look upon with alarm is in some way the cause of it.

When the groom brings the horse to the rider, we have no objection
that he should know how to make the horse stoop, so that it may be
easy to mount him; yet we think every rider ought to take care to be
able to mount even if the horse does not bend to him; for sometimes a
different horse will present himself, and the same horse will not
always be equally obedient....

When he has taken his seat, whether on the horse's bare back or on the
cloth, we do not like that he should sit as if he were on a
carriage-seat, but as if he were standing upright with his legs
somewhat apart, for thus he will cling more firmly to the horse with
his thighs, and keeping himself erect, he will be able to throw a
javelin, or to strike a blow on horseback, if it be necessary, with
greater force.

But it is necessary to allow the leg, as well as the foot, to hang
loose from the knee; for if a rider keep his leg stiff, and strike it
against anything, it may be broken; but if the leg hang easy, and
anything strikes against it, it will yield, and yet not move the thigh
from its position.

A rider should also accustom himself to keep the parts of his body
above the hips as flexible as possible; for he will by this means be
better able to exert himself, and if any person should drag or push
him, he will be less likely to be thrown off.

Let it be observed, that when he is seated on the horse's back, he
must first teach the horse to stand quiet, until he has drawn up his
mantle, if necessary, and adjusted the reins, and taken hold of his
lance in such a way as it may most conveniently be carried. Then let
him keep his left arm close to his side; for in such an attitude a
rider appears most graceful and his hand has the greatest power.

As to reins, we approve of such as are equally balanced, and not weak,
or slippery, or too thick, so that the hand which holds them may be
able also to hold the spear when it is necessary.

When the rider gives the signal to the horse to start, let him begin
to advance at a walking pace, as this pace is least likely to disturb
the horse. Let him hold the reins, if the horse be inclined to hold
down his head, rather high, but if he be more disposed to carry it
erect, let him keep them lower, for thus he will best set off the
horse's figure. After a little, if he trot at his natural pace, he
will find his limbs become pliant without inconvenience, and will come
with the greatest readiness to obey the whip. Since too it is the most
approved practise to set off toward the left side, the horse will most
readily start on that side, if, when he lifts, as he is trotting, the
right foot, the rider then give him the signal to gallop. For, being
then about to raise the left foot, he will thus start with that foot;
and just at the moment that the rider turns him to the left, he will
make the first spring in his gallop; for a horse, when he is turned to
the right, naturally leads off with the right foot, and when turned to
the left, with the left foot.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 54: From the treatise, "On Horsemanship." Translated by J.
S. Watson. Mahaffy says this treatise on the horse "shows an insight
into the character of horses which would do credit to a modern book."
Most readers of the treatise who are familiar with horses have
remarked how true it all is of the horse as we know him to-day. One
commentator has remarked that the book reads as if it might have been
written by some educated man professionally attached to racing
stables.]

[Footnote 55: The ancients did not use the stirrup; nor did they have
a saddle in the modern sense of the word.]




PLATO

    Born in AEgina of aristocratic parents about 427 B.C.; died
     in Athens in 347; originally called Aristocles and surnamed
     Plato because of his broad shoulders; a disciple of Socrates
     and a teacher of Aristotle; was the founder of the Academic
     school; in his youth a successful gymnast, soldier, and
     poet; traveled in Egypt, Sicily, and Magna Graecia; arrested
     in Syracuse by Dionysius, the tyrant, and sold as a slave in
     AEgina, where he was released and returned to Athens;
     revisited Syracuse in 367 and 361; lived afterward in Athens
     until his death, which occurred at a marriage feast.[56]

I

THE IMAGE OF THE CAVE[57]


After this, I said, imagine the enlightenment or ignorance of our nature
in a figure. Behold: human beings living in a sort of underground den,
which has a mouth open toward the light and reaching all across the den;
