
And Hector answered, "Bid me not be seated, Helen, for all the goodwill
you bear me. I cannot stay. I am in haste to help the Trojans, who miss
me greatly when I am not among them; but urge your husband, and of his
own self also let him make haste to overtake me before I am out of the
city. I must go home to see my household, my wife and my little son,
for I know not whether I shall ever again return to them, or whether
the gods will cause me to fill by the hands of the Achaeans."

Then Hector left her, and forthwith was at his own house. He did not
find Andromache, for she was on the wall with her child and one of her
maids, weeping bitterly. Seeing, then, that she was not within, he
stood on the threshold of the women's rooms and said, "Women, tell me,
and tell me true, where did Andromache go when she left the house? Was
it to my sisters, or to my brothers' wives? or is she at the temple of
Minerva where the other women are propitiating the awful goddess?"

His good housekeeper answered, "Hector, since you bid me tell you
truly, she did not go to your sisters nor to your brothers' wives, nor
yet to the temple of Minerva, where the other women are propitiating
the awful goddess, but she is on the high wall of Ilius, for she had
heard the Trojans were being hard pressed, and that the Achaeans were
in great force: she went to the wall in frenzied haste, and the nurse
went with her carrying the child."

Hector hurried from the house when she had done speaking, and went down
the streets by the same way that he had come. When he had gone through
the city and had reached the Scaean gates through which he would go out
on to the plain, his wife came running towards him, Andromache,
daughter of great Eetion who ruled in Thebe under the wooded slopes of
Mt. Placus, and was king of the Cilicians. His daughter had married
Hector, and now came to meet him with a nurse who carried his little
child in her bosom--a mere babe. Hector's darling son, and lovely as a
star. Hector had named him Scamandrius, but the people called him
Astyanax, for his father stood alone as chief guardian of Ilius. Hector
smiled as he looked upon the boy, but he did not speak, and Andromache
stood by him weeping and taking his hand in her own. "Dear husband,"
said she, "your valour will bring you to destruction; think on your
infant son, and on my hapless self who ere long shall be your
widow--for the Achaeans will set upon you in a body and kill you. It
would be better for me, should I lose you, to lie dead and buried, for
I shall have nothing left to comfort me when you are gone, save only
sorrow. I have neither father nor mother now. Achilles slew my father
when he sacked Thebe the goodly city of the Cilicians. He slew him, but
did not for very shame despoil him; when he had burned him in his
wondrous armour, he raised a barrow over his ashes and the mountain
nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, planted a grove of elms about
his tomb. I had seven brothers in my father's house, but on the same
day they all went within the house of Hades. Achilles killed them as
they were with their sheep and cattle. My mother--her who had been
queen of all the land under Mt. Placus--he brought hither with the
spoil, and freed her for a great sum, but the archer-queen Diana took
her in the house of your father. Nay--Hector--you who to me are father,
mother, brother, and dear husband--have mercy upon me; stay here upon
this wall; make not your child fatherless, and your wife a widow; as
for the host, place them near the fig-tree, where the city can be best
scaled, and the wall is weakest. Thrice have the bravest of them come
thither and assailed it, under the two Ajaxes, Idomeneus, the sons of
Atreus, and the brave son of Tydeus, either of their own bidding, or
because some soothsayer had told them."

And Hector answered, "Wife, I too have thought upon all this, but with
what face should I look upon the Trojans, men or women, if I shirked
battle like a coward? I cannot do so: I know nothing save to fight
bravely in the forefront of the Trojan host and win renown alike for my
father and myself. Well do I know that the day will surely come when
mighty Ilius shall be destroyed with Priam and Priam's people, but I
grieve for none of these--not even for Hecuba, nor King Priam, nor for
my brothers many and brave who may fall in the dust before their
foes--for none of these do I grieve as for yourself when the day shall
come on which some one of the Achaeans shall rob you for ever of your
freedom, and bear you weeping away. It may be that you will have to ply
the loom in Argos at the bidding of a mistress, or to fetch water from
the springs Messeis or Hypereia, treated brutally by some cruel
task-master; then will one say who sees you weeping, 'She was wife to
Hector, the bravest warrior among the Trojans during the war before
Ilius.' On this your tears will break forth anew for him who would have
put away the day of captivity from you. May I lie dead under the barrow
that is heaped over my body ere I hear your cry as they carry you into
bondage."

He stretched his arms towards his child, but the boy cried and nestled
in his nurse's bosom, scared at the sight of his father's armour, and
at the horse-hair plume that nodded fiercely from his helmet. His
father and mother laughed to see him, but Hector took the helmet from
his head and laid it all gleaming upon the ground. Then he took his
darling child, kissed him, and dandled him in his arms, praying over
him the while to Jove and to all the gods. "Jove," he cried, "grant
that this my child may be even as myself, chief among the Trojans; let
him be not less excellent in strength, and let him rule Ilius with his
might. Then may one say of him as he comes from battle, 'The son is far
better than the father.' May he bring back the blood-stained spoils of
him whom he has laid low, and let his mother's heart be glad."

With this he laid the child again in the arms of his wife, who took him
to her own soft bosom, smiling through her tears. As her husband
watched her his heart yearned towards her and he caressed her fondly,
saying, "My own wife, do not take these things too bitterly to heart.
No one can hurry me down to Hades before my time, but if a man's hour
is come, be he brave or be he coward, there is no escape for him when
he has once been born. Go, then, within the house, and busy yourself
with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of
your servants; for war is man's matter, and mine above all others of
them that have been born in Ilius."

He took his plumed helmet from the ground, and his wife went back again
to her house, weeping bitterly and often looking back towards him. When
she reached her home she found her maidens within, and bade them all
join in her lament; so they mourned Hector in his own house though he
was yet alive, for they deemed that they should never see him return
safe from battle, and from the furious hands of the Achaeans.

Paris did not remain long in his house. He donned his goodly armour
overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast as his feet
could take him. As a horse, stabled and fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to bathe in the
fair-flowing river--he holds his head high, and his mane streams upon
his shoulders as he exults in his strength and flies like the wind to
the haunts and feeding ground of the mares--even so went forth Paris
from high Pergamus, gleaming like sunlight in his armour, and he
laughed aloud as he sped swiftly on his way. Forthwith he came upon his
brother Hector, who was then turning away from the place where he had
held converse with his wife, and he was himself the first to speak.
"Sir," said he, "I fear that I have kept you waiting when you are in
haste, and have not come as quickly as you bade me."

"My good brother," answered Hector, "you fight bravely, and no man with
any justice can make light of your doings in battle. But you are
careless and wilfully remiss. It grieves me to the heart to hear the
ill that the Trojans speak about you, for they have suffered much on
your account. Let us be going, and we will make things right hereafter,
should Jove vouchsafe us to set the cup of our deliverance before
ever-living gods of heaven in our own homes, when we have chased the
Achaeans from Troy."



BOOK VII

  Hector and Ajax fight--Hector is getting worsted when night
  comes on and parts them--They exchange presents--The
  burial of the dead, and the building of a wall round their
  ships by the Achaeans--The Achaeans buy their wine of
  Agamemnon and Menelaus.

WITH these words Hector passed through the gates, and his brother
Alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. As when heaven sends a
breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have
laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome
was the sight of these two heroes to the Trojans.

Thereon Alexandrus killed Menesthius the son of Areithous; he lived in
Arne, and was son of Areithous the Mace-man, and of Phylomedusa. Hector
threw a spear at Eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in the neck
under the bronze rim of his helmet. Glaucus, moreover, son of
Hippolochus, captain of the Lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight smote
Iphinous son of Dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing on to his
chariot behind his fleet mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and
there was no life left in him.

When, therefore, Minerva saw these men making havoc of the Argives, she
darted down to Ilius from the summits of Olympus, and Apollo, who was
looking on from Pergamus, went out to meet her; for he wanted the
Trojans to be victorious. The pair met by the oak tree, and King Apollo
son of Jove was first to speak. "What would you have," said he,
"daughter of great Jove, that your proud spirit has sent you hither
from Olympus? Have you no pity upon the Trojans, and would you incline
the scales of victory in favour of the Danaans? Let me persuade
you--for it will be better thus--stay the combat for to-day, but let
them renew the fight hereafter till they compass the doom of Ilius,
since you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city."

And Minerva answered, "So be it, Far-Darter; it was in this mind that I
came down from Olympus to the Trojans and Achaeans. Tell me, then, how
do you propose to end this present fighting?"

Apollo, son of Jove, replied, "Let us incite great Hector to challenge
some one of the Danaans in single combat; on this the Achaeans will be
shamed into finding a man who will fight him."

Minerva assented, and Helenus son of Priam divined the counsel of the
gods; he therefore went up to Hector and said, "Hector son of Priam,
peer of gods in counsel, I am your brother, let me then persuade you.
Bid the other Trojans and Achaeans all of them take their seats, and
challenge the best man among the Achaeans to meet you in single combat.
I have heard the voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your
doom is not yet come."

Hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the
Trojans, grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and they
all sat down. Agamemnon also bade the Achaeans be seated. But Minerva
and Apollo, in the likeness of vultures, perched on father Jove's high
oak tree, proud of their men; and the ranks sat close ranged together,
bristling with shield and helmet and spear. As when the rising west
wind furs the face of the sea and the waters grow dark beneath it, so
sat the companies of Trojans and Achaeans upon the plain. And Hector
spoke thus:--

"Hear me, Trojans and Achaeans, that I may speak even as I am minded;
Jove on his high throne has brought our oaths and covenants to nothing,
and foreshadows ill for both of us, till you either take the towers of
Troy, or are yourselves vanquished at your ships. The princes of the
Achaeans are here present in the midst of you; let him, then, that will
fight me stand forward as your champion against Hector. Thus I say, and
may Jove be witness between us. If your champion slay me, let him strip
me of my armour and take it to your ships, but let him send my body
home that the Trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when
I am dead. In like manner, if Apollo vouchsafe me glory and I slay your
champion, I will strip him of his armour and take it to the city of
Ilius, where I will hang it in the temple of Apollo, but I will give up
his body, that the Achaeans may bury him at their ships, and the build
him a mound by the wide waters of the Hellespont. Then will one say
hereafter as he sails his ship over the sea, 'This is the monument of
one who died long since a champion who was slain by mighty Hector.'
Thus will one say, and my fame shall not be lost."

Thus did he speak, but they all held their peace, ashamed to decline
the challenge, yet fearing to accept it, till at last Menelaus rose and
rebuked them, for he was angry. "Alas," he cried, "vain braggarts,
women forsooth not men, double-dyed indeed will be the stain upon us if
no man of the Danaans will now face Hector. May you be turned every man
of you into earth and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious in
your places. I will myself go out against this man, but the upshot of
the fight will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods."

With these words he put on his armour; and then, O Menelaus, your life
would have come to an end at the hands of hands of Hector, for he was
far better the man, had not the princes of the Achaeans sprung upon you
and checked you. King Agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said,
"Menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. Be patient in spite of
passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself
as Hector son of Priam, who is feared by many another as well as you.
Even Achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from
meeting him in battle. Sit down your own people, and the Achaeans will
send some other champion to fight Hector; fearless and fond of battle
though he be, I ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes
out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

With these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,
whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders.
Then Nestor rose and spoke, "Of a truth," said he, "the Achaean land is
fallen upon evil times. The old knight Peleus, counsellor and orator
among the Myrmidons, loved when I was in his house to question me
concerning the race and lineage of all the Argives. How would it not
grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before Hector? Many a
time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave his
body and go down within the house of Hades. Would, by father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo, that I were still young and strong as when the
Pylians and Arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river Celadon
under the walls of Pheia, and round about the waters of the river
Iardanus. The godlike hero Ereuthalion stood forward as their champion,
with the armour of King Areithous upon his shoulders--Areithous whom
men and women had surnamed 'the Mace-man,' because he fought neither
with bow nor spear, but broke the battalions of the foe with his iron
mace. Lycurgus killed him, not in fair fight, but by entrapping him in
a narrow way where his mace served him in no stead; for Lycurgus was
too quick for him and speared him through the middle, so he fell to
earth on his back. Lycurgus then spoiled him of the armour which Mars
had given him, and bore it in battle thenceforward; but when he grew
old and stayed at home, he gave it to his faithful squire Ereuthalion,
who in this same armour challenged the foremost men among us. The
others quaked and quailed, but my high spirit bade me fight him though
none other would venture; I was the youngest man of them all; but when
I fought him Minerva vouchsafed me victory. He was the biggest and
strongest man that ever I killed, and covered much ground as he lay
sprawling upon the earth. Would that I were still young and strong as I
then was, for the son of Priam would then soon find one who would face
him. But you, foremost among the whole host though you be, have none of
you any stomach for fighting Hector."

Thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to
their feet. Foremost of all uprose King Agamemnon, and after him brave
Diomed the son of Tydeus. Next were the two Ajaxes, men clothed in
valour as with a garment, and then Idomeneus, and Meriones his brother
in arms. After these Eurypylus son of Euaemon, Thoas the son of
Andraemon, and Ulysses also rose. Then Nestor knight of Gerene again
spoke, saying: "Cast lots among you to see who shall be chosen. If he
come alive out of this fight he will have done good service alike to
his own soul and to the Achaeans."

Thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown
it into the helmet of Agamemnon son of Atreus, the people lifted their
hands in prayer, and thus would one of them say as he looked into the
vault of heaven, "Father Jove, grant that the lot fall on Ajax, or on
the son of Tydeus, or upon the king of rich Mycene himself."

As they were speaking, Nestor knight of Gerene shook the helmet, and
from it there fell the very lot which they wanted--the lot of Ajax. The
herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the
Achaeans, going from left to right; but they none of them owned it.
When, however, in due course he reached the man who had written upon it
and had put it into the helmet, brave Ajax held out his hand, and the
herald gave him the lot. When Ajax saw his mark he knew it and was
glad; he threw it to the ground and said, "My friends, the lot is mine,
and I rejoice, for I shall vanquish Hector. I will put on my armour;
meanwhile, pray to King Jove in silence among yourselves that the
Trojans may not hear you--or aloud if you will, for we fear no man.
None shall overcome me, neither by force nor cunning, for I was born
and bred in Salamis, and can hold my own in all things."

With this they fell praying to King Jove the son of Saturn, and thus
would one of them say as he looked into the vault of heaven, "Father
Jove that rulest from Ida, most glorious in power, vouchsafe victory to
Ajax, and let him win great glory: but if you wish well to Hector also
and would protect him, grant to each of them equal fame and prowess."

Thus they prayed, and Ajax armed himself in his suit of gleaming
bronze. When he was in full array he sprang forward as monstrous Mars
when he takes part among men whom Jove has set fighting with one
another--even so did huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans, spring forward
with a grim smile on his face as he brandished his long spear and
strode onward. The Argives were elated as they beheld him, but the
Trojans trembled in every limb, and the heart even of Hector beat
quickly, but he could not now retreat and withdraw into the ranks
behind him, for he had been the challenger. Ajax came up bearing his
shield in front of him like a wall--a shield of bronze with seven folds
of oxhide--the work of Tychius, who lived in Hyle and was by far the
best worker in leather. He had made it with the hides of seven full-fed
bulls, and over these he had set an eighth layer of bronze. Holding
this shield before him, Ajax son of Telamon came close up to Hector,
and menaced him saying, "Hector, you shall now learn, man to man, what
kind of champions the Danaans have among them even besides lion-hearted
Achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. He now abides at the ships in
anger with Agamemnon shepherd of his people, but there are many of us
who are well able to face you; therefore begin the fight."

And Hector answered, "Noble Ajax, son of Telamon, captain of the host,
treat me not as though I were some puny boy or woman that cannot fight.
I have been long used to the blood and butcheries of battle. I am quick
to turn my leathern shield either to right or left, for this I deem the
main thing in battle. I can charge among the chariots and horsemen, and
in hand to hand fighting can delight the heart of Mars; howbeit I would
not take such a man as you are off his guard--but I will smite you
openly if I can."

He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it from him. It struck the
sevenfold shield in its outermost layer--the eighth, which was of
bronze--and went through six of the layers but in the seventh hide it
stayed. Then Ajax threw in his turn, and struck the round shield of the
son of Priam. The terrible spear went through his gleaming shield, and
pressed onward through his cuirass of cunning workmanship; it pierced
the shirt against his side, but he swerved and thus saved his life.
They then each of them drew out the spear from his shield, and fell on
one another like savage lions or wild boars of great strength and
endurance: the son of Priam struck the middle of Ajax's shield, but the
bronze did not break, and the point of his dart was turned. Ajax then
sprang forward and pierced the shield of Hector; the spear went through
it and staggered him as he was springing forward to attack; it gashed
his neck and the blood came pouring from the wound, but even so Hector
did not cease fighting; he gave ground, and with his brawny hand seized
a stone, rugged and huge, that was lying upon the plain; with this he
struck the shield of Ajax on the boss that was in its middle, so that
the bronze rang again. But Ajax in turn caught up a far larger stone,
swung it aloft, and hurled it with prodigious force. This millstone of
a rock broke Hector's shield inwards and threw him down on his back
with the shield crushing him under it, but Apollo raised him at once.
Thereon they would have hacked at one another in close combat with
their swords, had not heralds, messengers of gods and men, come
forward, one from the Trojans and the other from the
Achaeans--Talthybius and Idaeus both of them honourable men; these
parted them with their staves, and the good herald Idaeus said, "My
sons, fight no longer, you are both of you valiant, and both are dear
to Jove; we know this; but night is now falling, and the behests of
night may not be well gainsaid."

Ajax son of Telamon answered, "Idaeus, bid Hector say so, for it was he
that challenged our princes. Let him speak first and I will accept his
saying."

Then Hector said, "Ajax, heaven has vouchsafed you stature and
strength, and judgement; and in wielding the spear you excel all others
of the Achaeans. Let us for this day cease fighting; hereafter we will
fight anew till heaven decide between us, and give victory to one or to
the other; night is now falling, and the behests of night may not be
well gainsaid. Gladden, then, the hearts of the Achaeans at your ships,
and more especially those of your own followers and clansmen, while I,
in the great city of King Priam, bring comfort to the Trojans and their
women, who vie with one another in their prayers on my behalf. Let us,
moreover, exchange presents that it may be said among the Achaeans and
Trojans, 'They fought with might and main, but were reconciled and
parted in friendship.'"

On this he gave Ajax a silver-studded sword with its sheath and
leathern baldric, and in return Ajax gave him a girdle dyed with
purple. Thus they parted, the one going to the host of the Achaeans,
and the other to that of the Trojans, who rejoiced when they saw their
hero come to them safe and unharmed from the strong hands of mighty
Ajax. They led him, therefore, to the city as one that had been saved
beyond their hopes. On the other side the Achaeans brought Ajax elated
with victory to Agamemnon.

When they reached the quarters of the son of Atreus, Agamemnon
sacrificed for them a five-year-old bull in honour of Jove the son of
Saturn. They flayed the carcass, made it ready, and divided it into
joints; these they cut carefully up into smaller pieces, putting them
on the spits, roasting them sufficiently, and then drawing them off.
When they had done all this and had prepared the feast, they ate it,
and every man had his full and equal share, so that all were satisfied,
and King Agamemnon gave Ajax some slices cut lengthways down the loin,
as a mark of special honour. As soon as they had had enough to eat and
drink, old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest began to speak; with
all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:--

"Son of Atreus, and other chieftains, inasmuch as many of the Achaeans
are now dead, whose blood Mars has shed by the banks of the Scamander,
and their souls have gone down to the house of Hades, it will be well
when morning comes that we should cease fighting; we will then wheel
our dead together with oxen and mules and burn them not far from the
ships, that when we sail hence we may take the bones of our comrades
home to their children. Hard by the funeral pyre we will build a barrow
that shall be raised from the plain for all in common; near this let us
set about building a high wall, to shelter ourselves and our ships, and
let it have well-made gates that there may be a way through them for
our chariots. Close outside we will dig a deep trench all round it to
keep off both horse and foot, that the Trojan chieftains may not bear
hard upon us."

Thus he spoke, and the princess shouted in applause. Meanwhile the
Trojans held a council, angry and full of discord, on the acropolis by
the gates of King Priam's palace; and wise Antenor spoke. "Hear me," he
said, "Trojans, Dardanians, and allies, that I may speak even as I am
minded. Let us give up Argive Helen and her wealth to the sons of
Atreus, for we are now fighting in violation of our solemn covenants,
and shall not prosper till we have done as I say."

He then sat down and Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen rose to speak.
"Antenor," said he, "your words are not to my liking; you can find a
better saying than this if you will; if, however, you have spoken in
good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason. I will
speak plainly, and hereby notify to the Trojans that I will not give up
the woman; but the wealth that I brought home with her from Argos I
will restore, and will add yet further of my own."

On this, when Paris had spoken and taken his seat, Priam of the race of
Dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: "Hear me, Trojans, Dardanians, and
allies, that I may speak even as I am minded. Get your suppers now as
hitherto throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful. At
daybreak let Idaeus go to the ships, and tell Agamemnon and Menelaus
sons of Atreus the saying of Alexandrus through whom this quarrel has
come about; and let him also be instant with them that they now cease
fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till
heaven decide between us and give victory to one or to the other."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They took supper
in their companies and at daybreak Idaeus went his way to the ships. He
found the Danaans, servants of Mars, in council at the stern of
Agamemnon's ship, and took his place in the midst of them. "Son of
Atreus," he said, "and princes of the Achaean host, Priam and the other
noble Trojans have sent me to tell you the saying of Alexandrus through
whom this quarrel has come about, if so be that you may find it
acceptable. All the treasure he took with him in his ships to
Troy--would that he had sooner perished--he will restore, and will add
yet further of his own, but he will not give up the wedded wife of
Menelaus, though the Trojans would have him do so. Priam bade me
inquire further if you will cease fighting till we burn our dead;
hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give
victory to one or to the other."

