who dwelt in well-built Arisba, rich in wealth, and he was beloved by
men, for dwelling in a house near the public way, he was wont to afford
entertainment to all. But none of them [his guests] coming up before
him, warded off sad death; but [Diomede] deprived both of life, himself
and his attendant Calesius, who then was the charioteer of his steeds,
and both these entered the earth.

And Euryalus slew Dresus and Opheltius; and afterwards went against
AEsepus and Pedasus, whom formerly the Naiad nymph Abarbarea brought
forth to blameless Bucolion. Bucolion was the son of illustrious
Laomedon, eldest by birth, but him his mother brought forth secretly.
While [Bucolion] was a shepherd, he was mingled in love and nuptials
with her amongst the sheep; but she becoming pregnant, brought forth
twin sons. And truly the son of Mecisteus[235] relaxed their strength
and their illustrious limbs, and tore the armour from their shoulders.
And next warlike Polypoetes slew Astyalus. Ulysses killed Percosian
Pidytes with his brazen spear; and Agamemnon, king of men, slew Elatus.
He dwelt at lofty Pedasus, on the banks of fair-flowing Satniois. The
hero Leitus slew Phylacus flying; and Eurypylus killed and spoiled
Melanthius.

   [Footnote 235: Euryalus.]

In the next place Menelaus, valiant in the din of war, took Adrastus
alive; for his two steeds, flying bewildered over the plain, coming in
violent contact with a branch of tamarisk, and having broken the curved
chariot at the extremity of the pole, themselves flew towards the city,
whither others also fled terrified. But he was rolled from his chariot
near the wheel, prone in the dust on his mouth: but near him stood
Menelaus, the son of Atreus, holding his long-shadowed spear. Adrastus
then embracing his knees supplicated him:

"Take me alive, O son of Atreus, and receive a worthy ransom; in my
wealthy father's [house][236] lie abundant stores, brass and gold, and
well-wrought steel; out of which my sire will bestow on thee countless
ransom-gifts, if he shall hear that I am alive at the ships of the
Greeks."

Thus he spoke; and persuaded his mind in his breast, and already he was
on the point of consigning him to the care of his attendant to conduct
him to the ships of the Greeks: but Agamemnon running up, met him, and
shouting in a chiding tone, spoke:

"O soft one, O Menelaus, why art thou thus so much concerned for these
men? In sooth very kind offices were done to thee in thy family by the
Trojans.[237] Of whom let none escape utter destruction, and our hands;
not even him whom the mother carries, being an infant in her womb, let
not even him escape; but let all the inhabitants of Ilium perish
totally, without burial-rites, and obscure."

   [Footnote 236: Supply [Greek: oiko] or [Greek: domo].]

   [Footnote 237: Ironically spoken.]

Thus having said, the hero changed his brother's mind, having advised
right things: but he, with his hand, thrust back the hero Adrastus from
him; and him king Agamemnon smote in the belly, and he was cast supine.
But the son of Atreus planting his heel upon his breast, drew out the
ashen spear.

Then Nestor exhorted the Greeks, exclaiming aloud: "O friends, Grecian
heroes, servants of Mars, let no one now, desirous of spoil, linger
behind, that he may return bringing abundance to the ships; but let us
slay the men, and afterwards at your leisure, shall ye spoil the dead
bodies through the plain."

Thus having said, he aroused the might and courage of each. And then
truly had the Trojans retreated into Ilium, under the influence of the
Mars-beloved Greeks, conquered through their own cowardice, had not
Helenus, son of Priam, by far the best of augurs, standing near, spoken
these words to AEneas and to Hector:

"AEneas and Hector, since upon you chiefly of the Trojans and Lydians the
labour devolves, because ye are the bravest for every purpose, both to
fight and to take counsel, stand here, and stay the forces before the
gates, running in all directions, before that, on the contrary, flying
they fall into the arms of their wives, and become a triumph to the
enemies. But after ye have exhorted all the phalanxes, we remaining here
will fight against the Greeks, though much pressed, for necessity urges
us. But Hector, do thou go to the city, and then speak to thy mother
and mine; and let her, collecting together the matrons of
distinction[238] into the temple of azure-eyed Minerva, on the lofty
citadel, [and] having opened the doors of the sacred house with the key,
let her place on the knees of fair-haired Minerva the robe which seems
to her the most beautiful, and the largest in her palace, and which is
much the most dear to her. And let her promise to sacrifice to that
goddess in her temple twelve yearling heifers, as yet ungoaded, if she
will take compassion on the city and on the wives and infant children of
the Trojans: if indeed she will avert from sacred Ilium the son of
Tydeus, that ferocious warrior, the dire contriver of flight: whom I
declare to be the bravest of the Greeks; nor have we ever to such a
degree dreaded Achilles, chiefest of men, whom they say is from a
goddess: but this man rages excessively, nor can any equal him in
might."

   [Footnote 238: Hesych. [Greek: Geraias entimous, tus geras ti
   echysas].]

Thus he said, but Hector was by no means disobedient to his brother; and
instantly from his chariot he leaped to the ground with his arms, and
brandishing his sharp spears, he went in all directions through the
army, inciting them to fight: and he stirred up dreadful battle. But
they rallied round, and stood opposite the Greeks. But the Greeks
retreated, and desisted from slaughter; for they thought that some of
the immortals, from the starry heaven, had descended to aid the Trojans,
in such a way did they rally. But Hector exhorted the Trojans,
exclaiming aloud:

"Courageous Trojans and far-summoned[239] allies, be men, my friends,
and recall to mind your daring valour, whilst I go to Ilium, and tell to
the aged counsellors, and to our wives, to pray to the gods, and to vow
them hecatombs."

   [Footnote 239: Or [Greek: telekleitoi], far-famed. See Anthon on
   v. 491.]

Thus having spoken, crest-tossing Hector departed; but about him the
black hide, the border which surrounded his bossy shield, kept striking
his ankles and his neck.

But Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, and the son of Tydeus met in the midst
of both armies, eager to fight. But when now they were near, going
against each other, Diomede, brave in the din of war, first addressed
him:

"Who of mortal men art thou, O most brave? For never yet have I beheld
thee in the glorious fight: but now indeed thou hast far surpassed all
in thy confidence, since thou hast awaited my long-shadowed spear.
Certainly they are sons of the hapless who meet my strength. But, if one
of the immortals, thou art come from heaven, I would not fight with the
celestial gods. For valiant Lycurgus, the son of Dryas, did not live
long, who contended with the heavenly gods; he who once pursued the
nurses of raving Bacchus through sacred Nyssa; but they all at once cast
their sacred implements[240] on the ground, smitten by man-slaying
Lycurgus with an ox-goad; but Bacchus, too, terrified, sunk under the
wave of the sea, and Thetis received him affrighted in her bosom; for
dreadful trembling had seized him, on account of the threat of the man.
With him the peaceful-living gods were afterwards enraged, and the son
of Saturn rendered him blind, nor did he live much longer, for he became
an object of aversion to all the immortal gods. Wherefore I should not
wish to fight with the blessed gods. But if thou art any one of mortals,
who eat the fruit of the earth, come hither, that thou mayest speedily
reach the goal of death."

   [Footnote 240: Not merely the thyrsi. See Anthon.]

Him then the renowned son of Hippolochus addressed in turn: "Magnanimous
son of Tydeus, why dost thou inquire of my race? As is the race of
leaves, even such is the race of men.[241] Some leaves the wind sheds
upon the ground, but the fructifying wood produces others, and these
grow up in the season of spring. Such is the generation of men; one
produces, another ceases [to do so]. But if thou wouldst learn even
these things, that thou mayest well know my lineage (for many know it),
there is a city, Ephyra, in a nook of horse-pasturing Argos; there dwelt
Sisyphus, who was the most cunning of mortals, Sisyphus, son of AEolus;
and he begat a son, Glaucus. But Glaucus begat blameless Bellerophon; to
whom the gods gave beauty and agreeable manliness. But against him
Proetus devised evils in his soul: who accordingly banished him from the
state (since he was far the best of the Greeks; for Jove had subjected
them to his sceptre). With him the wife of Proetus, noble Antea,[242]
passionately longed to be united in secret love; but by no means could
she persuade just-minded, wise-reflecting Bellerophon. She, therefore,
telling a falsehood, thus addressed king Proetus: 'Mayest thou be dead, O
Proetus! or do thou slay Bellerophon, who desired to be united in love
with me against my will.' Thus she said: but rage possessed the king at
what he heard. He was unwilling, indeed, to slay him, for he scrupled
this in his mind; but he sent him into Lycia, and gave to him fatal
characters, writing many things of deadly purport on a sealed tablet;
and ordered him to show it to his father-in-law, to the end that he
might perish. He therefore went into Lycia, under the blameless escort
of the gods; but when now he had arrived at Lycia and at the river
Xanthus, the king of wide Lycia honoured him with a willing mind. Nine
days did he entertain him hospitably, and sacrificed nine oxen; but when
the tenth rosy-fingered morn appeared, then indeed he interrogated him,
and desired to see the token,[243] whatever it was, that he brought from
his son-in-law Proetus. But after he had received the fatal token of his
son-in-law, first he commanded him to slay the invincible Chimaera; but
she was of divine race, not of men, in front a lion, behind a dragon, in
the middle a goat,[244] breathing forth the dreadful might of gleaming
fire. And her indeed he slew, relying on the signs of the gods. Next he
fought with the illustrious Solymi: and he said that he entered on this
as the fiercest fight among men. Thirdly, he slew the man-opposing
Amazons. But for him returning the king wove another wily plot.
Selecting the bravest men from wide Lycia, he placed an ambuscade; but
they never returned home again, for blameless Bellerophon slew them all.
But when [Iobates] knew that he was the offspring of a god, he detained
him there, and gave him his daughter:[245] he also gave him half of all
his regal honour. The Lycians also separated for him an enclosure of
land, excelling all others, pleasant, vine-bearing, and arable, that he
might cultivate it. But this woman brought forth three children to
warlike Bellerophon, Isandrus, Hippolochus, and Laodamia. Provident
Jove, indeed, had clandestine intercourse with Laodamia, and she brought
forth godlike, brazen-helmed Sarpedon. But when now even he
[Bellerophon] was become odious to all the gods, he, on his part,
wandered alone[246] through the Aleian plain,[247] pining in his soul,
and shunning the path of men. But Mars, insatiable of war, slew his son
Isandrus, fighting against the illustrious Solymi. And golden-reined
Diana, being enraged, slew his daughter. But Hippolochus begat me, and
from him I say that I am born; me he sent to Troy, and gave me very many
commands, always to fight bravely, and to be superior to others; and not
to disgrace the race of my fathers, who were by far the bravest in
Ephyra, and ample Lycia. From this race and blood do I boast to be."

   [Footnote 241: On this popular Homeric proverb, see Duport, Gnom.
   Hom. p. 31, sq.]

   [Footnote 242: She is more frequently called Sthenoboea, or
   Stheneboea, as by Apollodor. ii. 3,1; Serv. on AEn. v. 118.
   Fulgentius, iii. praef., agrees with Homer, giving a ridiculously
   philosophical explanation of the whole story.]

   [Footnote 243: Although Apollodorus, l. c. says, [Greek: deoken
   epistolas auto pros Iochaten komisein], and Hygin. Fab. lvii.
   "Scripsit tabellas, et mittit eum ad Iobaten regem," there is no
   reason to believe that letters, properly so called, were yet
   invented. See Knight, Prolegg. p. lxxiv. lxxxii.; Wood, on the
   original genius of Homer, p. 249, sqq.; Mueller, Lit. of Greece,
   iv. 5 (Bulwer, Athens, i. 8, boldly advocates the contrary
   opinion); and Anthon's note. Compare the similar story of Phaedra
   and Hippolytus.]

   [Footnote 244: For the different descriptions of the Chimaera, the
   mythological student may compare Muncker on Hygin. Fab. lvii. p.
   104.]

   [Footnote 245: Philonoe, the sister of Antea.]

   [Footnote 246: This "melancholy madness" of Bellerophon has been
   well illustrated by Duport, p. 31. Burton, Anatomy, p. 259,
   observes, "They delight in floods and waters, desert places, to
   walk alone in orchards, gardens, private walks, back lanes,
   averse from company, as Diogenes in his tub, or Timon
   Misanthropus; they abhor all companions at last, even their
   nearest acquaintances and most familiar friends; confining
   themselves therefore to their private houses or chambers, they
   will diet themselves, feed and live alone." Hence melancholy was
   called the "morbus Bellerophonteus." See Bourdelot on Heliodor.
   p. 25.]

   [Footnote 247: Properly, "the Plain of Wandering." It lay between
   the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in Cilicia. Cf. Dionys. Perieg.
   872. [Greek: Keithi de kai pedion to, ou kata nota Anthropon
   apaneythen alomenos indiaaske].]

Thus he said: and Diomede, valiant in the din of war, rejoiced. His
spear indeed he fixed in the all-nurturing earth, and next addressed the
shepherd of the people in courteous words:

"Certainly thou art my father's ancient guest; for in his halls noble
oeneus once entertained blameless Bellerophon, having detained him for
twenty days; and they bestowed valuable gifts of hospitality on each
other. oeneus on his part gave a belt shining with purple; and
Bellerophon in turn a golden double cup; and this I left in my halls
when I was coming hither. But Tydeus I remember not, for he left me
whilst I was yet young, when the people of the Greeks perished at
Thebes. Wherefore I am a guest friend to thee in the midst of Argos, and
thou art the same to me in Lycia, whenever I shall visit their state.
But let us also in the crowd avoid even each other's spears. For there
are many Trojans and illustrious allies for me to slay, whomsoever the
deity shall present, and I shall overtake with my feet. And there are
many Greeks in turn for thee to slay, whomsoever thou canst. But let us
exchange arms with each other, that even these may know that we profess
to be friends by our ancestors."

Thus then having spoken, leaping down from their steeds, they took each
other's hand, and plighted faith. Then Saturnian Jove took away prudence
from Glaucus, who exchanged armour with Diomede, the son of Tydeus,
[giving] golden [arms] for brazen; the value of a hundred beeves[248]
for the value of nine.

But when Hector arrived at the Scaean gates and the beech-tree, around
him ran the Trojan wives and daughters inquiring for their sons, their
brothers, their friends, and husbands. But he then ordered all in order
to supplicate the gods, for evils were impending over many.

But when now he had arrived at the very beautiful dwelling of Priam,
built with well-polished porticoes; but in it were fifty chambers[249]
of polished marble, built near one another, where lay the sons of Priam
with their lawful wives; and opposite, on the other side, within the
hall, were the twelve roofed chambers of his daughters, of polished
marble, built near to one another, where the sons-in-law of Priam slept
with their chaste wives. There his fond mother met him, as she was going
to Laodice, the most excellent in form of her daughters: and she hung
upon his hand, and addressed him, and spoke:

   [Footnote 248: See Gellius, ii. 23. It must be remembered that in
   the ancient times, when there was no money, cattle formed the
   standard of barter.]

   [Footnote 249: Cf. Virg. AEn. ii. 503; Eur. Hec. 421.]

"My son, why hast thou come, having left the bold fight? Certainly the
abominable sons of the Greeks harass thee much, fighting around thy
city: thy mind hath urged thee to come hither, to uplift thy hands to
Jove from the lofty citadel. But wait till I bring thee genial wine,
that first thou mayest make a libation to Jove, and to the other
immortal gods, and then thou shalt refresh thyself, if thou wilt drink.
For to a wearied man wine greatly increases strength; since thou art
wearied aiding thy kinsmen."

But her mighty crest-tossing Hector then answered: "Bring me not genial
wine, venerable mother, lest thou enervate me, and I forget my might and
valour. But I dread to pour out dark-red wine to Jove with unwashed
hands: nor is it by any means lawful for me, denied with blood and gore,
to offer vows to the cloud-compelling son of Saturn. But go thou to the
temple of Minerva the pillager, with victims, having assembled the
matrons of distinction. And the robe which is the most beautiful and the
largest in the palace, and by far the most esteemed by thyself, that
place on the knees of the fair-haired goddess, and vow that thou wilt
sacrifice to her, in her temple, twelve heifers, yearlings, ungoaded, if
she will take compassion on the city, and the wives and infant children
of the Trojans; if she will avert from sacred Ilium the son of Tydeus,
that fierce warrior, the valiant author of terror. Do thou, on thy part,
go to the temple of the pillager Minerva; but I will go after Paris,
that I may call him, if he is willing to hear me speaking. Would that
the earth might there open for him, for him hath Olympian Jove reared as
a great bane to the Trojans, to magnanimous Priam, and to his sons.
Could I but behold him descending to Hades, I might say that my soul had
forgotten its joyless woe."

Thus he spoke: but she, going to her palace, gave orders to her maids:
and they assembled through the city the matrons of distinction. But she
descended into her fragrant chamber, where were her
variously-embroidered robes, the works of Sidonian females, which
godlike Alexander himself had brought from Sidon, sailing over the broad
ocean, in that voyage in which he carried off Helen, sprung from a noble
sire. Hecuba, taking one of these which was most beauteous with various
hues, and largest, brought it as a gift to Minerva; and it glittered
like a star, and lay the undermost of all. But she hastened to set out,
and many venerable matrons hurried along with her.

But when they arrived at the temple of Minerva, in the lofty citadel,
fair-cheeked Theano, the daughter of Cisseus, wife of horse-breaking
Antenor, opened to them the gates; for the Trojans had made her
priestess of Minerva. They all, with a loud wailing, upraised their
hands to Minerva. But fair-cheeked Theano having received the garment,
placed it on the knees of fair-haired Minerva, and making vows, thus
prayed to the daughter of mighty Jove:

"Venerable Minerva, guardian of the city, divine one of goddesses, break
now the spear of Diomede, and grant that he may fall prostrate before
the Scaean gates, that we may forthwith sacrifice to thee in thy temple
twelve yearling untamed heifers, if thou wilt pity the city, and the
wives of the Trojans, and their infant children."

So she spake in prayer, but Pallas Minerva refused. Thus they, on their
part, offered vows to the daughter of mighty Jove.

But Hector had gone to the beautiful halls of Alexander, which he
himself had built with the aid of men, who then were the most skilful
artificers in fruitful Troy: who made for him a chamber, a
dwelling-room, and hall, in the lofty citadel, near the palaces of Priam
and Hector. There Jove-beloved Hector entered, and in his hand he held a
spear of eleven cubits; the brazen point of the spear shone in front,
and a golden ring encircled it. But him he found in his chamber
preparing his very beauteous armour, his shield and corslet, and fitting
his curved bow. Argive Helen sat amongst her female servants, and
assigned their tasks to her maids of renowned work. But Hector, seeing,
reproached him with foul words:

"Infatuate; not befittingly hast thou conceived this rage in thy mind:
the people are perishing, fighting around the city and the lofty wall:
and on thy account the battle and war are blazing around the city. Truly
thou wouldst thyself reprove another, if ever thou sawest any person
remiss in the hateful battle. But arise, lest perchance the city should
quickly blaze with hostile fire."

But him godlike Alexander then addressed: "Hector, since thou hast with
reason reproved me, and not without reason, therefore will I tell thee;
but do thou attend and hear me. I was sitting in my chamber, neither so
much from anger nor indignation against the Trojans, but [because] I
wished to give way to grief. But now my wife, advising me with soothing
words, hath urged me to the battle, and to myself also it seems to be
better: for victory alternates to men. But come now, wait, let me put on
my martial arms; or go on, and I will follow, and I think that I shall
overtake thee."

Thus he said, but crest-tossing Hector did not answer him. But Helen
addressed him [Hector] with soothing words: "Brother-in-law of me,
shameless authoress of mischief-devising, fearful wretch, would that, on
the day when first my mother brought me forth, a destructive tempest of
wind had seized and borne me to a mountain, or into the waves of the
much-resounding ocean, where the billow would have swept me away before
these doings had occurred. But since the gods have thus decreed these
evils, I ought at least to have been the wife of a braver man, who
understood both the indignation and the many reproaches of men. But this
man's sentiments are neither constant now, nor will they be hereafter;
wherefore I think he will reap the fruits [of them]. But come now,
enter, and sit on this seat, brother-in-law, since toils have greatly
encompassed thy mind, on account of shameless me, and of the guilt of
Alexander; on whom Jove hath imposed an unhappy lot, that, even in time
to come, we should be a subject of song to future men."

But her mighty crest-tossing Hector then answered: "Do not bid me sit,
Helen, though courteous, for thou wilt not persuade me. For now is my
mind urged on, that I may aid the Trojans, who have great regret for me
absent. But do thou arouse him [Paris], and let him hasten, that he may
overtake me being within the city. For I will go home, that I may see my
domestics, my beloved wife, and my infant son. For I know not whether I
shall ever again return to them, or whether the gods will now subdue me
under the hands of the Greeks."

Thus having said, crest-tossing Hector departed; and immediately he then
arrived at his well-situated palace, nor did he find white-armed
Andromache in the halls; but she stood lamenting and weeping on the
tower, with her son and her well-robed maid. But Hector, when he found
not his blameless wife within, went and stood at the threshold, and said
to the female servants:

"I pray you, maids, tell me truly whither went white-armed Andromache
from the palace? Has she gone anywhere [to the dwellings] of her
husband's sisters, or [to those] of any of her well-robed
brother-in-laws' wives, or to the temple of Minerva, where the other
fair-haired Trojan matrons are appeasing the dreadful goddess?"

Him then the active housewife in turn addressed: "Hector, since thou
biddest me to tell the truth, she has not gone to any of her husband's
sisters, nor to any of her well-robed brother-in-laws' wives, nor to the
temple of Minerva, where the other fair-haired Trojan matrons are
appeasing the dreadful goddess. But she went to the lofty tower of
Ilium, when she heard that the Trojans were worn out, and that the
valour of the Greeks was great. She is now on her way, hastening to the
wall, like unto one frenzied, and the nurse, along with her, bears the
child."

Thus spoke the housewife, but Hector hastened away from the palace, back
the same way through the well-built streets. When he had arrived at the
Scaean gates, after passing through the great city (for by this way he
was about to pass out into the plain), there met him his richly-dowered
spouse running, Andromache, daughter of magnanimous Eetion: Eetion, who
dwelt in woody Hypoplacus, in Hypoplacian Thebes, reigning over Cilician
men. His daughter then was possessed by brazen-helmed Hector. She then
met him; and with her came a maid, carrying in her bosom the tender
child, an infant quite, the only son of Hector, like unto a beauteous
star. Him Hector had named Scamandrius, but others Astyanax; for Hector
alone protected Ilium. He indeed, gazing in silence upon his son,
smiled. But Andromache stood near to him, weeping, and she hung upon his
hand, and addressed him, and spoke:

"Strange man! this thy valour will destroy thee; nor dost thou pity thy
infant child and unhappy me, who very soon will be bereft of thee, for
presently the Greeks will slay thee, all attacking thee at once. For me
much better it were to sink into the earth, when bereft of thee; for
there will no longer be any other comfort for me when thou shalt draw on
thy destruction; but sorrows only. Nor have I father or venerable
mother. For divine Achilles slew my father, and laid waste the
well-inhabited city of the Cilicians, lofty-gated Thebes. He slew
Eetion, but spoiled him not, he scrupled in his mind [to do] that; but
he burned him together with his well-wrought arms, and heaped a tomb
over him, and around [him] the mountain nymphs, daughters of
aegis-bearing Jove, planted elms. Moreover, the seven brothers besides,
whom I had at home, all these indeed departed to Hades in one day. For
divine, swift-footed Achilles slew them all, amidst their crooked hoofed
oxen and their snowy sheep. And my mother, who ruled in woody
Hypoplacus, after that he had led her hither with other treasures, he
sent back at liberty, having received countless ransom-gifts. But her
the shaft-rejoicing Diana slew in my father's hall. But, O Hector, to me
thou art both father and venerable mother and brother; thou art also my
blooming consort. But come now, pity me, and abide here in the tower,
nor make thy child an orphan and thy wife a widow. And place a company
at the wild fig-tree, where the city is chiefly easy of ascent, and the
wall can be scaled. For going to this very quarter, the bravest [of the
Greeks] have thrice assaulted, the two Ajaces, and most renowned
Idomeneus, and the sons of Atreus, and the brave son of Tydeus.
Certainly some person well skilled in prophecy mentioned it to them, or
their own mind impels and orders them."

But her then in turn the mighty crest-tossing Hector addressed:
"Assuredly to me also are all these things a subject of anxiety, dear
wife, but I am exceedingly ashamed of the Trojans and the long-robed
Trojan dames, if I, like a dastard, [keeping] aloof, should avoid the
battle: nor does my mind incline me thus, for I have learned to be
always brave, and to fight in the foremost among the Trojans, seeking to
gain both my father's great glory and mine own. For well I know this in
my mind and soul; a day will arrive when sacred Ilium shall perish, and
Priam, and the people of Priam skilled in the ashen spear. But to me the
grief that is to come will not be so great on account of the Trojans,
neither for Hecuba herself, nor for king Priam, nor for my brothers,
who, many and excellent, are destined to fall in the dust beneath
hostile men, as for thee, when some one of the brazen-mailed Greeks
shall lead thee away weeping, having deprived thee of the day of
freedom. And, perchance, being in Argos, thou mayest weave the web at
the command of some other dame, and bear water from the fountain of
Messeis, or Hyperia, very unwillingly; and hard necessity will oppress
thee; whilst some one, hereafter beholding thee pouring forth tears,
will say, 'This was the wife of Hector, who was the bravest in battle of
the horse-breaking Trojans, when they fought round Ilium.' Thus will
some one hereafter say; but fresh anguish will be thine, from the want
of such a husband, to avert the day of servitude. But may the heaped
earth cover me dead, before I hear of this lamentation and abduction."

Thus having said, illustrious Hector stretched out [his arms] for his
son; but the child, screaming, shrunk back to the bosom of the
well-zoned nurse, affrighted at the aspect of his dear sire, fearing the
brass and the horse-haired crest, seeing it nodding dreadfully from the
top of the helmet: gently his loving father smiled, and his revered
mother. Instantly illustrious Hector took the helmet from his head, and
laid it all-glittering on the ground; and having kissed his beloved
child, and fondled him in his hands, thus spoke, praying to Jove and to
the other gods:

"Jove, and ye other gods, grant that this my son also may become, even
as I am, distinguished amongst the Trojans, so powerful in might, and
bravely to rule over Ilium. And may some one hereafter say [concerning
him], returning from the fight, 'He indeed is much braver than his
sire.' And let him bear away the bloody spoils, having slain the foe,
and let his mother rejoice in her soul."

Thus having said, he placed the boy in the hands of his beloved spouse;
but she smiling tearfully received him in her fragrant bosom. Her
husband regarding her, pitied her, and soothed her with his hand, and
addressed her, and said:

"Beloved, be not at all too sad in thine heart on my account. For no man
shall send me prematurely to the shades. But I think there is no one of
men who has escaped fate, neither the coward nor the brave man, after he
has once been born. But do thou, going home, take care of thy own works,
thy web and distaff, and command thy maids to perform their task; but
war shall be a care to all the men who are born in Ilium, and
particularly to me."

Thus having spoken, illustrious Hector took up the horse-haired helmet,
and his beloved wife departed home, looking back from time to time, and
shedding copious tears. Then immediately she reached the very commodious
palace of man-slaying Hector, and within she found many maids, and in
all of them she excited grief. They, indeed, bewailed in his own palace
Hector still alive, for they thought that he would never return back
again from battle, escaping the might and the hands of the Greeks.

Nor did Paris delay in his lofty halls; but he, after he had put on his
famous arms, variegated with brass, then hastened through the city,
relying on his swift feet. And as[250] when a stabled courser, fed with
barley at the stall, having broken his cord, runs prancing over the
plain, elate with joy, being accustomed to bathe in some fair-flowing
river. He bears aloft his head, and his mane is tossed about on his
shoulders: but he, relying on his beauty,[251] his knees easily bear him
to the accustomed pastures[252] of the mares. Thus Paris, the son of
Priam, shining in arms like the sun, exulting descended down from the
citadel of Pergamus, but his swift feet bore him, and immediately after
he found his noble brother Hector, when he was now about to depart from
the place where he was conversing with his spouse.

   [Footnote 250: Cf. Ennius apud Macrob. iv. 3:

    "Et tunc sicut equus, qui de praesepibus actus,
    Vincla sueis magneis animeis abrumpit, et inde
    Fert sese campi per caerula, laetaque prata,
    Celso pectore, saepe jubam quassat simul altam;
    Spiritus ex anima calida spumas agit albas."]

   [Footnote 251: Observe the anacoluthon.]

   [Footnote 252: An instance of hendiadys.]

Him godlike Alexander first addressed: "Honoured brother, assuredly now
I am altogether detaining thee, although hastening, nor have I come in
due time as thou didst order."

Him then crest-tossing Hector answering addressed: "Strange man! not any
man indeed, who is just, could dispraise thy deeds of war, for thou art
brave. But willingly art thou remiss, and dost not wish [to fight]; and
my heart is saddened in my breast, when I hear dishonourable things of
thee from the Trojans, who have much toil on thy account. But let us
away, these things we shall arrange hereafter, if ever Jove shall grant
us to place a free goblet in our halls to the heavenly everlasting gods,
when we shall have repulsed the well-greaved Greeks from Troy."




                          BOOK THE SEVENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Hector challenges the bravest of the Greeks to single combat, and nine
of the chiefs having cast lots, Ajax is appointed to meet him. Having
protracted the contest till night, the combatants exchange gifts, and
separate. A truce is then made for the purpose of burying the dead, and
the Greeks fortify their camp.


Thus having said, illustrious Hector rushed forth from the gates, and
with him went his brother Alexander, for both were eager in soul to wage
war and to fight. As when the deity hath given a prosperous wind to
expecting mariners, after they have become weary, agitating the deep
with well-polished oars, and their limbs are relaxed with toil; thus
then did those two appear to the expecting Trojans. Then they slew, the
one,[253] indeed, Menesthius, son of king Areithoues, who dwelt in Arne,
whom the club-bearer Areithoues and large-eyed Philomedusa brought forth;
but Hector smote Eioneus with his sharp spear upon the neck, under his
well-wrought brazen helmet,[254] and relaxed his limbs. And Glaucus, son
of Hippolochus, leader of the Lycian heroes, in fierce engagement smote
Iphinous, son of Dexias, upon the shoulder with his spear, as he vaulted
on his swift mares.

   [Footnote 253: _I. e_. Paris. The construction is an instance of
   the [Greek: schema kath' olon kai meros]. See Jelf, Gk. Gr. Sec.478,
   and my note on AEsch. Prom. p. 8, ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 254: Apollonius, Lex. p. 734. seems to regard the
   [Greek: stephane] as a distinct kind of helmet, or cap. So, also,
   the Schol. and Hesych. t. ii. p. 186, and p. 1266. Others
   understand the rim of the helmet. Paschal, de Coronis, i. 2: "Eam
   galeae partem quam Hesychius dicit habere [Greek: exochas], id
   quod in galea eminentissimum est. Et vero apud Plutarchum
   distinguitur [Greek: to kranos] galea [Greek: apo tes stephanes],
   ab ejus parte quae est in ipsius summitate."]

But he fell from his mares on the ground, and his limbs were relaxed.

But when the azure-eyed goddess Minerva saw them destroying the Greeks,
in fierce engagement, she descended straightway, rushing down from the
tops of Olympus to sacred Ilium. Then Apollo hastened to meet her,
having perceived her from Pergamus, for he wished victory to the
Trojans. And they met each other at the beech-tree. Her first king
Apollo, the son of Jove, addressed:

"Why again dost thou, O daughter of mighty Jove, come ardently from
Olympus, and why has thy mighty soul impelled thee? It is that thou
mightst give to the Greeks the doubtful victory of battle, for thou dost
not pity the Trojans perishing. But if thou obeyest me in aught, which
indeed would be much better, let us now make the war and conflict to
cease this day, afterwards shall they fight until they find an end of
Ilium; since it is pleasing to the mind of you goddesses to overthrow
this city." [255]

   [Footnote 255: On the partisan deities for and against Troy, cf.
   Dionys. 817.

         [Greek: "Ilion, en epolisse Poseidaon kai Apollon,
         Ilion, en alapaken alapazan Athenaie te kai Ere".]

   See Grote's Hist, of Greece, vol. i. p. 68.]

But him in turn the azure-eyed goddess Minerva thus addressed: "Be it
so, Far-darter; for I myself, meditating the same things, came down from
Olympus to the Trojans and the Greeks. But come, how dost thou intend to
make the battle of men to cease?"

