
According to the legends, Hercules was a son of the god Jupiter, and had
ordered that a great festival should be held here every four years in
honor of his divine father.

[Illustration: The Temple at Olympia.]

For the purpose of attracting all the neighboring people to the temple
at Olympia, Hercules founded many athletic games, such as wrestling,
stone and spear throwing, foot, horse, and chariot races, boxing,
swimming, and the like.

Hercules himself was present at the first of these festivals, and acted
as umpire of the games, rewarding the victors by giving them crowns of
wild olive leaves. This custom had been kept up ever since, and the
Greek youths considered this simple crown the finest prize which could
be given.

As the Spartans were great athletes, they soon took important parts in
the Olympic games, won most of the prizes, and claimed the honor of
defending the temple at Olympia in all times of danger.

All the people who went to Olympia to witness the games laid some
precious offering before the shrines, so that the temple came to be
noted for its beauty and wealth. Painters and sculptors, too, further
adorned it with samples of their skill, and it soon contained numerous
gems of art.

The most precious of all was a statue representing Jupiter, which was
the work of the renowned sculptor Phid'i-as. This statue was more than
forty feet high; and, while the god himself was carved out of pure white
ivory, his hair, beard, and garments were made of gold, and his eyes of
the brightest jewels.

The temple and grove were further adorned with a great many statues
representing the other gods and all the prize winners, for it was
customary to place a life-sized statue of each of them in this beautiful
place.

During the celebration of the Olympic games many sacrifices were offered
up to the gods, and there were many religious processions in their
honor. Poets and artists, as well as athletes, were in the habit of
hastening thither on every occasion; for there were contests in poetry
and song, and the people were anxious to hear and see all the new
works.

Between the games, therefore, the poets recited their poems, the
musicians sang their songs, the historians read their histories, and the
story-tellers told their choicest tales, to amuse the vast crowd which
had come there from all parts of Greece, and even from the shores of
Italy and Asia Minor.

As the games were held every four years, the people eagerly looked
forward to their coming, and soon began to reckon time by them. It was
therefore usual to say that such and such a thing happened in the first,
second, or third year of the fifth, tenth, or seventieth O-lym'pi-ad, as
the case might be.

Soon even the historians began to use this way of dating important
events; and by counting four years for each Olympiad, as the time
between the games was called, we can find out exactly when the chief
events in Greek history took place.

Although the Olympic games were probably held many times before this
system of counting was begun, and before any good record was kept, we
can trace them back to 774 B.C.

For one thousand years after that, the name of each victor was carefully
written down; and it was only about three centuries after Christ that
the Olympic records ceased. Then the games came to an end, to the sorrow
of all the Greeks.

Several attempts have since been made to revive these games; but all
proved fruitless until the Greek king arranged to renew them in 1896. In
that year a great festival was held, not at Olympia, but in the city of
Athens.

Besides some of the old-fashioned Greek games, there were bicycle and
hurdle races, shooting matches, and contests in jumping. People from all
parts of the world went to see them in as large numbers as they went to
Olympia in the olden times.

The victors in the games, who belonged to many different nations,
received medals, and wreaths of wild olive and laurel leaves; but the
people did not wear crowns of flowers as formerly, nor offer sacrifices
to the old gods, for Greece is now a Christian country.




XXX. MILO OF CROTON.


Among the athletes whose statues were to be seen at Olympia was Mi'lo, a
man of Cro'ton, one of the Greek colonies in Italy. This man was
remarkable for his great strength, and could carry very heavy weights.
In order to develop his muscle and become strong, he had trained himself
from a boy, and had practiced carrying burdens until he could lift more
than any other man of his time.

We are told that he was so earnest in his efforts to become strong, that
he daily carried a pet calf, gradually increasing the distance. As the
calf grew larger, Milo became stronger, and his muscles became so
powerful that he could carry the animal with ease when it became a
full-sized ox.

To please his companions and show them what he could do, Milo once
carried an ox for several miles, and then, feeling hungry, killed it
with one blow of his fist, cooked it, and ate it all at a single meal.
On another occasion, Milo was sitting with several companions in a
rather tumble-down house. All at once he noticed that the roof was
falling in. He stretched up his great arms, spread out his hands, and
held the roof up until all his companions had run out of the house.

Milo's hands were so strong that when he seized a chariot, even with one
hand only, four horses could not make it stir until he let it go. Of
course, Milo was very proud of his great strength, which, however,
proved unlucky for him, and caused his death.

One day when he was very old, Milo wandered out alone into a forest
where some woodcutters had been at work. The men had gone away, leaving
their wedges in an unusually large tree trunk.

Milo, remembering his former strength, gazed for a moment at the tree,
and then, feeling sure that he could easily pull it apart, he slipped
his fingers into the crack. At his first effort the tree parted a
little, and the wedges fell out; but the two halves, instead of
splitting apart, suddenly came together again, and Milo found his hands
held fast.

In vain he struggled, in vain he called. He could neither wrench himself
free nor attract any one's attention. Night came on, and soon the wild
beasts of the forest began to creep out of their dens.

They found the captive athlete, and, springing upon him, tore him to
pieces, for he could not defend himself, in spite of all his boasted
strength.




XXXI. THE JEALOUS ATHLETE.


Near the statue of Milo of Croton stood that of The-ag'e-nes, another
noted athlete, who lived many years after Milo. He too had defeated
every rival. He was the winner of many prizes, and all envied him his
strength and renown.

One of the men in particular, whom he had defeated in the games, was
jealous of him, and of the honors which he had won. This man, instead of
trying to overcome these wicked feelings, used to steal daily into the
temple to view his rival's statue, and mutter threats and curses against
it.

In his anger, he also gave the pedestal an angry shake every night,
hoping that some harm would befall the statue. One evening, when this
jealous man had jostled the image of Theagenes a little more roughly
than usual, the heavy marble toppled and fell, crushing him to death
beneath its weight.

When the priests came into the temple the next day, and found the man's
dead body under the great statue, they were very much surprised. The
judges assembled, as was the custom when a crime of any kind had been
committed, to decide what had caused his death.

As it was usual in Greece to hold judgment over lifeless as well as over
living things, the statue of Theagenes was brought into court, and
accused and found guilty of murder.

The judges then said, that, as the statue had committed a crime, it
deserved to be punished, and so they condemned it to be cast into the
sea and drowned. This sentence had scarcely been executed, when a plague
broke out in Greece; and when the frightened people consulted an oracle
to find out how it could be checked, they learned that it would not
cease until the statue of Theagenes had been set up on its pedestal
again. The superstitious Greeks believed these words, fished the statue
up out of the sea, and placed it again in Olympia. As the plague stopped
shortly after this, they all felt sure that it was because they had
obeyed the oracle, and they ever after looked upon the statue with great
awe.




XXXII. THE GIRLS' GAMES.


Although the women and girls were not often allowed to appear in public,
or to witness certain of the Olympic games, there were special days held
sacred to them, when the girls also strove for prizes.

They too ran races; and it must have been a pretty sight to see all
those healthy, happy girls running around the stadium, as the foot-race
course was called.

One of these races was called the torch race, for each runner carried a
lighted torch in her hand. All were allowed to try to put out each
other's light; and the prize was given to the maiden who first reached
the goal with her torch aflame, or to the one who kept hers burning
longest.

The prize for the girls was the same as that given to the boys; but the
boys took part in more games, and were present in greater numbers,
than the girls, and their victories were praised much more than those of
their sisters.

[Illustration: A Torch Race.]

The crowd of people watching the games often grew so excited that they
carried the victor all around the grounds on their shoulders, while
Olympia fairly re-echoed with their cries of joy.

We are also told that one old man called Chi'lo was so happy when his
son laid at his feet the crowns he had just won, that he actually died
of joy, thus turning his son's happiness into bitter grief.

While all the foot races took place in the stadium, the horse and
chariot races were held in the hippodrome, and excited the greatest
interest. There were two-, four-, and eight-horse races; and, as the
horses were sometimes unruly, the chariots were liable to be overturned.
Thus at times a number of horses would fall in a heap, and lie
struggling and kicking in the dust, which added to the general
excitement.




XXXIII. THE BLOODY LAWS OF DRACO.


You have already learned that Athens was one of the greatest cities of
ancient Greece, and that after the heroic self-sacrifice of Codrus the
inhabitants would not allow any one to bear the name of king.

The sons of Codrus were named archons, or rulers for life,--an office
which was at first handed down from father to son, but which soon became
elective; that is to say, all the people voted for and elected their
own rulers. Then nine archons were chosen at once, but they kept their
office for only one year.

As these men received no pay for serving the state, only the richest
citizens could accept the office; and thus Athens, from a monarchy, or
country ruled by a king, became an oligarchy, or state ruled by the rich
and noble citizens.

As the rich thus held the reins of the government, they often used their
power to oppress the poor, and this gave rise to many quarrels. Little
by little the two parties, the rich and the poor, grew to hate each
other so much that it was decided that a new code or set of laws should
be made, and that they should be obeyed by all alike.

A severe archon called Dra'co was chosen to draw up these new laws (602
B.C.); and he made them so strict and cruel that the least sin was
punished as if it had been a crime, and a man was sentenced to be hanged
for stealing even a cabbage.

When the Athenians heard these new laws, they were frightened. Such
severity had never been known before; and one and all said that the laws
had been written in blood instead of ink. Some of the citizens, hoping
to make Draco change them, asked why he had named such a terrible
punishment for so small a crime as the theft of a cabbage. Draco sternly
replied that a person who stole even the smallest thing was dishonest,
and deserved death; and that, as he knew of no severer punishment, he
could not inflict one for the greater crimes.

The Athenians had all promised to obey Draco's laws, so they were
obliged to submit for a short time. Then, driven wild by their
strictness, rich and poor rose up, drove the unhappy lawmaker out of the
city, and forced him to go to the neighboring Island of AE-gi'na. Here
Draco spent all the rest of his life.

The people were now in a state of great uncertainty. The laws of Draco
were too severe, but they had no others to govern the city. While they
were hesitating, not knowing what to do, Cy'lon, an Athenian citizen,
tried to make himself king.

His first move was to gather together a few of his friends, and go
secretly to the Acropolis, or fortress of Athens, which he took by
surprise. Now that he was master of the fortress, he tried to force the
Athenians to recognize him as their king, but this they stoutly refused
to do.

Instead of yielding, the Athenians armed themselves, met the rebels in a
bloody battle, and killed Cylon himself in the midst of the fight.

As their leader was now dead, and they feared the anger of their
fellow-citizens, Cylon's friends fled in haste to the temple of the
goddess Athene. Once inside the sacred building, they felt quite safe;
for no person could be killed in a temple, or be taken out of it by
force.

Although they had neither food nor drink, the rebels refused to leave
the temple, until the archon Meg'a-cles, fearing that they would die
there, and thus defile the temple, promised to do them no harm if they
would only come out.

The rebels did not quite trust to this promise, so they came out of the
temple holding a small cord, one end of which was fastened to the statue
of the goddess. They were thus still under her protection, and any one
touching them would be guilty of a great crime.

When the men reached the street at the bottom of the hill where the
temple stood, the cord to which they were all clinging suddenly broke.
Megacles, the first to notice this, said that the goddess refused to
protect the rebels any longer, and gave orders to kill the unhappy men.

