      Daughter invincible of Jove supreme!                           400
    Oh, hear me! Hear me now, because when erst
    The mighty Shaker of the shores incensed
    Toss'd me from wave to wave, thou heard'st me not.
    Grant me, among Phaeacia's sons, to find
    Benevolence and pity of my woes!
      He spake, whose pray'r well-pleas'd the Goddess heard,
    But, rev'rencing the brother of her sire,[24]
    Appear'd not to Ulysses yet, whom he
    Pursued with fury to his native shores.


FOOTNOTES:

[23] In the Original, she calls him, pappa! a more natural stile of
address and more endearing. But ancient as this appellative is, it is
also so familiar in modern use, that the Translator feared to hazard it.

[24] Neptune.




BOOK VII

ARGUMENT

Nausicaa returns from the river, whom Ulysses follows. He halts, by her
direction, at a small distance from the palace, which at a convenient
time he enters. He is well received by Alcinoues and his Queen; and having
related to them the manner of his being cast on the shore of Scheria, and
received from Alcinoues the promise of safe conduct home, retires to rest.


    Such pray'r Ulysses, toil-worn Chief renown'd,
    To Pallas made, meantime the virgin, drawn
    By her stout mules, Phaeacia's city reach'd,
    And, at her father's house arrived, the car
    Stay'd in the vestibule; her brothers five,
    All godlike youths, assembling quick around,
    Released the mules, and bore the raiment in.
    Meantime, to her own chamber she return'd,
    Where, soon as she arrived, an antient dame
    Eurymedusa, by peculiar charge                                    10
    Attendant on that service, kindled fire.
    Sea-rovers her had from Epirus brought
    Long since, and to Alcinoues she had fall'n
    By public gift, for that he ruled, supreme,
    Phaeacia, and as oft as he harangued
    The multitude, was rev'renced as a God.
    She waited on the fair Nausicaa, she
    Her fuel kindled, and her food prepared.
    And now Ulysses from his seat arose
    To seek the city, around whom, his guard                          20
    Benevolent, Minerva, cast a cloud,
    Lest, haply, some Phaeacian should presume
    T' insult the Chief, and question whence he came.
    But ere he enter'd yet the pleasant town,
    Minerva azure-eyed met him, in form
    A blooming maid, bearing her pitcher forth.
    She stood before him, and the noble Chief
    Ulysses, of the Goddess thus enquired.
      Daughter! wilt thou direct me to the house
    Of brave Alcinoues, whom this land obeys?                          30
    For I have here arrived, after long toil,
    And from a country far remote, a guest
    To all who in Phaeacia dwell, unknown.
      To whom the Goddess of the azure-eyes.
    The mansion of thy search, stranger revered!
    Myself will shew thee; for not distant dwells
    Alcinoues from my father's own abode:
    But hush! be silent--I will lead the way;
    Mark no man; question no man; for the sight
    Of strangers is unusual here, and cold                            40
    The welcome by this people shown to such.
    They, trusting in swift ships, by the free grant
    Of Neptune traverse his wide waters, borne
    As if on wings, or with the speed of thought.
      So spake the Goddess, and with nimble pace
    Led on, whose footsteps he, as quick, pursued.
    But still the seaman-throng through whom he pass'd
    Perceiv'd him not; Minerva, Goddess dread,
    That sight forbidding them, whose eyes she dimm'd
    With darkness shed miraculous around                              50
    Her fav'rite Chief. Ulysses, wond'ring, mark'd
    Their port, their ships, their forum, the resort
    Of Heroes, and their battlements sublime
    Fenced with sharp stakes around, a glorious show!
    But when the King's august abode he reach'd,
    Minerva azure-eyed, then, thus began.
      My father! thou behold'st the house to which
    Thou bad'st me lead thee. Thou shalt find our Chiefs
    And high-born Princes banqueting within.
    But enter fearing nought, for boldest men                         60
    Speed ever best, come whencesoe'er they may.
    First thou shalt find the Queen, known by her name
    Areta; lineal in descent from those
    Who gave Alcinoues birth, her royal spouse.
    Neptune begat Nausithoues, at the first,
    On Peribaea, loveliest of her sex,
    Latest-born daughter of Eurymedon,
    Heroic King of the proud giant race,
    Who, losing all his impious people, shared
    The same dread fate himself. Her Neptune lov'd,                   70
    To whom she bore a son, the mighty prince
    Nausithoues, in his day King of the land.
    Nausithoues himself two sons begat,
    Rhexenor and Alcinoues. Phoebus slew
    Rhexenor at his home, a bridegroom yet,
    Who, father of no son, one daughter left,
    Areta, wedded to Alcinoues now,
    And whom the Sov'reign in such honour holds,
    As woman none enjoys of all on earth
    Existing, subjects of an husband's pow'r.                         80
    Like veneration she from all receives
    Unfeign'd, from her own children, from himself
    Alcinoues, and from all Phaeacia's race,
    Who, gazing on her as she were divine,
    Shout when she moves in progress through the town.
    For she no wisdom wants, but sits, herself,
    Arbitress of such contests as arise
    Between her fav'rites, and decides aright.
    Her count'nance once and her kind aid secured,
    Thou may'st thenceforth expect thy friends to see,                90
    Thy dwelling, and thy native soil again.
      So Pallas spake, Goddess caerulean-eyed,
    And o'er the untillable and barren Deep
    Departing, Scheria left, land of delight,
    Whence reaching Marathon, and Athens next,
    She pass'd into Erectheus' fair abode.
    Ulysses, then, toward the palace moved
    Of King Alcinoues, but immers'd in thought
    Stood, first, and paused, ere with his foot he press'd
    The brazen threshold; for a light he saw                         100
    As of the sun or moon illuming clear
    The palace of Phaeacia's mighty King.
    Walls plated bright with brass, on either side
    Stretch'd from the portal to th' interior house,
    With azure cornice crown'd; the doors were gold
    Which shut the palace fast; silver the posts
    Rear'd on a brazen threshold, and above,
    The lintels, silver, architraved with gold.
    Mastiffs, in gold and silver, lined the approach
    On either side, by art celestial framed                          110
    Of Vulcan, guardians of Alcinoues' gate
    For ever, unobnoxious to decay.
    Sheer from the threshold to the inner house
    Fixt thrones the walls, through all their length, adorn'd,
    With mantles overspread of subtlest warp
    Transparent, work of many a female hand.
    On these the princes of Phaeacia sat,
    Holding perpetual feasts, while golden youths
    On all the sumptuous altars stood, their hands
    With burning torches charged, which, night by night,             120
    Shed radiance over all the festive throng.
    Full fifty female menials serv'd the King
    In household offices; the rapid mills
    These turning, pulverize the mellow'd grain,
    Those, seated orderly, the purple fleece
    Wind off, or ply the loom, restless as leaves
    Of lofty poplars fluttering in the breeze;
    Bright as with oil the new-wrought texture shone.[25]
    Far as Phaeacian mariners all else
    Surpass, the swift ship urging through the floods,               130
    So far in tissue-work the women pass
    All others, by Minerva's self endow'd
    With richest fancy and superior skill.
    Without the court, and to the gates adjoin'd
    A spacious garden lay, fenced all around
    Secure, four acres measuring complete.
    There grew luxuriant many a lofty tree,
    Pomegranate, pear, the apple blushing bright,
    The honied fig, and unctuous olive smooth.
    Those fruits, nor winter's cold nor summer's heat                140
    Fear ever, fail not, wither not, but hang
    Perennial, whose unceasing zephyr breathes
    Gently on all, enlarging these, and those
    Maturing genial; in an endless course
    Pears after pears to full dimensions swell,
    Figs follow figs, grapes clust'ring grow again
    Where clusters grew, and (ev'ry apple stript)
    The boughs soon tempt the gath'rer as before.
    There too, well-rooted, and of fruit profuse,
    His vineyard grows; part, wide-extended, basks,                  150
    In the sun's beams; the arid level glows;
    In part they gather, and in part they tread
    The wine-press, while, before the eye, the grapes
    Here put their blossom forth, there, gather fast
    Their blackness. On the garden's verge extreme
    Flow'rs of all hues smile all the year, arranged
    With neatest art judicious, and amid
    The lovely scene two fountains welling forth,
    One visits, into ev'ry part diffus'd,
    The garden-ground, the other soft beneath                        160
    The threshold steals into the palace-court,
    Whence ev'ry citizen his vase supplies.
      Such were the ample blessings on the house
    Of King Alcinoues by the Gods bestow'd.
      Ulysses wond'ring stood, and when, at length,
    Silent he had the whole fair scene admired,
    With rapid step enter'd the royal gate.
    The Chiefs he found and Senators within
    Libation pouring to the vigilant spy
    Mercurius, whom with wine they worshipp'd last                   170
    Of all the Gods, and at the hour of rest.
    Ulysses, toil-worn Hero, through the house
    Pass'd undelaying, by Minerva thick
    With darkness circumfus'd, till he arrived
    Where King Alcinoues and Areta sat.
    Around Areta's knees his arms he cast,
    And, in that moment, broken clear away
    The cloud all went, shed on him from above.
    Dumb sat the guests, seeing the unknown Chief,
    And wond'ring gazed. He thus his suit preferr'd.                 180
      Areta, daughter of the Godlike Prince
    Rhexenor! suppliant at thy knees I fall,
    Thy royal spouse imploring, and thyself,
    (After ten thousand toils) and these your guests,
    To whom heav'n grant felicity, and to leave
    Their treasures to their babes, with all the rights
    And honours, by the people's suffrage, theirs!
    But oh vouchsafe me, who have wanted long
    And ardent wish'd my home, without delay
    Safe conduct to my native shores again!                          190
      Such suit he made, and in the ashes sat
    At the hearth-side; they mute long time remain'd,
    Till, at the last, the antient Hero spake
    Echeneus, eldest of Phaeacia's sons,
    With eloquence beyond the rest endow'd,
    Rich in traditionary lore, and wise
    In all, who thus, benevolent, began.
      Not honourable to thyself, O King!
    Is such a sight, a stranger on the ground
    At the hearth-side seated, and in the dust.                      200
    Meantime, thy guests, expecting thy command,
    Move not; thou therefore raising by his hand
    The stranger, lead him to a throne, and bid
    The heralds mingle wine, that we may pour
    To thunder-bearing Jove, the suppliant's friend.
    Then let the cat'ress for thy guest produce
    Supply, a supper from the last regale.
      Soon as those words Alcinoues heard, the King,
    Upraising by his hand the prudent Chief
    Ulysses from the hearth, he made him sit,                        210
    On a bright throne, displacing for his sake
    Laodamas his son, the virtuous youth
    Who sat beside him, and whom most he lov'd.
    And now, a maiden charg'd with golden ew'r
    And with an argent laver, pouring, first,
    Pure water on his hands, supply'd him, next,
    With a resplendent table, which the chaste
    Directress of the stores furnish'd with bread
    And dainties, remnants of the last regale.
    Then ate the Hero toil-inured, and drank,                        220
    And to his herald thus Alcinoues spake.
      Pontonoues! mingling wine, bear it around
    To ev'ry guest in turn, that we may pour
    To thunder-bearer Jove, the stranger's friend,
    And guardian of the suppliant's sacred rights.
      He said; Pontonoues, as he bade, the wine
    Mingled delicious, and the cups dispensed
    With distribution regular to all.
    When each had made libation, and had drunk
    Sufficient, then, Alcinoues thus began.                           230
      Phaeacian Chiefs and Senators, I speak
    The dictates of my mind, therefore attend!
    Ye all have feasted--To your homes and sleep.
    We will assemble at the dawn of day
    More senior Chiefs, that we may entertain
    The stranger here, and to the Gods perform
    Due sacrifice; the convoy that he asks
    Shall next engage our thoughts, that free from pain
    And from vexation, by our friendly aid
    He may revisit, joyful and with speed,                           240
    His native shore, however far remote.
    No inconvenience let him feel or harm,
    Ere his arrival; but, arrived, thenceforth
    He must endure whatever lot the Fates
    Spun for him in the moment of his birth.
    But should he prove some Deity from heav'n
    Descended, then the Immortals have in view
    Designs not yet apparent; for the Gods
    Have ever from of old reveal'd themselves
    At our solemnities, have on our seats                            250
    Sat with us evident, and shared the feast;
    And even if a single traveller
    Of the Phaeacians meet them, all reserve
    They lay aside; for with the Gods we boast
    As near affinity as do themselves
    The Cyclops, or the Giant race profane.[26]
      To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    Alcinoues! think not so. Resemblance none
    In figure or in lineaments I bear
    To the immortal tenants of the skies,                            260
    But to the sons of earth; if ye have known
    A man afflicted with a weight of woe
    Peculiar, let me be with him compared;
    Woes even passing his could I relate,
    And all inflicted on me by the Gods.
    But let me eat, comfortless as I am,
    Uninterrupted; for no call is loud
    As that of hunger in the ears of man;
    Importunate, unreas'nable, it constrains
    His notice, more than all his woes beside.                       270
    So, I much sorrow feel, yet not the less
    Hear I the blatant appetite demand
    Due sustenance, and with a voice that drowns
    E'en all my suff'rings, till itself be fill'd.
    But expedite ye at the dawn of day
    My safe return into my native land,
    After much mis'ry; and let life itself
    Forsake me, may I but once more behold
    All that is mine, in my own lofty abode.
      He spake, whom all applauded, and advised,                     280
    Unanimous, the guest's conveyance home,
    Who had so fitly spoken. When, at length,
    All had libation made, and were sufficed,
    Departing to his house, each sought repose.
    But still Ulysses in the hall remain'd,
    Where, godlike King, Alcinoues at his side
    Sat, and Areta; the attendants clear'd
    Meantime the board, and thus the Queen white-arm'd,
    (Marking the vest and mantle, which he wore
    And which her maidens and herself had made)                      290
    In accents wing'd with eager haste began.
      Stranger! the first enquiry shall be mine;
    Who art, and whence? From whom receiv'dst thou these?
    Saidst not--I came a wand'rer o'er the Deep?
      To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    Oh Queen! the task were difficult to unfold
    In all its length the story of my woes,
    For I have num'rous from the Gods receiv'd;
    But I will answer thee as best I may.
    There is a certain isle, Ogygia, placed                          300
    Far distant in the Deep; there dwells, by man
    Alike unvisited, and by the Gods,
    Calypso, beauteous nymph, but deeply skill'd
    In artifice, and terrible in pow'r,
    Daughter of Atlas. Me alone my fate
    Her miserable inmate made, when Jove
    Had riv'n asunder with his candent bolt
    My bark in the mid-sea. There perish'd all
    The valiant partners of my toils, and I
    My vessel's keel embracing day and night                         310
    With folded arms, nine days was borne along.
    But on the tenth dark night, as pleas'd the Gods,
    They drove me to Ogygia, where resides
    Calypso, beauteous nymph, dreadful in pow'r;
    She rescued, cherish'd, fed me, and her wish
    Was to confer on me immortal life,
    Exempt for ever from the sap of age.
    But me her offer'd boon sway'd not. Sev'n years
    I there abode continual, with my tears
    Bedewing ceaseless my ambrosial robes,                           320
    Calypso's gift divine; but when, at length,
    (Sev'n years elaps'd) the circling eighth arrived,
    She then, herself, my quick departure thence
    Advised, by Jove's own mandate overaw'd,
    Which even her had influenced to a change.
    On a well-corded raft she sent me forth
    With num'rous presents; bread she put and wine
    On board, and cloath'd me in immortal robes;
    She sent before me also a fair wind
    Fresh-blowing, but not dang'rous. Sev'nteen days                 330
    I sail'd the flood continual, and descried,
    On the eighteenth, your shadowy mountains tall
    When my exulting heart sprang at the sight,
    All wretched as I was, and still ordain'd
    To strive with difficulties many and hard
    From adverse Neptune; he the stormy winds
    Exciting opposite, my wat'ry way
    Impeded, and the waves heav'd to a bulk
    Immeasurable, such as robb'd me soon
    Deep-groaning, of the raft, my only hope;                        340
    For her the tempest scatter'd, and myself
    This ocean measur'd swimming, till the winds
    And mighty waters cast me on your shore.
    Me there emerging, the huge waves had dash'd
    Full on the land, where, incommodious most,
    The shore presented only roughest rocks,
    But, leaving it, I swam the Deep again,
    Till now, at last, a river's gentle stream
    Receiv'd me, by no rocks deform'd, and where
    No violent winds the shelter'd bank annoy'd.                     350
    I flung myself on shore, exhausted, weak,
    Needing repose; ambrosial night came on,
    When from the Jove-descended stream withdrawn,
    I in a thicket lay'd me down on leaves
    Which I had heap'd together, and the Gods
    O'erwhelm'd my eye-lids with a flood of sleep.
    There under wither'd leaves, forlorn, I slept
    All the long night, the morning and the noon,
    But balmy sleep, at the decline of day,
    Broke from me; then, your daughter's train I heard               360
    Sporting, with whom she also sported, fair
    And graceful as the Gods. To her I kneel'd.
    She, following the dictates of a mind
    Ingenuous, pass'd in her behaviour all
    Which even ye could from an age like hers
    Have hoped; for youth is ever indiscrete.
    She gave me plenteous food, with richest wine
    Refresh'd my spirit, taught me where to bathe,
    And cloath'd me as thou seest; thus, though a prey
    To many sorrows, I have told thee truth.                         370
      To whom Alcinoues answer thus return'd.
    My daughter's conduct, I perceive, hath been
    In this erroneous, that she led thee not
    Hither, at once, with her attendant train,
    For thy first suit was to herself alone.
      Thus then Ulysses, wary Chief, replied.
    Blame not, O Hero, for so slight a cause
    Thy faultless child; she bade me follow them,
    But I refused, by fear and awe restrain'd,
    Lest thou should'st feel displeasure at that sight               380
    Thyself; for we are all, in ev'ry clime,
    Suspicious, and to worst constructions prone.
      So spake Ulysses, to whom thus the King.
    I bear not, stranger! in my breast an heart
    Causeless irascible; for at all times
    A temp'rate equanimity is best.
    And oh, I would to heav'n, that, being such
    As now thou art, and of one mind with me,
    Thou would'st accept my daughter, would'st become
    My son-in-law, and dwell contented here!                         390
    House would I give thee, and possessions too,
    Were such thy choice; else, if thou chuse it not,
    No man in all Phaeacia shall by force
    Detain thee. Jupiter himself forbid!
    For proof, I will appoint thee convoy hence
    To-morrow; and while thou by sleep subdued
    Shalt on thy bed repose, they with their oars
    Shall brush the placid flood, till thou arrive
    At home, or at what place soe'er thou would'st,
    Though far more distant than Euboea lies,                        400
    Remotest isle from us, by the report
    Of ours, who saw it when they thither bore
    Golden-hair'd Rhadamanthus o'er the Deep,
    To visit earth-born Tityus. To that isle
    They went; they reach'd it, and they brought him thence
    Back to Phaeacia, in one day, with ease.
    Thou also shalt be taught what ships I boast
    Unmatch'd in swiftness, and how far my crews
    Excel, upturning with their oars the brine.
      He ceas'd; Ulysses toil-inur'd his words                       410
    Exulting heard, and, praying, thus replied.
      Eternal Father! may the King perform
    His whole kind promise! grant him in all lands
    A never-dying name, and grant to me
    To visit safe my native shores again!
      Thus they conferr'd; and now Areta bade
    Her fair attendants dress a fleecy couch
    Under the portico, with purple rugs
    Resplendent, and with arras spread beneath,
    And over all with cloaks of shaggy pile.                         420
    Forth went the maidens, bearing each a torch,
    And, as she bade, prepared in haste a couch
    Of depth commodious, then, returning, gave
    Ulysses welcome summons to repose.
      Stranger! thy couch is spread. Hence to thy rest.
    So they--Thrice grateful to his soul the thought
    Seem'd of repose. There slept Ulysses, then,
    On his carv'd couch, beneath the portico,
    But in the inner-house Alcinoues found
    His place of rest, and hers with royal state                     430
    Prepared, the Queen his consort, at his side.


FOOTNOTES:

[25]
    +Kairoseon d' othoneon apoleibetai hygron elaion+.

Pope has given no translation of this line in the text of his work, but
has translated it in a note. It is variously interpreted by commentators;
the sense which is here given of it is that recommended by Eustathius.

[26] The Scholiast explains the passage thus--We resemble the Gods in
righteousness as much as the Cyclops and Giants resembled each other in
impiety. But in this sense of it there is something intricate and
contrary to Homer's manner. We have seen that they derived themselves
from Neptune, which sufficiently justifies the above interpretation.




BOOK VIII

ARGUMENT

The Phaeacians consult on the subject of Ulysses. Preparation is made for
his departure. Antinoues entertains them at his table. Games follow the
entertainment. Demodocus the bard sings, first the loves of Mars and
Venus, then the introduction of the wooden horse into Troy. Ulysses, much
affected by his song, is questioned by Alcinoues, whence, and who he is,
and what is the cause of his sorrow.


    But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Blush'd in the East, then from his bed arose
    The sacred might of the Phaeacian King.
    Then uprose also, city-waster Chief,
    Ulysses, whom the King Alcinoues
    Led forth to council at the ships convened.
    There, side by side, on polish'd stones they sat
    Frequent; meantime, Minerva in the form
    Of King Alcinoues' herald ranged the town,
    With purpose to accelerate the return                             10
    Of brave Ulysses to his native home,
    And thus to ev'ry Chief the Goddess spake.
      Phaeacian Chiefs and Senators, away!
    Haste all to council on the stranger held,
    Who hath of late beneath Alcinoues' roof
    Our King arrived, a wand'rer o'er the Deep,
    But, in his form, majestic as a God.
      So saying, she roused the people, and at once
    The seats of all the senate-court were fill'd
    With fast-assembling throngs, no few of whom                      20
    Had mark'd Ulysses with admiring eyes.
    Then, Pallas o'er his head and shoulders broad
    Diffusing grace celestial, his whole form
    Dilated, and to the statelier height advanced,
    That worthier of all rev'rence he might seem
    To the Phaeacians, and might many a feat
    Atchieve, with which they should assay his force.
      When, therefore, the assembly now was full,
    Alcinoues, them addressing, thus began.
      Phaeacian Chiefs and Senators! I speak                           30
    The dictates of my mind, therefore attend.
    This guest, unknown to me, hath, wand'ring, found
    My palace, either from the East arrived,
    Or from some nation on our western side.
    Safe conduct home he asks, and our consent
    Here wishes ratified, whose quick return
    Be it our part, as usual, to promote;
    For at no time the stranger, from what coast
    Soe'er, who hath resorted to our doors,
    Hath long complain'd of his detention here.                       40
    Haste--draw ye down into the sacred Deep
    A vessel of prime speed, and, from among
    The people, fifty and two youths select,
    Approved the best; then, lashing fast the oars,
    Leave her, that at my palace ye may make
    Short feast, for which myself will all provide.
    Thus I enjoin the crew; but as for those
    Of sceptred rank, I bid them all alike
    To my own board, that here we may regale
    The stranger nobly, and let none refuse.                          50
    Call, too, Demodocus, the bard divine,
    To share my banquet, whom the Gods have blest
    With pow'rs of song delectable, unmatch'd
    By any, when his genius once is fired.
      He ceas'd, and led the way, whom follow'd all
    The sceptred senators, while to the house
    An herald hasted of the bard divine.
    Then, fifty mariners and two, from all
    The rest selected, to the coast repair'd,
    And, from her station on the sea-bank, launched                   60
    The galley down into the sacred Deep.
    They placed the canvas and the mast on board,
    Arranged the oars, unfurl'd the shining sail,
    And, leaving her in depth of water moor'd,
    All sought the palace of Alcinoues.
    There, soon, the portico, the court, the hall
    Were fill'd with multitudes of young and old,
    For whose regale the mighty monarch slew
    Two beeves, twelve sheep, and twice four fatted brawns.
    They slay'd them first, then busily their task                    70
    Administ'ring, prepared the joyous feast.
    And now the herald came, leading with care
    The tuneful bard; dear to the muse was he,
    Who yet appointed him both good and ill;
    Took from him sight, but gave him strains divine.
    For him, Pontonoues in the midst disposed
    An argent-studded throne, thrusting it close
    To a tall column, where he hung his lyre
    Above his head, and taught him where it hung.
