and folk say that it DID bubble and sparkle like a seething cauldron. He
flung the cup at Dougal's head, and said he had given him blood instead
of burgundy; and, sure aneugh, the lass washed clotted blood aff the
carpet; the neist day. The jackanape they caa'd Major Weir, it jibbered
and cried as if it was mocking its master; my gudesire's head was like
to turn--he forgot baith siller and receipt, and downstairs he
banged; but as he ran, the shrieks came faint and fainter; there was a
deep-drawn shivering groan, and word gaed through the castle that the
laird was dead.

Weel, away came my gudesire, wi' his finger in his mouth, and his best
hope was that Dougal had seen the money-bag, and heard the laird
speak of writing the receipt. The young laird, now Sir John, came from
Edinburgh, to see things put to rights. Sir John and his father never
gree'd weel. Sir John had been bred an advocate, and afterwards sat in
the last Scots Parliament and voted for the Union, having gotten, it was
thought, a rug of the compensations--if his father could have come out
of his grave, he would have brained him for it on his awn hearthstane.
Some thought it was easier counting with the auld rough knight than the
fair-spoken young ane--but mair of that anon.

Dougal MacCallum, poor body, neither grat nor grained, but gaed about
the house looking like a corpse, but directing, as was his duty, a'
the order of the grand funeral. Now Dougal looked ay waur and waur when
night was coming, and was ay the last to gang to his bed, whilk was in
a little round just opposite the chamber of dais, whilk his master
occupied while he was living, and where he now lay in state, as they
caa'd it, weel-a-day! The night before the funeral, Dougal could keep
his awn counsel nae langer; he came doun with his proud spirit, and
fairly asked auld Hutcheon to sit in his room with him for an hour. When
they were in the round, Dougal took ae tass of brandy to himsell, and
gave another to Hutcheon, and wished him all health and lang life, and
said that, for himsell, he wasna lang for this world; for that, every
night since Sir Robert's death, his silver call had sounded from the
state chamber, just as it used to do at nights in his lifetime, to call
Dougal to help to turn him in his bed. Dougal said that being alone
with the dead on that floor of the tower (for naebody cared to wake Sir
Robert Redgauntlet like another corpse) he had never daured to answer
the call, but that now his conscience checked him for neglecting his
duty; for, 'though death breaks service,' said MacCallum, 'it shall
never break my service to Sir Robert; and I will answer his next
whistle, so be you will stand by me, Hutcheon.'

Hutcheon had nae will to the wark, but he had stood by Dougal in battle
and broil, and he wad not fail him at this pinch; so down the carles
sat ower a stoup of brandy, and Hutcheon, who was something of a clerk,
would have read a chapter of the Bible; but Dougal would hear naething
but a blaud of Davie Lindsay, whilk was the waur preparation.

When midnight came, and the house was quiet as the grave, sure enough
the silver whistle sounded as sharp and shrill as if Sir Robert was
blowing it, and up got the twa auld serving-men, and tottered into the
room where the dead man lay. Hutcheon saw aneugh at the first glance;
for there were torches in the room, which showed him the foul fiend, in
his ain shape, sitting on the laird's coffin! Ower he cowped as if he
had been dead. He could not tell how lang he lay in a trance at the
door, but when he gathered himself, he cried on his neighbour, and
getting nae answer, raised the house, when Dougal was found lying dead
within twa steps of the bed where his master's coffin was placed. As for
the whistle, it was gaen anes and ay; but mony a time was it heard at
the top of the house on the bartizan, and amang the auld chimneys and
turrets where the howlets have their nests. Sir John hushed the matter
up, and the funeral passed over without mair bogle-wark.

But when a' was ower, and the laird was beginning to settle his affairs,
every tenant was called up for his arrears, and my gudesire for the full
sum that stood against him in the rental-book. Weel, away he trots to
the castle, to tell his story, and there he is introduced to Sir John,
sitting in his father's chair, in deep mourning, with weepers and
hanging cravat, and a small wallring rapier by his side, instead of the
auld broadsword that had a hundredweight of steel about it, what with
blade, chape, and basket-hilt. I have heard their communing so often
tauld ower, that I almost think I was there mysell, though I couldna
be born at the time. (In fact, Alan, my companion mimicked, with a
good deal of humour, the flattering, conciliating tone of the tenant's
address, and the hypocritical melancholy of the laird's reply. His
grandfather, he said, had, while he spoke, his eye fixed on the
rental-book, as if it were a mastiff-dog that he was afraid would spring
up and bite him).

'I wuss ye joy, sir, of the head seat, and the white loaf, and the braid
lairdship. Your father was a kind man to friends and followers; muckle
grace to you, Sir John, to fill his shoon--his boots, I suld say, for he
seldom wore shoon, unless it were muils when he had the gout.'

'Aye, Steenie,' quoth the laird, sighing deeply, and putting his
napkin to his een, 'his was a sudden call, and he will be missed in the
country; no time to set his house in order--weel prepared Godward, no
doubt, which is the root of the matter--but left us behind a tangled
heap to wind, Steenie.--Hem! hem! We maun go to business, Steenie; much
to do, and little time to do it in.'

Here he opened the fatal volume. I have heard of a thing they call
Doomsday Book--I am clear it has been a rental of back-ganging tenants.

'Stephen,' said Sir John, still in the same soft, sleekit tone of
voice--'Stephen Stevenson, or Steenson, ye are down here for a year's
rent behind the hand--due at last term.'

STEPHEN. 'Please your honour, Sir John, I paid it to your father.'

SIR JOHN. 'Ye took a receipt, then, doubtless, Stephen; and can produce
it?'

STEPHEN. 'Indeed I hadna time, an it like your honour; for nae sooner
had I set doun the siller, and just as his honour, Sir Robert, that's
gaen, drew it till him to count it, and write out the receipt, he was
ta'en wi' the pains that removed him.'

'That was unlucky,' said Sir John, after a pause. 'But ye maybe paid
it in the presence of somebody, I want but a TALIS QUALIS evidence,
Stephen. I would go ower strictly to work with no poor man.'

STEPHEN. 'Troth, Sir John, there was naebody in the room but Dougal
MacCallum the butler. But, as your honour kens, he has e'en followed his
auld master.

'Very unlucky again, Stephen,' said Sir John, without altering his voice
a single note. 'The man to whom ye paid the money is dead--and the man
who witnessed the payment is dead too--and the siller, which should have
been to the fore, is neither seen nor heard tell of in the repositories.
How am I to believe a' this?'

STEPHEN. 'I dinna, ken, your honour; but there is a bit memorandum
note of the very coins; for, God help me! I had to borrow out of twenty
purses; and I am sure that ilka man there set down will take his grit
oath for what purpose I borrowed the money.'

SIR JOHN. 'I have little doubt ye BORROWED the money, Steenie. It is the
PAYMENT to my father that I want to have some proof of.'

STEPHEN. 'The siller maun be about the house, Sir John. And since your
honour never got it, and his honour that was canna have taen it wi' him,
maybe some of the family may have seen it.'

SIR JOHN. 'We will examine the servants, Stephen; that is but
reasonable.'

But lackey and lass, and page and groom, all denied stoutly that they
had ever seen such a bag of money as my gudesire described. What was
waur, he had unluckily not mentioned to any living soul of them his
purpose of paying his rent. Ae quean had noticed something under his
arm, but she took it for the pipes.

Sir John Redgauntlet ordered the servants out of the room, and then said
to my gudesire, 'Now, Steenie, ye see ye have fair play; and, as I have
little doubt ye ken better where to find the siller than ony other body,
I beg, in fair terms, and for your own sake, that you will end this
fasherie; for, Stephen, ye maun pay or flit.'

'The Lord forgie your opinion,' said Stephen, driven almost to his wit's
end--'I am an honest man.'

'So am I, Stephen,' said his honour; 'and so are all the folks in the
house, I hope. But if there be a knave amongst us, it must be he that
tells the story he cannot prove.' He paused, and then added, mair
sternly, 'If I understand your trick, sir, you want to take advantage
of some malicious reports concerning things in this family, and
particularly respecting my father's sudden death, thereby to cheat me
out of the money, and perhaps take away my character, by insinuating
that I have received the rent I am demanding. Where do you suppose this
money to be? I insist upon knowing.'

My gudesire saw everything look so muckle against him, that he grew
nearly desperate--however, he shifted from one foot to another, looked
to every corner of the room, and made no answer.

'Speak out, sirrah,' said the laird, assuming a look of his father's, a
very particular ane, which he had when he was angry--it seemed as if the
wrinkles of his frown made that selfsame fearful shape of a horse's
shoe in the middle of his brow;--'Speak out, sir! I WILL know your
thoughts;--do you suppose that I have this money?'

'Far be it frae me to say so,' said Stephen.

'Do you charge any of my people with having taken it?'

'I wad be laith to charge them that may be innocent,' said my gudesire;
'and if there be any one that is guilty, I have nae proof.'

'Somewhere the money must be, if there is a word of truth in your
story,' said Sir John; 'I ask where you think it is--and demand a
correct answer?'

'In HELL, if you will have my thoughts of it,' said my gudesire, driven
to extremity, 'in hell! with your father, his jackanape, and his silver
whistle.'

Down the stairs he ran (for the parlour was nae place for him after such
a word) and he heard the laird swearing blood and wounds behind him,
as fast; as ever did Sir Robert, and roaring for the bailie and the
baron-officer.

Away rode my gudesire to his chief creditor (him they ca'd Laurie
Lapraik) to try if he could make onything out of him; but when he tauld
his story, he got but the worst word in his wame--thief, beggar, and
dyvour, were the saftest terms; and to the boot of these hard terms,
Laurie brought up the auld story of his dipping his hand in the blood
of God's saunts, just as if a tenant could have helped riding with the
laird, and that a laird like Sir Robert Redgauntlet. My gudesire was, by
this time, far beyond the bounds of patience, and, while he and
Laurie were at deil speed the liars, he was wanchancie aneugh to abuse
Lapraik's doctrine as weel as the man, ond said things that garr'd
folks' flesh grue that heard them;--he wasna just himsell, and he had
lived wi' a wild set in his day.

At last they parted, and my gudesire was to ride hame through the wood
of Pitmurkie, that is a' fou of black firs, as they say.--I ken the
wood, but the firs may be black or white for what I can tell.--At the
entry of the wood there is a wild common, and on the edge of the common,
a little lonely change-house, that was keepit then by an ostler-wife,
they suld hae caa'd her Tibbie Faw, and there puir Steenie cried for a
mutchkin of brandy, for he had had no refreshment the haill day. Tibbie
was earnest wi' him to take a bite of meat, but he couldna think o't,
nor would he take his foot out of the stirrup, and took off the brandy
wholely at twa draughts, and named a toast at each:--the first was the
memory of Sir Robert Redgauntlet, and might he never lie quiet in his
grave till he had righted his poor bond-tenant; and the second was a
health to Man's Enemy, if he would but get him back the pock of siller
or tell him what came o't, for he saw the haill world was like to regard
him as a thief and a cheat, and he took that waur than even the ruin of
his house and hauld.

On he rode, little caring where. It was a dark night turned, and the
trees made it yet darker, and he let the beast take its ain road through
the wood; when all of a sudden, from tired and wearied that it was
before, the nag began to spring and flee, and stend, that my gudesire
could hardly keep the saddle. Upon the whilk, a horseman, suddenly
riding up beside him, said, 'That's a mettle beast of yours, freend;
will you sell him?' So saying, he touched the horse's neck with his
riding-wand, and it fell into its auld heigh-ho of a stumbling trot.
'But his spunk's soon out of him, I think,' continued the stranger, 'and
that is like mony a man's courage, that thinks he wad do great things
till he come to the proof.'

My gudesire scarce listened to this, but spurred his horse, with 'Gude
e'en to you, freend.'

But it's like the stranger was ane that doesna lightly yield his point;
for, ride as Steenie liked, he was ay beside him at the selfsame pace.
At last my gudesire, Steenie Steenson, grew half angry, and, to say the
truth, half feared.

'What is it that ye want with me, freend?' he said. 'If ye be a robber,
I have nae money; if ye be a leal man, wanting company, I have nae heart
to mirth or speaking; and if ye want to ken the road, I scarce ken it
mysell.'

'If you will tell me your grief,' said the stranger, 'I am one that,
though I have been sair miscaa'd in the world, am the only hand for
helping my freends.'

So my gudesire, to ease his ain heart, mair than from any hope of help,
told him the story from beginning to end.

'It's a hard pinch,' said the stranger; 'but I think I can help you.'

'If you could lend the money, sir, and take a lang day--I ken nae other
help on earth,' said my gudesire.

'But there may be some under the earth,' said the stranger. 'Come, I'll
be frank wi' you; I could lend you the money on bond, but you would
maybe scruple my terms. Now, I can tell you, that your auld laird is
disturbed in his grave by your curses, and the wailing of your family,
and if ye daur venture to go to see him, he will give you the receipt.'

My gudesire's hair stood on end at this proposal, but he thought his
companion might be some humoursome chield that was trying to frighten
him, and might end with lending him the money. Besides, he was bauld wi'
brandy, and desperate wi' distress; and he said he had courage to go
to the gate of hell, and a step farther, for that receipt. The stranger
laughed.

Weel, they rode on through the thickest of the wood, when, all of a
sudden, the horse stopped at the door of a great house; and, but that he
knew the place was ten miles off, my father would have thought he was
at Redgauntlet Castle. They rode into the outer courtyard, through the
muckle faulding yetts and aneath the auld portcullis; and the whole
front of the house was lighted, and there were pipes and fiddles, and
as much dancing and deray within as used to be at Sir Robert's house at
Pace and Yule, and such high seasons. They lap off, and my gudesire, as
seemed to him, fastened his horse to the very ring he had tied him to
that morning, when he gaed to wait on the young Sir John.

'God!' said my gudesire, 'if Sir Robert's death be but a dream!'

He knocked at the ha' door just as he was wont, and his auld
acquaintance, Dougal MacCallum--just after his wont, too,--came to open
the door, and said, 'Piper Steenie, are ye there, lad? Sir Robert has
been crying for you.'

My gudesire was like a man in a dream--he looked for the stranger, but
he was gane for the time. At last he just tried to say, 'Ha! Dougal
Driveower, are ye living? I thought ye had been dead.'

'Never fash yoursell wi' me,' said Dougal, 'but look to yoursell; and
see ye tak naethlng frae ony body here, neither meat, drink, or siller,
except just the receipt that is your ain.'

So saying, he led the way out through halls and trances that were weel
kend to my gudesire, and into the auld oak parlour; and there was as
much singing of profane sangs, and birling of red wine, and speaking
blasphemy and sculduddry, as had ever been in Redgauntlet Castle when it
was at the blithest.

But, Lord take us in keeping, what a set of ghastly revellers they were
that sat around that table! My gudesire kend mony that had long before
gane to their place, for often had he piped to the most part in the
hall of Redgauntlet. There was the fierce Middleton, and the dissolute
Rothes, and the crafty Lauderdale; and Dalyell, with his bald head and
a beard to his girdle; and Earlshall, with Cameron's blude on his hand;
and wild Bonshaw, that tied blessed Mr. Cargill's limbs till the blude
sprung; and Dunbarton Douglas, the twice-turned traitor baith to country
and king. There was the Bluidy Advocate MacKenyie, who, for his worldly
wit and wisdom had been to the rest as a god. And there was Claverhouse,
as beautiful as when he lived, with his long, dark, curled locks
streaming down over his laced buff-coat, and his left hand always on his
right spule-blade, to hide the wound that the silver bullet had made.
[See Note 2.] He sat apart from them all, and looked at them with a
melancholy, haughty countenance; while the rest hallooed, and sang, and
laughed, that the room rang. But their smiles were fearfully contorted
from time to time; and their laugh passed into such wild sounds as made
my gudesire's very nails grow blue, and chilled the marrow in his banes.

They that waited at the table were just the wicked serving-men and
troopers, that had done their work and cruel bidding on earth. There
was the Lang Lad of the Nethertown, that helped to take Argyle; and
the bishop's summoner, that they called the Deil's Rattle-bag; and the
wicked guardsmen in their laced coats; and the savage Highland Amorites,
that shed blood like water; and many a proud serving-man, haughty of
heart and bloody of hand, cringing to the rich, and making them wickeder
than they would be; grinding the poor to powder, when the rich had
broken them to fragments. And mony, mony mair were coming and ganging,
a' as busy in their vocation as if they had been alive.

Sir Robert Redgauntlet, in the midst of a' this fearful riot, cried, wi'
a voice like thunder, on Steenie Piper to come to the board-head where
he was sitting; his legs stretched out before him, and swathed up with
flannel, with his holster pistols aside him, while the great broadsword
rested against his chair, just as my gudesire had seen him the last time
upon earth--the very cushion for the jackanape was close to him, but the
creature itself was not there--it wasna its hour, it's likely; for he
heard them say as he came forward, 'Is not the major come yet?' And
another answered, 'The jackanape will be here betimes the morn.' And
when my gudesire came forward, Sir Robert, or his ghaist, or the deevil
in his likeness, said, 'Weel, piper, hae ye settled wi' my son for the
year's rent?'

With much ado my father gat breath to say that Sir John would not settle
without his honour's receipt.

'Ye shall hae that for a tune of the pipes, Steenie,' said the
appearance of Sir Robert--'Play us up "Weel hoddled, Luckie".'

Now this was a tune my gudesire learned frae a warlock, that heard it
when they were worshipping Satan at their meetings, and my gudesire had
sometimes played it at the ranting suppers in Redgauntlet Castle, but
never very willingly; and now he grew cauld at the very name of it, and
said, for excuse, he hadna his pipes wi' him.

'MacCallum, ye limb of Beelzebub,' said the fearfu' Sir Robert, 'bring
Steenie the pipes that I am keeping for him!'

MacCallum brought a pair of pipes might have served the piper of Donald
of the Isles. But he gave my gudesire a nudge as he offered them; and
looking secretly and closely, Steenie saw that the chanter was of steel,
and heated to a white heat; so he had fair warning not to trust his
fingers with it. So he excused himself again, and said he was faint and
frightened, and had not wind aneugh to fill the bag.

'Then ye maun eat and drink, Steenie,' said the figure; 'for we
do little else here; and it's ill speaking between a fou man and a
fasting.'

Now these were the very words that the bloody Earl of Douglas said to
keep the king's messenger in hand while he cut the head off MacLellan of
Bombie, at the Threave Castle, [The reader is referred for particulars
to Pitscottie's HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.] and that put Steenie mair and mair
on his guard. So he spoke up like a man, and said he came neither to
eat, or drink or make minstrelsy; but simply for his ain--to ken what
was come o' the money he had paid, and to get a discharge for it; and
he was so stout-hearted by this time that he charged Sir Robert for
conscience-sake (he had no power to say the holy name) and as he hoped
for peace and rest, to spread no snares for him, but just to give him
his ain.

The appearance gnashed its teeth and laughed, but it took from a large
pocket-book the receipt, and handed it to Steenie. 'There is your
receipt, ye pitiful cur; and for the money, my dog-whelp of a son may go
look for it in the Cat's Cradle.'

My gudesire uttered mony thanks, and was about to retire when Sir Robert
roared aloud, 'Stop, though, thou sack-doudling son of a whore! I am not
done with thee. HERE we do nothing for nothing; and you must return on
this very day twelvemonth, to pay your master the homage that you owe me
for my protection.'

My father's tongue was loosed of a suddenty, and he said aloud, 'I refer
mysell to God's pleasure, and not to yours.'

He had no sooner uttered the word than all was dark around him; and he
sank on the earth with such a sudden shock, that he lost both breath and
sense.

How lang Steenie lay there, he could not tell; but when he came to
himsell, he was lying in the auld kirkyard of Redgauntlet parochine just
at the door of the family aisle, and the scutcheon of the auld knight,
Sir Robert, hanging over his head. There was a deep morning fog on grass
and gravestane around him, and his horse was feeding quietly beside the
minister's twa cows. Steenie would have thought the whole was a dream,
but he had the receipt in his hand, fairly written and signed by the
auld laird; only the last letters of his name were a little disorderly,
written like one seized with sudden pain.

Sorely troubled in his mind, he left that dreary place, rode through
the mist to Redgauntlet Castle, and with much ado he got speech of the
laird.

'Well, you dyvour bankrupt,' was the first word, 'have you brought me my
rent?'

'No,' answered my gudesire, 'I have not; but I have brought your honour
Sir Robert's receipt for it.'

'Wow, sirrah? Sir Robert's receipt! You told me he had not given you
one.'

'Will your honour please to see if that bit line is right?'

Sir John looked at every line, and at every letter, with much attention;
and at last, at the date, which my gudesire had not observed,--'FROM MY
APPOINTED PLACE,' he read, 'THIS TWENTY-FIFTH OF NOVEMBER.'--'What!
That is yesterday!--Villain, thou must have gone to hell for this!'

'I got it from your honour's father--whether he be in heaven or hell, I
know not,' said Steenie.

'I will delate you for a warlock to the Privy Council!' said Sir
John. 'I will send you to your master, the devil, with the help of a
tar-barrel and a torch!'

'I intend to delate mysell to the Presbytery,' said Steenie, 'and tell
them all I have seen last night, whilk are things fitter for them to
judge of than a borrel man like me.'

Sir John paused, composed himsell, and desired to hear the full history;
and my gudesire told it him from point to point, as I have told it
you--word for word, neither more nor less.

Sir John was silent again for a long time, and at last he said, very
composedly, 'Steenie, this story of yours concerns the honour of many
a noble family besides mine; and if it be a leasing-making, to keep
yourself out of my danger, the least you can expect is to have a redhot
iron driven through your tongue, and that will be as bad as scauding
your fingers wi' a redhot chanter. But yet it may be true, Steenie; and
if the money cast up I shall not know what to think of it. But where
shall we find the Cat's Cradle? There are cats enough about the old
house, but I think they kitten without the ceremony of bed or cradle.'

'We were best ask Hutcheon,' said my gudesire; 'he kens a' the odd
corners about as weel as--another serving-man that is now gane, and that
I wad not like to name.'

Aweel, Hutcheon, when he was asked, told them, that a ruinous turret,
lang disused, next to the clock-house, only accessible by a ladder,
for the opening was on the outside, and far above the battlements, was
called of old the Cat's Cradle.

'There will I go immediately,' said Sir John; and he took (with what
purpose, Heaven kens) one of his father's pistols from the hall-table,
where they had lain since the night he died, and hastened to the
battlements.

It was a dangerous place to climb, for the ladder was auld and frail,
and wanted ane or twa rounds. However, up got Sir John, and entered at
the turret-door, where his body stopped the only little light that was
in the bit turret. Something flees at him wi' a vengeance, maist dang
him back ower--bang gaed the knight's pistol, and Hutcheon, that
held the ladder, and my gudesire that stood beside him, hears a loud
skelloch. A minute after, Sir John flings the body of the jackanape down
to them, and cries that the siller is fund, and that they should come up
and help him. And there was the bag of siller sure aneugh, and mony orra
thing besides, that had been missing for mony a day. And Sir John, when
he had riped the turret weel, led my gudesire into the dining-parlour,
and took him by the hand and spoke kindly to him, and said he was sorry
he should have doubted his word and that he would hereafter be a good
master to him to make amends.

'And now, Steenie,' said Sir John, 'although this vision of yours tend,
on the whole, to my father's credit, as an honest man, that he should,
even after his death, desire to see justice done to a poor man like
you, yet you are sensible that ill-dispositioned men might make bad
constructions upon it, concerning his soul's health. So, I think, we had
better lay the haill dirdum on that ill-deedie creature, Major Weir, and
say naething about your dream in the wood of Pitmurkie. You had taken
ower muckle brandy to be very certain about onything; and, Steenie, this
receipt' (his hand shook while he held it out),--'it's but a queer kind
of document, and we will do best, I think, to put it quietly in the
fire.'

'Od, but for as queer as it is, it's a' the voucher I have for my rent,'
said my gudesire, who was afraid, it may be, of losing the benefit of
Sir Robert's discharge.

'I will bear the contents to your credit in the rental-book, and give
you a discharge under my own hand,' said Sir John, 'and that on the
spot. And, Steenie, if you can hold your tongue about this matter, you
shall sit, from this term downward, at an easier rent.'

'Mony thanks to your honour,' said Steenie, who saw easily in what
corner the wind was; 'doubtless I will be comformable to all your
honour's commands; only I would willingly speak wi' some powerful
minister on the subject, for I do not like the sort of sommons of
appointment whilk your honour's father'--

'Do not call the phantom my father!' said Sir John, interrupting him.

'Weel, then, the thing that was so like him,' said my gudesire; 'he
spoke of my coming back to see him this time twelvemonth, and it's a
weight on my conscience.'

'Aweel, then,' said Sir John, 'if you be so much distressed in mind, you
may speak to our minister of the parish; he is a douce man, regards the
honour of our family, and the mair that he may look for some patronage
from me.'

Wi' that, my father readily agreed that the receipt should be burnt, and
the laird threw it into the chimney with his ain hand. Burn it would
not for them, though; but away it flew up the lum, wi' a lang train of
sparks at its tail, and a hissing noise like a squib.

My gudesire gaed down to the Manse, and the minister, when he had heard
the story, said it was his real opinion that though my gudesire had gaen
very far in tampering with dangerous matters, yet, as he had refused the
devil's arles (for such was the offer of meat and drink) and had refused
to do homage by piping at his bidding, he hoped, that if he held a
circumspect walk hereafter, Satan could take little advantage by what
was come and gane. And, indeed, my gudesire, of his ain accord, lang
foreswore baith the pipes and the brandy--it was not even till the
year was out, and the fatal day past, that he would so much as take the
fiddle, or drink usquebaugh or tippeny.

Sir John made up his story about the jackanape as he liked himsell;
and some believe till this day there was no more in the matter than the
filching nature of the brute. Indeed, ye'll no hinder some to threap
that it was nane o' the auld Enemy that Dougal and my gudesire saw in
the laird's room, but only that wanchancy creature, the major, capering
on the coffin; and that, as to the blawing on the laird's whistle that
was heard after he was dead, the filthy brute could do that as weel as
the laird himsell, if no better. But Heaven kens the truth, whilk first
came out by the minister's wife, after Sir John and her ain gudeman were
baith in the moulds. And then my gudesire, wha was failed in his limbs,
but not in his judgement or memory--at least nothing to speak of--was
obliged to tell the real narrative to his friends, for the credit of his
good name. He might else have been charged for a warlock. [See Note 3.]

The shades of evening were growing thicker around us as my conductor
finished his long narrative with this moral--'Ye see, birkie, it is nae
chancy thing to tak a stranger traveller for a guide, when you are in an
uncouth land.'

'I should not have made that inference,' said I. 'Your grandfather's
adventure was fortunate for himself, whom it saved from ruin and
distress; and fortunate for his landlord also, whom it prevented from
committing a gross act of injustice.'

'Aye, but they had baith to sup the sauce o't sooner or later,' said
Wandering Willie--'what was fristed wasna forgiven. Sir John died
before he was much over three-score; and it was just like of a moment's
illness. And for my gudesire, though he departed in fullness of life,
yet there was my father, a yauld man of forty-five, fell down betwixt
the stilts of his pleugh, and rase never again, and left nae bairn but
me, a puir sightless, fatherless, motherless creature, could neither
work nor want. Things gaed weel aneugh at first; for Sir Redwald
Redgauntlet, the only son of Sir John, and the oye of auld Sir Robert,
and, waes me! the last of the honourable house, took the farm aff our
hands, and brought me into his household to have care of me. He liked
music, and I had the best teachers baith England and Scotland could gie
me. Mony a merry year was I wi' him; but waes me! he gaed out with other
pretty men in the Forty-five--I'll say nae mair about it--My head never
settled weel since I lost him; and if I say another word about it, deil
a bar will I have the heart to play the night.--Look out, my gentle
chap,' he resumed in a different tone, 'ye should see the lights at
Brokenburn glen by this time.'




LETTER XII

THE SAME TO THE SAME

  Tam Luter was their minstrel meet,
    Gude Lord as he could lance,
  He play'd sae shrill, and sang sae sweet,
    Till Towsie took a trance.
  Auld Lightfoot there he did forleet,
    And counterfeited France;
  He used himself as man discreet,
    And up took Morrice danse sae loud,
  At Christ's Kirk on the Green that day.
                                     KING JAMES I.

I continue to scribble at length, though the subject may seem somewhat
deficient in interest. Let the grace of the narrative, therefore,
and the concern we take in each other's matters, make amends for its
tenuity. We fools of fancy who suffer ourselves, like Malvolio, to be
cheated with our own visions, have, nevertheless, this advantage over
the wise ones of the earth, that we have our whole stock of enjoyments
under our own command, and can dish for ourselves an intellectual
banquet with most moderate assistance from external objects. It is,
to be sure, something like the feast which the Barmecide served up to
Alnaschar; and we cannot expect to get fat upon such diet. But then,
neither is there repletion nor nausea, which often succeed the grosser
and more material revel. On the whole, I still pray, with the Ode to
Castle Building--

  Give me thy hope which sickens not the heart;
    Give me thy wealth which has no wings to fly;
  Give me the bliss thy visions can impart:
    Thy friendship give me, warm in poverty!

And so, despite thy solemn smile and sapient shake of the head, I will
go on picking such interest as I can out of my trivial adventures, even
though that interest should be the creation of my own fancy; nor will I
cease to indict on thy devoted eyes the labour of perusing the scrolls
in which I shall record my narrative.

My last broke off as we were on the point of descending into the glen
at Brokenburn, by the dangerous track which I had first travelled EN
CROUPE, behind a furious horseman, and was now again to brave under the
precarious guidance of a blind man.

It was now getting dark; but this was no inconvenience to my guide, who
moved on, as formerly, with instinctive security of step, so that we
soon reached the bottom, and I could see lights twinkling in the cottage
which had been my place of refuge on a former occasion. It was not
thither, however, that our course was directed. We left the habitation
of the laird to the left, and turning down the brook, soon approached
the small hamlet which had been erected at the mouth of the stream,
probably on account of the convenience which it afforded as a harbour
to the fishing-boats. A large, low cottage, full in our front, seemed
highly illuminated; for the light not only glanced from every window
and aperture in its frail walls, but was even visible from rents and
fractures in the roof, composed of tarred shingles, repaired in part by
thatch and divot.

While these appearances engaged my attention, that of my companion was
attracted by a regular succession of sounds, like a bouncing on the
floor, mixed with a very faint noise of music, which Willie's acute
organs at once recognized and accounted for, while to me it was almost
inaudible. The old man struck the earth with his staff in a violent
passion. 'The whoreson fisher rabble! They have brought another violer
upon my walk! They are such smuggling blackguards, that they must run
in their very music; but I'll sort them waur than ony gauger in the
country.--Stay--hark--it 's no a fiddle neither--it's the pipe and tabor
bastard, Simon of Sowport, frae the Nicol Forest; but I'll pipe and
tabor him!--Let me hae ance my left hand on his cravat, and ye shall see
what my right will do. Come away, chap--come away, gentle chap--nae time
