
     Strep. (turning to the audience) Bravo! Ye wretches, why
     do you sit senseless, the gain of us wise men, being
     blocks, ciphers, mere sheep, jars heaped together,
     wherefore I must sing an encomium upon myself and this
     my son, on account of our good fortune. "O happy
     Strepsiades! How wise you are yourself, and how
     excellent is the son whom you are rearing!" My friends
     and fellow-tribesmen will say of me, envying me, when
     you prove victorious in arguing causes. But first I wish
     to lead you in and entertain you.

     [Exeunt Strepsiades and Phidippides.]

     Pasias (entering with his summons-witness) Then, ought a
     man to throw away any part of his own property? Never!
     But it were better then at once to put away blushes,
     rather than now to have trouble; since I am now dragging
     you to be a witness, for the sake of my own money; and
     further, in addition to this, I shall become an enemy to
     my fellow-tribesman. But never, while I live, will I
     disgrace my country, but will summon Strepsiades.

     Strep. (from within) Who's there?

     Pas. For the Old and New.

     Strep. I call you to witness, that he has named it for
     two days. For what matter do you summon me?

     Pas. For the twelve minae, which you received when you
     were buying the dapple-gray horse.

     Strep. A horse? Do you not hear? I, whom you all know to
     hate horsemanship!

     Pas. And, by Jupiter! You swore by the gods too, that
     you would repay it.

     Strep. Ay, by Jove! For then my Phidippides did not yet
     know the irrefragable argument.

     Pas. And do you now intend, on this account, to deny the
     debt?

     Strep. Why, what good should I get else from his
     instruction?

     Pas. And will you be willing to deny these upon oath of
     the gods?

     Strep. What gods?

     Pas. Jupiter, Mercury, and Neptune.

     Strep. Yes, by Jupiter! And would pay down, too, a
     three-obol piece besides to swear.

     Pas. Then may you perish some day for your impudence!

     Strep. This man would be the better for it if he were
     cleansed by rubbing with salt.

     Pas. Ah me, how you deride me!

     Strep. He will contain six choae.

      Pas. By great Jupiter and the gods, you certainly shall
     not do this to me with impunity!

     Strep. I like your gods amazingly; and Jupiter, sworn
     by, is ridiculous to the knowing ones.

      Pas. You will assuredly suffer punishment, some time or
     other, for this. But answer and dismiss me, whether you
     are going to repay me my money or not.

     Strep. Keep quiet now, for I will presently answer you
     distinctly.

     [Runs into the house.]

     Pas. (to his summons-witness). What do you think he will
     do?

     Witness. I think he will pay you.

     [Re-enter Strepsiades with a kneading-trough]

     Strep. Where is this man who asks me for his money? Tell
     me what is this?

     Pas. What is this? A kardopos.

     Strep. And do you then ask me for your money, being such
     an ignorant person? I would not pay, not even an obolus,
     to any one who called the kardope kardopos.

     Pas. Then won't you pay me?

     Strep. Not, as far as I know. Will you not then pack off
     as fast as possible from my door?

     Pas. I will depart; and be assured of this, that I will
     make deposit against you, or may I live no longer!

     Strep. Then you will lose it besides, in addition to
     your twelve minae. And yet I do not wish you to suffer
     this, because you named the kardopos foolishly.

     [Exeunt Pasias and Witness, and enter Amynias]

     Amynias. Ah me! Ah me!

     Strep. Ha! Whoever is this, who is lamenting? Surely it
     was not one of Carcinus' deities  that spoke.

     Amyn. But why do you wish to know this, who I am?-A
     miserable man.

     Strep. Then follow your own path.

     Amyn. O harsh fortune! O Fates, breaking the wheels of
     my horses! O Pallas, how you have destroyed me!

     Strep. What evil, pray, has Tlepolemus  ever done you?

     Amyn. Do not jeer me, my friend; but order your son to
     pay me the money which he received; especially as I have
     been unfortunate.

     Strep. What money is this?

     Amyn. That which he borrowed.

     Strep. Then you were really unlucky, as I think.

     Amyn. By the gods, I fell while driving my horses.

     Strep. Why, pray, do you talk nonsense, as if you had
     fallen from an ass?

     Amyn. Do I talk nonsense if I wish to recover my money?

     Strep. You can't be in your senses yourself.

     Amyn. Why, pray?

     Strep. You appear to me to have had your brains shaken
     as it were.

     Amyn. And you appear to me, by Hermes, to be going to be
     summoned, if you will not pay me the money?

     Strep. Tell me now, whether you think that Jupiter
     always rains fresh rain on each occasion, or that the
     sun draws from below the same water back again?

     Amyn. I know not which; nor do I care.

     Strep. How then is it just that you should recover your
     money, if you know nothing of meteorological matters?

     Amyn. Well, if you are in want, pay me the interest of
     my money.

     Strep. What sort of animal is this interest?

     Amyn. Most assuredly the money is always becoming more
     and more every month and every day as the time slips
     away.

     Strep. You say well. What then? Is it possible that you
     consider the sea to be greater now than formerly?

     Amyn. No, by Jupiter, but equal; for it is not fitting
     that it should be greater.

     Strep. And how then, you wretch does this become no way
     greater, though the rivers flow into it, while you seek
     to increase your money? Will you not take yourself off
     from my house? Bring me the goad.

     [Enter Servant with a goad.]

      Amyn. I call you to witness these things.

     Strep. (beating him). Go! Why do you delay? Won't you
     march, Mr. Blood-horse?

     Amyn. Is not this an insult, pray?

     Strep. Will you move quickly?

      [Pricks him behind with the goad.]

     I'll lay on you, goading you behind, you outrigger? Do
     you fly?

     [Amynias runs off.]

     I thought I should stir you, together with your wheels
     and your two-horse chariots.

     [Exit Strepsiades.]

     Cho. What a thing it is to love evil courses! For this
     old man, having loved them, wishes to withhold the money
     that he borrowed. And he will certainly meet with
     something today, which will perhaps cause this sophist
     to suddenly receive some misfortune, in return for the
     knaveries he has begun. For I think that he will
     presently find what has been long boiling up, that his
     son is skilful to speak opinions opposed to justice, so
     as to overcome all with whomsoever he holds converse,
     even if he advance most villainous doctrines; and
     perhaps, perhaps his father will wish that he were even
     speechless.

     Strep. (running out of the house pursued by his son)
     Hollo! Hollo! O neighbours, and kinsfolk, and
     fellow-tribesmen, defend me, by all means, who am being
     beaten! Ah me, unhappy man, for my head and jaw! Wretch!
     Do you beat your father?

     Phid. Yes, father.

     Strep. You see him owning that he beats me.

     Phid. Certainly.

     Strep. O wretch, and parricide, and house-breaker!

     Phid. Say the same things of me again, and more. Do you
     know that I take pleasure in being much abused?

     Strep. You blackguard!

     Phid. Sprinkle me with roses in abundance.

     Strep. Do you beat your father?

     Phid. And will prove too, by Jupiter! that I beat you
     with justice.

     Strep. O thou most rascally! Why, how can it be just to
     beat a father?

     Phid. I will demonstrate it, and will overcome you in
     argument.

     Strep. Will you overcome me in this?

     Phid. Yea, by much and easily. But choose which of the
     two Causes you wish to speak.

     Strep. Of what two Causes?

     Phid. The better, or the worse?

     Strep. Marry, I did get you taught to speak against
     justice, by Jupiter, my friend, if you are going to
     persuade me of this, that it is just and honourable for
     a father to be beaten by his sons!

     Phid. I think I shall certainly persuade you; so that,
     when you have heard, not even you yourself will say
     anything against it.

     Strep. Well, now, I am willing to hear what you have to
     say.

     Cho. It is your business, old man, to consider in what
     way you shall conquer the man; for if he were not
     relying upon something, he would not be so licentious.
     But he is emboldened by something; the boldness of the
     man is evident. Now you ought to tell to the Chorus from
     what the contention first arose. And this you must do by
     all means.

     Strep. Well, now, I will tell you from what we first
     began to rail at one another. After we had feasted, as
     you know, I first bade him take a lyre, and sing a song
     of Simonides, "The Shearing of the Ram."  But he
     immediately said it was old-fashioned to play on the
     lyre and sing while drinking, like a woman grinding
     parched barley.

     Phid. For ought you not then immediately to be beaten
     and trampled on, bidding me sing, just as if you were
     entertaining cicadae?

     Strep. He expressed, however, such opinions then too
     within, as he does now; and he asserted that Simonides
     was a bad poet. I bore it at first, with difficulty
     indeed, yet nevertheless I bore it. And then I bade him
     at least take a myrtle-wreath and recite to me some
     portion of Aeschylus; and then he immediately said,
     "Shall I consider Aeschylus the first among the poets,
