Not for a moment had we ever dreamed of such a thing. We were young, you
see, and did not know the human race, as I have said before. We had been
so proud of our country, so sure of her nobleness, her magnanimity,
her gratitude. We had expected little of the King, but of France we
had expected everything. Everybody knew that in various towns patriot
priests had been marching in procession urging the people to sacrifice
money, property, everything, and buy the freedom of their heaven-sent
deliverer. That the money would be raised we had not thought of
doubting.

But it was all over now, all over. It was a bitter time for us. The
heavens seemed hung with black; all cheer went out from our hearts.
Was this comrade here at my bedside really Noel Rainguesson, that
light-hearted creature whose whole life was but one long joke, and who
used up more breath in laughter than in keeping his body alive? No, no;
that Noel I was to see no more. This one's heart was broken. He moved
grieving about, and absently, like one in a dream; the stream of his
laughter was dried at its source.

Well, that was best. It was my own mood. We were company for each other.
He nursed me patiently through the dull long weeks, and at last, in
January, I was strong enough to go about again. Then he said:

"Shall we go now?"

"Yes."

There was no need to explain. Our hearts were in Rouen; we would carry
our bodies there. All that we cared for in this life was shut up in that
fortress. We could not help her, but it would be some solace to us to be
near her, to breathe the air that she breathed, and look daily upon the
stone walls that hid her. What if we should be made prisoners there?
Well, we could but do our best, and let luck and fate decide what should
happen.

And so we started. We could not realize the change which had come upon
the country. We seemed able to choose our own route and go whenever we
pleased, unchallenged and unmolested. When Joan of Arc was in the field
there was a sort of panic of fear everywhere; but now that she was out
of the way, fear had vanished. Nobody was troubled about you or afraid
of you, nobody was curious about you or your business, everybody was
indifferent.

We presently saw that we could take to the Seine, and not weary
ourselves out with land travel.

So we did it, and were carried in a boat to within a league of Rouen.
Then we got ashore; not on the hilly side, but on the other, where it
is as level as a floor. Nobody could enter or leave the city without
explaining himself. It was because they feared attempts at a rescue of
Joan.

We had no trouble. We stopped in the plain with a family of peasants and
stayed a week, helping them with their work for board and lodging, and
making friends of them. We got clothes like theirs, and wore them.
When we had worked our way through their reserves and gotten their
confidence, we found that they secretly harbored French hearts in their
bodies. Then we came out frankly and told them everything, and found
them ready to do anything they could to help us.

Our plan was soon made, and was quite simple. It was to help them drive
a flock of sheep to the market of the city. One morning early we made
the venture in a melancholy drizzle of rain, and passed through the
frowning gates unmolested. Our friends had friends living over a humble
wine shop in a quaint tall building situated in one of the narrow lanes
that run down from the cathedral to the river, and with these they
bestowed us; and the next day they smuggled our own proper clothing and
other belongings to us. The family that lodged us--the Pieroons--were
French in sympathy, and we needed to have no secrets from them.

(1) It remained there three hundred and sixty years, and then was
destroyed in a public bonfire, together with two swords, a plumed cap,
several suits of state apparel, and other relics of the Maid, by a mob
in the time of the Revolution. Nothing which the hand of Joan of Arc is
known to have touched now remains in existence except a few preciously
guarded military and state papers which she signed, her pen being guided
by a clerk or her secretary, Louis de Conte. A boulder exists from which
she is known to have mounted her horse when she was once setting out
upon a campaign. Up to a quarter of a century ago there was a single
hair from her head still in existence. It was drawn through the wax of
a seal attached to the parchment of a state document. It was
surreptitiously snipped out, seal and all, by some vandal relic-hunter,
and carried off. Doubtless it still exists, but only the thief knows
where. -- TRANSLATOR.




3 Weaving the Net About Her

IT WAS necessary for me to have some way to gain bread for Noel and
myself; and when the Pierrons found that I knew how to write, the
applied to their confessor in my behalf, and he got a place for me with
a good priest named Manchon, who was to be the chief recorder in the
Great Trial of Joan of Arc now approaching. It was a strange position
for me--clerk to the recorder--and dangerous if my sympathies and the
late employment should be found out. But there was not much danger.
Manchon was at bottom friendly to Joan and would not betray me; and
my name would not, for I had discarded my surname and retained only my
given one, like a person of low degree.

I attended Manchon constantly straight along, out of January and into
February, and was often in the citadel with him--in the very fortress
where Joan was imprisoned, though not in the dungeon where she was
confined, and so did not see her, of course.

Manchon told me everything that had been happening before my coming.
Ever since the purchase of Joan, Cauchon had been busy packing his jury
for the destruction of the Maid--weeks and weeks he had spent in this
bad industry. The University of Paris had sent him a number of learned
and able and trusty ecclesiastics of the stripe he wanted; and he had
scraped together a clergyman of like stripe and great fame here and
there and yonder, until he was able to construct a formidable court
numbering half a hundred distinguished names. French names they were,
but their interests and sympathies were English.

A great officer of the Inquisition was also sent from Paris for the
accused must be tried by the forms of the Inquisition; but this was a
brave and righteous man, and he said squarely that this court had no
power to try the case, wherefore he refused to act; and the same honest
talk was uttered by two or three others.

The Inquisitor was right. The case as here resurrected against Joan had
already been tried long ago at Poitiers, and decided in her favor. Yes,
and by a higher tribunal than this one, for at the head of it was an
Archbishop--he of Rheims--Cauchon's own metropolitan. So here, you see,
a lower court was impudently preparing to try and redecide a cause which
had already been decided by its superior, a court of higher authority.
Imagine it! No, the case could not properly be tried again. Cauchon
could not properly preside in this new court, for more than one reason:

Rouen was not in his diocese; Joan had not been arrested in her
domicile, which was still Domremy; and finally this proposed judge was
the prisoner's outspoken enemy, and therefore he was incompetent to
try her. Yet all these large difficulties were gotten rid of. The
territorial Chapter of Rouen finally granted territorial letters to
Cauchon--though only after a struggle and under compulsion. Force was
also applied to the Inquisitor, and he was obliged to submit.

So then, the little English King, by his representative, formally
delivered Joan into the hands of the court, but with this reservation:
if the court failed to condemn her, he was to have her back again! Ah,
dear, what chance was there for that forsaken and friendless child?
Friendless, indeed--it is the right word. For she was in a black
dungeon, with half a dozen brutal common soldiers keeping guard night
and day in the room where her cage was--for she was in a cage; an iron
cage, and chained to her bed by neck and hands and feet. Never a person
near her whom she had ever seen before; never a woman at all. Yes, this
was, indeed, friendlessness.

Now it was a vassal of Jean de Luxembourg who captured Joan and
Compiegne, and it was Jean who sold her to the Duke of Burgundy. Yet
this very De Luxembourg was shameless enough to go and show his face to
Joan in her cage. He came with two English earls, Warwick and Stafford.
He was a poor reptile. He told her he would get her set free if she
would promise not to fight the English any more. She had been in that
cage a long time now, but not long enough to break her spirit. She
retorted scornfully:

"Name of God, you but mock me. I know that you have neither the power
nor the will to do it."

He insisted. Then the pride and dignity of the soldier rose in Joan, and
she lifted her chained hands and let them fall with a clash, saying:

"See these! They know more than you, and can prophesy better. I know that
the English are going to kill me, for they think that when I am dead
they can get the Kingdom of France. It is not so.

"Though there were a hundred thousand of them they would never get it."

This defiance infuriated Stafford, and he--now think of it--he a free,
strong man, she a chained and helpless girl--he drew his dagger and
flung himself at her to stab her. But Warwick seized him and held him
back. Warwick was wise. Take her life in that way? Send her to Heaven
stainless and undisgraced? It would make her the idol of France, and the
whole nation would rise and march to victory and emancipation under the
inspiration of her spirit. No, she must be saved for another fate than
that.

Well, the time was approaching for the Great Trial. For more than two
months Cauchon had been raking and scraping everywhere for any odds and
ends of evidence or suspicion or conjecture that might be usable against
Joan, and carefully suppressing all evidence that came to hand in her
favor. He had limitless ways and means and powers at his disposal for
preparing and strengthening the case for the prosecution, and he used
them all.

But Joan had no one to prepare her case for her, and she was shut up in
those stone walls and had no friend to appeal to for help. And as for
witnesses, she could not call a single one in her defense; they were
all far away, under the French flag, and this was an English court; they
would have been seized and hanged if they had shown their faces at the
gates of Rouen. No, the prisoner must be the sole witness--witness for
the prosecution, witness for the defense; and with a verdict of death
resolved upon before the doors were opened for the court's first
sitting.

When she learned that the court was made up of ecclesiastics in the
interest of the English, she begged that in fairness an equal number of
priests of the French party should be added to these.

Cauchon scoffed at her message, and would not even deign to answer it.

By the law of the Church--she being a minor under twenty-one--it was her
right to have counsel to conduct her case, advise her how to answer
when questioned, and protect her from falling into traps set by cunning
devices of the prosecution. She probably did not know that this was her
right, and that she could demand it and require it, for there was none
to tell her that; but she begged for this help, at any rate. Cauchon
refused it. She urged and implored, pleading her youth and her ignorance
of the complexities and intricacies of the law and of legal procedure.
Cauchon refused again, and said she must get along with her case as best
she might by herself. Ah, his heart was a stone.

Cauchon prepared the proces verbal. I will simplify that by calling it
the Bill of Particulars. It was a detailed list of the charges against
her, and formed the basis of the trial. Charges? It was a list of
suspicions and public rumors--those were the words used. It was merely
charged that she was suspected of having been guilty of heresies,
witchcraft, and other such offenses against religion.

Now by the law of the Church, a trial of that sort could not be begun
until a searching inquiry had been made into the history and character
of the accused, and it was essential that the result of this inquiry be
added to the proces verbal and form a part of it. You remember that that
was the first thing they did before the trial at Poitiers. They did it
again now. An ecclesiastic was sent to Domremy. There and all about
the neighborhood he made an exhaustive search into Joan's history
and character, and came back with his verdict. It was very clear. The
searcher reported that he found Joan's character to be in every way what
he "would like his own sister's character to be." Just about the
same report that was brought back to Poitiers, you see. Joan's was a
character which could endure the minutest examination.

This verdict was a strong point for Joan, you will say. Yes, it would
have been if it could have seen the light; but Cauchon was awake, and it
disappeared from the proces verbal before the trial. People were prudent
enough not to inquire what became of it.

One would imagine that Cauchon was ready to begin the trial by this
time. But no, he devised one more scheme for poor Joan's destruction,
and it promised to be a deadly one.

One of the great personages picked out and sent down by the University
of Paris was an ecclesiastic named Nicolas Loyseleur. He was tall,
handsome, grave, of smooth, soft speech and courteous and winning
manners. There was no seeming of treachery or hypocrisy about him,
yet he was full of both. He was admitted to Joan's prison by night,
disguised as a cobbler; he pretended to be from her own country; he
professed to be secretly a patriot; he revealed the fact that he was
a priest. She was filled with gladness to see one from the hills and
plains that were so dear to her; happier still to look upon a priest and
disburden her heart in confession, for the offices of the Church were
the bread of life, the breath of her nostrils to her, and she had been
long forced to pine for them in vain. She opened her whole innocent
heart to this creature, and in return he gave her advice concerning her
trial which could have destroyed her if her deep native wisdom had not
protected her against following it.

You will ask, what value could this scheme have, since the secrets of
the confessional are sacred and cannot be revealed? True--but suppose
another person should overhear them? That person is not bound to keep
the secret. Well, that is what happened. Cauchon had previously caused
a hole to be bored through the wall; and he stood with his ear to that
hole and heard all. It is pitiful to think of these things. One wonders
how they could treat that poor child so. She had not done them any harm.




4 All Ready to Condemn

ON TUESDAY, the 20th of February, while I sat at my master's work in the
evening, he came in, looking sad, and said it had been decided to begin
the trial at eight o'clock the next morning, and I must get ready to
assist him.

Of course I had been expecting such news every day for many days; but no
matter, the shock of it almost took my breath away and set me trembling
like a leaf. I suppose that without knowing it I had been half imagining
that at the last moment something would happen, something that would
stop this fatal trial; maybe that La Hire would burst in at the gates
with his hellions at his back; maybe that God would have pity and
stretch forth His mighty hand. But now--now there was no hope.

The trial was to begin in the chapel of the fortress and would be
public. So I went sorrowing away and told Noel, so that he might be
there early and secure a place. It would give him a chance to look again
upon the face which we so revered and which was so precious to us.
All the way, both going and coming, I plowed through chattering and
rejoicing multitudes of English soldiery and English-hearted French
citizens. There was no talk but of the coming event. Many times I heard
the remark, accompanied by a pitiless laugh:

"The fat Bishop has got things as he wants them at last, and says he
will lead the vile witch a merry dance and a short one."

But here and there I glimpsed compassion and distress in a face, and
it was not always a French one. English soldiers feared Joan, but they
admired her for her great deeds and her unconquerable spirit.

In the morning Manchon and I went early, yet as we approached the
vast fortress we found crowds of men already there and still others
gathering. The chapel was already full and the way barred against
further admissions of unofficial persons. We took our appointed places.
Throned on high sat the president, Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, in
his grand robes, and before him in rows sat his robed court--fifty
distinguished ecclesiastics, men of high degree in the Church, of
clear-cut intellectual faces, men of deep learning, veteran adepts in
strategy and casuistry, practised setters of traps for ignorant minds
and unwary feet. When I looked around upon this army of masters of
legal fence, gathered here to find just one verdict and no other,
and remembered that Joan must fight for her good name and her life
single-handed against them, I asked myself what chance an ignorant poor
country-girl of nineteen could have in such an unequal conflict; and
my heart sank down low, very low. When I looked again at that obese
president, puffing and wheezing there, his great belly distending and
receding with each breath, and noted his three chins, fold above fold,
and his knobby and knotty face, and his purple and splotchy complexion,
and his repulsive cauliflower nose, and his cold and malignant eyes--a
brute, every detail of him--my heart sank lower still. And when I noted
that all were afraid of this man, and shrank and fidgeted in their seats
when his eye smote theirs, my last poor ray of hope dissolved away and
wholly disappeared.

There was one unoccupied seat in this place, and only one. It was over
against the wall, in view of every one. It was a little wooden bench
without a back, and it stood apart and solitary on a sort of dais. Tall
men-at-arms in morion, breastplate, and steel gauntlets stood as stiff
as their own halberds on each side of this dais, but no other creature
was near by it. A pathetic little bench to me it was, for I knew whom it
was for; and the sight of it carried my mind back to the great court at
Poitiers, where Joan sat upon one like it and calmly fought her cunning
fight with the astonished doctors of the Church and Parliament, and
rose from it victorious and applauded by all, and went forth to fill the
world with the glory of her name.

What a dainty little figure she was, and how gentle and innocent, how
winning and beautiful in the fresh bloom of her seventeen years! Those
were grand days. And so recent--for she was just nineteen now--and how
much she had seen since, and what wonders she had accomplished!

But now--oh, all was changed now. She had been languishing in dungeons,
away from light and air and the cheer of friendly faces, for nearly
three-quarters of a year--she, born child of the sun, natural comrade of
the birds and of all happy free creatures. She would be weary now, and
worn with this long captivity, her forces impaired; despondent, perhaps,
as knowing there was no hope. Yes, all was changed.

All this time there had been a muffled hum of conversation, and rustling
of robes and scraping of feet on the floor, a combination of dull noises
which filled all the place. Suddenly:

"Produce the accused!"

It made me catch my breath. My heart began to thump like a hammer. But
there was silence now--silence absolute. All those noises ceased, and
it was as if they had never been. Not a sound; the stillness grew
oppressive; it was like a weight upon one. All faces were turned toward
the door; and one could properly expect that, for most of the people
there suddenly realized, no doubt, that they were about to see, in
actual flesh and blood, what had been to them before only an embodied
prodigy, a word, a phrase, a world-girdling Name.

The stillness continued. Then, far down the stone-paved corridors, one
heard a vague slow sound approaching: clank... clink... clank--Joan of
Arc, Deliverer of France, in chains!

My head swam; all things whirled and spun about me. Ah, I was realizing,
too.




5 Fifty Experts Against a Novice

I GIVE you my honor now that I am not going to distort or discolor the
facts of this miserable trial. No, I will give them to you honestly,
detail by detail, just as Manchon and I set them down daily in the
official record of the court, and just as one may read them in the
printed histories.

There will be only this difference: that in talking familiarly with you,
I shall use my right to comment upon the proceedings and explain them as
I go along, so that you can understand them better; also, I shall throw
in trifles which came under our eyes and have a certain interest for you
and me, but were not important enough to go into the official record.
(1) To take up my story now where I left off. We heard the clanking of
Joan's chains down the corridors; she was approaching.

Presently she appeared; a thrill swept the house, and one heard deep
breaths drawn. Two guardsmen followed her at a short distance to the
rear. Her head was bowed a little, and she moved slowly, she being weak
and her irons heavy. She had on men's attire--all black; a soft woolen
stuff, intensely black, funereally black, not a speck of relieving color
in it from her throat to the floor. A wide collar of this same black
stuff lay in radiating folds upon her shoulders and breast; the sleeves
of her doublet were full, down to the elbows, and tight thence to her
manacled wrists; below the doublet, tight black hose down to the chains
on her ankles.

Half-way to her bench she stopped, just where a wide shaft of light fell
slanting from a window, and slowly lifted her face. Another thrill!--it
was totally colorless, white as snow; a face of gleaming snow set in
vivid contrast upon that slender statue of somber unmitigated black. It
was smooth and pure and girlish, beautiful beyond belief, infinitely
sad and sweet. But, dear, dear! when the challenge of those untamed
eyes fell upon that judge, and the droop vanished from her form and
it straightened up soldierly and noble, my heart leaped for joy; and I
said, all is well, all is well--they have not broken her, they have not
conquered her, she is Joan of Arc still! Yes, it was plain to me now
that there was one spirit there which this dreaded judge could not quell
nor make afraid.
