he should be let alone, yet even with this signal showing, in hotly
contested elections the voter ran a noisy gauntlet of eager solicitors,
harassing him on his way to vote as cab drivers assail the traveler
when he alights from the train. This free and easy method, tolerable in
sparsely settled pioneer districts, failed miserably in the cities. It
was necessary to pass rigorous laws against vote buying and selling, and
to clear the polling-place of all partizan soliciting. Penal provisions
were enacted against intimidation, violence, repeating, false swearing
when challenged, ballot-box stuffing, and the more patent forms of
partizan vices. In order to stop the practice of "repeating," New York
early passed laws requiring voters to be duly registered. But the early
laws were defective, and the rolls were easily padded. In most of the
cities poll lists were made by the party workers, and the name of each
voter was checked off as he voted. It was still impossible for the voter
to keep secret his ballot. The buyer of votes could tell whether he got
what he paid for; the employer, so disposed, could bully those dependent
on him into voting as he wished, and the way was open to all manner
of tricks in the printing of ballots with misleading emblems, or with
certain names omitted, or with a mixture of candidates from various
parties--tricks that were later forbidden by law but were none the less
common.

Rather suddenly a great change came over election day. In 1888
Kentucky adopted the Australian ballot for the city of Louisville,
and Massachusetts adopted it for all state and local elections. The
Massachusetts statute provided that before an election each political
party should certify its nominees to the Secretary of the Commonwealth.
The State then printed the ballots. All the nominees of all the parties
were printed on one sheet. Each office was placed in a separate column,
the candidates in alphabetical order, with the names of the parties
following. Blank spaces were left for those who wished to vote for
others than the regular nominees. This form of ballot prevented "voting
straight" with a single mark. The voter, in the seclusion of a booth at
the polling-place, had to pick his party's candidates from the numerous
columns.

Indiana, in 1889, adopted a similar statute but the ballot had certain
modifications to suit the needs of party orthodoxy. Here the columns
represented parties, not offices. Each party had a column. Each column
was headed by the party name and its device, so that those who could not
read could vote for the Rooster or the Eagle or the Fountain. There was
a circle placed under the device, and by making his mark in this circle
the voter voted straight.

Within eight years thirty-eight States and two Territories had adopted
the Australian or blanket ballot in some modified form. It was but a
step to the state control of the election machinery. Some state officer,
usually the Secretary of State, was designated to see that the election
laws were enforced. In New York a State Commissioner of Elections was
appointed. The appointment of local inspectors and judges remained for
a time in the hands of the parties. But soon in several States even this
power was taken from them, and the trend now is towards appointing all
election officers by the central authority. These officers also have
complete charge of the registration of voters. In some States, like New
York, registration has become a rather solemn procedure, requiring the
answering of many questions and the signing of the voter's name, all
under the threat of perjury if a wilful misrepresentation is made.

So passed out of the control of the party the preparation of the ballot
and the use of the ballot on election day. Innumerable rules have been
laid down by the State for the conduct of elections. The distribution
of the ballots, their custody before election, the order of electional
procedure, the counting of the ballots, the making of returns, the
custody of the ballot-boxes, and all other necessary details, are
regulated by law under official state supervision. The parties are
allowed watchers at the polls, but these have no official standing.

If a Revolutionary Father could visit his old haunts on election day, he
would be astonished at the sober decorum. In his time elections lasted
three days, days filled with harangue, with drinking, betting, raillery,
and occasional encounters. Even those whose memory goes back to the
Civil War can contrast the ballot peddling, the soliciting, the crowded
noisy polling-places, with the calm and quiet with which men deposit
their ballots today. For now every ballot is numbered and no one is
permitted to take a single copy from the room. Every voter must prepare
his ballot in the booth. And every polling-place is an island of
immunity in the sea of political excitement.

While the people were thus assuming control of the ballot, they were
proceeding to gain control of their legislatures. In 1890 Massachusetts
enacted one of the first anti-lobby laws. It has served as a model for
many other States. It provided that the sergeant-at-arms should keep
dockets in which were enrolled the names of all persons employed as
counsel or agents before legislative committees. Each counsel or
agent was further compelled to state the length of his engagement, the
subjects or bills for which he was employed, and the name and address of
his employer.

The first session after the passage of this law, many of the
professional lobbyists refused to enroll, and the most notorious ones
were seen no more in the State House. The regular counsel of railroads,
insurance companies, and other interests signed the proper docket and
appeared for their clients in open committee meetings.

The law made it the duty of the Secretary of the Commonwealth to report
to the law officers of the State, for prosecution, all those who failed
to comply with the act. Sixty-seven such delinquents were reported the
first year. The Grand Jury refused to indict them, but the number of
recalcitrants has gradually diminished.

The experience of Massachusetts is not unique. Other States passed more
or less rigorous anti-lobby laws, and today, in no state Capitol, will
the visitor see the disgusting sights that were usual thirty years
ago--arrogant and coarse professional "agents" mingling on the floor
of the legislature with members, even suggesting procedure to
presiding officers, and not infrequently commandeering a majority. Such
influences, where they persist, have been driven under cover.

With the decline of the professional lobbyist came the rise of the
volunteer lobbyist. Important bills are now considered in formal
committee hearings which are well advertised so that interested parties
may be present. Publicity and information have taken the place of
secrecy in legislative procedure. The gathering of expert testimony by
special legislative commissions of inquiry is now a frequent practice
in respect to subjects of wide social import, such as workmen's
compensation, widows' pensions, and factory conditions.

A number of States have resorted to the initiative and referendum
as applied to ordinary legislation. By means of this method a small
percentage of the voters, from eight to ten per cent, may initiate
proposals and impose upon the voters the function of legislation. South
Dakota, in 1898, made constitutional provision for direct legislation.
Utah followed in 1900, Oregon in 1902, Nevada in 1904, Montana in 1906,
and Oklahoma in 1907. East of the Mississippi, several States have
adopted a modified form of the initiative and referendum. In Oregon,
where this device of direct government has been most assiduously
applied, the voters in 1908 voted upon nineteen different bills and
constitutional amendments; in 1910 the number increased to thirty-two;
in 1912, to thirty-seven; in 1914 it fell to twenty-nine. The vote cast
for these measures rarely exceeded eighty per cent of those voting at
the election and frequently fell below sixty.

The electorate that attempts to rid itself of the evils of the state
legislature by these heroic methods assumes a heavy responsibility. When
the burden of direct legislation is added to the task of choosing from
the long list of elective officers which is placed before the voter at
every local and state election, it is not surprising that there should
set in a reaction in favor of simplified government. The mere separation
of state and local elections does not solve the problem. It somewhat
minimizes the chances of partizan influence over the voter in local
elections; but the voter is still confronted with the long lists of
candidates for elective offices. Ballots not infrequently contain two
hundred names, sometimes even three hundred or more, covering candidates
of four or five parties for scores of offices. These blanket ballots are
sometimes three feet long. After an election in Chicago in 1916, one of
the leading dailies expressed sympathy "for the voter emerging from the
polling-booth, clutching a handful of papers, one of them about half as
large as a bed sheet." Probably most voters were able to express a real
preference among the national candidates. It is almost equally certain
that most voters were not able to express a real preference among
important local administrative officials. A huge ballot, all printed
over with names, supplemented by a series of smaller ballots, can never
be a manageable instrument even for an electorate as intelligent as
ours.

Simplification is the prophetic watchword in state government today. For
cities, the City Manager and the Commission have offered salvation. A
few officers only are elected and these are held strictly responsible,
sometimes under the constant threat of the recall, for the entire
administration. Over four hundred cities have adopted the form of
government by Commission. But nothing has been done to simplify our
state governments, which are surrounded by a maze of heterogeneous and
undirected boards and authorities. Every time the legislature found
itself confronted by a new function to be cared for, it simply created
a new board. New York has a hodgepodge of over 116 such authorities;
Minnesota, 75; Illinois, 100. Iowa in 1913 and Illinois and Minnesota in
1914, indeed, perfected elaborate proposals for simplifying their state
governments. But these suggestions remain dormant. And the New York
State Constitutional Convention in 1915 prepared a new Constitution for
the State, with the same end in view, but their work was not accepted
by the people. It may be said, however, that in our attempt to
rid ourselves of boss rule we have swung through the arc of direct
government and are now on the returning curve toward representative
government, a more intensified representative government that makes
evasion of responsibility and duty impossible by fixing it upon one or
two men.



CHAPTER X. PARTY REFORM

The State, at first, had paid little attention to the party, which was
regarded as a purely voluntary aggregation of like-minded citizens.
Evidently the State could not dictate that you should be a Democrat or
a Republican or force you to be an Independent. With the adoption of the
Australian ballot, however, came the legal recognition of the party; for
as soon as the State recognized the party's designated nominees in the
preparation of the official ballot, it recognized the party. It was
then discovered that, unless some restrictions were imposed, groups of
interested persons in the old parties would manage the nominations of
both to their mutual satisfaction. Thus a handful of Democrats would
visit Republican caucuses or primaries and a handful of Republicans
would return the favor to the Democrats. In other words, the bosses of
both parties would cooperate in order to secure nominations satisfactory
to themselves. Massachusetts began the reform by defining a party as a
group of persons who had cast a certain percentage of the votes at the
preceding election. This definition has been widely accepted; and the
number of votes has been variously fixed at from two to twenty-five per
cent. Other States have followed the New York plan of fixing definitely
the number of voters necessary to form a party. In New York no fewer
than 10,000 voters can secure recognition as a state party, exception
being made in favor of municipal or purely local parties. But merely
fixing the numerical minimum of the party was not enough. The State took
another step forward in depriving the manipulator of his liberty when it
undertook to determine who was entitled to membership in the party and
privileged to take part in its nominations and other party procedure.
Otherwise the virile minority in each party would control both the
membership and the nominations.

An Oregon statute declares: "Every political party and every volunteer
political organization has the same right to be protected from the
interference of persons who are not identified with it, as its known and
publicly avowed members, that the government of the State has to protect
itself from the interference of persons who are not known and registered
as its electors. It is as great a wrong to the people, as well as to
members of a political party, for anyone who is not known to be one
of its members to vote or take any part at any election, or other
proceedings of such political party, as it is for one who is not a
qualified and registered elector to vote at any state election or to
take part in the business of the State." It is a far reach from the
democratic laissez faire of Jackson's day to this state dogmatism which
threatens the independent or detached voter with ultimate extinction.

A variety of methods have been adopted for initiating the citizen into
party membership. In the Southern States, where the dual party system
does not exist, the legislature has left the matter in the hands of
the duly appointed party officials. They can, with canonical rigor,
determine the party standing of voters at the primaries. But where
there is party competition, such a generous endowment of power would be
dangerous.

Many States permit the voter to make his declaration of party allegiance
when he goes to the primary. He asks for the ticket of the party whose
nominees he wishes to help select. He is then handed the party's ballot,
which he marks and places in the ballot-box of that party. Now, if he is
challenged, he must declare upon oath that he is a member of that party,
that he has generally supported its tickets and its principles, and that
at the coming election he intends to support at least a majority of its
nominees. In this method little freedom is left to the voter who wishes
to participate as an independent both in the primaries and in the
general election.

The New York plan is more rigorous. Here, in all cities, the voter
enrolls his name on his party's lists when he goes to register for
the coming election. He receives a ballot upon which are the following
words: "I am in general sympathy with the principles of the party which
I have designated by my mark hereunder; it is my intention to support
generally at the next general election, state and national, the nominees
of such party for state and national offices; and I have not enrolled
with or participated in any primary election or convention of any other
party since the first day of last year." On this enrollment blank he
indicates the party of his choice, and the election officials deposit
all the ballots, after sealing them in envelopes, in a special box. At a
time designated by law, these seals are broken and the party enrollment
is compiled from them. These party enrollment books are public
records. Everyone who cares may consult the lists. The advantages of
secrecy--such as they are--are thus not secured.

It remained for Wisconsin, the experimenting State, to find a way of
insuring secrecy. Here, when the voter goes to the primary, he is handed
a large ballot, upon which all the party nominations are printed. The
different party tickets are separated by perforations, so that the voter
simply tears out the party ticket he wishes to vote, marks it, and puts
it in the box. The rejected tickets he deposits in a large waste basket
provided for the discards.

While the party was being fenced in by legal definition, its machinery,
the intricate hierarchy of committees, was subjected to state scrutiny
with the avowed object of ridding the party of ring rule. The State
Central Committee is the key to the situation. To democratize this
committee is a task that has severely tested the ingenuity of the State,
for the inventive capacity of the professional politician is prodigious.
The devices to circumvent the politician are so numerous and various
that only a few types can be selected to illustrate how the State is
carrying out its determination. Illinois has provided perhaps the most
democratic method. In each congressional district, the voters, at the
regular party primaries, choose the member of the state committee for
the district, who serves for a term of two years. The law says that "no
other person or persons whomsoever" than those so chosen by the voters
shall serve on the committee, so that members by courtesy or by
proxy, who might represent the boss, are apparently shut off. The law
stipulates the time within which the committee must meet and organize.
Under this plan, if the ring controls the committee, the fault lies
wholly with the majority of the party; it is a self-imposed thraldom.

Iowa likewise stipulates that the Central Committee shall be composed of
one member from each congressional district. But the members are chosen
in a state convention, organized under strict and minute regulations
imposed by law. It permits considerable freedom to the committee,
however, stating that it "may organize at pleasure for political work as
is usual and customary with such committees."

In Wisconsin another plan was adopted in 1907. Here the candidates for
the various state offices and for both branches of the legislature and
the senators whose terms have not expired meet in the state capital at
noon on a day specified by law and elect by ballot a central committee
consisting of at least two members from each congressional district. A
chairman is chosen in the same manner.

Most States, however, leave some leeway in the choice of the state
committee, permitting their election usually by the regular
primaries but controlling their action in many details. The lesser
committees--county, city, district, judicial, senatorial, congressional,
and others--are even more rigorously controlled by law.

So the issuing of the party platform, the principles on which it must
stand or fall, has been touched by this process of ossification. Few
States retain the state convention in its original vigor. In all States
where primaries are held for state nominations, the emasculated and
subdued convention is permitted to write the party platform. But not
so in some States. Wisconsin permits the candidates and the hold-over
members of the Senate, assembled according to law in a state meeting,
to issue the platform. In other States, the Central Committee and the
various candidates for state office form a party council and frame the
platform. Oregon, in 1901, tried a novel method of providing platforms
by referendum. But the courts declared the law unconstitutional. So
Oregon now permits each candidate to write his own platform in not
over one hundred words and file it with his nominating petition, and
to present a statement of not over twelve words to be printed on the
ballot.

The convention system provided many opportunities for the manipulator
and was inherently imperfect for nominating more than one or two
candidates for office. It has survived as the method of nominating
candidates for President of the United States because it is adapted to
the wide geographical range of the nation and because in the national
convention only a President and a Vice-President are nominated. In
state and county conventions, where often candidates for a dozen or
more offices are to be nominated, it was often subject to demoralizing
bartering.

The larger the number of nominations to be made, the more complete was
the jobbery, and this was the death warrant of the local convention.
These evils were recognized as early as June 20, 1860, when the
Republican county convention of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, adopted
the following resolutions:

"Whereas, in nominating candidates for the several county offices, it
clearly is, or ought to be, the object to arrive as nearly as possible
at the wishes of the majority, or at least a plurality of the Republican
voters; and

"Whereas the present system of nominating by delegates, who virtually
represent territory rather than votes, and who almost necessarily are
wholly unacquainted with the wishes and feelings of their constituents
in regard to various candidates for office, is undemocratic, because
the people have no voice in it, and objectionable, because men are
often placed in nomination because of their location who are decidedly
unpopular, even in their own districts, and because it affords too great
an opportunity for scheming and designing men to accomplish their own
purposes; therefore

"Resolved, that we are in favor of submitting nominations directly to
the people--the Republican voters--and that delegate conventions for
nominating county officers be abolished, and we hereby request and
instruct the county committee to issue their call in 1861, in accordance
with the spirit of this resolution."

Upon the basis of this indictment of the county convention system, the
Republican voters of Crawford County, a rural community, whose largest
town is Meadville, the county seat, proceeded to nominate their
candidates by direct vote, under rules prepared by the county committee.
These rules have been but slightly changed. The informality of a hat
or open table drawer has been replaced by an official ballotbox, and
an official ballot has taken the place of the tickets furnished by each
candidate.

The "Crawford County plan," as it was generally called, was adopted
by various localities in many States. In 1866 California and New York
enacted laws to protect primaries and nominating caucuses from fraud. In
1871 Ohio and Pennsylvania enacted similar laws, followed by Missouri in
1875 and New Jersey in 1878. By 1890 over a dozen States had passed
laws attempting to eliminate the grosser frauds attendant upon making
nominations. In many instances it was made optional with the party
whether the direct plan should supersede the delegate plan. Only in
certain cities, however, was the primary made mandatory in these States.
By far the larger areas retained the convention.

There is noticeable in these years a gradual increase in the amount of
legislation concerning the nominating machinery--prescribing the
days and hours for holding elections of delegates, the size of the
polling-place, the nature of the ballotbox, the poll-list, who might
participate in the choice of delegates, how the returns were to be made,
and so on. By the time, then, that the Australian ballot came, with
its profound changes, nearly all the States had attempted to remove the
glaring abuses of the nominating system; and several of them officially
recognized the direct primary. The State was reluctant to abolish the
convention system entirely; and the Crawford County plan long remained
merely optional. But in 1901 Minnesota enacted a state-wide, mandatory
primary law. Mississippi followed in 1902, Wisconsin in 1903, and Oregon
in 1904. This movement has swept the country.

Few States retain the nominating convention, and where it remains it is
shackled by legal restrictions. The boss, however, has devised adequate
means for controlling primaries, and a return to a modified convention
system is being earnestly discussed in many States to circumvent the
further ingenuity of the boss. A further step towards the state control
of parties was taken when laws began to busy themselves with the conduct
of the campaign. Corrupt Practices Acts began to assume bulk in the
early nineties, to limit the expenditure of candidates, and to enumerate
the objects for which campaign committees might legitimately spend
money. These are usually personal traveling expenses of the candidates,
rental of rooms for committees and halls for meetings, payment of
musicians and speakers and their traveling expenses, printing campaign
material, postage for distribution of letters, newspapers and printed
matter, telephone and telegraph charges, political advertising,
employing challengers at the polls, necessary clerk hire, and
conveyances for bringing aged or infirm voters to the polls. The maximum
amount that can be spent by candidates is fixed, and they are required
to make under oath a detailed statement of their expenses in both
primary and general elections. The various committees, also, must make
detailed reports of the funds they handle, the amount, the contributors,
and the expenditures. Corporations are forbidden to contribute, and the
amount that candidates themselves may give is limited in many States.
These exactions are reinforced by stringent laws against bribery.
Persons found guilty of either receiving or soliciting a bribe are
generally disfranchised or declared ineligible for public office for a
term of years. Illinois, for the second offense, forever disfranchises.

It is not surprising that these restrictions have led the State to face
the question whether it should not itself bear some of the expenses
of the campaign. It has, of course, already assumed an enormous burden
