Conservatives, and Nationalists, over the candidate of the Radicals,
Liberals, and Democrats. The maintenance of the parliamentary system,
however, continued to produce frequent alterations in the personnel of
the Cabinet.

In its foreign relations, apart from the adjustment reached with
Argentina, Chile managed to settle the difficulties with Bolivia arising
out of the War of the Pacific. By the terms of treaties concluded in
1895 and 1905, the region tentatively transferred by the armistice of
1884 was ceded outright to Chile in return for a seaport and a narrow
right of way to it through the former Peruvian province of Tarapaca.
With Peru, Chile was not so fortunate. Though the tension over the
ultimate disposal of the Tacna and Arica question was somewhat reduced,
it was far from being removed. Chile absolutely refused to submit the
matter to arbitration, on the ground that such a procedure could not
properly be applied to a question arising out of a war that had taken
place so many years before. Chile did not wish to give the region up,
lest by so doing it might expose Tarapaca to a possible attack from
Peru. The investment of large amounts of foreign capital in the
exploitation of the deposits of nitrate of soda had made that province
economically very valuable, and the export tax levied on the product was
the chief source of the national revenue. These were all potent
reasons why Chile wanted to keep its hold on Tacna and Arica. Besides,
possession was nine points in the law!

On the other hand, the original plan of having the question decided by a
vote of the inhabitants of the provinces concerned was not carried
into effect, partly because both claimants cherished a conviction that
whichever lost the election would deny its validity, and partly because
they could not agree upon the precise method of holding it. Chile
suggested that the international commission which was selected to
take charge of the plebiscite, and which was composed of a Chilean, a
Peruvian, and a neutral, should be presided over by the Chilean member
as representative of the country actually in possession, whereas Peru
insisted that the neutral should act as chairman. Chile proposed also
that Chileans, Peruvians, and foreigners resident in the area six months
before the date of the elections should vote, provided that they had
the right to do so under the terms of the constitutions of both states.
Peru, on its part, objected to the length of residence, and wished to
limit carefully the number of Chilean voters, to exclude foreigners
altogether from the election, and to disregard qualifications for the
suffrage which required an ability to read and write. Both countries,
moreover, appeared to have a lurking suspicion that in any event
the other would try to secure a majority at the polls by supplying a
requisite number of voters drawn from their respective citizenry who
were not ordinarily resident in Tacna and Arica! Unable to overcome the
deadlock, Chile and Peru agreed in 1913 to postpone the settlement for
twenty years longer. At the expiration of this period, when Chile would
have held the provinces for half a century, the question should be
finally adjusted on bases mutually satisfactory. Officially amicable
relations were then restored.

While the political situation in Bolivia remained stable, so much could
not be said of that in Peru and Ecuador. If the troubles in the former
were more or less military, a persistence of the conflict between
clericals and radicals characterized the commotions in the latter,
because of certain liberal provisions in the Constitution of 1907.
Peru, on the other hand, in 1915 guaranteed its people the enjoyment of
religious liberty.

Next to the Tacna and Arica question, the dubious boundaries of Ecuador
constituted the most serious international problem in South America. The
so-called Oriente region, lying east of the Andes and claimed by Peru,
Brazil, and Colombia, appeared differently on different maps, according
as one claimant nation or another set forth its own case. Had all three
been satisfied, nothing would have been left of Ecuador but the strip
between the Andes and the Pacific coast, including the cities of Quito
and Guayaquil. The Ecuadorians, therefore, were bitterly sensitive on
the subject.

Protracted negotiations over the boundaries became alike tedious and
listless. But the moment that the respective diplomats had agreed upon
some knotty point, the Congress of one litigant or another was almost
sure to reject the decision and start the controversy all over again.
Even reference of the matter to the arbitral judgment of European
monarchs produced, so far as Ecuador and Peru were concerned, riotous
attacks upon the Peruvian legation and consulates, charges and
countercharges of invasion of each other's territory, and the suspension
of diplomatic relations. Though the United States, Argentina, and Brazil
had interposed to ward off an armed conflict between the two republics
and, in 1911, had urged that the dispute be submitted to the Hague
Tribunal, nothing would induce Ecuador to comply.

Colombia was even more unfortunate than its southern neighbor, for in
addition to political convulsions it suffered financial disaster and
an actual deprivation of territory. Struggles among factions, official
influence at the elections, dictatorships, and fighting between the
departments and the national Government plunged the country, in 1899,
into the worst civil war it had known for many a day. Paper money,
issued in unlimited amounts and given a forced circulation, made the
distress still more acute. Then came the hardest blow of all. Since
1830 Panama, as province or state, had tried many times to secede from
Colombia. In 1903 the opportunity it sought became altogether favorable.
The parent nation, just beginning to recover from the disasters of civil
strife, would probably be unable to prevent a new attempt at withdrawal.
The people of Panama, of course, knew how eager the United States was
to acquire the region of the proposed Canal Zone, since it had failed to
win it by negotiation with Colombia. Accordingly, if they were to
start a "revolution," they had reason to believe that it would not lack
support--or at least, connivance--from that quarter.

On the 3d of November the projected "revolution" occurred, on schedule
time, and the United States recognized the independence of the "Republic
of Panama" three days later! In return for a guarantee of independence,
however, the United States stipulated, in the convention concluded
on the 18th of November, that, besides authority to enforce sanitary
regulations in the Canal Zone, it should also have the right of
intervention to maintain order in the republic itself. More than
once, indeed, after Panama adopted its constitution in 1904, elections
threatened to become tumultuous; whereupon the United States saw to it
that they passed off quietly.

Having no wish to flout their huge neighbor to the northward, the
Hispanic nations at large hastened to acknowledge the independence of
the new republic, despite the indignation that prevailed in press and
public over what was regarded as an act of despoilment. In view of the
resentful attitude of Colombia and mindful also of the opinion of many
Americans that a gross injustice had been committed, the United States
eventually offered terms of settlement. It agreed to express regret for
the ill feeling between the two countries which had arisen out of the
Panama incident, provided that such expression were made mutual; and, as
a species of indemnity, it agreed to pay for canal rights to be acquired
in Colombian territory and for the lease of certain islands as naval
stations. But neither the terms nor the amount of the compensation
proved acceptable. Instead, Colombia urged that the whole matter be
referred to the judgment of the tribunal at The Hague.

Alluding to the use made of the liberties won in the struggle for
emancipation from Spain by the native land of Miranda, Bolivar, and
Sucre, on the part of the country which had been in the vanguard of
the fight for freedom from a foreign yoke, a writer of Venezuela once
declared that it had not elected legally a single President; had not put
democratic ideas or institutions into practice; had lived wholly under
dictatorships; had neglected public instruction; and had set up a large
number of oppressive commercial monopolies, including the navigation
of rivers, the coastwise trade, the pearl fisheries, and the sale of
tobacco, salt, sugar, liquor, matches, explosives, butter, grease,
cement, shoes, meat, and flour. Exaggerated as the indictment is and
applicable also, though in less degree, to some of the other backward
countries of Hispanic America, it contains unfortunately a large measure
of truth. Indeed, so far as Venezuela itself is concerned, this critic
might have added that every time a "restorer," "regenerator," or
"liberator" succumbed there, the old craze for federalism again broke
out and menaced the nation with piecemeal destruction. Obedient,
furthermore, to the whims of a presidential despot, Venezuela
perpetrated more outrages on foreigners and created more international
friction after 1899 than any other land in Spanish America had ever
done.

While the formidable Guzman Blanco was still alive, the various
Presidents acted cautiously. No sooner had he passed away than disorder
broke out afresh. Since a new dictator thought he needed a longer term
of office and divers other administrative advantages, a constitution
incorporating them was framed and published in the due and customary
manner. This had hardly gone into operation when, in 1895, a contest
arose with Great Britain about the boundaries between Venezuela and
British Guiana. Under pressure from the United States, however, the
matter was referred to arbitration, and Venezuela came out substantially
the loser.

In 1899 there appeared on the scene a personage compared with whom
Zelaya was the merest novice in the art of making trouble. This was
Cipriano Castro, the greatest international nuisance of the early
twentieth century. A rude, arrogant, fearless, energetic, capricious
mountaineer and cattleman, he regarded foreigners no less than his
own countryfolk, it would seem, as objects for his particular scorn,
displeasure, exploitation, or amusement, as the case might be. He was
greatly angered by the way in which foreigners in dispute with
local officials avoided a resort to Venezuelan courts and--still
worse--rejected their decisions and appealed instead to their diplomatic
representatives for protection. He declared such a procedure to be an
affront to the national dignity. Yet foreigners were usually correct in
arming that judges appointed by an arbitrary President were little more
than figureheads, incapable of dispensing justice, even were they so
inclined.

Jealous not only of his personal prestige but of what he imagined, or
pretended to imagine, were the rights of a small nation, Castro tried
throughout to portray the situation in such a light as to induce the
other Hispanic republics also to view foreign interference as a
dire peril to their own independence and sovereignty; and he further
endeavored to involve the United States in a struggle with European
powers as a means possibly of testing the efficacy of the Monroe
Doctrine or of laying bare before the world the evil nature of American
imperialistic designs.

By the year 1901, in which Venezuela adopted another constitution, the
revolutionary disturbances had materially diminished the revenues from
the customs. Furthermore Castro's regulations exacting military service
of all males between fourteen and sixty years of age had filled the
prisons to overflowing. Many foreigners who had suffered in consequence
resorted to measures of self-defense--among them representatives of
certain American and British asphalt companies which were working
concessions granted by Castro's predecessors. Though familiar with what
commonly happens to those who handle pitch, they had not scrupled to
aid some of Castro's enemies. Castro forthwith imposed on them enormous
fines which amounted practically to a confiscation of their rights.

While the United States and Great Britain were expostulating over this
behavior of the despot, France broke off diplomatic relations with
Venezuela because of Castro's refusal either to pay or to submit to
arbitration certain claims which had originated in previous revolutions.
Germany, aggrieved in similar fashion, contemplated a seizure of the
customs until its demands for redress were satisfied. And then came
Italy with like causes of complaint. As if these complications were not
sufficient, Venezuela came to blows with Colombia.

As the foreign pressure on Castro steadily increased, Luis Maria Drago,
the Argentine Minister of Foreign Affairs, formulated in 1902 the
doctrine with which his name has been associated. It stated in substance
that force should never be employed between nations for the collection
of contractual debts. Encouraged by this apparent token of support from
a sister republic, Castro defied his array of foreign adversaries more
vigorously than ever, declaring that he might find it needful to invade
the United States, by way of New Orleans, to teach it the lesson it
deserved! But when he attempted, in the following year, to close the
ports of Venezuela as a means of bringing his native antagonists to
terms, Great Britain, Germany, and Italy seized his warships, blockaded
the coast, and bombarded some of his forts. Thereupon the United States
interposed with a suggestion that the dispute be laid before the Hague
Tribunal. Although Castro yielded, he did not fail to have a clause
inserted in a new "constitution" requiring foreigners who might wish
to enter the republic to show certificates of good character from the
Governments of their respective countries.

These incidents gave much food for thought to Castro as well as to
his soberer compatriots. The European powers had displayed an apparent
willingness to have the United States, if it chose to do so, assume the
role of a New World policeman and financial guarantor. Were it to assume
these duties, backward republics in the Caribbean and its vicinity were
likely to have their affairs, internal as well as external, supervised
by the big nation in order to ward off European intervention. At
this moment, indeed, the United States was intervening in Panama. The
prospect aroused in many Hispanic countries the fear of a "Yankee peril"
greater even than that emanating from Europe. Instead of being a kindly
and disinterested protector of small neighbors, the "Colossus of the
North" appeared rather to resemble a political and commercial ogre bent
upon swallowing them to satisfy "manifest destiny."

Having succeeded in putting around his head an aureole of local
popularity, Castro in 1905 picked a new set of partially justified
quarrels with the United States, Great Britain, France, Italy, Colombia,
and even with the Netherlands, arising out of the depredations of
revolutionists; but an armed menace from the United States induced him
to desist from his plans. He contented himself accordingly with issuing
a decree of amnesty for all political offenders except the leaders. When
"reelected," he carried his magnanimity so far as to resign awhile in
favor of the Vice President, stating that, if his retirement were to
bring peace and concord, he would make it permanent. But as he saw to it
that his temporary withdrawal should not have this happy result, he came
back again to his firmer position a few months later.

Venting his wrath upon the Netherlands because its minister had reported
to his Government an outbreak of cholera at La Guaira, the chief seaport
of Venezuela, the dictator laid an embargo on Dutch commerce, seized
its ships, and denounced the Dutch for their alleged failure to check
filibustering from their islands off the coast. When the minister
protested, Castro expelled him. Thereupon the Netherlands instituted a
blockade of the Venezuelan ports. What might have happened if Castro
had remained much longer in charge, may be guessed. Toward the close
of 1908, however, he departed for Europe to undergo a course of medical
treatment. Hardly had he left Venezuelan shores when Juan Vicente Gomez,
the able, astute, and vigorous Vice President, managed to secure his
own election to the presidency and an immediate recognition from
foreign states. Under his direction all of the international tangles of
Venezuela were straightened out.

In 1914 the country adopted its eleventh constitution and thereby
lengthened the presidential term to seven years, shortened that
of members of the lower house of the Congress to four, determined
definitely the number of States in the union, altered the apportionment
of their congressional representation, and enlarged the powers of the
federal Government--or, rather, those of its executive branch! In 1914
Gomez resigned office in favor of the Vice President, and secured an
appointment instead as commander in chief of the army. This procedure
was promptly denounced as a trick to evade the constitutional
prohibition of two consecutive terms. A year later he was unanimously
elected President, though he never formally took the oath of office.

Whatever may be thought of the political ways and means of this
new Guzmin Blanco to maintain himself as a power behind or on the
presidential throne, Gomez gave Venezuela an administration of a sort
very different from that of his immediate predecessor. He suppressed
various government monopolies, removed other obstacles to the material
advancement of the country, and reduced the national debt. He did much
also to improve the sanitary conditions at La Guaira, and he promoted
education, especially the teaching of foreign languages.

Gomez nevertheless had to keep a watchful eye on the partisans of
Castro, who broke out in revolt whenever they had an opportunity. The
United States, Great Britain, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Cuba,
and Colombia eyed the movements of the ex-dictator nervously, as
European powers long ago were wont to do in the case of a certain Man
of Destiny, and barred him out of both their possessions and Venezuela
itself. International patience, never Job-like, had been too sorely
vexed to permit his return. Nevertheless, after the manner of the
ancient persecutor of the Biblical martyr, Castro did not refrain from
going to and fro in the earth. In fact he still "walketh about" seeking
to recover his hold upon Venezuela!



CHAPTER X. MEXICO IN REVOLUTION

When, in 1910, like several of its sister republics, Mexico celebrated
the centennial anniversary of its independence, the era of peace
and progress inaugurated by Porfirio Diaz seemed likely to last
indefinitely, for he was entering upon his eighth term as President.
Brilliant as his career had been, however, and greatly as Mexico had
prospered under his rigid rule, a sullen discontent had been brewing.
The country that had had but one continuous President in twenty-six
years was destined to have some fourteen chief magistrates in less than
a quarter of that time, and to surpass all its previous records for
rapidity in presidential succession, by having one executive who is said
to have held office for precisely fifty-six minutes!

It has often been asserted that the reason for the downfall of Diaz
and the lapse of Mexico into the unhappy conditions of a half century
earlier was that he had grown too old to keep a firm grip on the
situation. It has also been declared that his insistence upon reelection
and upon the elevation of his own personal candidate to the vice
presidency, as a successor in case of his retirement, occasioned his
overthrow. The truth of the matter is that these circumstances were only
incidental to his downfall; the real causes of revolution lay deeprooted
in the history of these twenty-six years. The most significant feature
of the revolt was its civilian character. A widespread public opinion
had been created; a national consciousness had been awakened which was
intolerant of abuses and determined upon their removal at any cost; and
this public opinion and national consciousness were products of general
education, which had brought to the fore a number of intelligent men
eager to participate in public affairs and yet barred out because of
their unwillingness to support the existing regime.

Some one has remarked, and rightly, that Diaz in his zeal for the
material advancement of Mexico, mistook the tangible wealth of the
country for its welfare. Desirable and even necessary as that material
progress was, it produced only a one-sided prosperity. Diaz was
singularly deaf to the just complaints of the people of the laboring
classes, who, as manufacturing and other industrial enterprises
developed, were resolved to better their conditions. In the country at
large the discontent was still stronger. Throughout many of the rural
districts general advancement had been retarded because of the holding
of huge areas of fertile land by a comparatively few rich families, who
did little to improve it and were content with small returns from the
labor of throngs of unskilled native cultivators. Wretchedly paid and
housed, and toiling long hours, the workers lived like the serfs of
medieval days or as their own ancestors did in colonial times. Ignorant,
poverty-stricken, liable at any moment to be dispossessed of the tiny
patch of ground on which they raised a few hills of corn or beans, most
of them were naturally a simple, peaceful folk who, in spite of their
misfortunes, might have gone on indefinitely with their drudgery in
a hopeless apathetic fashion, unless their latent savage instincts
happened to be aroused by drink and the prospect of plunder. On the
other hand, the intelligent among them, knowing that in some of the
northern States of the republic wages were higher and treatment fairer,
felt a sense of wrong which, like that of the laboring class in the
towns, was all the more dangerous because it was not allowed to find
expression.

Diaz thought that what Mexico required above everything else was the
development of industrial efficiency and financial strength, assured
by a maintenance of absolute order. Though disposed to do justice in
individual cases, he would tolerate no class movements of any kind.
Labor unions, strikes, and other efforts at lightening the burden of the
workers he regarded as seditious and deserving of severe punishment. In
order to attract capital from abroad as the best means of exploiting the
vast resources of the country, he was willing to go to any length, it
would seem, in guaranteeing protection. Small wonder, therefore, that
the people who shared in none of the immediate advantages from that
source should have muttered that Mexico was the "mother of foreigners
and the stepmother of Mexicans." And, since so much of the capital came
from the United States, the antiforeign sentiment singled Americans out
for its particular dislike.

If Diaz appeared unable to appreciate the significance of the
educational and industrial awakening, he was no less oblivious of the
political outcome. He knew, of course, that the Mexican constitution
made impossible demands upon the political capacity of the people. He
was himself mainly of Indian blood and he believed that he understood
the temperament and limitations of most Mexicans. Knowing how
tenaciously they clung to political notions, he believed that it was
safer and wiser to forego, at least for a time, real popular government
and to concentrate power in the hands of a strong man who could maintain
order.

Accordingly, backed by his political adherents, known as cientificos
(doctrinaires), some of whom had acquired a sinister ascendancy over
him, and also by the Church, the landed proprietors, and the foreign
capitalists, Diaz centered the entire administration more and more in
himself. Elections became mere farces. Not only the federal officials
themselves but the state governors, the members of the state
legislatures, and all others in authority during the later years of his
rule owed their selection primarily to him and held their positions only
if personally loyal to him. Confident of his support and certain that
protests against misgovernment would be regarded by the President as
seditious, many of them abused their power at will. Notable among them
were the local officials, called jefes politicos, whose control of the
police force enabled them to indulge in practices of intimidation and
extortion which ultimately became unendurable.

Though symptoms of popular wrath against the Diaz regime, or diazpotism
as the Mexicans termed it, were apparent as early as 1908, it was not
until January, 1911, that the actual revolution came. It was headed by
Francisco I. Madero, a member of a wealthy and distinguished family
of landed proprietors in one of the northern States. What the
revolutionists demanded in substance was the retirement of the
President, Vice President, and Cabinet; a return to the principle of no
reelection to the chief magistracy; a guarantee of fair elections at
all times; the choice of capable, honest, and impartial judges, jefes
politicos, and other officials; and, in particular, a series of agrarian
and industrial reforms which would break up the great estates, create
peasant proprietorships, and better the conditions of the working
classes. Disposed at first to treat the insurrection lightly, Diaz soon
found that he had underestimated its strength. Grants of some of the
demands and promises of reform were met with a dogged insistence upon
his own resignation. Then, as the rebellion spread to the southward, the
masterful old man realized that his thirty-one years of rule were at an
end. On the 25th of May, therefore, he gave up his power and sailed for
Europe.

Madero was chosen President five months later, but the revolution soon
passed beyond his control. He was a sincere idealist, if not something
of a visionary, actuated by humane and kindly sentiments, but he lacked
resoluteness and the art of managing men. He was too prolific, also, of
promises which he must have known he could not keep. Yielding to family
influence, he let his followers get out of hand. Ambitious chieftains
and groups of Radicals blocked and thwarted him at every turn. When
he could find no means of carrying out his program without wholesale
confiscation and the disruption of business interests, he was accused of
abandoning his duty. One officer after another deserted him and turned
rebel. Brigandage and insurrection swept over the country and threatened
to involve it in ugly complications with the United States and European
powers. At length, in February, 1913, came the blow that put an end to
all of Madero's efforts and aspirations. A military uprising in the
city of Mexico made him prisoner, forced him to resign, and set up a
provisional government under the dictatorship of Victoriano Huerta,
one of his chief lieutenants. Two weeks later both Madero and the Vice
President were assassinated while on their way supposedly to a place of
safety.

Huerta was a rough soldier of Indian origin, possessed of unusual force
of character and strength of will, ruthless, cunning, and in bearing
alternately dignified and vulgar. A scientifico in political faith, he
was disposed to restore the Diaz regime, so far as an application of
shrewdness and force could make it possible. But from the outset he
found an obstacle confronting him that he could not surmount. Though
acknowledged by European countries and by many of the Hispanic
republics, he could not win recognition from the United States, either
as provisional President or as a candidate for regular election to the
office. Whether personally responsible for the murder of Madero or
not, he was not regarded by the American Government as entitled to
recognition, on the ground that he was not the choice of the Mexican
people. In its refusal to recognize an administration set up merely by
brute force, the United States was upheld by Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
and Cuba. The elimination of Huerta became the chief feature for a while
of its Mexican policy.

Meanwhile the followers of Madero and the pronounced Radicals had found
a new northern leader in the person of Venustiano Carranza. They
called themselves Constitutionalists, as indicative of their purpose to
reestablish the constitution and to choose a successor to Madero in
a constitutional manner. What they really desired was those radical
changes along social, industrial, and political lines, which Madero had
championed in theory. They sought to introduce a species of socialistic
regime that would provide the Mexicans with an opportunity for
self-regeneration. While Diaz had believed in economic progress
supported by the great landed proprietors, the moral influence of the
Church, and the application of foreign capital, the Constitutionalists,
personified in Carranza, were convinced that these agencies, if left
free and undisturbed to work their will, would ruin Mexico. Though not
exactly antiforeign in their attitude, they wished to curb the power
of the foreigner; they would accept his aid whenever desirable for the
economic development of the country, but they would not submit to his
virtual control of public affairs. In any case they would tolerate no
interference by the United States. Compromise with the Huerta regime,
therefore, was impossible. Huerta, the "strong man" of the Diaz type,
must go. On this point, at least, the Constitutionalists were in
thorough agreement with the United States.

A variety of international complications ensued. Both Huertistas and
Carranzistas perpetrated outrages on foreigners, which evoked sharp
protests and threats from the United States and European powers.
While careful not to recognize his opponents officially, the American
Government resorted to all kinds of means to oust the dictator. An
embargo was laid on the export of arms and munitions; all efforts to
procure financial help from abroad were balked. The power of Huerta was
waning perceptibly and that of the Constitutionalists was increasing
when an incident that occurred in April, 1914, at Tampico brought
matters to a climax. A number of American sailors who had gone ashore
to obtain supplies were arrested and temporarily detained. The United
States demanded that the American flag be saluted as reparation for the
insult. Upon the refusal of Huerta to comply, the United States sent a
naval expedition to occupy Vera Cruz.

Both Carranza and Huerta regarded this move as equivalent to an act of
war. Argentina, Brazil, and Chile then offered their mediation. But
the conference arranged for this purpose at Niagara Falls, Canada,
had before it a task altogether impossible of accomplishment. Though
Carranza was willing to have the Constitutionalists represented, if
the discussion related solely to the immediate issue between the United
States and Huerta, he declined to extend the scope of the conference so
as to admit the right of the United States to interfere in the internal
affairs of Mexico. The conference accomplished nothing so far as the
immediate issue was concerned. The dictator did not make reparation for
the "affronts and indignities" he had committed; but his day was over.
The advance of the Constitutionalists southward compelled him in July
to abandon the capital and leave the country. Four months later the
American forces were withdrawn from Vera Cruz. The "A B C" Conference,
however barren it was of direct results, helped to allay suspicions of
the United States in Hispanic America and brought appreciably nearer a
