
Counsel for the State of Virginia again advanced the principles which
had been developed by Roane in Hunter vs. Martin but urged in addition
that this particular appeal rendered Virginia a defendant contrary to
Article XI of the Amendments. Marshall's summary of their argument at
the outset of his opinion is characteristic: "They maintain," he said,
"that the nation does not possess a department capable of restraining
peaceably, and by authority of law, any attempts which may be made by a
part against the legitimate powers of the whole, and that the government
is reduced to the alternative of submitting to such attempts or of
resisting them by force. They maintain that the Constitution of the
United States has provided no tribunal for the final construction of
itself or of the laws or treaties of the nation, but that this power
must be exercised in the last resort by the courts of every State in
the Union. That the Constitution, laws, and treaties may receive as many
constructions as there are States; and that this is not a mischief, or,
if a mischief, is irremediable."

The cause of such absurdities, Marshall continued, was a conception of
State Sovereignty contradicted by the very words of the Constitution,
which assert its supremacy, and that of all acts of Congress in
pursuance of it, over all conflicting state laws whatsoever. "This," he
proceeded to say, "is the authoritative language of the American People,
and if gentlemen please, of the American States. It marks, with lines
too strong to be mistaken, the characteristic distinction between the
Government of the Union and those of the States. The General Government,
though limited as to its objects, is supreme with respect to those
objects. This principle is a part of the Constitution, and if there be
any who deny its necessity, none can deny its authority." Nor was
this to say that the Constitution is unalterable. "The people make the
Constitution, and the people can unmake it. It is the creature of
their own will, and lives only by their will. But this supreme and
irresistible power to make or unmake resides only in the whole body of
the people, not in any subdivision of them. The attempt of any of the
parts to exercise it is usurpation, and ought to be repelled by those to
whom the people have delegated their power of repelling it."

Once Marshall had swept aside the irrelevant notion of State
Sovereignty, he proceeded with the remainder of his argument without
difficulty. Counsel for Virginia had contended that "a case arising
under the Constitution or a law must be one in which a party comes into
court to demand something conferred on him by the Constitution or a
law"; but this construction Marshall held to be "too narrow." "A case in
law or equity consists of the right of the one party as well as of the
other, and may truly be said to arise under the Constitution or a law
of the United States WHENEVER ITS CORRECT DECISION DEPENDS ON THE
CONSTRUCTION OF EITHER." From this it followed that Section XXV was a
measure necessary and proper for extending the judicial power of the
United States appellately to such cases whenever they were first brought
in a state court. Nor did Article XI of the Amendments nullify the
power thus conferred upon the Court in a case which the State itself had
instituted, for in such a case the appeal taken to the national tribunal
was only another stage in an action "begun and prosecuted," not against
the State, but by the State. The contention of Virginia was based upon
the assumption that the Federal and the State Judiciaries constituted
independent systems for the enforcement of the Constitution, the
national laws, and treaties, and such an assumption Marshall held to be
erroneous. For the purposes of the Constitution the United States "form
a single nation," and in effecting these purposes the Government of the
Union may "legitimately control all individuals or governments within
the American territory."

"Our opinion in the Bank Case," Marshall had written Story from Richmond
in 1819, a few weeks after M'Culloch vs. Maryland, "has roused the
sleeping spirit of Virginia, if indeed it ever sleeps." Cohens vs.
Virginia, in 1821, produced an even more decided reaction. Jefferson,
now in retirement, had long since nursed his antipathy for the Federal
Judiciary to the point of monomania. It was in his eyes "a subtle corps
of sappers and miners constantly working underground to undermine our
confederated fabric"; and this latest assault upon the rights of the
States seemed to him, though perpetrated in the usual way, the most
outrageous of all: "An opinion is huddled up in conclave, perhaps by
a majority of one, delivered as if unanimous, and with the silent
acquiescence of lazy or timid associates, by a crafty chief judge, who
sophisticates the law to his own mind by the turn of his own reasoning."

Roane, Jefferson's protege, was still more violent and wrote a series of
unrestrained papers at this time in the Richmond "Enquirer," under the
pseudonym "Algernon Sidney." Alluding to these, Marshall wrote Story
that "their coarseness and malignity would designate the author of them
if he was not avowed." Marshall himself thought to answer Roane, but
quickly learned that the Virginia press was closed to that side of the
question. He got his revenge, however, by obtaining the exclusion
of Roane's effusions from Hall's "Law Journal," an influential legal
periodical published in Philadelphia. But the personal aspect of the
controversy was the least important. "A deep design," Marshall again
wrote his colleague, "to convert our Government into a mere league of
States has taken hold of a powerful and violent party in Virginia. The
attack upon the judiciary is in fact an attack upon the Union." Nor was
Virginia the only State where this movement was formidable, and an early
effort to repeal Section XXV was to be anticipated.

That the antijudicial movement was extending to other States was indeed
apparent. The decision in Sturges vs. Crowinshield * left for several
years the impression that the States could not pass bankruptcy laws even
for future contracts and consequently afforded a widespread grievance.
Ohio had defied the ruling in M'Culloch vs. Maryland, and her Treasurer
was languishing in jail by the mandate of the Federal Circuit Court.
Kentucky had a still sharper grievance in the decision in Green vs.
Biddle, * * which invalidated a policy she had been pursuing for nearly
a quarter of a century with reference to squatters' holdings; and what
made the decision seem the more outrageous was the mistaken belief that
it had represented the views of only a minority of the justices.


 * 4 Wheaton, 122.


 * * 8 Wheaton, 1.


The Legislatures of the aggrieved States were soon in full hue and cry
at the heels of the Court; and from them the agitation quickly spread to
Congress. * On December 12, 1821, Senator Johnson of Kentucky proposed
an amendment to the Constitution which was intended to substitute
the Senate for the Supreme Court in all constitutional cases. In his
elaborate speech in support of his proposition, Johnson criticized at
length the various decisions of the Court but especially those grounded
on its interpretation of the "obligation of contracts" clause. More than
that, however, he denied in toto the rights of the Federal Courts to
pass upon the constitutionality either of acts of Congress or of state
legislative measures. So long as judges were confined to the field of
jurisprudence, the principles of which were established and immutable,
judicial independence was all very well, said Johnson, but "the science
of politics was still in its infancy"; and in a republican system of
government its development should be entrusted to those organs which
were responsible to the people. Judges were of no better clay than
other folk. "Why, then," he asked, "should they be considered any more
infallible, or their decisions any less subject to investigation and
revision?" Furthermore, "courts, like cities, and villages, or like
legislative bodies, will sometimes have their leaders; and it may
happen that a single individual will be the prime cause of a decision
to overturn the deliberate act of a whole State or of the United States;
yet we are admonished to receive their opinions as the ancients did the
responses of the Delphic oracle, or the Jews, with more propriety, the
communications from Heaven delivered by Urim and Thummim to the High
Priest of God's chosen people."


 *For a good review of the contemporary agitation aroused by
Marshall's decisions, see two articles by Charles Warren in the
"American Law Review," vol. XLVII, pp. 1 and 161.


For several years after this, hardly a session of Congress convened in
which there was not introduced some measure for the purpose either of
curbing the Supreme Court or of curtailing Marshall's influence on its
decisions. One measure, for example, proposed the repeal of Section XXV;
another, the enlargement of the Court from seven to ten judges; another,
the requirement that any decision setting aside a state law must have
the concurrence of five out of seven judges; another, the allowance of
appeals to the Court on decisions adverse to the constitutionality of
state laws as well as on decisions sustaining them. Finally, in January,
1826, a bill enlarging the Court to ten judges passed the House by a
vote of 132 to 27. In the Senate, Rowan of Kentucky moved an amendment
requiring in all cases the concurrence of seven of the proposed ten
judges. In a speech which was typical of current criticism of the Court
he bitterly assailed the judges for the protection they had given the
Bank--that "political juggernaut," that "creature of the perverted
corporate powers of the Federal Government"--and he described the Court
itself as "placed above the control of the will of the people, in a
state of disconnection with them, inaccessible to the charities and
sympathies of human life." The amendment failed, however, and in the end
the bill itself was rejected.

Yet a proposition to swamp the Court which received the approval of
four-fifths of the House of Representatives cannot be lightly dismissed
as an aberration. Was it due to a fortuitous coalescence of local
grievances, or was there a general underlying cause? That Marshall's
principles of constitutional law did not entirely accord with the
political and economic life of the nation at this period must be
admitted. The Chief Justice was at once behind his times and ahead of
them. On the one hand, he was behind his times because he failed to
appreciate adequately the fact that freedom was necessary to frontier
communities in meeting their peculiar problems--a freedom which the
doctrine of State Rights promised them--and so he had roused Kentucky's
wrath by the pedantic and, as the Court itself was presently forced to
admit, unworkable decision in Green vs. Biddle. Then on the other hand,
the nationalism of this period was of that negative kind which was
better content to worship the Constitution than to make a really
serviceable application of the national powers. After the War of 1812
the great and growing task which confronted the rapidly expanding
nation was that of providing adequate transportation, and had the old
federalism from which Marshall derived his doctrines been at the
helm, this task would undoubtedly have been taken over by the National
Government. By Madison's veto of the Cumberland Road Bill, however, in
1816, this enterprise was handed over to the States; and they eagerly
seized upon it after the opening of the Erie Canal in 1825 and the
perception of the immense success of the venture. Later, to be sure, the
panic of 1837 transferred the work of railroad and canal building to the
hands of private capital but, after all, without altering greatly the
constitutional problem. For with corporations to be chartered, endowed
with the power of eminent domain, and adequately regulated, local policy
obviously called for widest latitude.

Reformers are likely to count it a grievance that the courts do not
trip over themselves in an endeavor to keep abreast with what is called
"progress." But the true function of courts is not to reform, but to
maintain a definite status quo. The Constitution defined a status quo
the fundamental principles of which Marshall considered sacred. At the
same time, even his obstinate loyalty to "the intentions of the framers"
was not impervious to facts nor unwilling to come to terms with them,
and a growing number of his associates were ready to go considerably
farther.

While the agitation in Congress against the Court was at its height,
Marshall handed down his decision in Gibbons vs. Ogden, and shortly
after, that in Osborn vs. United States Bank. * In the latter case,
which was initiated by the Bank, the plaintiff in error, who was
Treasurer of the State of Ohio, brought forward Article XI of the
Amendments to the Constitution as a bar to the action, but Marshall held
that this Amendment did not prevent a state officer from being sued
for acts done in excess of his rightful powers. He also reiterated and
amplified the principles of M'Culloch vs. Maryland. Three years later he
gave his opinions in Brown vs. Maryland and Ogden vs. Saunders. * * In
the former Marshall's opinion was dissented from by a single associate,
but in the latter the Chief Justice found himself for the first and
only time in his entire incumbency in the role of dissenter in a
constitutional case. The decision of the majority, speaking through
Justice Washington, laid down the principle that the obligation of
a private executory contract cannot be said to be "impaired" in
a constitutional sense by the adverse effect of legislative acts
antedating the making of the contract; and thus the dangerous ambiguity
of Sturges vs. Crowinshield was finally resolved in favor of the States.


 * 9 Wheaton, 738.


 * * 12 Wheaton, 213.


In the course of the next few years the Court, speaking usually through
the Chief Justice, decided several cases on principles favoring local
interest, sometimes indeed curtailing the operation of previously
established principles. For example, the Court held that, in the absence
of specific legislation by Congress to the contrary, a State may erect
a dam across navigable waters of the United States for local purposes *;
that the mere grant of a charter to a corporation does not prevent the
State from taxing such corporation on its franchises, notwithstanding
that "the power to tax involves the power to destroy" * *; that the
Federal Courts have no right to set a state enactment aside on the
ground that it had divested vested rights, unless it had done so through
impairing the obligation of contracts * * *; that the first eight
Amendments to the Constitution do not limit state power, but only
Federal power * * * * that decisions adverse to state laws must have the
concurrence of a majority of the Court. * * * * *


 * Wilson vs. Blackbird Creek Marsh Company (1829), 2 Peters, 245.


 * * Providence Bank vs. Billings (1830), 4 Peters, 514.


 * * * Satterlee vs. Matthewson (1829), 2 Peters, 380; and Watson
vs. Mercer (1834), 8 Peters, 110.


 * * * * Barron vs. Baltimore (1833), 7 Peters, 243.


 * * * * * See in this connection the Chief Justice's remarks in
Briscoe vs. Bank of Kentucky, 8 Peters, 118.


Despite all these concessions which he made to the rising spirit of the
times, Marshall found his last years to be among the most trying of
his chief justiceship. Jackson, who was now President, felt himself the
chosen organ of "the People's will" and was not disposed to regard as
binding anybody's interpretation of the Constitution except his own. The
West and Southwest, the pocket boroughs of the new Administration, were
now deep in land speculation and clamorous for financial expedients
which the Constitution banned. John Taylor of Caroline had just finished
his task of defining the principles of constitutional construction which
were requisite to convert the Union into a league of States and had laid
his work at the feet of Calhoun. Taylor was a candid man and frankly
owned the historical difficulties in the way of carrying out his
purpose; but Calhoun's less scrupulous dialectic swept aside every
obstacle that stood in the way of attributing to the States the
completest sovereignty.

In Craig vs. Missouri (1830) * the Court was confronted with a case in
which a State had sought to evade the prohibition of the Constitution
against the emission of bills of credit by establishing loan offices
with authority to issue loan certificates intended to circulate
generally in dimensions of fifty cents to ten dollars and to be
receivable for taxes. A plainer violation of the Constitution would be
difficult to imagine. Yet Marshall's decision setting aside the act was
followed by a renewed effort to procure the repeal of Section XXV of
the Judiciary Act. The discussion of the proposal threw into interesting
contrast two points of view. The opponents of this section insisted
upon regarding constitutional cases as controversies between the United
States and the States in their corporate capacities; its advocates, on
the other hand, treated the section as an indispensable safeguard of
private rights. In the end, the latter point of view prevailed: the bill
to repeal, which had come up in the House, was rejected by a vote of 138
to 51, and of the latter number all but six came from Southern States,
and more than half of them from natives of Virginia.


 * 4 Peters, 410.


Meantime the Supreme Court had become involved in controversy with
Georgia on account of a series of acts which that State had passed
extending its jurisdiction over the Cherokee Indians in violation of the
national treaties with this tribe. In Corn Tassel's case, the appellant
from the Georgia court to the United States Supreme Court was hanged
in defiance of a writ of error from the Court. In Cherokee Nation vs.
Georgia, the Court itself held that it had no jurisdiction. Finally, in
1832, in Worcester vs. Georgia, * the Court was confronted squarely with
the question of the validity of the Georgia acts. The State put in
no appearance, the acts were pronounced void, and the decision went
unenforced. When Jackson was asked what effort the Executive Department
would make to back up the Court's mandate, he is reported to have said:
"John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it."


 * 6 Peters, 515.


Marshall began to see the Constitution and the Union crumbling before
him. "I yield slowly and reluctantly to the conviction," he wrote Story,
late in 1832, "that our Constitution cannot last .... Our opinions
[in the South] are incompatible with a united government even among
ourselves. The Union has been prolonged this far by miracles." A
personal consideration sharpened his apprehension. He saw old age at
hand and was determined "not to hazard the disgrace of continuing in
office a mere inefficient pageant," but at the same time he desired
some guarantee of the character of the person who was to succeed him.
At first he thought of remaining until after the election of 1832;
but Jackson's reelection made him relinquish altogether the idea of
resignation.

A few months later, in consequence of the Administration's vigorous
measures against nullification in South Carolina, things were
temporarily wearing a brighter aspect. Yet that the fundamental elements
of the situation had been thereby altered, Marshall did not believe. "To
men who think as you and I do," he wrote Story, toward the end of 1834,
"the present is gloomy enough; and the future presents no cheering
prospect. In the South... those who support the Executive do not support
the Government. They sustain the personal power of the President, but
labor incessantly to impair the legitimate powers of the Government.
Those who oppose the rash and violent measures of the Executive... are
generally the bitter enemies of Constitutional Government. Many of them
are the avowed advocates of a league; and those who do not go the
whole length, go a great part of the way. What can we hope for in such
circumstances?"

Yet there was one respect in which the significance of Marshall's
achievement must have been as clear to himself as it was to his
contemporaries. He had failed for the time being to establish his
definition of national power, it is true, but he had made the Supreme
Court one of the great political forces of the country. The very
ferocity with which the pretensions of the Court were assailed in
certain quarters was indirect proof of its power, but there was also
direct testimony of a high order. In 1830 Alexis de Tocqueville, the
French statesman, visited the United States just as the rough frontier
democracy was coming into its own. Only through the Supreme Court, in
his opinion, were the forces of renewal and growth thus liberated to
be kept within the bounds set by existing institutions. "The peace, the
prosperity, and the very existence of the Union," he wrote, "are vested
in the hands of the seven Federal judges. Without them the Constitution
would be a dead letter: the Executive appeals to them for assistance
against the encroachments of the legislative power; the Legislature
demands their protection against the assaults of the Executive; they
defend the Union from the disobedience of the States, the States from
the exaggerated claims of the Union, the public interest against
private interests and the conservative spirit of stability against the
fickleness of the democracy." The contrast between these observations
and the disheartened words in which Jay declined renomination to the
chief justiceship in 1801 gives perhaps a fair measure of Marshall's
accomplishment.

Of the implications of the accomplishment of the great Chief Justice
for the political life of the country, let De Tocqueville speak again:
"Scarcely any political question arises in the United States which
is not resolved sooner, or later, into a judicial question. Hence all
parties are obliged to borrow in their daily controversies the ideas,
and even the language peculiar to judicial proceedings.... The language
of the law thus becomes, in some measure, a vulgar tongue; the spirit of
law, which is produced in the schools and courts of justice, gradually
penetrates beyond their walls into the bosom of society, where it
descends to the lowest classes, so that at last the whole people
contract the habits and the tastes of the judicial magistrate."

In one respect, however, De Tocqueville erred. American "legalism,"
that curious infusion of politics with jurisprudence, that mutual
consultation of public opinion and established principles, which in the
past has so characterized the course of discussion and legislation
in America, is traceable to origins long antedating Marshall's chief
justiceship. On the other hand, there is no public career in American
history which ever built so largely upon this pervasive trait of the
national outlook as did Marshall's, or which has contributed so much to
render it effective in palpable institutions.



CHAPTER VIII. Among Friends And Neighbors

It is a circumstance of no little importance that the founder of
American Constitutional Law was in tastes and habit of life a simple
countryman. To the establishment of National Supremacy and the Sanctity
of Contracts Marshall brought the support not only of his office and
his command of the art of judicial reasoning but also the whole-souled
democracy and unpretentiousness of the fields. And it must be borne in
mind that Marshall was on view before his contemporaries as a private
citizen rather more of the time, perhaps, than as Chief Justice. His
official career was, in truth, a somewhat leisurely one. Until 1827 the
term at Washington rarely lasted over six weeks and subsequently not
over ten weeks. In the course of his thirty-four years on the Bench, the
Court handed down opinions in over 1100 cases, which is probably about
four times the number of opinions now handed down at a single term; and
of this number Marshall spoke for the Court in about half the cases.
Toward the middle of March, he left Washington for Richmond, and on the
22d of May opened court in his own circuit. Then, three weeks later, if
the docket permitted, he went on to Raleigh to hold court there for a
few days. The summers he usually spent on the estate which he inherited
from his father at Fauquier, or else he went higher up into the
mountains to escape malaria. But by the 22d of November at the latest he
was back once more in Richmond for court, and at the end of December for
a second brief term he again drove to Raleigh in his high-wheeled gig.
With his return to Washington early in February he completed the round
of his judicial year.

The entire lack of pageantry and circumstance which attended these
journeyings of his is nowhere more gaily revealed than in the following
letter to his wife, which is now published for the first time through
the kindness of Mr. Beveridge:

Rawleigh, Jan'y. 2d, 1803.

My Dearest Polly

You will laugh at my vexation when you hear the various calamities that
have befallen me. In the first place when I came to review my funds, I
had the mortification to discover that I had lost 15 silver dollars out
of my waist coat pocket. They had worn through the various mendings the
pocket had sustained and sought their liberty in the sands of Carolina.

I determined not to vex myself with what could not be remedied & ordered
Peter to take out my cloaths that I might dress for court when to my
astonishment & grief after fumbling several minutes in the portmanteau,
starting [sic] at vacancy, & sweating most profusely he turned to me
with the doleful tidings that I had no pair of breeches. You may be sure
this piece of intelligence was not very graciously received; however,
after a little scolding, I determined to make the best of my situation &
immediately set out to get a pair made.

I thought I should be a sans-culotte only one day & that for the residue
of the term I might be well enough dressed for the appearance on the
first day to be forgotten.

But, the greatest of evils, I found, was followed by still greater. Not
a taylor in town could be prevailed on to work for me: They were all so
busy that it was impossible to attend to my wants however pressing they
might be, & I have the extreme mortification to pass the whole time
without that important article of dress I have mentioned. I have no
alleviation for this misfortune but the hope that I shall be enabled in
four or five days to commence my journey homeward & that I shall have
the pleasure of seeing you & our dear children in eight or nine days
after this reaches you.

In the meantime, I flatter myself that you are well and happy.

Adieu my dearest Polly

I am your own affectionate,

J. Marshall.


Marshall erected his Richmond home, called "Shockoe Hill," in 1793 on a
plot of ground which he had purchased four years earlier. Here, as his
eulogist has said, was "the scene of his real triumphs." At an early
date his wife became a nervous invalid, and his devotion to her brought
out all the finest qualities of his sound and tender nature. "It is,"
says Mr. Beveridge, "the most marked characteristic of his entire
private life and is the one thing which differentiates him sharply from
the most eminent men of that heroic but socially free-and-easy period."
From his association with his wife Marshall derived, moreover, an
opinion of the sex "as the friends, the companions, and the equals
of man" which may be said to have furnished one of his few points of
sympathetic contact with American political radicalism in his later
years. The satirist of woman, says Story, "found no sympathy in his
bosom," and "he was still farther above the commonplace flatteries by
which frivolity seeks to administer aliment to personal vanity, or vice
to make its approaches for baser purposes. He spoke to the sex when
present, as he spoke of them when absent, in language of just appeal to
their understandings, their tastes, and their duties."

Marshall's relations with his neighbors were the happiest possible.
Every week, when his judicial duties permitted or the more "laborious
relaxation" of directing his farm did not call him away, he attended the
meetings of the Barbecue Club in a fine grove just outside the city,
to indulge in his favorite diversion of quoits. The Club consisted of
thirty of the most prominent men of Richmond, judges, lawyers, doctors,
clergymen, and merchants. To quoits was added the inducement of an
excellent repast of which roast pig was the piece de resistance. Then
followed a dessert of fruit and melons, while throughout a generous
stock of porter, toddy, and of punch "from which water was carefully
excluded," was always available to relieve thirst. An entertaining
account of a meeting of the Club at which Marshall and his friend
Wickham were the caterers has been thus preserved for us:

"At the table Marshall announced that at the last meeting two members
had introduced politics, a forbidden subject, and had been fined a
basket of champagne, and that this was now produced, as a warning to
evil-doers; as the club seldom drank this article, they had no champagne
glasses, and must drink it in tumblers. Those who played quoits retired
after a while for a game. Most of the members had smooth, highly
polished brass quoits. But Marshall's were large, rough, heavy, and
of iron, such as few of the members could throw well from hub to hub.
Marshall himself threw them with great success and accuracy, and often
'rang the meg.' On this occasion Marshall and the Rev. Mr. Blair led the
two parties of players. Marshall played first, and rang the meg.
Parson Blair did the same, and his quoit came down plumply on top of
Marshall's. There was uproarious applause, which drew out all the others
from the dinner; and then came an animated controversy as to what should
be the effect of this exploit. They all returned to the table, had
another bottle of champagne, and listened to arguments, one from
Marshall, pro se, and one from Wickham for Parson Blair. [Marshall's]
argument is a humorous companion piece to any one of his elaborate
judicial opinions. He began by formulating the question, 'Who is winner
when the adversary quoits are on the meg at the same time?' He then
stated the facts, and remarked that the question was one of the true
construction and applications of the rules of the game. The first one
ringing the meg has the advantage. No other can succeed who does not
begin by displacing this first one. The parson, he willingly allowed,
deserves to rise higher and higher in everybody's esteem; but then he
mustn't do it by getting on another's back in this fashion. That is
more like leapfrog than quoits. Then, again, the legal maxim, Cujus est
solum, ejus est usque ad coelum--his own right as first occupant extends
to the vault of heaven; no opponent can gain any advantage by squatting
on his back. He must either bring a writ of ejectment, or drive him out
vi et armis. And then, after further argument of the same sort, he asked
judgment, and sat down amidst great applause. Mr. Wickham then rose,
