gentleman," went sailing up the Appomattox in search of corn for
the settlement.  He had to go warily because no one could tell how
the Indians would behave, for they would be friends or foes just
as it suited them.  If they got the chance of killing the Pale-faces
and stealing their goods they would do so.  But if they were not
strong enough to do that they would willingly trade for the coloured
cloths, beads and hatchets they so much wanted.

Presently Argall came to the country of one of the chiefs with
whom he had made friends.  While here he was told that Pocahontas,
the great Powhatan's daughter, was living with the tribe.  As soon
as he heard this Captain Argall saw at once that here was a means
of forcing the Powhatan to make peace, and he resolved at all costs
to get possession of Pocahontas.  So sending for the chief he told
him he must bring Pocahontas on board his ship.

But the chief was afraid and refused to do this.

"Then we are no longer brothers and friends," said Argall.

"My father," said the chief, "be not wroth.  For if I do this thing
the Powhatan will make war upon me and upon my people."

"My brother," said Argall," have no fear; if so be that the
Powhatan shall make war upon you I will join with you against him
to overthrow him utterly.  I mean, moreover, no manner of hurt to
Pocahontas, but will only keep her as hostage until peace be made
between the Powhatan and the Pale-faces.  If therefore you do my
bidding I will give to you the copper kettle which you desire so
much."

Now the chief longed greatly to possess the copper kettle.  So he
promised to do as Argall asked, and began to cast about for an excuse
for getting Pocahontas on board.  Soon he fell upon a plan.  He bade
his wife pretend that she was very anxious to see the Englishman's
ship.  But when she asked to be taken on board he refused to go with
her.  Again and again she asked.  Again and again the chief refused.
Then the poor lady wept with disappointment and at length the chief,
pretending to be very angry, swore that he would beat her if she
did not cease her asking and her tears.  But as she still begged
and wept he said he would take her if Pocahontas would go too.

To please the old woman Pocahontas went.  Captain Argall received
all three very courteously, and made a great feast for them in his
cabin.  The old chief, however, was so eager to get his promised
kettle that he could little enjoy the feast, but kept kicking
Captain Argall under the table as much as to say, "I have done my
part, now you do yours."

At length Captain Argall told Pocahontas that she must stay with
him until peace was made between her father and the white men.  As
soon as the old chief and his wife heard that they began to howl,
and cry, and make a great noise, so as to pretend that they knew
nothing about the plot.  Pocahontas too began to cry.  But Argall
assured her that no harm was intended her, and that she need have
no fear.  So she was soon comforted and dried her eyes.

As for the wily old Indians they were made quite happy with the
copper kettle and a few other trifles, and went merrily back to
the shore.

A messenger was then sent to the Powhatan telling him that his
daughter, whom he loved so dearly, was a prisoner, and that he
could only ransom her by sending back all the Pale-faces he held
prisoner, with all their guns, swords and tools which he had stolen.

When Powhatan got this news he was both angry and sorry.  For he
loved his daughter very dearly, but he loved the Englishmen's tools
and weapons almost more.  He did not know what to do, so for three
months he did nothing.  Then at last he sent back seven of his
prisoners, each one carrying a useless gun.

"Tell your chieftain," he said, "that all the rest of the arms of
the Pale-faces are lost, or have been stolen from me.  But if the
Pale-faces will give back my daughter I will give satisfaction
for all the other things I have taken, together with five hundred
bushels of corn, and will make peace forever."

But the Englishmen were not easily deceived.  They returned a message
to the chief saying, "Your daughter is well used.  But we do not
believe the rest of our arms are either lost or stolen, and therefore
until you send them we will keep your daughter."

The Powhatan was so angry when he got this message that for a long
time he would have no further dealings with the Pale-faces, but
continued to vex and harass them as much as he could.

At length Sir Thomas Dale, seeking to put an end to this, took
Pocahontas, and with a hundred and fifty men sailed up the river
to the Powhatan's chief town.

As soon as the savages saw the white men they came down to the river's
bank, jeering at them and insulting them, haughtily demanding why
they had come.

"We have brought the Powhatan's daughter," replied the Englishmen.
"For we are come to receive the ransom promised, and if you do not
give it willingly we will take it by force."

But the savages were not in the least afraid at that threat.  They
jeered the more.

"If so be," they cried, "that you are come to fight you are right
welcome, for we are ready for you.  But we advise you, if you love
your lives, to retire with haste.  Else we will serve you as we have
served others of your countrymen."

"Oh," answered the Englishmen, "we must have a better answer than
that," and driving their ship nearer to the shore they made ready
to land.

But as soon as they were within bow shot the savages let fly their
arrows.  Thick and fast they fell, rattling on the deck, glancing
from the men's armour, wounding not a few.  This reception made the
Englishmen angry, so without more ado they launched their boats and
made for the shore.  The savages fled at their coming, and so enraged
were the colonists against them that they burned their houses, and
utterly destroyed their town.  Then they sailed on up the river in
pursuit of the Redmen.

Next day they came up again with the savages.  They were now not so
insolent and sent a messenger to ask why the Pale-faces had burned
their town.

"Why did you fire upon us?" asked the Englishmen, sternly.

"Brothers," replied the Redmen, "we did not fire upon you.  It was
but some stray savages who did so.  We intend you no hurt and are
your friends."

With these and many other fair words they tried to pacify the
Pale-faces.  So the Englishmen, who had no wish to fight, made peace
with them.  Then the Indians sent a messenger to the Powhatan who
was a day's journey off; and the Englishmen were told they must
wait two days for his answer.

Meanwhile the Englishmen asked to see their comrades whom the
Indians had taken prisoner.

"We cannot show them to you," replied the wily Redmen, "for they have
all run away in fear lest you should hang them.  But the Powhatan's
men are pursuing after them, and will doubtless bring them back."

"Then where are the swords and guns which you have stolen from us?"
demanded the Englishmen.

"These you shall have to-morrow," replied the Redmen.

But, as the Englishmen well knew, this was all idle talk and deceit,
and next day no message came from the Powhatan, neither were any
swords nor guns forthcoming.  So once more the Englishmen set sail
and went still further up the river.

Here quite close to another village belonging to the Powhatan they
came upon four hundred Indians in war paint.  When they saw the
Englishmen the Indians yelled and danced, and dared them to come
ashore.  This the Englishmen, nothing daunted, accordingly did.  The
Redmen on their side showed no fear, but walked boldly up and down
among the Englishmen, demanding to speak with their captain.

So the chiefs were brought to Sir Thomas.

"Why do you come against us thus?" they asked. "We are friends and
brothers.  Let us not fight until we have sent once again to our
King to know his pleasure.  Then if he sends not back the message
of peace we will fight you and defend our own as best we may."

The Englishmen knew well that by all this talk of peace the Indians
wanted but to gain time so that they might be able to carry away
and hide their stores.  Still they had no desire to fight if by any
other means they might gain their end.  So they promised a truce
until noon the day following. "And if we then decide to fight you,
you shall be warned of it by the sounding of our drums and trumpets,"
they said.

The truce being settled Pocahontas' two brothers came on board the
Englishmen's ships to visit their sister.  And when they saw that
she was well cared for, and appeared to be quite happy they were
very glad, for they had heard that she was ill treated and most
miserable.  But finding her happy they promised to persuade their
father to ransom her, and make friends again with the Pale-faces.

Seeing them thus friendly Sir Thomas suggested that Pocahontas' two
brothers should stay on board his vessel as hostages while he sent
two of his company to parley with the Powhatan.  This was accordingly
done, and Master John Rolfe and Master Sparkes set off on their
mission.  When, however, they reached the village where the Powhatan
was hiding they found him still in high dudgeon, and he refused to
see them, or speak with them.  So they had to be content with seeing
his brother, who treated them with all courtesy and kindness and
promised to do his best to pacify the Powhatan.

It was now April, and high time for the colonists to be back
on their farms sowing their corn.  So with this promise they were
fain to be content in the meantime.  And having agreed upon a truce
until harvest time they set sail once more for Jamestown, taking
Pocahontas with them.

One at least among the company of Englishmen was glad that
the negotiations with the Powhatan had come to nothing, and that
Pocahontas had not been ransomed.  That was Master John Rolfe.  For
Pocahontas, although a savage, was beautiful and kind, and John
Rolfe had fallen madly in love with her.  So he had no desire that
she should return to her own tribe, but rather that she should
return to Jamestown and marry him.

Pocahontas, too, was quite fond of John Rolfe, although she had
never forgotten her love for the great White Chief whose life she
had saved.  The Englishmen, however, told her that he had gone away
never to come back any more, and that very likely he was dead.
Pocahontas was then easily persuaded to marry John Rolfe.  But he
himself, although he loved her very much, had some misgivings.  For
was this beautiful savage not a heathen?

That difficulty was, however, soon overcome.  For Pocahontas made no
objection to becoming a Christian.  So one day there was a great
gathering in the little church at Jamestown when the heathen
princess stood beside the fort, and the water of Christian baptism
was sprinkled on her dark face, and she was given the Bible name
of Rebecca.

And now when the Powhatan heard that his daughter was going to
marry one of the Pale-faces he was quite pleased.  He forgot all
his anger and sulkiness, sent many of his braves to be present at
the wedding, and swore to be the friend and brother of the Pale-faces
forever more.

Sir Thomas Dale was delighted.  So every one was pleased, and one
morning early in April three hundred years ago all the inhabitants
of the country round, both Redman and White, gathered to see the
wedding.  And from that day for eight years, as long as the Powhatan
lived, there was peace between him and his brothers, the Pale-faces.

__________





Chapter 16 - How Pocahontas Took a Journey Over the Seas




At peace with the Indians, the colonists could till their fields
without fear of attack.  And now, besides corn, they began to grow
tobacco.

You remember that Columbus had noticed how the natives of his "India"
smoked rolled-up dried leaves.  But, no one paid much attention to
it.  Then the men of Raleigh's expedition again noticed it.  They
tried it themselves, found it comforting, and brought both tobacco
and the habit home with them.  And soon not only the seafaring
adventurers but many a man who was never likely to see the ocean,
or adventure beyond his native town, had taken to smoking.  That,
too, despite his king's disgust at it.  For James thought smoking
was "a custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to
the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black smoking fumes
thereof nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke of the pit
that is bottomless." He indeed wrote a little book against it,
which he called "A Counterblaste to Tobacco." But no one paid much
attention to him.  The demand for tobacco became greater and greater,
and soon the Virginian farmers found that there was a sale for as
much tobacco as they could grow, and that a crop of it paid better
than anything else.

Up till now the colony had. been a constant disappointment to the
"adventurers" - that is, to the people who had given the money to
fit out the expeditions - the shareholders we would now call them.

Most of them had adventured their money, not with any idea of
founding a New England beyond the seas where men should settle down
as farmers and tillers of the soil.  They had adventured it rather
for the finding of gold and pearls, jewels and spices, so that it
might be repaid quickly, and a hundredfold.  But year by year passed,
and all these glittering hopes were doomed to disappointment.  No
gold was found.  The adventurers saw their money being swallowed
up for nought.  They grew discontented and grumbled, some of them
refused to pay any more, refused to throw more away on an empty
dream.  They little knew that they were helping to found a new State
which in time was to become one of the world's greatest powers.
They little knew that in days to come their money should produce
a harvest a thousand, thousandfold, and that from the broad land,
of which they had helped to settle a tiny corner, was to come wealth
such as in their wildest imaginings, they had never dreamt.

Meanwhile, anything a Virginian wanted he could buy with tobacco.
Indeed, after a time the Virginians threw themselves with such
complete enthusiasm into the growing of tobacco that they were
reproached for neglecting everything else because of it.

The English were not the only people who had set forth to find
golden wealth and broad lands beyond the seas.  Both the French and
the Dutch had carried their standard across the ocean, and planted
it upon the further shores.  Already, too, the struggle for possession
began.

Captain Argall, in one of his many expeditions, sailing northward
to the Bay of Fundy, found a French colony settled there.  Argall
swooped down upon them, and claiming the whole continent by right
of Cabot's discovery, he utterly destroyed the colony, burning the
houses to the ground, and carrying off the cattle.

Argall next found a Dutch colony on the Hudson River.  Here he
contented himself with ordering the Governor to pull down the Dutch
flag and run up the English one.  To save his colony the Dutchman
did as he was commanded.  But as soon as the arrogant Englishman
was out of sight he calmly ran up his own flag once more.

Meanwhile under Sir Thomas Dale Virginia continued to prosper.  Then
after five years' rule Sir Thomas went home and the colony was left
to a new ruler.  With him went John Rolfe and his wife Pocahontas,
together with their little baby son.

Now began a wonderful new life for the beautiful Indian.  Only a
few years before she had been a merry, little, half naked savage,
turning cart wheels all over the Jamestown fort, and larking with
the boys.  Now she found herself treated as a great lady.

In those days the people in England had very little idea of the
life out in the wilds.  The Powhatan, they had heard, was a king, a
sort of emperor, indeed, and they doubtless pictured him as living in
a stately palace, wearing a golden crown and velvet robes.  That a
"king" should be a half-naked savage, living in a mud hut, wearing
a crown of feathers on his head, and a string of beads about
his neck, they could not imagine.  As the Powhatan was a king then
his daughter was a princess, and as such must be treated with all
respect.

It is even said that John Rolfe was roundly scolded by King James
for daring to marry a princess without first asking leave.

"For," he gravely pointed out, "if the Powhatan was a king and
Pocahontas his daughter, when the Powhatan died Rolfe or his baby
son might become King of Virginia.  It was not meet or right that a
commoner should thus lightly take upon himself to marry the daughter
of a brother sovereign."

Every one, then, was ready to treat Pocahontas with deference.  Besides
this John Smith wrote to the Queen relating all that she had done
for the Colony of Virginia and begging her to be kind to the Indian
girl who had done so much for England.  For that or some other reason
the Queen took an interest in the little dusky Princess.  Pocahontas
was presented to her, and was often seen at the theatre or other
entertainment with her.  The ladies of the court were made to treat
Pocahontas with great ceremony.  They addressed her as "Princess"
or "Lady," remained standing before her, and walked backwards when
they left her presence; famous artists painted her portrait; poets
wrote of her, and in one of his plays Ben Johnson calls her

The Blessed Pokahontas, as the historian calls her And great King's
daughter of Virginia.

In fact she became the rage.  She was the talk of the town.  Even
coffee-houses and taverns were named after her,-La Belle Sauvage
(the beautiful savage).  And it is interesting to remember that a
great publishing house in London takes its name from one of these
old taverns.  Books go out to all the world from the sign of La
Belle Sauvage, thus forming a link between the present and that
half-forgotten American "princess" of so long ago.

In spite of all the homage and flattery poured upon her, Pocahontas
yet remained modest and simple, enchanting all who met her.  And
among all the new delights of England she had the joy of seeing once
again the great White Chief she had loved and called her father in
days gone by.

Her joy was all the greater because she had believed him to be
dead.  When Smith first came to see her her feelings were so deep
that at first she could not speak.  She greeted him in silence,
then suddenly turning away she hid her face and wept.  But after a
little she recovered herself, and began to speak of the old days,
and of how she had thought he was dead. "I knew no other," she
said, "until I came to Plymouth."

In many ways Pocahontas showed her joy at again recovering her old
friend.  But when she found that Smith was not going to treat her
as an old friend, but as if she were a great lady, and call her
Princess like all the others round her, she was hurt.

"You did promise the Powhatan that what was yours should be his,
and he did promise the like to you," she said. "A stranger in his
land you called him father, and I shall do the same by you."

"Lady," replied Smith, "I dare not allow that title, for you are
a King's daughter."

But from the man who had known her in those strange, wild days in
far-off Virginia, from the man she had looked upon as a great and
powerful chief, Pocahontas would have no such nonsense.  She laughed
at him.

"You were not afraid," she said defiantly, "to come into my father's
country, and cause fear in him, and in all his people save me.
And fear you here that I should call you father? I tell you then
I will.  And you shall call me child.  And so I will be forever and
ever your countryman."

Pocahontas took all the strangeness of her new surroundings very
simply.  But some of her attendants were utterly overwhelmed with
wonder and awe at the things they saw.  One man in particular, who
was accounted a very clever man among his own people, had been sent
by the Powhatan to take particular note of everything in England.
Among other things he had been charged to count the people! So
on landing at Plymouth he provided himself with a long stick and
proceeded to make a notch in it for every man he met.  But he met
so many people that he could not make notches fast enough; so in
a very short time he grew weary of that and threw his stick away.

Coming to London he was more amazed than ever.  Never had he seen
so great a city nor so many folk all gathered together, and among
them not one familiar face.  So he welcomed Captain John Smith like
an old friend, and eagerly questioned him as to the wonders of this
strange country.  More especially he asked to see God, the King and
Queen, and the Prince.

Captain Smith tried as best he could to explain to the poor heathen
about God, telling him He could not be seen.  As, to the King, he
added, "you have seen him."

"No," said the Indian, "I have not seen your great King."

Then when Captain Smith explained that the little man with a jeweled
feather in his cap and sword by his side, who had one day spoken
to him was the King, the Indian was much disappointed.

"You gave Powhatan a white dog," he said, "which Powhatan fed as
himself.  But your King gave me nothing."

However if the old Indian was disappointed with the manner in which
the King had received him he was much made of by others.  For every
one was eager to see this wild savage.  And often to please these
new friends he would sing to them and make their blood creep by
his wild dances.

Pocahontas loved England where she was so kindly treated.  She took
to the new life so well that it is said she soon "became very formal
and civil after our English manner." But she who had been used to
roam the wild woods could not live in the confinement of towns,
and soon she became very ill.  So she made up her mind at length,
sorely against her will, to go back to Virginia with her husband.
Captain Argall was about to return there as Deputy Governor.  So
Pocahontas and her husband took passages in his boat.

But Pocahontas was never again to see her native shore.  She went on
board Captain Argall's boat, the George, and indeed set sail from
London, but before she reached Gravesend she became so ill that
she had to be taken ashore, and there she died.  She was buried in
the chancel of the Parish Church.  Later the Church was burned down,
but it was rebuilt, and as a memorial to Pocahontas American ladies
have placed a stained glass window there, and also a pulpit made
of Virginian wood.

John Rolfe returned alone to Virginia, leaving his little son
Thomas behind him in the care of an uncle.  He remained in England
until he was grown up, and then went to his native land.  There he
married, and had a daughter, and became the ancestor of several
Virginian families who are to this day proud to trace their descent
from beautiful Pocahontas and her English husband.

__________





Chapter 17 - How the Redmen Fought Against Their White Brothers




The Colony of Virginia which had prospered so greatly under Sir
Thomas Dale had fallen again on evil days.  For Samuel Argall, who
now governed, proved a tyrant.  Dale had been autocratic, but he had
been autocratic for the good of the colony.  Argall was autocratic
for his own gains.  He extorted money and tribute from the colonists
to make himself rich, and profits which should have gone to the
company went into his pocket.  Again and again the colonists sent
home complaints of Argall's doings.  At length these complaints became
so loud and long that the company once more sent Lord Delaware out
as Governor.

But on the way Lord Delaware died, and the party of settlers he was
bringing out arrived without him.  On their arrival Argall at once
took possession of Lord Delaware's private papers, and much to his
disgust he found among them one telling Lord Delaware to arrest
Argall and send him back to England.

This made Argall very angry; it also made him more despotic and
cruel than ever.  In consequence still more bitter complaints reached
home from the colonists.

At this time the company at home were quarrelling among themselves.
But in the end they sent out a new Governor called Sir George
Yeardley.  He, too, had orders to arrest Argall and send him home.
But Argall somehow came to know of it, and he made up his mind not
to go home a prisoner.  So before the new Governor could arrive he
packed up his goods, and leaving the colony to take care of itself,
sailed gaily off to England.

The Virginians now were heartily tired of despots, and thought
that it was time that they had some say in the matter of governing
themselves.  At the head of the company at home there was at this
time a wise man named Sandys.  He also thought that it would be best
for the colony to be self-governing.

And so on July 30th, 1619, the first General Election was held in
Virginia, and the first Parliament of Englishmen in America met.
There were by this time about two thousand people living in the
colony, and the settlements were scattered about on both sides
of the river for sixty miles or so above Jamestown.  So the colony
was divided into eleven parts or constituencies, each constituency
sending two members to the little parliament.  These members
were called burgesses, and the parliament was called the House of
Burgesses.  But there was no special building in which the burgesses
could gather, so the meetings were held in the little wooden church
at Jamestown.  And thus with such small beginnings were the first
foundations of a free and independent nation laid.  And because of
the founding of this House of Burgesses 1619 stands out as the year
most to be remembered in all the early days of Virginia.

But 1619 has to be remembered for another, and this time a sad reason:
for it saw not only the beginnings of freedom, but the beginnings
of slavery.

Just a month after the opening of the House of Burgesses a Dutch
vessel anchored at Jamestown.  The captain had been on a raiding
expedition off the coast of Africa, and he had on board a cargo of
negroes, whom he had stolen from their homes.  Twenty of these he
sold to the farmers.  And thus slavery was first introduced upon
the Virginian plantations.

In 1619, too, there arrived the first ship-load of women colonists.
Nearly all the settlers were men.  A few indeed had brought their
wives and daughters with them, but for the most part the colony
was a community of men.  Among these there were many who were young,
and as they grew rich and prosperous they wanted to marry and have
homes of their own.  But there was no one for them to marry.  So
at length some one at home fell upon the plan of persuading young
women to go out to Virginia to settle there, and in 1619 a ship-load
of ninety came out.  As soon as they arrived they found many young
men eager to marry them, and sometimes they must have found it
difficult to make a choice.  But as soon as a young man was accepted
he had to pay the Company 120 Ibs., afterwards raised to 150 Ibs.,
of tobacco as the price of his bride's passage across the seas.
Then they were free to marry as soon as they pleased.

After this from time to time women went out to the colony.  Sometimes
we read of "a widow and eleven maids," or again of "fifty maids for
wives." And always there came with them a letter from the company
at home to the old men of the colony reminding them that these
young women did not come to be servants. "We pray you therefore to
be fathers to them in their business, not enforcing them to marry
against their wills, neither send them to be servants," they wrote.
And if the girls did not marry at once they were to be treated as
guests and "put to several householders that have wives till they
can be provided of husbands."

Helped in this quaint fashion and in others the colony prospered
and grew ever larger.  It would have prospered even more had it
not been for the outbreak of a kind of plague, which the colonists
simply called "the sickness." It attacked chiefly the new settlers,
and was so deadly that in one year a thousand of them died.  Doctors
were not very skilful in those days, and although they did their
best, all their efforts were of little use, till at length the
dread disease wore itself out.

But in spite of all difficulties the colony grew, the settlements
extended farther and farther in a long line up and down both banks
of the James from Chesapeake Bay to what is now Richmond.  Had the
Indians been unfriendly, the colony could not have stretched out
in this fashion without great danger to the settlers.  But for eight
years the Redmen had been at peace with their white brothers, and
the settlers had lost all fear of attack from them.  The Indians,
indeed, might be seen wandering freely about the towns and farms.
They came into the houses, and even shared the meals of the farmer
and his household.  Nothing, to all outward seeming, could be more
friendly than the relations between the Redmen and the settlers.

Then after eight years, old Powhatan, the father of Pocahontas,
died, and his brother became chief of the tribe.  It may be that
this new chief was known not to be so friendly to the Pale-faces as
his brother had been.  In any case the Governor took the precaution
of sending a messenger to him with renewed expressions of friendship.

Opekankano received the messenger kindly and sent him back to his
master. "Tell the Pale-faces," he said, "that I hold the peace so
sure that the skies shall fall sooner than it should be broken."

But at this very time he and his people were plotting utterly to
destroy the settlers.  Yet they gave no hint of it.  They had planned
a general massacre, yet two days before the 22nd of March, the day
fixed for it, some settlers were safely guided through the woods by
the Indians.  They came as usual, quite unarmed, into the settlers'
houses, selling game, fish and furs in exchange for glass beads and
such trifles.  Even on the night of the 21st of March they borrowed
the settlers' boats so that many of their tribe could get quickly
across the river.  Next morning in many places the Indians were
sitting at breakfast with the settlers and their families when
suddenly, as at a given signal, they sprang up, and, seizing the
settlers own weapons, killed them all, sparing neither men, women
nor children.  So sudden was the onslaught that many a man fell dead
without a cry, seeing not the hand which smote him.  In the workshops,
in the fields, in the gardens, wherever they were, wherever their
daily work took them, they were thus suddenly and awfully struck
down.

For days and weeks the Indians had watched the habits of the
settlers until they knew the daily haunts of every man.  Then they
had planned one swift and deadly blow which was to wipe out the
whole colony.  And so cunning was their plot, so complete and perfect
their treachery, that they might have succeeded but for the love
of one faithful Indian.  This Indian, named Chanco, lived with one
of the settlers named Pace, and had become his servant.  But Pace
treated him more as a son than as a servant, and the Indian had
become very devoted to him.  When, then, this Indian was told that
his chief commanded him to murder his master he felt that he could
not do it.  Instead, he went at once to Pace and told him of the
plot.  Pace then made ready to defend himself, and sent warnings
to all the other settlers within reach.  Thus a great many of the
colonists were saved from death, but three hundred and fifty were
cruelly slain.

This sudden and treacherous attack, after so many years of peace,
enraged the white men, and they followed the Redmen with a terrible
vengeance.  They hunted them like wild beasts, tracking them down
with bloodhounds, driving them mercilessly from place to place,
until, their corn destroyed, their houses burned, their canoes
smashed to splinters, the Indians were fain to sue for mercy, and
peace once more was restored for more than twenty years.

__________





Chapter 18 - How Englishmen Fought a Duel With Tyranny




At last Virginia prospered.  But while it prospered the man who had
first conceived the idea of this New England beyond the seas had
fallen on evil days.  Sir Walter Raleigh had been thrown into prison
by King James.  There for twelve long years he languished, only to
be set free at length on condition that he should find a gold-mine
for his King.  He failed to find the mine, and by his efforts only
succeeded in rousing to greater heights than before the Spanish
hatred against him.  For Spain claimed the land and gold of which
Raleigh had gone in search.  And now the King of Spain demanded that
he should be punished.  And James, weakly yielding to his outcry,
condemned Sir Walter to death.  So on 29th of October, 1618,
this great pioneer laid his head upon the block, meeting death as
gallantly as ever man died.

"I shall yet live to see it (Virginia) an English nation," he had
said, after his own fifth failure to found a colony, and his words
had come true.  But long ere his death Raleigh had ceased to have
any connection with Virginia.  And perhaps there was scarce a man
among those who had made their homes there who remembered that it
was Raleigh who had prepared the way, that but for Raleigh a new
Spain and not a New England might have been planted on the American
shores.

So the death of Raleigh made no difference to the fortunes of
Virginia.  But the same stupidity, that same "wonderful instinct for
the wrong side of every question" which made James kill his great
subject, also made him try to stifle the infant colony.  So while
in spite of sickness and massacre the colony prospered, the company
at home was passing through strenuous times.  The head or treasurer
of the company was still that Sir Edwin Sandys who had been the
chief mover in giving the colony self-government.  King James, who
was full of great ideas about the divine right of kings, had never
forgiven him that.  He was as eager as any of his people to build
up a colonial Empire, but he desired that it should be one which
should be dependent on himself.  He had no intention of allowing
colonies to set themselves up against him.

Now the time came to elect a new treasurer, and the company being
very pleased with Sandys, decided to elect him again.  But when King
James heard that, he was very angry.  He called the company a school
of treason and Sandys his greatest enemy.  Then, flinging himself
out of the room in a terrible passion, he shouted "Choose the Devil
if you will, but not Sir Edwin Sandys."

