to get up, and the milkwoman coming round at that instant, he went
downstairs, and brought up a quart, with a penny loaf, on which we made
a comfortable meal. He then shared his money with me, which amounted to
eighteen-pence, and left me with an intention to borrow an old wig and
hat of his friend the schoolmaster.

He was no sooner gone, than I began to consider my situation with great
uneasiness, and revolved all the schemes my imagination could suggest,
in order to choose and pursue some one that would procure me bread; for
it is impossible to express the pangs I felt, when I reflected on the
miserable dependence in which I lived at the expense of a poor barber's
boy, My pride took the alarm, and having no hopes of succeeding at the
Navy Office, I came to a resolution of enlisting in the foot-guards next
day, be the event what it would. This extravagant design, by flattering
my disposition, gave great satisfaction; and I was charging the enemy at
the head of my own regiment, when Strap's return interrupted my reverie.
The schoolmaster had made him a present of the tie-wig which he wore,
when I was introduced to him, together with an old hat, whose brims
would have overshadowed a Colossus. Though Strap had ventured to
wear them in the dusk, he did not choose to entertain the mob by day;
therefore went to work immediately, and reduced them both to a moderate
size. While he was employed in this office, he addressed me thus: "To
be sure, Mr. Random, you are born a gentleman, and have a great deal of
learning--and, indeed, look like a gentleman; for, as to person, you may
hold up your head with the best of them. On the other hand, I am a poor
but honest cobbler's son: my mother was as industrious a woman as ever
broke bread, till such time as she took to drinking, which you very well
know; but everybody has failings--Humanum est errare. Now myself, I am
a poor journeyman barber, tolerably well made and understand some Latin,
and have a smattering of Greek; but what of that? Perhaps I might
also say, that I know a little of the world; but that is to no
purpose,--though you be gentle, and I simple, it does not follow, but
that I who am simple may do a good office to you who are gentle. Now
this is the case: my kinsman, the schoolmaster--perhaps you did not know
he how nearly he is related to me--I'll satisfy you in that presently;
his mother and my grandmother's sister's nephew--no, that's not it!--my
grandfather's brother's daughter--rabbit it! I have forgot the
degree. But this I know, he and I are cousins seven times removed." My
impatience to know the good office he had done me, got the better of my
temper, and I interrupted him at this place with the exclamation, "If
the schoolmaster or you can be of any advantage to me, why don't you
tell me without all this preamble?" When I pronounced these words
with some vehemence, Strap looked at me for same time with a grave
countenance, and then went on: "I'm very sorry to see such an alteration
in your temper of late; you were always fiery, but now you are grown
as crabbed as old Periwinkle the drunken tinker, on whom you and I (God
forgive us!) played so many unlucky tricks while we were at school--but
I will no longer detain you in suspense, because (doubtless) nothing
is more uneasy than doubt--Dubio procul dubio nil dubius. My friend or
relation, or which you will, or both, the schoolmaster, being informed
of the regard I have for you; for you may be sure I did not fail to let
him know of your good qualities--by the bye, he has undertaken to teach
you the pronunciation of the English tongue, without which, he says, you
will be unfit for business in this country--I say my relation has spoke
in your behalf to a French apothecary who wants a journeyman; and on
his recommendation you may have fifteen pounds a year, bed and board,
whenever you please." I was too much interested in this piece of news
to entertain it with indifference; but, jumping up, insisted on Strap's
immediately accompanying me to the house of his friend, that I might not
lose this opportunity through the least delay or neglect on my part.

We were informed, that the schoolmaster was in company at a publichouse
in the neighbourhood, whither we repaired, and found him drinking with
the very individual apothecary in question. When he was called to the
door at our desire, and observed my impatience, he broke out into his
usual term of admiration. "Oh! I suppose, when you heard of this offer,
you did not take leisure enough to come downstairs, but leaped out of
the window: did you overturn no porter nor oyster-woman in your way? It
was a mercy of God you did not knock your brains out against some post
in your career. Oh, my conscience! I believe, had I been in the inmost
recesses of my habitation--the very penetralia--your eagerness would
have surmounted bolts, bars, decency, and everything. The den of Cacus,
or sanctum sanctorum, could not have hid me from you. But come along
the gentleman of whom I spoke is in the house; I will present you to
him forthwith." When I entered the room, I perceived four or five people
smoking, one of whom the schoolmaster accosted thus: "Mr. Lavement,
here's the young man of whom I spoke to you." The apothecary, who was
a little old withered man, with a forehead about an inch high, a nose
turned up at the end, large cheek-bones that helped to form a pit for
his little gray eyes, a great bag of loose skin hanging down on each
side in wrinkles, like the alforjos of a baboon, and a mouth so much
accustomed to that contraction which produces grinning, that he could
not pronounce a syllable without discovering the remains of his teeth,
which consisted of four yellow fangs, not improperly, by anatomists,
called canine. This person, I say, after having eyed me some time,
said, "Oho, 'tis ver well, Monsieur Concordance; young man, you are
ver welcome, take one coup of bierre--and come to mine house to-morrow
morning; Monsieur Concordance vil show you de way." Upon this I made my
bow, and as I went out of the room could hear him say, "Ma foi! c'est un
beau garcon; c'est un gaillard."

As I had by my own application, while I served Crab, acquired the
French tongue well enough to read authors written in that language
and understand anything that occurred in conversation, I determined
to pretend ignorance to my new master, that he and his family, whom I
supposed to be of the same country, not being on the reserve before me,
I might possibly discover something in discourse, which would either
yield me amusement or advantage. Next morning Mr. Concordance carried me
to the apothecary's house, where the bargain was made, and orders given
to provide an apartment for me immediately. But before I entered upon
business the schoolmaster recommended me to his tailor, who gave me
credit for a suit of clothes, to be paid out of the first moiety of
my wages, and they were begun upon that very day; he afterwards
accommodated me with a new hat on the same term: so that in a few days
I hoped to make a very fashionable appearance. In the meantime, Strap
conveyed my baggage to the place allotted for me, which was a back room
up two pair of stairs, furnished with a pallet for me to lie upon, a
chair without a back, a bottle by way of candlestick, and a triangular
piece of glass instead of a mirror; the rest of its ornaments having
been lately removed to one of the garrets, for the convenience of the
servant of an Irish captain, who lodged in the first floor.






CHAPTER XIX

The character of Mr. Lavement, his wife and daughter--some anecdotes
of the family--the mother and daughter rivals--I am guilty of a mistake
that gives me present satisfaction, but is attended with troublesome
consequences

Next day, while I was at work in the shop, a bouncing damsel well
dressed came on pretence of finding a vial for some use or other; and
taking an opportunity, when she thought I did not mind her, of observing
me narrowly, went away with a silent look of disdain. I easily guessed
her sentiments, and my pride took the resolution of entertaining the
same indifference and neglect towards her. At dinner the maids, with
whom I dined in the kitchen, gave me to understand that this was my
master's only daughter, who would have a very handsome fortune, on
account of which, and her beauty, a great many young gentlemen made
their addresses to her--that she had been twice on the brink of
marriage, but disappointed by the stinginess of her father, who refused
to part with a shilling to promote the match; for which reason the young
lady did not behave to her father with all the filial veneration that
might be expected. In particular she harboured the most perfect hatred
for his countrymen; in which disposition she resembled her mother, who
was an English-woman; and, by the hints they dropped, I learned the gray
mare was the better horse--that she was a matron of a high spirit, which
was often manifested at the expense of her dependents; that she loved
diversions, and looked upon miss as her rival in all parties--which was
indeed the true cause of her disappointments; for had the mother been
hearty in her interest, the father would not have ventured to refuse her
demands. Over and above this intelligence, I, of myself, soon made more
discoveries. Mr. Lavement's significant grins at his wife, while she
looked another way, convinced me that he was not at all content with his
lot; and his behaviour in presence of the captain made me believe his
chief torment was jealousy. As for my own part, I was considered in no
other light than that of a menial servant, and had been already six days
in the house without being honoured with one word from either mother or
daughter; the latter (as I understood from the maids) having at table
one day expressed some surprise that her papa should entertain such
an awkward mean-looking journeyman. I was nettled at this piece of
information, and next Sunday (it being my turn to take my diversion)
dressed myself in my new clothes to the greatest advantage, and, vanity
apart, made no contemptible figure.

After having spent most part of the day in company with Strap and some
of his acquaintance, I came home in the afternoon, and was let in by
miss, who not knowing me, dropped a low curtsey as I advanced, which
I returned with a profound bow, and shut the door. By the time I had
turned about, she had perceived her mistake, and changed colour, but
did not withdraw. The passage being narrow, I could not get away without
jolting her; so I was forced to remain where I was with my eyes fixed
to the ground, and my face glowing with blushes. At length, her vanity
coming to her assistance, she went away tittering, and I could hear her
pronounce the word 'creature!' From this day forward, she came into the
shop fifty times, every day upon various pretences, and put in practice
so many ridiculous airs, that I could easily perceive her opinion of
me was changed, and that she did not think me altogether an unworthy
conquest. But my heart was so steeled against her charms by pride and
resentment, which were two chief ingredients in my disposition, that I
remained insensible to all her arts; and notwithstanding some advances
she made, could not be prevailed upon to yield her the least attention.
This neglect soon banished all the favourable impressions she felt for
me, and the rage of a slighted woman took place in her heart; this she
manifested not only in all the suggestions her malice could invent to
my prejudice with her father, but also in procuring for me such servile
employments as she hoped would sufficiently humble my spirit. One day in
particular, she ordered me to brush my master's coat; but I refusing, a
smart dialogue ensued, which ended in her bursting into tears of rage;
when her mother interposing, and examining into the merits of the cause,
determined it in my favour: and this good office I owed not to any
esteem or consideration she had for me, but solely to the desire of
mortifying her daughter, who on this occasion observed, that let people
be never so much in the right, there were some folks who would never do
them justice, but, to be sure, they had their reasons for it, which some
people were ignorant of, although they despised their little arts. This
insinuation of some people and some folks put me upon observing the
behaviour of my mistress more narrowly for the future: and it was not
long before I had reason to believe that she looked upon her daughter as
a rival in the affections of Captain O'Donnell, who lodged in the house.

In the meantime, my industry and knowledge gained me the goodwill of my
master, who would often say in French, "Mardy! c'est un bon garcon."
He had a great deal of business; but he was mostly employed among
his fellow refugees, his profits were small. However, his expense for
medicines was not great; for he was the most expert man at a succedaneum
of any apothecary in London, so that I have been sometimes amazed to see
him, without the least hesitation, make up a physician's prescription,
though he had not in his shop one medicine mentioned in it.
Oyster-shells he could convert into crab's eyes; common oil into oil
of sweet almonds; syrup of sugar into balsamic syrup; Thames water into
aqua cinnamoni; and a hundred more costly preparations were produced in
an instant, from the cheapest and coarsest drugs of the materia medica:
and when any common thing was ordered for a patient, he always took care
to disguise it in colour or taste, or both, in such a manner that it
could not possibly be known; for which purpose cochineal and oil of
cloves were of great service. Mr. Lavement had attempted more than once
to introduce a vegetable diet into his family, by launching out into
the praise of roots and greens, and decrying the use of flesh, both as
a physician and philosopher; but all his rhetoric could not make one
proselyte to his opinion, and even the wife of his bosom declared
against the proposal.

One afternoon, when her husband was abroad, and his daughter gone to
visit, this lady ordered me to call a hackney-coach, in which she and
the captain drove towards Covent Garden. Miss came home in the evening,
and, supping at her usual hour, went to bed. About eleven o'clock my
master entered, and asked if his wife was gone to sleep: upon which
I told him, my mistress went out in the afternoon, and was not yet
returned. This was like a clap of thunder to the poor apothecary, who
starting back, cried, "Mort de ma vie! vat you tell a me? My vife not at
home!" At that instant a patient's servant arrived with a prescription
for a draught, which my master taking, went into the shop to make it up
with his own hand. While he rubbed the ingredients in a glass mortar,
he inquired of me, whether or no his wife went out alone; and no sooner
heard that she was in company with the captain, than with one blow he
split the mortar into a thousand pieces, and grinning like the head of
a bass viol, exclaimed, "Ah, traitresse!" It would have been impossible
for me to have preserved my gravity a minute longer, when I was happily
relieved by a rap at the door, which I opened, and perceived my mistress
coming out of the coach. She flounced immediately into the shop, and
addressed her husband thus: "I suppose you thought I was lost, my dear.
Captain O'Donnell has been so good as to treat me with a play." The
reply, it may be supposed, was anything but courteous but the captain,
who had been all the time at the door discharging the coach, entered,
and Mr. Lavement, changing his tone, saluted him with all the usual
politesse of a Frenchman.

Shortly after this event, by the knowledge which I acquired of the
family secrets, my life became much more agreeable; and as I every
day improved in my knowledge of the town I shook off my awkward air by
degrees, and acquired the character of a polite journeyman apothecary.






CHAPTER XX

I am assaulted and dangerously wounded-suspect O'Donnell, and am
confirmed in my opinion--concert a scheme of revenge, and put it into
execution--O'Donnell robs his own servant and disappears--make my
addresses to a lady, and am miraculously delivered from her snare

One night, at about twelve o'clock, as I returned from visiting a
patient at Chelsea, I received a blow on my head from an unseen hand,
that stretched me senseless on the ground; and was left for dead with
three stabs of a sword in my body. The groans I uttered when I recovered
the use of my reason alarmed the people of a solitary alehouse that
stood near the spot where I lay: and they were humane enough to take me
in, and send for a surgeon, who dressed my wounds, and assured me they
were not mortal. One of them penetrated through the skin and muscles
of one side of my belly in such a manner, that doubtless the assassin
imagined he had run me through the entrails. The second slanted along
one of my ribs; and the last, which was intended for the finishing
stroke, having been directed to my heart, the sword snapped upon
my breast-bone, and the point remained sticking in the skin. When I
reflected upon this event, I could not persuade myself that I had been
assaulted by a common footpad, because it is not usual for such people
to murder though they rob, especially when they meet with no resistance;
and I found my money, and everything else about me but my carcase,
safe. I concluded, therefore, that I must either have been mistaken for
another, or obliged to the private resentment of some secret enemy for
what had happened; and as I could remember nobody who had the least
cause of complaint against me, except Captain O'Donnell and my master's
daughter, my suspicion settled upon them, though I took care to conceal
it, that I might the sooner arrive at confirmation.

With this view, I went home in the chair about ten o'clock in the
morning; and as the chairman supported me into the house, met the
captain in the passage, who no sooner saw me than he started back and
gave evident signs of guilty confusion, which he would have accounted
for from surprise occasioned by the seeing me in such a condition. My
master having heard my story, condoled me with a good deal of sympathy,
and when he understood my wounds were not dangerous, ordered me to be
carried upstairs to bed; though not without some opposition from his
wife, who was of opinion that it would be better for me to go to an
hospital, where I should be more carefully attended. My meditation was
employed in concerting with myself some method of revenge against Squire
O'Donnell and his inamorata, whom I looked upon as the author of my
misfortune; when miss, who was not at home at my arrival, entered my
chamber, and saying she was sorry for the accident that had befallen me,
asked if I suspected anybody to be the assassin; upon which I fixed my
eyes steadfastly upon her and answered, "Yes." She discovered no symptom
of confusion, but replied hastily, "If that be the case, why don't
you take out a warrant, to have him apprehended? It will cost but a
trifle--if you have no money, I'll lend you." This frankness not only
cured me of my suspicion with respect to her, but even staggered my
belief with regard to the captain, of whose guilt I resolved to have
further proof before I should enterprise anything in the way of revenge.
I thanked her kindly for her generous offer, which, however, I had no
occasion to accept, being determined to do nothing rashly: for though I
could plainly perceive the person who attacked me to be a soldier,
whose face I thought was familiar to me, I could not swear with a safe
conscience to any particular man; and, granting I could, my prosecution
of him would not much avail.

This uncertainty I pretended, lest the captain, hearing from her that I
knew the person who wounded me, might think proper to withdraw before I
could be in a condition to requite him. In two days I was up and able
to do a little business, so that Mr. Lavement made shift to carry on his
practice without hiring another journeyman in my room.

The first thing I attempted towards a certain discovery of my secret
enemy, was to get into O'Donnell's apartment, while he was abroad in an
undress, and examine his sword, the point of which being broken off, I
applied the fragment that was found sticking in my body, and found it
answered the fractured part exactly. There was no room left for doubt;
and all that remained was to fix upon a scheme of revenge, which almost
solely engrossed my thoughts during the space of eight nights and days.
Sometimes I was tempted to fall upon him in the same manner as he had
practised upon me, and kill him outright. But this assault my honour
opposed as a piece of barbarous cowardice, in which he was not to
be imitated. At other times I entertained thoughts of demanding
satisfaction in an honourable way; but was diverted from this
undertaking by considering the uncertainty of the event, and the nature
of the injury he had done me, which did not entitle him to such easy
terms. At last I determined to pursue a middle course, and actually put
my design in execution after this manner. Having secured the assistance
of Strap and two of his acquaintance whom he could depend upon, we
provided ourselves with disguises, and I caused the following letter
to be delivered to him by one of our associates in livery, one Sunday
evening:--

"Sir--If I may be allowed to judge from appearance, it will not be
disagreeable for you to hear that my husband is gone to Bagshot to visit
a patient, and will not return till to-morrow night; so that, if you
have anything to propose to me (as your behaviour on many occasions
has seemed to insinuate), you will do well to embrace the present
opportunity of seeing, Yours, etc." This letter was signed with the
Dame of an apothecary's wife who lived in Chelsea, of whom I had heard
O'Donnell was an admirer. Everything succeeded to our wish. The hero
hastened towards the place of appointment, and was encountered by us
in the very place where he had assaulted me. We rushed upon him all
at once, secured his sword, stripped off his clothes even to the skin,
which was scourged with nettles till he was blistered from head to foot,
notwithstanding all the eloquence of his tears and supplications. When
I was satisfied with the stripes I had bestowed, we carried off his
clothes, which we hid in a hedge near the place, and left him stark
naked to find his way home in the best manner he could, while I took
care to be there before him. I afterwards understood that, in his way
to the lodgings of a friend, who lived in the skirts of the town, he was
picked up by the watch, who carried him to the round-house, from whence
he sent for clothes to his lodgings, and next morning arrived at the
door in a chair, wrapt up in a blanket he had borrowed; for his body
was so sore and swelled, that he could not bear to be confined in
his wearing apparel. He was treated with the utmost tenderness by my
mistress and her daughter, who vied with each other in their care and
attendance of him; but Lavement himself could not forbear expressing
his joy, by several malicious grins, while he ordered me to prepare an
unguent for his sores. As to myself, nobody can doubt my gratification,
when I had every day an opportunity of seeing my revenge protracted on
the body of my adversary, by the ulcers of which I had been the cause;
and, indeed, I not only enjoyed the satisfaction of having flea'd him
alive, but another also which I had not foreseen. The story of his being
attacked and stripped in such a place having been inserted in the news,
gave information to those who found his clothes next day, whither to
bring them; and accordingly he retrieved everything he had lost except a
few letters, among which was that which I had writ to him in the name
of the apothecary's wife. This, and the others, which were all on the
subject of love (for this Hibernian hero was one of those people who are
called fortune-hunters), fell into the hands of a certain female author,
famous for the scandal she has published; who, after having embellished
them with some ornaments of her own invention, gave them to the to town
in print. I was very much shocked on reflection, that I might possibly
be the occasion of a whole family's unhappiness on account of the letter
I had written; but was eased of that apprehension, when I understood
that the Chelsea apothecary had commenced a lawsuit against the
printer for defamation, and looked upon the whole as a piece of forgery
committed by the author, who had disappeared. But whatever might be his
opinion of the matter, our two ladies seemed to entertain a different
idea of it: for as soon as the pamphlet appeared, I could perceive their
care of their patient considerably diminish, till at last it ended in a
total neglect. It was impossible for him to be ignorant of this change,
any more than of the occasion of it; but as he was conscious to himself
of having deserved worse than contempt at their hands, he was glad to
come off so cheaply, and contented himself with muttering curses and
threats against the apothecary, who, as he imagined, having got an
inkling of the appointment with his wife, had taken revenge of him
in the manner described. By the time he had got a new scarf skin his
character was become so notorious, that he thought it high time for him
to decamp; and his retreat he performed in one night, without beat of
drum, after having robbed his own servant of everything that belonged to
him except the clothes he had on his back.

A few days after he disappeared, Mr. Lavement, for his own security,
took into his custody a large old trunk which he had left; and as it
was very heavy, made no question that the contents were sufficient to
indemnify him for what O'Donnell owed in lodging. But a month being
elapsed without hearing any tidings of this adventurer, and my master
being impatient to know what the trunk contained, he ordered me to break
it open in his presence, which task I performed with the pestle of our
great mortar, and discovered, to his inexpressible astonishment and
mortification, a heap of stones.

About this time, my friend Strap informed me of an offer he had to go
abroad with a gentleman in quality of valet de chambre and at the same
time assured me that, whatever advantage he might propose to himself
from this prospect, he could not bear the thoughts of parting from me,
so much was he attached to my fortune. In spite of all the obligations I
owed to this poor, honest fellow, ingratitude is so natural to the heart
of man, that I began to be tired of his acquaintance: and now that I had
contracted other friendships which appeared more creditable, was
even ashamed to see a journeyman barber inquiring after me with the
familiarity of a companion. I therefore, on pretence of consulting his
welfare, insisted upon his accepting the proposal, which he at last
determined to embrace, with great reluctance, and in a few days, took
his leave of me, shedding a flood of tears, which I could not behold
without emotion. I now began to look upon me as of a gentleman in
reality; learned to dance, frequented plays during the holidays; became
the oracle of an ale-house, where every dispute was referred to my
decision; and at length contracted an acquaintance with a young
lady, who found means to make a conquest of my heart, and upon whom I
prevailed, after much attendance and solicitation, to give me a promise
of marriage. As this beautiful creature passed for a rich heiress, I
blessed my good fortune, and was actually on the point of crowning all
my wishes by matrimony, when I made such a discovery as effectually
turned me from my design, and I abandoned all thoughts of marriage for
the future.






CHAPTER XXI

Squire Gawky comes to lodge with my master--is involved in a troublesome
affair, out of which he is extricated by me--he marries my master's
daughter--they conspire against me--I am found guilty of theft,
discharged--deserted by my friends, I hire a room in St. Gile's--where,
by accident, I find the lady to whom I paid my addresses in a miserable
condition--I relieve her

When I enjoyed myself at large in this temper of mind, Lavement let his
first floor to my countryman and acquaintance, Squire Gawky, who by this
time had got a lieutenancy in the army, and such a martial ferocity in
his appearance that I was afraid he would remember what happened between
us in Scotland, and atone for his breach of appointment then by his
punctuality now; but whether he had actually forgot me, or was willing
to make me believe so, he betrayed not the least symptom of recognition
at sight of me, and I remained quite cured of my apprehension; though
I had occasion not long after to be convinced, that howsoever his
externals might be altered, he was at bottom the same individual Gawky,
whom I have already described. For coming home late one night from the
house of a patient, I heard a noise in the street, and as I approached,
perceived two gentlemen in custody, of three watchmen. The prisoners,
who were miserable, disfigured with dirt, complained bitterly of the
loss of their hats and wigs; and one of them, whom by his tongue I know
to be a Scotchman, lamented most piteously, offering a guinea for his
liberty, which the watchman refused, alleging that one of his companions
was wounded grievously, and that he must stand to the consequence. My
prejudice in favour of my native country was so strong, that I could not
bear to see anybody belonging to it in distress, and therefore, with one
blow of my faithful cudgel, knocked down the watchman who had hold
of the person for whom I was chiefly concerned. He was no sooner
disengaged, than he betook himself to his heels, and left me to maintain
the dispute as I should think proper; and, indeed, I came off but
scurvily, for, before I could avail myself of my speed, I received a
blow on the eye, from one of the other two, that had well nigh deprived
me of the use of that organ. However, I made shift to get home, where I
was informed of Captain Gawky's being robbed and abused by a company of
footpads, and was ordered by my master to prepare an emollient glyster
and paregoric draught, in order to allay and compose the ferment of his
spirits, occasioned by the barbarous treatment he had undergone, while
he took twelve ounces of blood from him immediately.

When I inquired into the particulars of this adventure, and understood
by the servant that he came in just before me, without hat and wig, I
made no scruple of believing him to be the person I had released, and
was confirmed in my belief upon hearing his voice, to which (before that
event) I had long been a stranger.

My eye being considerably swelled and inflamed, I could not reflect
upon my enterprise without cursing my own folly, and even resolving to
declare the truth the truth of the whole story in order to be revenged
on the cowardly wretch for whom I had suffered: accordingly, next day
after he had told, in presence of my master, his wife and daughter,
who came to him, a thousand lies concerning the prowess he had shown in
making his escape, I ventured to explain the mystery, and, calling
in the evidence of my contused eye, upbraided him with cowardice and
ingratitude. Gawky was so astonished at this that he could not answer
one word, and the rest of the company stared at one another; till
at length my mistress reprimanded me for my insolent behaviour, and
threatened to turn me away for my presumption. Upon which, Gawky (having
recollected himself) observed, as the young man might have mistaken
another person for him, he could forgive his insinuations, more
especially as he seemed to have suffered for his incivility; but
advised me to be more certain in my conjectures for the future, before I
ventured to publish them to the prejudice of any man. Miss applauded the
Captain's generosity in pardoning one who had so villainously aspersed
him, and I began to imagine her praise was not at all disinterested. But
the apothecary, who perhaps had more penetration or less partiality than
his wife and daughter, differed from them in their sentiments of the
matter, and expressed himself to me in the shop in this manner: "Ah mon
pauvre Roderique! you have more of de veracite dan of de prudence--bot
mine vife and dater be diablement sage, and Monsieur le Capitaine un
fanfaron, pardieu!"

This eulogium on his wife and daughter, though spoken ironically by him,
was nevertheless literally just; by espousing the cause of Gawky, the
one obliged a valuable lodger, and the other acquired a husband at a
juncture when one was absolutely necessary. The young lady insinuated
herself so artfully into the affection of this new lodger, that in less
than a fortnight, on pretence of going to the play, they drove away
together to the Fleet, where they were married; and in the morning came
home, where they asked her father's and mother's blessing. The prudent
parents, notwithstanding the precipitation with which the match was
carried on, did not think fit to refuse their approbation; for the
apothecary was not ill pleased to find his daughter married to a young
man of a good prospect, who had not mentioned one syllable on the
article of her dowry; and his wife was rejoiced at being rid of a rival
and a spy upon her. Whatever face Gawky put on the matter, my discovery
of the adventure before related, and the reproaches I vented against
him, had stung him to the soul, and cherished the seeds of enmity so
strongly in his breast, that he imparted his indignation to his wife,
who being as desirous as himself to accomplish the ruin of one that not
only slighted her caresses, but was able on any occasion to discover
particulars not at all advantageous to her character, readily joined in
a conspiracy against me, which (had it taken effect as they expected)
would infallibly have brought me to an ignominious death.

My master having several times missed large quantities of medicines, of
which I could give no account, at last lost all patience, and in plain
terms taxed me with having embezzled them for my own use. As I could
only oppose my single asseveration to his suspicion, he told me one
day, "Your vord not be give me de satisfaction--me find necessaire to
chercher for my medicine; pardonnez moi--il faut chercber--me demand le
clef of your coffre a cette heure." Then raising his voice to conceal
the fright he was in lest I should make any opposition, he went on,
"Oui! I charge you rendez le clef of your cofrre--moi--si, moi qui
vous parle." I was fired with so much resentment and disdain at this
accusation, that I burst into tears, which he took for a sign of guilt;
and pulling out my key, told him he might satisfy himself immediately,
though he would not find it so easy to satisfy me for the injury my
reputation had suffered from his unjust suspicion. He took the key and
mounted up to my chamber, attended by the whole family, saying, "Eh
bien, nous verrons--nous verrons." But what was my horror and amazement,
when, opening my chest, he pulled out a handful of the very things that
were missing, and pronounced, "Ah, ha, vous etes bienvenu--mardy, Mons.
Roderique, you be fort innocent!" I had not power to utter one word in
my own vindication, but stood motionless and silent, while everybody
present made their respective remarks on what appeared against me.
The servants said they were sorry for my misfortune, and went away
repeating, "Who would have thought it?" My mistress took occasion from
this detection to rail against the practice of employing strangers in
general; and Mrs. Gawky, after having observed that she never had a good
opinion of my fidelity, proposed to have me carried before the justice
and committed to Newgate immediately. Her husband was actually upon the
stairs in his way for a constable, when Mr. Lavement knowing the cost
ant trouble of a prosecution to which he must bind himself, and at the
same time dreading lest some particulars of my confession might affect
his practice, called out. "Restez, mon fils! restez, it be veritablement
one grand crime which dis pauvre diable have committed--bot peut-etre de
good God give him de penitence, and me vill not have upon mine head de
blood of one sinner." The captain and his lady used all the Christian
arguments their zeal could suggest to prevail upon the apothecary to
pursue me to destruction, and represented the injustice he did to the
community of which he was a member, in letting a villain escape, who
would not fail of doing more mischief in the world when he should
reflect on his coming off so easily now; but their eloquence made no
impression on my master, who turning to me said, "Go, miserable, go
from mine house quick, quick!--and make reparation for your mauvaise
actions." By this time my indignation had roused me from the
stupefaction in which I had hitherto remained and I began in this
