through Kustrin, Berlin, and Spandau, and the first and last are strong
fortresses. I can do nothing until the Elector of Brandenburg declares
for us, and gives us leave to pass those places, for I dare not march
round and leave them in my rear until sure that this weak prince will
not take sides with the Imperialists. I will despatch a messenger
tonight to him at Berlin demanding leave to march through his territory
to relieve Magdeburg. In the meantime we will finish off with this
place, and so be in readiness to march west when his answer arrives.
And now, sir," he went on, turning to Malcolm, "please to give me the
account of how you escaped first from New Brandenburg, and then from
Tilly."

Malcolm related briefly the manner of his escape from the massacre at
New Brandenburg, and how, after accompanying Tilly's army as a teamster
for two days, he had made his escape. He then still more briefly related
how he had been taken prisoner by a band of freebooters, but had managed
to get away from them, and had drawn them into an ambush by peasants,
where they had been slain, by which means he had obtained a horse and
ridden straight to the army.

Gustavus asked many questions, and elicited many more details than
Malcolm had deemed it necessary to give in his first recital.

"You have shown great prudence and forethought," the king said when he
had finished, "such as would not be looked for in so young a soldier."

"And he behaved, sire, with distinguished gallantry and coolness at
Schiefelbrune, and in the destructive fight outside Colberg," Colonel
Munro put in. "By the slaughter on the latter day he would naturally
have obtained his promotion, but he begged to be passed over, asserting
that it was best that at his age he should remain for a time an ensign."

"Such modesty is unusual," the king said, "and pleases me; see the next
time a step is vacant, colonel, that he has it. Whatever his age, he has
shown himself fit to do man's work, and years are of no great value in a
soldier; why, among all my Scottish regiments I have scarcely a colonel
who is yet thirty years old."

Malcolm now returned with Colonel Munro to the regiment, and there had
to give a full and minute account of his adventures, and was warmly
congratulated by his fellow officers on his good fortune in escaping
from the dangers which had beset him. The suit of armour was a handsome
one, and had been doubtless stripped off from the body of some knight
or noble murdered by the freebooters. The leg pieces Malcolm laid aside,
retaining only a cuirass, back piece, and helmet, as the full armour was
too heavy for service on foot.

Two days later the king gave orders that the assault upon Landsberg was
to be made that night. The place was extremely strong, and Gustavus had
in his previous campaign twice failed in attempts to capture it.
Since that time the Imperialists had been busy in strengthening the
fortification, and all the peasantry for ten miles round had been
employed in throwing up earthworks; but its principal defence was in
the marsh which surrounded it, and which rendered the construction of
approaches by besiegers almost impossible. Its importance consisted in
the fact that from its great strength its garrison dominated the whole
district known as the Marc of Brandenburg. It was the key to Silesia,
and guarded the approaches to Pomerania, and its possession was
therefore of supreme importance to Gustavus. The garrison consisted of
five thousand Imperialist infantry and twelve troops of horse, the whole
commanded by Count Gratz. The principal approach to the town was guarded
by a strong redoubt armed with numerous artillery.

Colonel Munro had advanced his trenches to within a short distance of
this redoubt, and had mounted the twelve pieces of cannon to play upon
it, but so solid was the masonry of the fort that their fire produced
but little visible effect. Gustavus had brought from Frankfort as guide
on the march a blacksmith who was a native of Landsberg, and this man
had informed him of a postern gate into the town which would not be
likely to be defended, as to reach it it would be necessary to cross a
swamp flanked by the advanced redoubt and covered with water.

For two days previous to the assault the troops had been at work
cutting bushes and trees, and preparing the materials for constructing
a floating causeway across the mud and water. As soon as night fell
the men were set to work laying down the causeway, and when this was
finished the column advanced to the attack. It consisted of 250 pikemen
under Colonel Munro, and the same number of the dragoons under Colonel
Deubattel. Hepburn with 1000 musketeers followed a short distance behind
them.

The pikemen led the way, and passed along the floating causeway without
difficulty, but the causeway swayed and often sank under the feet of the
cavalry behind them. These, however, also managed to get across. Their
approach was entirely unobserved, and they effected an entrance into the
town.

Scarcely had they done so when they came upon a body of three hundred
Imperialists who were about to make a sally under Colonel Gratz, son of
the governor. The pikemen at once fell upon them. Taken by surprise the
Imperialists fought nevertheless stoutly, and eighty of the Scots fell
under the fire of their musketry. But the pikemen charged home; Colonel
Gratz was killed, with many of his men, and the rest taken prisoners.
Hepburn marching on behind heard the din of musketry and pressed
forward; before reaching the town he found a place in the swamp
sufficiently firm to enable his men to march across it, and, turning
off, he led his troops between the town and the redoubt, and then
attacked the latter in the rear where its defences were weak, and after
three minutes' fighting with its surprised and disheartened garrison the
latter surrendered.

The redoubt having fallen, and Munro's men having effected a lodgment
in the town, while the retreat on one side was cut off by the force of
Gustavus, and on the other by a strong body of cavalry under Marshal
Horn, the governor sent a drummer to Colonel Munro to say that he
was ready to surrender, and to ask for terms. The drummer was sent to
Gustavus, who agreed that the garrison should be allowed to march away
with the honours of war, taking their baggage and effects with them.
Accordingly at eight o'clock the Count of Gratz at the head of his
soldiers marched out with colours flying and drums beating, and retired
into Silesia. A garrison was placed in Landsberg, and the blacksmith
appointed burgomaster of the town. Landsberg fell on the 15th of April,
and on the 18th the force marched back to Frankfort.



CHAPTER VII A QUIET TIME


In spite of the urgent entreaties of Gustavus and the pressing peril of
Magdeburg, the wavering Duke of Brandenburg could not bring himself
to join the Swedes. He delivered Spandau over to them, but would do no
more. The Swedish army accordingly marched to Berlin and invested his
capital. The duke sent his wife to Gustavus to beseech him to draw off
his army and allow him to remain neutral; but Gustavus would not listen
to his entreaties, and insisted, as the only condition upon which he
would raise the siege, that the duke should ally himself with him, and
that the troops of Brandenburg should join his army.

These conditions the duke was obliged to accept, but in the meantime his
long hesitation and delay had caused the loss of Magdeburg, which after
a gallant defence was stormed by the troops of Pappenheim and Tilly on
the 10th of May. The ferocious Tilly had determined upon a deed which
would, he believed, frighten Germany into submission; he ordered that no
quarter should be given, and for five days the city was handed over to
the troops.

History has no record since the days of Attila of so frightful a
massacre. Neither age nor sex was spared, and 30,000 men, women, and
children were ruthlessly massacred. The result for a time justified the
anticipations of the ferocious leader. The terrible deed sent a shudder
of horror and terror through Protestant Germany. It seemed, too, as if
the catastrophe might have been averted had the Swedes shown diligence
and marched to the relief of the city; for in such a time men were not
inclined to discuss how much of the blame rested upon the shoulders of
the Duke of Brandenburg, who was, in fact, alone responsible for the
delay of the Swedes.

Many of the princes and free towns which had hitherto been staunch to
the cause of Protestantism at once hastened to make their peace with
the emperor. For a time the sack of Magdeburg greatly strengthened the
Imperialist cause. No sooner did the news reach the ears of the Duke
of Brandenburg than his fears overcame him, and he wrote to Gustavus
withdrawing from the treaty he had made, and saying that as Spandau had
only been delivered to him in order that he might march to the relief of
Magdeburg he was now bound in honour to restore it.

Gustavus at once ordered Spandau to be evacuated by his troops, and
again marched with the army against Berlin, which he had but a few days
before left. Here he again dictated terms, which the duke was forced to
agree to.

The Swedish army now marched to Old Brandenburg, thirty-four miles west
of Berlin, and there remained for some time waiting until some expected
reinforcements should reach it.

The place was extremely unhealthy, and great numbers died from malaria
and fever, thirty of Munro's musketeers dying in a single week. During
this time the king was negotiating with the Elector of Saxony and the
Landgrave of Hesse. These were the two most powerful of the Protestant
princes in that part of Germany, and Tilly resolved to reduce them to
obedience before the army of Gustavus was in a position to move forward,
for at present his force was too small to enable him to take the field
against the united armies of Tilly and Pappenheim.

He first fell upon the Landgrave of Hesse, and laid Thuringen waste with
fire and sword. Frankenhausen was plundered and burned to the ground.
Erfurt saved itself from a similar fate by the payment of a large sum of
money, and by engaging to supply great stores of provisions for the use
of the Imperial army. The Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel was next summoned
by Tilly, who threatened to carry fire and sword through his dominions
unless he would immediately disband his troops, pay a heavy contribution
and receive the Imperial troops into his cities and fortresses; but the
landgrave refused to accept the terms.

Owing to the unhealthiness of the district round Old Brandenburg,
Gustavus raised his camp there, and marched forward to Werben near the
junction of the Elbe with the Havel. He was joined there by his young
queen, Maria Eleonora, with a reinforcement of 8000 men, and by the
Marquis of Hamilton with 6200, for the most part Scotch, who had been
raised by him with the consent of Charles I, to whom the marquis was
master of the horse.

Werben was distant but a few miles from Magdeburg, and Pappenheim, who
commanded the troops in that neighbourhood, seeing that Gustavus was now
in a position to take the field against him, sent an urgent message to
Tilly for assistance; and the Imperial general, who was on the point of
attacking the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, at once marched with his army
and effected a junction with Pappenheim, their combined force being
greatly superior to that of Gustavus even after the latter had received
his reinforcements.

Malcolm had not accompanied the army in its march from Old Brandenburg.
He had been prostrated by fever, and although he shook off the attack it
left him so weak and feeble that he was altogether unfit for duty.
The army was still lying in its swampy quarters, and the leech who had
attended him declared that he could never recover his strength in such
an unhealthy air. Nigel Graheme, who had now rejoined the regiment cured
of his wound, reported the surgeon's opinion to Munro.

"I am not surprised," the colonel said, "and there are many others in
the same state; but whither can I send them? The Elector of Brandenburg
is so fickle and treacherous that he may at any moment turn against us."

"I was speaking to Malcolm," Nigel replied, "and he said that he would
he could go for a time to recruit his health in that village among the
hills where he had the fight with the freebooters who made him captive.
He said he was sure of a cordial welcome there, and it is but three
days' march from here."

"'Tis an out-of-the-way place," Munro said, "and if we move west
we shall be still further removed from it. There are Imperial bands
everywhere harrying the country unguarded by us, and one of these might
at any moment swoop down into that neighbourhood."

"That is true; but, after all, it would be better that he should run
that risk than sink from weakness as so many have done here after
getting through the first attack of fever."

"That is so, Nigel, and if you and Malcolm prefer that risk to the other
I will not say you nay; but what is good for him is good for others, and
I will ask the surgeon to make me a list of twenty men who are strong
enough to journey by easy stages, and who yet absolutely require to get
out of this poisonous air to enable them to effect their recovery. We
will furnish them with one of the baggage wagons of the regiment, so
that they can ride when they choose. Tell the paymaster to give each
man in advance a month's pay, that they may have money to pay what they
need. Horses are scarce, so we can give them but two with the wagon, but
that will be sufficient as they will journey slowly. See that a steady
and experienced driver is told off with them. They had best start at
daybreak tomorrow morning."

At the appointed time the wagon was in readiness, and those who had to
accompany Malcolm gathered round, together with many of their comrades
who had assembled to wish them Godspeed. The pikes and muskets, helmets
and breast pieces were placed in the wagon, and then the fever stricken
band formed up before it.

Munro, Nigel, and most of the officers came down to bid farewell to
Malcolm, and to wish him a speedy return in good health. Then he placed
himself at the head of the band and marched off, the wagon following in
the rear. Before they had been gone a mile several of the men had been
compelled to take their places in the wagon, and by the time three miles
had been passed the rest had one by one been forced to give in.

Malcolm was one of the last. He took his seat by the driver, and the
now heavily freighted wagon moved slowly across the country. A store of
provisions sufficient for several days had been placed in the wagon, and
after proceeding fifteen miles a halt was made at a deserted village,
and two of the houses in the best condition were taken possession of,
Malcolm and the sergeant of the party, a young fellow named Sinclair,
occupying the one, and the men taking up their quarters in another.

The next morning the benefit of the change and the removal from the
fever tainted air made itself already apparent. The distance performed
on foot was somewhat longer than on the preceding day; the men were in
better spirits, and marched with a brisker step than that with which
they had left the camp. At the end of the fourth day they approached the
wood in which the village was situated.

"I will go on ahead," Malcolm said. "Our approach will probably have
been seen, and unless they know who we are we may meet with but a rough
welcome. Halt the wagon here until one returns with news that you may
proceed, for there may be pitfalls in the road."

Malcolm had kept the horse on which he had ridden to Landsberg, and it
had been tied behind the wagon. During the last day's march he had been
strong enough to ride it. He now dismounted, and taking the bridle over
his arm he entered the wood. He examined the road cautiously as he went
along. He had gone about half way when the farmer with four of his men
armed with pikes suddenly appeared in the road before him.

"Who are you," the farmer asked, "and what would you here?"

"Do you not remember me?" Malcolm said. "It is but three months since I
was here."

"Bless me, it is our Scottish friend! Why, lad, I knew you not again, so
changed are you. Why, what has happened to you?"

"I have had the fever," Malcolm said, "and have been like to die; but I
thought that a change to the pure air of your hills and woods here would
set me up. So I have travelled here to ask your hospitality."

By this time the farmer had come up and had grasped Malcolm's hand.

"All that I have is yours," he said warmly. "The lookout saw a wagon
coming across the plain with three or four men walking beside it, and he
thought that many more were seated in it; so thinking that this might be
a ruse of some freebooting band, I had the alarm bell rung, and prepared
to give them a hot reception."

"I have brought some sick comrades with me," Malcolm said. "I have no
thought of quartering them on you. That would be nigh as bad as the
arrival of a party of marauders, for they are getting strength, and
will, I warrant you, have keen appetites ere long; but we have brought
tents, and will pay for all we have."

"Do not talk of payment," the farmer said heartily. "As long as there is
flour in the storehouse and bacon on the beams, any Scottish soldier of
Gustavus is welcome to it, still more if they be comrades of thine."

"Thanks, indeed," Malcolm replied. "I left them at the edge of the wood,
for I knew not what welcome you might have prepared here; and seeing so
many men you might have shot at them before waiting to ask a question."

"That is possible enough," the farmer said, "for indeed we could hardly
look for friends. The men are all posted a hundred yards further on."

The farmer ordered one of his men to go on and bring up the wagon, and
then with Malcolm walked on to the village. A call that all was right
brought out the defenders of the ambush. It had been arranged similarly
to that which had been so successful before, except that instead of the
pit, several strong ropes had been laid across the road, to be tightened
breast high as soon as an enemy came close to them.

"These are not as good as the pit," the farmer said as they passed them;
"but as we have to use the road sometimes we could not keep a pit
here, which, moreover, might have given way and injured any one from a
neighbouring village who might be riding hither. We have made a strong
stockade of beams among the underwood on either side, so that none could
break through into the wood from the path."

"That is good," Malcolm said; "but were I you I would dig a pit across
the road some twelve feet wide, and would cover it with a stout door
with a catch, so that it would bear wagons crossing, but when the catch
is drawn it should rest only on some light supports below, and would
give way at once if a weight came on it. It would, of course, be covered
over with turf. It will take some time to make, but it will add greatly
to your safety."

"It shall be done," the farmer said. "Wood is in plenty, and some of my
men are good carpenters. I will set about it at once."

On arriving at the village Malcolm was cordially welcomed by the
farmer's wife and daughters. The guest chamber was instantly prepared
for him and refreshments laid on the table, while the maids, under the
direction of the farmer's wife, at once began to cook a bounteous meal
in readiness for the arrival of the soldiers. A spot was chosen on some
smooth turf under the shade of trees for the erection of the tents, and
trusses of clean straw carried there for bedding.

Malcolm as he sat in the cool chamber in the farm house felt the change
delightful after the hot dusty journey across the plain. There was quite
an excitement in the little village when the wagon drove up. The men
lifted the arms and baggage from the wagon. The women offered fruit and
flagons of wine, and fresh cool water, to the soldiers. There was not
only general pleasure throughout the village caused by the novelty of
the arrival of the party from the outer world, but a real satisfaction
in receiving these men who had fought so bravely against the oppressors
of the Protestants of Germany. There was also the feeling that so long
as this body of soldiers might remain in the village they would be able
to sleep in peace and security, safe from the attacks of any marauding
band. The tents were soon pitched by the peasants under the direction of
Sergeant Sinclair, straw was laid down in them, and the canvas raised to
allow the air to sweep through them.

Very grateful were the weary men for the kindness with which they were
received, and even the weakest felt that they should soon recover their
strength.
