grieves me deeply."

"Have our troops sustained a defeat?"

"They continue to be victorious, but thousands of our countrymen have
fallen victims in the fight or on the march.  Rameses demands fresh
reinforcements.  The pioneer, Paaker, has brought me a letter from our
brethren who accompany the king, and delivered a document from him to the
Regent, which contains the order to send to him fifty thousand fighting
men: and as the whole of the soldier-caste and all the auxiliaries are
already under arms, the bondmen of the temple, who till our acres, are to
be levied, and sent into Asia."

A murmur of disapproval arose at these words.  The chief of the
haruspices stamped his foot, and Gagabu asked:

"What do you mean to do?"

"To prepare to obey the commands of the king," answered Ameni, "and to
call the heads of the temples of the city of Anion here without delay to
hold a council.  Each must first in his holy of holies seek good counsel
of the Celestials.  When we have come to a conclusion, we must next win
the Viceroy over to our side.  Who yesterday assisted at his prayers?"

"It was my turn," said the chief of the haruspices.

"Follow me to my abode, when the meal is over."  commanded Ameni.  "But
why is our poet missing from our circle?"

At this moment Pentaur came into the hall, and while he bowed easily and
with dignity to the company and low before Ameni, he prayed him to grant
that the pastophorus Teta should accompany the leech Nebsecht to visit
the daughter of the paraschites.

Ameni nodded consent and exclaimed: "They must make haste.  Paaker waits
for them at the great gate, and will accompany them in my chariot."

As soon as Pentaur had left the party of feasters, the old priest from
Chennu exclaimed, as he turned to Ameni:

"Indeed, holy father, just such a one and no other had I pictured your
poet.  He is like the Sun-god, and his demeanor is that of a prince.
He is no doubt of noble birth."

"His father is a homely gardener," said the highpriest, "who indeed tills
the land apportioned to him with industry and prudence, but is of humble
birth and rough exterior.  He sent Pentaur to the school at an early
age, and we have brought up the wonderfully gifted boy to be what he now
is."

"What office does he fill here in the temple?"

"He instructs the elder pupils of the high-school in grammar and
eloquence; he is also an excellent observer of the starry heavens, and a
most skilled interpreter of dreams," replied Gagabu.  "But here he is
again.  To whom is Paaker conducting our stammering physician and his
assistant?"

"To the daughter of the paraschites, who has been run over," answered
Pentaur.  "But what a rough fellow this pioneer is.  His voice hurts my
ears, and he spoke to our leeches as if they had been his slaves."

"He was vexed with the commission the princess had devolved on him," said
the high-priest benevolently, "and his unamiable disposition is hardly
mitigated by his real piety."

"And yet," said an old priest, "his brother, who left us some years ago,
and who had chosen me for his guide and teacher, was a particularly
loveable and docile youth."

"And his father," said Ameni, was one of the most superior energetic, and
withal subtle-minded of men."

"Then he has derived his bad peculiarities from his mother?"

"By no means.  She is a timid, amiable, soft-hearted woman."

"But must the child always resemble its parents?" asked Pentaur.  "Among
the sons of the sacred bull, sometimes not one bears the distinguishing
mark of his father."

"And if Paaker's father were indeed an Apis," Gagabu laughing, "according
to your view the pioneer himself belongs, alas! to the peasant's stable."

Pentaur did not contradict him, but said with a smile:

"Since he left the school bench, where his school-fellows called him the
wild ass on account of his unruliness, he has remained always the same.
He was stronger than most of them, and yet they knew no greater pleasure
than putting him in a rage."

"Children are so cruel!"  said Ameni.  "They judge only by appearances,
and never enquire into the causes of them.  The deficient are as guilty
in their eyes as the idle, and Paaker could put forward small claims to
their indulgence.  I encourage freedom and merriment," he continued
turning to the priests from Cheraw, "among our disciples, for in
fettering the fresh enjoyment of youth we lame our best assistant.  The
excrescences on the natural growth of boys cannot be more surely or
painlessly extirpated than in their wild games.  The school-boy is the
school-boy's best tutor."

"But Paaker," said the priest Meriapu, "was not improved by the
provocations of his companions.  Constant contests with them increased
that roughness which now makes him the terror of his subordinates and
alienates all affection."

"He is the most unhappy of all the many youths, who were intrusted to my
care," said Ameni, "and I believe I know why,--he never had a childlike
disposition, even when in years he was still a child, and the Gods had
denied him the heavenly gift of good humor.  Youth should be modest, and
he was assertive from his childhood.  He took the sport of his companions
for earnest, and his father, who was unwise only as a tutor, encouraged
him to resistance instead of to forbearance, in the idea that he thus
would be steeled to the hard life of a Mohar."

     [The severe duties of the Mohar are well known from the papyrus of
     Anastasi I. in the Brit. Mus., which has been ably treated by F.
     Chabas, Voyage d'un Egyptien.]

"I have often heard the deeds of the Mohar spoken of," said the old
priest from Chennu, "yet I do not exactly know what his office requires
of him."

"He has to wander among the ignorant and insolent people of hostile
provinces, and to inform himself of the kind and number of the
population, to investigate the direction of the mountains, valleys, and
rivers, to set forth his observations, and to deliver them to the house
of war,

     [Corresponding to our minister of war.  A person of the highest
     importance even in the earliest times.]

so that the march of the troops may be guided by them."

"The Mohar then must be equally skilled as a warrior and as a Scribe."

"As thou sayest; and Paaker's father was not a hero only, but at the same
time a writer, whose close and clear information depicted the country
through which he had travelled as plainly as if it were seen from a
mountain height.  He was the first who took the title of Mohar.  The king
held him in such high esteem, that he was inferior to no one but the king
himself, and the minister of the house of war."

"Was he of noble race?"

"Of one of the oldest and noblest in the country.  His father was the
noble warrior Assa," answered the haruspex, "and he therefore, after he
himself had attained the highest consideration and vast wealth, escorted
home the niece of the King Hor-em-lieb, who would have had a claim to the
throne, as well as the Regent, if the grandfather of the present Rameses
had not seized it from the old family by violence."

"Be careful of your words," said Ameni, interrupting the rash old man.
"Rameses I. was and is the grandfather of our sovereign, and in the
king's veins, from his mother's side, flows the blood of the legitimate
descendants of the Sun-god."

"But fuller and purer in those of the Regent the haruspex ventured to
retort.

"But Rameses wears the crown," cried Ameni, "and will continue to wear it
so long as it pleases the Gods.  Reflect--your hairs are grey, and
seditious words are like sparks, which are borne by the wind, but which,
if they fall, may set our home in a blaze.  Continue your feasting, my
lords; but I would request you to speak no more this evening of the king
and his new decree.  You, Pentaur, fulfil my orders to-morrow morning
with energy and prudence."

The high-priest bowed and left the feast.

As soon as the door was shut behind him, the old priest from Chennu
spoke.

"What we have learned concerning the pioneer of the king, a man who holds
so high an office, surprises me.  Does he distinguish himself by a
special acuteness?"

"He was a steady learner, but of moderate ability."

"Is the rank of Mohar then as high as that of a prince of the empire?"

"By no means."

"How then is it--?"

"It is, as it is," interrupted Gagabu.  "The son of the vine-dresser has
his mouth full of grapes, and the child of the door-keeper opens the lock
with words."

"Never mind," said an old priest who had hitherto kept silence.  "Paaker
earned for himself the post of Mohar, and possesses many praiseworthy
qualities.  He is indefatigable and faithful, quails before no danger,
and has always been earnestly devout from his boyhood.  When the other
scholars carried their pocket-money to the fruit-sellers and
confectioners at the temple-gates, he would buy geese, and, when his
mother sent him a handsome sum, young gazelles, to offer to the Gods on
the altars.  No noble in the land owns a greater treasure of charms and
images of the Gods than he.  To the present time he is the most pious of
men, and the offerings for the dead, which he brings in the name of his
late father, may be said to be positively kingly."

"We owe him gratitude for these gifts," said the treasurer, "and the high
honor he pays his father, even after his death, is exceptional and far-
famed."

"He  emulates him in every  respect," sneered Gagabu; "and though he does
not resemble him in any feature, grows more and more like him.  But
unfortunately, it is as the goose resembles the swan, or the owl
resembles the eagle.  For his father's noble pride he has overbearing
haughtiness; for kindly severity, rude harshness; for dignity, conceit;
for perseverance, obstinacy.  Devout he is, and we profit by his gifts.
The treasurer may rejoice over them, and the dates off a crooked tree
taste as well as those off a straight one.  But if I were the Divinity I
should prize them no higher than a hoopoe's crest; for He, who sees into
the heart of the giver-alas! what does he see!  Storms and darkness are
of the dominion of Seth, and in there--in there--" and the old man struck
his broad breast "all is wrath and tumult, and there is not a gleam of
the calm blue heaven of Ra, that shines soft and pure in the soul of the
pious; no, not a spot as large as this wheaten-cake."

"Hast thou then sounded to the depths of his soul?"  asked the haruspex.

"As this beaker!" exclaimed Gagabu, and he touched the rim of an empty
drinking-vessel.  "For fifteen years without ceasing.  The man has been
of service to us, is so still, and will continue to be.  Our leeches
extract salves from bitter gall and deadly poisons; and folks like
these--"

"Hatred speaks in thee," said the haruspex, interrupting the indignant
old man.

"Hatred!"  he retorted, and his lips quivered.  "Hatred?"  and he struck
his breast with his clenched hand.  "It is true, it is no stranger to
this old heart.  But open thine ears, O haruspex, and all you others too
shall hear.  I recognize two sorts of hatred.  The one is between man and
man; that I have gagged, smothered, killed, annihilated--with what
efforts, the Gods know.  In past years I have certainly tasted its
bitterness, and served it like a wasp, which, though it knows that in
stinging it must die, yet uses its sting.  But now I am old in years,
