The child was going, but Pentaur stopped him, seized him, lifted him up
in his arms and kissed him; saying, as he turned to Nebsecht:

"They were wise, who represented Horus--the symbol of the triumph of good
over evil and of purity over the impure--in the form of a child.  Bless
you, my little friend; be good, and always give away what you have to
make others happy.  It will not make your house rich--but it will your
heart!"

Scherau clung to the priest, and involuntarily raised his little hand
to stroke Pentaur's cheek.  An unknown tenderness had filled his little
heart, and he felt as if he must throw his arms round the poet's neck and
cry upon his breast.

But Pentaur set him down on the ground, and he trotted down into the
valley.  There he paused.  The sun was high in the heavens, and he must
return to the witch's cave and his board, but he would so much like to go
a little farther--only as far as to the king's tomb, which was quite
near.

Close by the door of this tomb was a thatch of palm-branches, and under
this the sculptor Batau, a very aged man, was accustomed to rest.  The
old man was deaf, but he passed for the best artist of his time, and with
justice; he had designed the beautiful pictures and hieroglyphic
inscriptions in Seti's splendid buildings at Abydos and Thebes, as well
as in the tomb of that prince, and he was now working at the decoration
of the walls in the grave of Rameses.

Scherau had often crept close up to him, and thoughtfully watched him at
work, and then tried himself to make animal and human figures out of a
bit of clay.

One day the old man had observed him.

The sculptor had silently taken his humble attempt out of his hand, and
had returned it to him with a smile of encouragement.

From that time a peculiar tie had sprung up between the two.  Scherau
would venture to sit down by the sculptor, and try to imitate his
finished images.  Not a word was exchanged between them, but often the
deaf old man would destroy the boy's works, often on the contrary improve
them with a touch of his own hand, and not seldom nod at him to encourage
him.

When he staid away the old man missed his pupil, and Scherau's happiest
hours were those which he passed at his side.

He was not forbidden to take some clay home with him.  There, when the
old woman's back was turned, he moulded a variety of images which he
destroyed as soon as they were finished.

While he lay on his rack his hands were left free, and he tried to
reproduce the various forms which lived in his imagination, he forgot the
present in his artistic attempts, and his bitter lot acquired a flavor of
the sweetest enjoyment.

But to-day it was too late; he must give up his visit to the tomb of
Rameses.

Once more he looked back at the hut, and then hurried into the dark cave.




CHAPTER XIV.

Pentauer also soon quitted the but of the paraschites.

Lost in meditation, he went along the hill-path which led to the temple
which Ameni had put under his direction.

     [This temple is well proportioned, and remains in good preservation.
     Copies of the interesting pictures discovered in it are to be found
     in the "Fleet of an Egyptian queen" by Dutnichen.  Other details may
     be found in Lepsius' Monuments of Egypt, and a plan of the place has
     recently been published by Mariette.]

He foresaw many disturbed and anxious hours in the immediate future.

The sanctuary of which he was the superior, had been dedicated to her own
memory, and to the goddess Hathor, by Hatasu,

     [The daughter of Thotmes I., wife of her brother Thotmes II., and
     predecessor of her second brother Thotmes III.  An energetic woman
     who executed great works, and caused herself to be represented with
     the helmet and beard-case of a man.]

a great queen of the dethroned dynasty.

The priests who served it were endowed with peculiar chartered
privileges, which hitherto had been strictly respected.  Their dignity
was hereditary, going down from father to son, and they had the right of
choosing their director from among themselves.

Now their chief priest Rui was ill and dying, and Ameni, under whose
jurisdiction they came, had, without consulting them, sent the young poet
Pentaur to fill his place.

They had received the intruder most unwillingly, and combined strongly
against him when it became evident that he was disposed to establish a
severe rule and to abolish many abuses which had become established
customs.

They had devolved the greeting of the rising sun on the temple-servants;
Pentaur required that the younger ones at least should take part in
chanting the morning hymn, and himself led the choir.  They had
trafficked with the offerings laid on the altar of the Goddess; the new
master repressed this abuse, as well as the extortions of which they were
guilty towards women in sorrow, who visited the temple of Hathor in
greater number than any other sanctuary.

The poet-brought up in the temple of Seti to self-control, order,
exactitude, and decent customs, deeply penetrated with a sense of the
dignity of his position, and accustomed to struggle with special zeal
against indolence of body and spirit--was disgusted with the slothful
life and fraudulent dealings of his subordinates; and the deeper insight
which yesterday's experience had given him into the poverty and sorrow
of human existence, made him resolve with increased warmth that he would
awake them to a new life.

The conviction that the lazy herd whom he commanded was called upon to
pour consolation into a thousand sorrowing hearts, to dry innumerable
tears, and to clothe the dry sticks of despair with the fresh verdure of
hope, urged him to strong measures.

Yesterday he had seen how, with calm indifference, they had listened to
the deserted wife, the betrayed maiden, to the woman, who implored the
withheld blessing of children, to the anxious mother, the forlorn widow,
--and sought only to take advantage of sorrow, to extort gifts for the
Goddess, or better still for their own pockets or belly.

Now he was nearing the scene of his new labors.

There stood the reverend building, rising stately from the valley on four
terraces handsomely and singularly divided, and resting on the western
side against the high amphitheatre of yellow cliffs.

On the closely-joined foundation stones gigantic hawks were carved in
relief, each with the emblem of life, and symbolized Horus, the son of
the Goddess, who brings all that fades to fresh bloom, and all that dies
to resurrection.

On each terrace stood a hall open to the east, and supported on two and
twenty archaic pillars.

     [Polygonal pillars, which were used first in tomb-building under the
     12th dynasty, and after the expulsion of the Hyksos under the kings
     of the 17th and 18th, in public buildings; but under the subsequent
     races of kings they ceased to be employed.]

On their inner walls elegant pictures and inscriptions in the finest
sculptured work recorded, for the benefit of posterity, the great things
that Hatasu had done with the help of the Gods of Thebes.

There were the ships which she had to send to Punt

     [Arabia; apparently also the coast of east Africa south of Egypt as
     far as Somali.  The latest of the lists published by Mariette, of
     the southern nations conquered by Thotmes III., mentions it.  This
     list was found on the pylon of the temple of Karnak.]

to enrich Egypt with the treasures of the east; there the wonders brought
to Thebes from Arabia might be seen; there were delineated the houses of
the inhabitants of the land of frankincense, and all the fishes of the
Red Sea, in distinct and characteristic outline.

On the third and fourth terraces were the small adjoining rooms of
Hatasu and her brothers Thotmes II. and III., which were built against
the rock, and entered by granite doorways.  In them purifications were
accomplished, the images of the Goddess worshipped, and the more
distinguished worshippers admitted to confess.  The sacred cows
of the Goddess were kept in a side-building.

As Pentaur approached the great gate of the terrace-temple, he became the
witness of a scene which filled him with resentment.

A woman implored to be admitted into the forecourt, to pray at the altar
of the Goddess for her husband, who was very ill, but the sleek gate-
keeper drove her back with rough words.

"It is written up," said he, pointing to the inscription over the gate,
"only the purified may set their foot across this threshold, and you
cannot be purified but by the smoke of incense."

"Then swing the censer for me," said the woman, and take this silver
ring--it is all I have."

"A silver  ring!"  cried  the  porter, indignantly.  "Shall the goddess
be impoverished for your sake!  The grains of Anta, that would be used in
purifying you, would cost ten times as much."

"But I have no more," replied the woman, "my husband, for whom I come to
pray, is ill; he cannot work, and my children--"

"You fatten them up and deprive the goddess of her due," cried the gate-
keeper.  "Three rings down, or I shut the gate."

"Be merciful," said the woman, weeping.  "What will become of us if
Hathor does not help my husband?"

"Will our goddess fetch the doctor?"  asked the porter.  "She has
something to do besides curing sick starvelings.  Besides, that is not
her office.  Go to Imhotep or to Chunsu the counsellor, or to the great
Techuti herself, who helps the sick.  There is no quack medicine to be
got here."

"I only want comfort in my trouble," said the woman.

"Comfort!"  laughed the gate-keeper, measuring the comely young woman
with his eye.  "That you may have cheaper."

The woman turned pale, and drew back from the hand the man stretched out
towards her.

At this moment Pentaur, full of wrath, stepped between them.

He raised his hand in blessing over the woman, who bent low before him,
and said, "Whoever calls fervently on the Divinity is near to him.  You
are pure.  Enter."

As soon as she had disappeared within the temple, the priest turned to
the gate-keeper and exclaimed: "Is this how you serve the goddess, is
this how you take advantage of a heart-wrung woman?  Give me the keys of
this gate.  Your office is taken from you, and early to-morrow you go out
in the fields, and keep the geese of Hathor."

The porter threw himself on his knees with loud outcries; but Pentaur
turned his back upon him, entered the sanctuary, and mounted the steps
which led to his dwelling on the third terrace.

A few priests whom he passed turned their backs upon him, others looked
down at their dinners, eating noisily, and making as if they did not see
him.  They had combined strongly, and were determined to expel the
inconvenient intruder at any price.

Having reached his room, which had been splendidly decorated for his
predecessor, Pentaur laid aside his new insignia, comparing sorrowfully
the past and the present.

To what an exchange Ameni had condemned him!  Here, wherever he looked,
he met with sulkiness and aversion; while, when he walked through the
courts of the House of Seti, a hundred boys would hurry towards him, and
cling affectionately to his robe.  Honored there by great and small, his
every word had had its value; and when each day he gave utterance to his
thoughts, what he bestowed came back to him refined by earnest discourse
with his associates and superiors, and he gained new treasures for his
inner life.

"What is rare," thought he, "is full of charm; and yet how hard it is to
do without what is habitual!"  The occurrences of the last few days
passed before his mental sight.  Bent-Anat's image appeared before him,
and took a more and more distinct and captivating form.  His heart began
to beat wildly, the blood rushed faster through his veins; he hid his
face in his hands, and recalled every glance, every word from her lips.

"I follow thee willingly," she had said to him before the hut of the
paraschites.  Now he asked himself whether he were worthy of such a
follower.

He had indeed broken through the old bonds, but not to disgrace the house
that was dear to him, only to let new light into its dim chambers.

"To do what we have earnestly felt to be right," said he to himself,
"may seem worthy of punishment to men, but cannot before God."

He sighed and walked out into the terrace in a mood of lofty excitement,
and fully resolved to do here nothing but what was right, to lay the
foundation of all that was good.

"We men," thought he, "prepare sorrow when we come into the world, and
lamentation when we leave it; and so it is our duty in the intermediate
time to fight with suffering, and to sow the seeds of joy.  There are
many tears here to be wiped away.  To work then!"  The poet found none of
his subordinates on the upper terrace.  They had all met in the forecourt
of the temple, and were listening to the gate-keeper's tale, and seemed
to sympathize with his angry complaint--against whom Pentaur well knew.

