
"Aye, truly so rings the war cry!"  said prince Rameri, who had entered
his sister's half-dark room unperceived by the two women.

The princess turned to the boy.  "How you frightened me!"  she said.

"You!"  said Rameri astonished.

"Yes, me.  I used to have a stout heart, but since that evening I
frequently tremble, and an agony of terror comes over me, I do not know
why.  I believe some demon commands me."

"You command, wherever you go; and no one commands you," cried Rameri.
"The excitement and tumult in the valley, and on the quay, still agitate
you.  I grind my teeth myself when I remember how they turned me out of
the school, and how Paaker set the dog at us.  I have gone through a
great deal today too."

"Where were you so long?"  asked Bent-Anat.  "My uncle Ani commanded that
you should not leave the palace."

"I shall be eighteen years old next month," said the prince, "and need no
tutor."

"But your father--" said Bent-Anat.

"My father"--interrupted the boy, "he little knows the Regent.  But I
shall write to him what I have today heard said by different people.
They were to have sworn allegiance to Ani at that very feast in the
valley, and it is quite openly said that Ani is aiming at the throne, and
intends to depose the king.  You are right, it is madness--but there must
be something behind it all."

Nefert turned pale, and Bent-Anat asked for particulars.  The prince
repeated all he had gathered, and added laughing: "Ani depose my father!
It is as if I tried to snatch the star of Isis from the sky to light the
lamps--which are much wanted here."

"It is more comfortable in the dark," said Nefert.  "No, let us have
lights," said Bent-Anat.  "It is better to talk when we can see each
other face to face.  I have no belief in the foolish talk of the people;
but you are right--we must bring it to my fathers knowledge."

"I heard the wildest gossip in the City of the Dead," said Rameri.

"You ventured over there?  How very wrong!"

"I disguised myself a little, and I have good news for you.  Pretty Uarda
is much better.  She received your present, and they have a house of
their own again.  Close to the one that was burnt down, there was a
tumbled-down hovel, which her father soon put together again; he is a
bearded soldier, who is as much like her as a hedgehog is like a white
dove.  I offered her to work in the palace for you with the other girls,
for good wages, but she would not; for she has to wait on her sick
grandmother, and she is proud, and will not serve any one."

"It seems you were a long time with the paraschites' people," said Bent-
Anat reprovingly.  "I should have thought that what has happened to me
might have served you as a warning."

"I will not be better than you!"  cried the boy.  "Besides, the
paraschites is dead, and Uarda's father is a respectable soldier, who can
defile no one.  I kept a long way from the old woman.  To-morrow I am
going again.  I promised her."

"Promised who?"  asked his sister.

"Who but Uarda?  She loves flowers, and since the rose which you gave her
she has not seen one.  I have ordered the gardener to cut me a basket
full of roses to-morrow morning, and shall take them to her myself."

"That you will not!"  cried Bent-Anat.  "You are still but half a child--
and, for the girl's sake too, you must give it up."

"We only gossip together," said the prince coloring, "and no one shall
recognize me.  But certainly, if you mean that, I will leave the basket
of roses, and go to her alone.  No--sister, I will not be forbidden this;
she is so charming, so white, so gentle, and her voice is so soft and
sweet!  And she has little feet, as small as--what shall I say?--as small
and graceful as Nefert's hand.  We talked most about Pentaur.  She knows
his father, who is a gardener, and knows a great deal about him.  Only
think! she says the poet cannot be the son of his parents, but a good
spirit that has come down on earth--perhaps a God.  At first she was very
timid, but when I spoke of Pentaur she grew eager; her reverence for him
is almost idolatry--and that vexed me."

"You would rather she should reverence you so," said Nefert smiling.

"Not at all," cried Rameri.  "But I helped to save her, and I am so happy
when I am sitting with her, that to-morrow, I am resolved, I will put a
flower in her hair.  It is red certainly, but as thick as yours, Bent-
Anat, and it must be delightful to unfasten it and stroke it."

The ladies exchanged a glance of intelligence, and the princess said
decidedly:

"You will not go to the City of the Dead to-morrow, my little son!"

"That we will see, my little mother!"  He answered laughing; then he
turned grave.

"I saw my school-friend Anana too," he said.  "Injustice reigns in the
House of Seti!  Pentaur is in prison, and yesterday evening they sat in
judgment upon him.  My uncle was present, and would have pounced upon the
poet, but Ameni took him under his protection.  What was finally decided,
the pupils could not learn, but it must have been something bad, for the
son of the Treasurer heard Ameni saying, after the sitting, to old
Gagabu: 'Punishment he deserves, but I will not let him be overwhelmed;'
and he can have meant no one but Pentaur.  To-morrow I will go over, and
learn more; something frightful, I am afraid--several years of
imprisonment is the least that will happen to him."

Bent-Anat had turned very pale.

"And whatever they do to him," she cried, "he will suffer for my sake!
Oh, ye omnipotent Gods, help him--help me, be merciful to us both!"

She covered her face with her hands, and left the room.  Rameri asked
Nefert:

What can have come to my sister? she seems quite strange to me; and you
too are not the same as you used to be."

"We both have to find our way in new circumstances."

"What are they?"

"That I cannot explain to you!--but it appears to me that you soon may
experience something of the same kind.  Rumeri, do not go again to the
paraschites."



CHAPTER XXXII.

Early on the following clay the dwarf Nemu went past the restored hut of
Uarda's father--in which he had formerly lived with his wife--with a man
in a long coarse robe, the steward of some noble family.  They went
towards old Hekt's cave-dwelling.

"I would beg thee to wait down here a moment, noble lord," said the
dwarf, "while I announce thee to my mother."

"That sounds very grand," said the other.  "However, so be it.  But stay!
The old woman is not to call me by my name or by my title.  She is to
call me 'steward'--that no one may know.  But, indeed, no one would
recognize me in this dress."

Nemu hastened to the cave, but before he reached his mother she called
out: "Do not keep my lord waiting--I know him well."

Nemu laid his finger to his lips.

"You are to call him steward," said he.

"Good," muttered the old woman.  "The ostrich puts his head under his
feathers when he does not want to be seen."

"Was the young prince long with Uarda yesterday?"

"No, you fool," laughed the witch, "the children play together.  Rameri
is a kid without horns, but who fancies he knows where they ought to
grow.  Pentaur is a more dangerous rival with the red-headed girl.  Make
haste, now; these stewards must not be kept waiting!"

The old woman gave the dwarf a push, and he hurried back to Ani, while
she carried the child, tied to his board, into the cave, and threw the
sack over him.

A few minutes later the Regent stood before her.  She bowed before him
with a demeanor that was more like the singer Beki than the sorceress
Hekt, and begged him to take the only seat she possessed.

When, with a wave of his hand, he declined to sit down, she said:

"Yes--yes--be seated!  then thou wilt not be seen from the valley, but be
screened by the rocks close by.  Why hast thou chosen this hour for thy
visit?"

"Because the matter presses of which I wish to speak," answered Ani; "and
in the evening I might easily be challenged by the watch.  My disguise is
good.  Under this robe I wear my usual dress.  From this I shall go to
the tomb of my father, where I shall take off this coarse thing, and
these other disfigurements, and shall wait for my chariot, which is
already ordered.  I shall tell people I had made a vow to visit the
grave humbly, and on foot, which I have now fulfilled."

"Well planned," muttered the old woman.

Ani pointed to the dwarf, and said politely: "Your pupil."

Since her narrative the sorceress was no longer a mere witch in his eyes.
The old woman understood this, and saluted him with a curtsey of such
courtly formality, that a tame raven at her feet opened his black beak
wide, and uttered a loud scream.  She threw a bit of cheese within the
cave, and the bird hopped after it, flapping his clipped wings, and was
silent.

"I have to speak to you about Pentaur," said Ani.  The old woman's eyes
flashed, and she eagerly asked, "What of him?"

"I have reasons," answered the Regent, "for regarding him as dangerous to
me.  He stands in my way.  He has committed many crimes, even murder; but
he is in favor at the House of Seti, and they would willingly let him go
unpunished.  They have the right of sitting in judgment on each other,
and I cannot interfere with their decisions; the day before yesterday
they pronounced their sentence.  They would send him to the quarries of
Chennu.

     [Chennu is now Gebel Silsileh; the quarries there are of enormous
     extent, and almost all the sandstone used for building the temples
     of Upper Egypt was brought from thence.  The Nile is narrower there
     than above, and large stela, were erected there by Rameses II.  his
     successor Mernephtah, on which were inscribed beautiful hymns to the
     Nile, and lists of the sacrifices to be offered at the Nile-
     festivals.  These inscriptions can be restored by comparison, and my
     friend Stern and I had the satisfaction of doing this on the spot
     (Zeitschrift fur Agyptishe Sprache, 1873, p.  129.)]

"All my objections were disregarded, and now Nemu, go over to the grave of
Anienophis, and wait there for me--I wish to speak to your mother alone."

Nemu bowed, and then went down the slope, disappointed, it is true, but
sure of learning later what the two had discussed together.
