though as thy son I may be hateful in thine eyes, yet as Egypt's future I
ought to be near thy heart.  Remember, that at thy death, which may the
gods long avert, I shall represent the existence of this glorious land as
thou dost now; my fall will be the ruin of thine house, of Egypt!"

Amasis became more and more serious, and Psamtik went on eagerly: "Thou
knowest that I am right!  Phanes can betray our land to any foreign
enemy; he is as intimately acquainted with it as we are; and beside this,
he possesses a secret, the knowledge of which would convert our most
powerful ally into a most formidable enemy."

"There thou art in error.  Though not mine, Nitetis is a king's daughter
and will know how to win the love of her husband."

"Were she the daughter of a god, she could not save thee from Cambyses'
wrath, if he discovers the treachery; lying is to a Persian the worst of
crimes, to be deceived the greatest disgrace; thou hast deceived the
highest and proudest of the nation, and what can one inexperienced girl
avail, when hundreds of women, deeply versed in intrigue and artifice,
are striving for the favor of their lord?"

"Hatred and revenge are good masters in the art of rhetoric," said Amasis
in a cutting tone.  "And think'st thou then, oh, foolish son, that I
should have undertaken such a dangerous game without due consideration?
Phanes may tell the Persians what he likes, he can never prove his point.
I, the father, Ladice the mother must know best whether Nitetis is our
child or not.  We call her so, who dare aver the contrary?  If it please
Phanes to betray our land to any other enemy beside the Persians, let
him; I fear nothing!  Thou wouldst have me ruin a man who has been my
friend, to whom I owe much gratitude, who has served me long and
faithfully; and this without offence from his side.  Rather will I
shelter him from thy revenge, knowing as I do the impure source from
which it springs."

"My father!"

"Thou desirest the ruin of this man, because he hindered thee from taking
forcible possession of the granddaughter of Rhodopis, and because thine
own incapacity moved me to place him in thy room as commander of the
troops.  Ah! thou growest pale!  Verily, I owe Phanes thanks for
confiding to me your vile intentions, and so enabling me to bind my
friends and supporters, to whom Rhodopis is precious, more firmly to my
throne."

"And is it thus thou speakest of these strangers, my father?  dost thou
thus forget the ancient glory of Egypt?  Despise me, if thou wilt; I know
thou lovest me not; but say not that to be great we need the help of
strangers!  Look back on our history!  Were we not greatest when our
gates were closed to the stranger, when we depended on ourselves and our
own strength, and lived according to the ancient laws of our ancestors
and our gods?  Those days beheld the most distant lands subjugated by
Rameses, and heard Egypt celebrated in the whole world as its first and
greatest nation.  What are we now?  The king himself calls beggars and
foreigners the supporters of his throne, and devises a petty stratagem to
secure the friendship of a power over whom we were victorious before the
Nile was infested by these strangers.  Egypt was then a mighty Queen in
glorious apparel; she is now a painted woman decked out in tinsel!"


     [Rameses the Great, son of Sethos, reigned over Egypt 1394-1328 B.
     C.  He was called Sesostris by the Greeks; see Lepsius (Chron. d.
     Aegypter, p.  538.) on the manner in which this confusion of names
     arose.  Egypt attained the zenith of her power under this king,
     whose army, according to Diodorus (I.  53-58).  consisted of 600,000
     foot and 24,000 horsemen, 27,000 chariots and 400 ships of war.
     With these hosts he subdued many of the Asiatic and African nations,
     carving his name and likeness, as trophies of victory, on the rocks
     of the conquered countries.  Herodotus speaks of having seen two of
     these inscriptions himself (II. 102-106.) and two are still to be
     found not far from Bairut.   His conquests brought vast sums of
     tribute into Egypt.  Tacitus annal. II. 60. and these enabled him to
     erect magnificent buildings in the whole length of his land from
     Nubia to Tanis, but more especially in Thebes, the city in which he
     resided.  One of the obelisks erected by Rameses at Heliopolis is
     now standing in the Place de la Concorde at Paris, and has been
     lately translated by E. Chabas.  On the walls of the yet remaining
     palaces and temples, built under this mighty king, we find, even to
     this day, thousands of pictures representing himself, his armed
     hosts, the many nations subdued by the power of his arms, and the
     divinities to whose favor he believed these victories were owing.
     Among the latter Ammon and Bast seem to have received his especial
     veneration, and, on the other hand, we read in these inscriptions
     that the gods were very willing to grant the wishes of their
     favorite.  A poetical description of the wars he waged with the
     Cheta is to be found in long lines of hieroglyphics on the south
     wall of the hall of columns of Rameses II. at Karnal, also at Luxor
     and in the Sallier Papyrus, and an epic poem referring to his mighty
     deeds in no less than six different places.]

"Have a care what thou sayest!"  shouted Amasis stamping on the floor.
"Egypt was never so great, so flourishing as now!  Rameses carried our
arms into distant lands and earned blood; through my labors the products
of our industry have been carried to all parts of the world and instead
of blood, have brought us treasure and blessing.  Rameses caused the
blood and sweat of his subjects to flow in streams for the honor of his
own great name; under my rule their blood flows rarely, and the sweat of
their brow only in works of usefulness.  Every citizen can now end his
days in prosperity and comfort.  Ten thousand populous cities rise on the
shores of the Nile, not a foot of the soil lies untilled, every child
enjoys the protection of law and justice, and every ill-doer shuns the
watchful eye of the authorities.

"In case of attack from without, have we not, as defenders of those god-
given bulwarks, our cataracts, our sea and our deserts, the finest army
that ever bore arms?  Thirty thousand Hellenes beside our entire Egyptian
military caste? such is the present condition of Egypt!  Rameses
purchased the bright tinsel of empty fame with the blood and tears of his
people.  To me they are indebted for the pure gold of a peaceful welfare
as citizens--to me and to my predecessors, the Saitic kings!"

     [The science of fortification was very fairly understood by the
     ancient Egyptians.  Walled and battlemented forts are to be seen
     depicted on their monuments.  We have already endeavored to show
     (see our work on Egypt. I. 78 and following) that, on the northeast,
     Egypt  defended from Asiatic invasion by a line of forts extending
     from Pelusium to the Red Sea.]

"And yet I tell thee," cried the prince, "that a worm is gnawing at the
root of Egypt's greatness and her life.  This struggle for riches and
splendor corrupts the hearts of the people, foreign luxury has given a
deadly blow to the simple manners of our citizens, and many an Egyptian
has been taught by the Greeks to scoff at the gods of his fathers.  Every
day brings news of bloody strife between the Greek mercenaries and our
native soldiery, between our own people and the strangers.  The shepherd
and his flock are at variance; the wheels of the state machinery are
grinding one another and thus the state itself, into total ruin.  This
once, father, though never again, I must speak out clearly what is
weighing on my heart.  While engaged in contending with the priests, thou
hast seen with calmness the young might of Persia roll on from the East,
consuming the nations on its way, and, like a devouring monster, growing
more and more formidable from every fresh prey.  Thine aid was not, as
thou hadst intended, given to the Lydians and Babylonians against the
enemy, but to the Greeks in the building of temples to their false gods.
At last resistance seemed hopeless; a whole hemisphere with its rulers
lay in submission at the feet of Persia; but even then the gods willed
Egypt a chance of deliverance.  Cambyses desired thy daughter in
marriage.  Thou, however, too weak to sacrifice thine own flesh and blood
for the good of all, hast substituted another maiden, not thine own
child, as an offering to the mighty monarch; and at the same time, in thy
soft-heartedness, wilt spare the life of a stranger in whose hand he the
fortunes of this realm, and who will assuredly work its ruin; unless
indeed, worn out by internal dissension, it perish even sooner from its
own weakness!"

Thus far Amasis had listened to these revilings of all he held dearest in
silence, though pale, and trembling with rage; but now he broke forth in
a voice, the trumpet-like sound of which pealed through the wide hall:
"Know'st thou not then, thou boasting and revengeful son of evil, thou
future destroyer of this ancient and glorious kingdom, know'st thou not
whose life must be the sacrifice, were not my children, and the dynasty
which I have founded, dearer to me than the welfare of the whole realm?
Thou, Psamtik, thou art the man, branded by the gods, feared by men--the
man to whose heart love and friendship are strangers, whose face is never
seen to smile, nor his soul known to feel compassion!  It is not,
however, through thine own sin that thy nature is thus unblessed, that
all thine undertakings end unhappily.  Give heed, for now I am forced to
relate what I had hoped long to keep secret from thine ears.  After
dethroning my predecessor, I forced him to give me his sister Tentcheta
in marriage.  She loved me; a year after marriage there was promise of a
child.  During the night preceding thy birth I fell asleep at the bedside
of my wife.  I dreamed that she was lying on the shores of the Nile, and
complained to me of pain in the breast.  Bending down, I beheld a
cypress-tree springing from her heart.  It grew larger and larger, black
and spreading, twined its roots around thy mother and strangled her.  A
cold shiver seized me, and I was on the point of flying from the spot,
when a fierce hurricane came from the East, struck the tree and overthrew
it, so that its spreading branches were cast into the Nile.  Then the
waters ceased to flow; they congealed, and, in place of the river, a
gigantic mummy lay before me.  The towns on its banks dwindled into huge
funereal urns, surrounding the vast corpse of the Nile as in a tomb.  At
this I awoke and caused the interpreters of dreams to be summoned.  None
could explain the vision, till at last the priests of the Libyan Ammon
gave me the following interpretation 'Tentcheta will die in giving birth
to a son.  The cypress, which strangled its mother, is this gloomy,
unhappy man.  In his days a people shall come from the East and shall
make of the Nile, that is of the Egyptians, dead bodies, and of their
cities ruinous heaps; these are the urns for the dead, which thou
sawest."

Psamtik listened as if turned into stone; his father continued; "Thy
mother died in giving birth to thee; fiery-red hair, the mark of the sons
of Typhon, grew around thy brow; thou becam'st a gloomy man.  Misfortune
pursued thee and robbed thee of a beloved wife and four of thy children.
The astrologers computed that even as I had been born under the fortunate
sign of Amman, so thy birth had been watched over by the rise of the
awful planet Seb.  Thou .  .  ."  But here Amasis broke off, for Psamtik,
in the anguish produced by these fearful disclosures had given way, and
with sobs and groans, cried:

"Cease, cruel father! spare me at least the bitter words, that I am the
only son in Egypt who is hated by his father without cause!"

Amasis looked down on the wretched man who had sunk to the earth before
him, his face hidden in the folds of his robe, and the father's wrath was
changed to compassion.  He thought of Psamtik's mother, dead forty years
before, and felt he had been cruel in inflicting this poisonous wound on
her son's soul.  It was the first time for years, that he had been able
to feel towards this cold strange man, as a father and a comforter.  For
the first time he saw tears in the cold eyes of his son, and could feel
the joy of wiping them away.  He seized the opportunity at once, and
bending clown over the groaning form, kissed his forehead, raised him
from the ground and said gently:

