"Then why did he not suffer it to content him?"  cried Cleopatra
wrathfully.

"Fulvia's school," replied the Roman, "was probably the last where he
would learn the moderation which--as you know--is so alien to his nature.
His opinion of the quiet valleys and middle course you have just heard."

"But I, what have I been to him?" urged the Queen.

Lucilius bent his gaze for a short time on the floor, then answered
hesitatingly:

"You asked to hear, and the Queen's command must be obeyed.  He compared
your Majesty to a delicious banquet given to celebrate a victory, at
which the guests, crowned with garlands, revel before the battle--"

"Which is lost," said the Queen hurriedly, in a muffled voice.  "The
comparison is apt.  Now, after the defeat, it would be absurd to prepare
another feast.  The tragedy is closing, so the play (doubtless he said
so) which preceded it would be but a wearisome repetition if performed a
second time.  One thing, it is true, seems desirable--a closing act of
reconciliation.  If you think it is in my power to recall my husband to
active life, rely upon me.  The banquet of which he spoke occupied long
years.  The dessert will consume little time, but I am ready to serve it.
When I asked permission to visit him he refused.  What plan of meeting
have you arranged?"

"That I will leave to your feminine delicacy of feeling," replied
Lucilius.  "Yet I have come with a request whose fulfilment will perhaps
contain the answer.  Eros, Mark Antony's faithful body-slave, humbly
petitions your Majesty to grant him a few minutes' audience.  You know
the worthy fellow.  He would die for you and his master, and he--I once
heard from your lips the remark of King Antiochus, that no man was great
to his body-slave--thus Eros sees his master's weaknesses and lofty
qualities from a nearer point of view than we, and he is shrewd.  Antony
gave him his freedom long ago, and if your Majesty does not object to
receiving a man so low in station--"

"Let him  come," replied  Cleopatra.  "Your demand upon me is just.
Unhappily, I am but too well aware of the atonement due your friend.
Before you came, I was engaged in making preparations for the fulfilment
of one of his warmest wishes."

With these words she dismissed the Roman.  Her feelings as she watched
his departure were of very mingled character.  The yearning for the
happiness of which she had been so long deprived had again awaked, while
the unkind words which he had applied to her still rankled in her heart.
But the door had scarcely closed behind Lucilius when the usher announced
a deputation of the members of the museum.

The learned gentlemen came to complain of the wrong which had been done
to their colleague, Didymus, and also to express their loyalty during
these trying times.  Cleopatra assured them of her favour, and said that
she had already offered ample compensation to the old philosopher.  In a
certain sense she was one of themselves.  They all knew that, from early
youth, she had honoured and shared their labours.  In proof of this, she
would present to the library of the museum the two hundred thousand
volumes from Pergamus, one of the most valuable gifts Mark Antony had
ever bestowed upon her, and which she had hitherto regarded merely as a
loan.  This she hoped would repay Didymus for the injury which, to her
deep regret, had been inflicted upon him, and at least partially repair
the loss sustained by the former library of the museum during the
conflagration in the Bruchium.

The sages, eagerly assuring her of their gratitude and devotion, retired.
Most of them were personally known to Cleopatra who, to their mutual
pleasure and advantage, had measured her intellectual powers with the
most brilliant minds of their body.

The sun had already set, when a procession of the priests of Serapis, the
chief god of the city, whose coming had been announced the day before,
appeared at Lochias.  Accompanied by torch and lantern bearers, it moved
forward with slow and solemn majesty.  In harmony with the nature of
Serapis, there were many reminders of death.

The meaning of every image, every standard, every shrine, every
peculiarity of the music and singing, was familiar to the Queen.  Even
the changing colours of the lights referred to the course of growth and
decay in the universe and in human life, and the magnificent close of the
chant of homage which represented the reception of the royal soul into
the essence of the deity, the apotheosis of the sovereign, was well
suited to stir the heart; for a sea of light unexpectedly flooded the
whole procession and, while its glow irradiated the huge pile of the
palace, the sea with its forest of ships and masts, and the shore with
its temples, pylons, obelisks, and superb buildings, all the choruses,
accompanied by the music of sackbuts, cymbals, and lutes, blended in a
mighty hymn, whose waves of sound rose to the star-strewn sky and reached
the open sea beyond the Pharos.

Many a symbolical image suggested death and the resurrection, defeat and
a victory following it by the aid of great Serapis; and when the torches
retired, vanishing in the darkness, with the last, notes of the chanting
of the priests, Cleopatra, raised her head, feeling as if the vow she had
made during the gloomy singing of the aged men and the extinguishing of
the torches had received the approval of the deity brought by her
forefathers to Alexandria and enthroned there to unite in his own person
the nature of the Greek and the Egyptian gods.

Her tomb was to be built and, if destiny was fulfilled, to receive her
lover and herself.  She had perceived from Antony's bitter words, as well
as the looks and tones of Lucilius, that he, as well as the man to whom
her heart still clung with indissoluble bonds, held her responsible for
Actium and the fall of his greatness.

The world, she knew, would imitate them, but it should learn that if love
had robbed the greatest man of his day of fame and sovereignty, that love
had been worthy of the highest price.

The belief which had just been symbolically represented to her--that it
was allotted to the vanishing light to rise again in new and radiant
splendour--she would maintain for the present, though the best success
could scarcely lead to anything more than merely fanning the glimmering
spark and deferring its extinction.

For herself there was no longer any great victory to win which would be
worth the conflict.  Yet the weapons must not rest until the end.  Antony
must not perish, growling, like a second Timon, or a wild beast caught in
a snare.  She would rekindle, though but for the last blaze, the fire of
his hero-nature, which blind love for her and the magic spell that had
enabled her to bind his will had covered for a time with ashes.

While listening to the resurrection hymn of the priests of Serapis, she
had asked herself if it might not be possible to give Antony, when he had
been roused to fresh energy, the son of Caesar as a companion in arms.
True, she had found the boy in a mood far different from the one for
which she had hoped.  If he had once been carried on to a bold deed, it
seemed to have exhausted his energy; for he remained absorbed in the most
pitiable love-sickness.  Yet he had not recovered from his illness.  When
he was better he would surely wake to active interest in the events which
threatened to exert so great an influence on his own existence and,
like the humblest slave, lament the defeat of Actium.  Hitherto he had
listened to the tidings of battle which had reached his ears with an
indifference that seemed intelligible and pardonable only when attributed
to his wound.

His tutor Rhodon had just requested a leave of absence, remarking that
Caesarion would not lack companions, since he was expecting Antyllus and
other youths of his own age.  A flood of light streamed from the windows
of the reception hall of the "King of kings."  There was still time to
seek him and make him understand what was at stake.  Ah! if she could but
succeed in awaking his father's spirit!  If that culpable attack should
prove the harbinger of future deeds of manly daring!

No interview with him as yet had encouraged this expectation, but a
mother's heart easily sees, even in disappointment, a step which leads to
a new hope.  When Charmian entered to announce Antony's body-slave, she
sent word to him to wait, and requested her friend to accompany her to
her son.

As they approached the apartments occupied by Caesarion, Antyllus's loud
voice reached them through the open door, whose curtain was only half
drawn.  The first word which the Queen distinguished was her own name;
so, motioning to her companion, she stood still.  Barine was again the
subject of conversation.

Antony's son was relating what Alexas had told him.  Cleopatra, the
Syrian had asserted, intended to send the young beauty to the mines or
into exile, and severely punish Dion; but both had made their escape.
The Ephebi had behaved treacherously by taking sides with their foe.
But this was because they were not yet invested with their robes.
He hoped to induce his father to do this as soon as he shook off his
pitiable misanthropy.  And he must also be persuaded to direct the
pursuit of the fugitives.  "This will not be difficult," he cried
insolently, "for the old man appreciates beauty, and has himself cast
an eye on the singer.  If they capture her, I'll guarantee nothing, you
'King of kings!' for, spite of his grey beard, he can cut us all out with
the women, and Barine--as we have heard--doesn't think a man of much
importance until his locks begin to grow thin.  I gave Derketaeus orders
to send all his men in pursuit.  He's as cunning as a fox, and the police
are compelled to obey him."

"If I were not forced to lie here like a dead donkey, I would soon find
her," sighed Caesarion.  "Night or day, she is never out of my mind.
I have already spent everything I possessed in the search.  Yesterday I
sent for the steward Seleukus.  What is the use of being my mother's son,
and the fat little fellow isn't specially scrupulous!  He will do
nothing, yet there must be gold enough.  The Queen has sunk millions in
the sand on the Syrian frontier of the Delta.  There is to be a square
hole or something of the sort dug there to hide the fleet.  I only half
understand the absurd plan.  The money might have paid hundreds of spies.
So talents are thrown away, and the strong-box is locked against the son.
But I'll find one that will open to me.  I must have her, though I risk
the crown.  It always sounds like a jeer when they call me the King of
kings.  I am not fit for sovereignty.  Besides, the throne will be seized
ere I really ascend it.  We are conquered, and if we succeed in
concluding a peace, which will secure us life and a little more, we must
be content.  For my part, I shall be satisfied with a country estate on
the water, a sufficient supply of money and, above all, Barine.  What do
I care for Egypt?  As Caesar's son I ought to have ruled Rome; but the
immortals knew what they were doing when they prompted my father to
disinherit me.  To govern the world one must have less need of sleep.
Really--you know it--I always feel tired, even when I am well.  People
must let me alone!  Your father, too, Antyllus, is laying down his arms
and letting things go as they will."

"Ah, so he is!"  cried Antony's son indignantly.  "But just wait!  The
sleeping lion will wake again, and, when he uses his teeth and paws--"

"My mother will run away, and your father will follow her," replied
Caesarion with a melancholy smile, wholly untinged by scorn.  "All is
lost.  But conquered kings and queens are permitted to live.  Caesar's
son will not be exhibited to the Quirites in the triumphal procession.
Rhodon says that there would be an insurrection if I appeared in the
Forum.  If I go there again, it certainly will not be in Octavianus's
train.  I am not suited for that kind of ignominy.  It would stifle me
and, ere I would grant any man the pleasure of dragging the son of Caesar
behind him to increase his own renown, I would put an end--ten, nay, a
hundred times over, in the good old Roman fashion, to my life, which is
by no means especially attractive.  What is sweeter than sound sleep, and
who will disturb and rouse me when Death has lowered his torch before me?
But now I think I shall be spared this extreme.  Whatever else they may
inflict upon me will scarcely exceed my powers of endurance.  If any one
has learned contentment it is I.  The King of kings and Co-Regent of the
Great Queen has been trained persistently, and with excellent success,
to be content.  What should I be, and what am I?  Yet I do not complain,
and wish to accuse no one.  We need not summon Octavianus, and when he is
here let him take what he will if he only spares the lives of my mother,
the twins, and little Alexander, whom I love, and bestows on me the
estate--the main thing is that it must be full of fishponds--of which I
spoke.  The private citizen Caesarion, who devotes his time to fishing
and the books he likes to read, will gladly be allowed to choose a wife
to suit his own taste.  The more humble her origin, the more easily I
shall win the consent of the Roman guardian."

"Do you know, Caesarion," interrupted Antony's unruly son, leaning back
on the cushions and stretching his feet farther in front of him, "if you
were not the King of kings I should be inclined to call you a base, mean-
natured fellow!  One who has the good fortune to be the son of Julius
Caesar ought not to forget it so disgracefully.  My gall overflows at
your whimpering.  By the dog!  It was one of my most senseless pranks to
take you to the singer.  I should think there would be other things to
occupy the mind of the King of kings.  Besides, Barine cares no more
for you than the last fish you caught.  She showed that plainly enough.
I say once more, if Derketaeus's men succeed in capturing the beauty who
has robbed you of your senses, she won't go with you to your miserable
estate to cook the fish you catch, for if we have her again, and my
father holds out his hand to her, all your labour will be in vain.  He
saw the fair enchantress only twice, and had no time to become better
acquainted, but she captured his fancy and, if I remind him of her, who
knows what will happen?"

Here Cleopatra beckoned to her companion and returned to her apartments
with drooping head.  On reaching them, she broke the silence, saying:
"Listening, Charmian, is unworthy of a Queen; but if all listeners heard
things so painful, one need no longer guard keyholes and chinks of doors.
I must recover my calmness ere I receive Eros.  One thing more.  Is
Barine's hiding-place secure?"

