through the curtain which divided the room in which Iras remained from
the one he occupied he sometimes heard her light footsteps pacing
restlessly to and fro, sometimes the coming and going of messengers in
quest of news.

All his former life passed before his mind.  Cleopatra had been his sun,
and now black clouds were rising which would dim its light, perchance
forever.  He, the disciple of Epicurus, who had not followed the
doctrines of other masters until later in life, held the same view of the
gods as his first master.  To him also they had seemed immortal beings
sufficient unto themselves, dwelling free from anxiety in blissful peace,
to whom mortals must look upward on account of their supreme grandeur,
but who neither troubled themselves about the guidance of the world,
which was fixed by eternal laws, nor the fate of individuals.  Had he
been convinced of the contrary, he would have sacrificed everything he
possessed in order, by lavish offerings, to propitiate the immortals in
behalf of her to whom he had devoted his life and every faculty of his
being.

Like Iras, he, too, could find no rest upon his couch, and when she heard
his step she called to him and asked why he did not recover the sleep
which he had lost.  No one knew the demands the next night might make
upon him.

"You will find me awake," he answered quietly.

Then he went to the window which, above the pylons that rose before the
main front of the Sebasteum, afforded a view of the Bruchium and the sea.
The harbour was now swarming with vessels of every size, garlanded with
flowers and adorned with gay flags and streamers.  The report of the
successful issue of the first naval battle was believed, and many desired
to greet the victorious fleet and hail their sovereign as she entered the
harbour.

Many people, equipages, and litters had also gathered on the shore,
between the lofty pylons and the huge door of the Sebasteum.  They were
representatives of the aristocracy of the city; for the majority were
attended by richly attired slaves.  Many wore costly garlands, and
numerous chariots and litters were adorned with gold or silver ornaments,
gems, and glittering paste.  The stir and movement in front of the palace
were ceaseless, and Iras, who was now standing beside her uncle, waved
her hand towards it, saying: "The wind of rumour!  Yesterday only one or
two came; to-day every one who belongs to the 'Inimitable Livers' flocks
hither in person to get news.  The victory was proclaimed in the market-
place, at the theatre, the gymnasium, and the camp.  Every one who wears
garlands or weapons heard of a battle won.  Yesterday, among all the
thousands, there was scarcely a single doubter; but to-day-how does it
happen?  Even among those who as 'Inimitables' have shared all the
pleasures, entertainments, and festivities of our noble pair, faith
wavers; for if they were firmly convinced of the brilliant victory which
was announced loudly enough, they would not come themselves to watch,
to spy, to listen.  Just look down!  There is the litter of Diogenes--
yonder that of Ammonius.  The chariot beyond belongs to Melampous.  The
slaves in the red bombyx garments serve Hermias.  They all belong to the
society of--'Inimitables,' and shared our banquets.  That very Apollonius
who, for the last half hour, has been trying to question the palace
servants, day before yesterday ordered fifty oxen to be slaughtered to
Ares, Nike, and the great Isis, as the Queen's goddess, and when I met
him in the temple he exclaimed that this was the greatest piece of
extravagance he had ever committed; for even without the cattle Cleopatra
and Antony would be sure of victory.  But now the wind of rumour has
swept away his beautiful confidence also.  They are not permitted to see
me.  The doorkeepers say that I am in the country.  The necessity of
showing every one a face radiant with the joy of victory would kill me.
There comes Apollonius.  How his fat face beams!  He believes in the
victory, and after sunset none of yonder throng will appear here; he is
already giving orders to his slaves.  He will invite all his friends to a
banquet, and won't spare his costly wines.  Capital!  At least no one
from that company can disturb us.  Dion is his cousin, and will be
present also.  We shall see what these pleasure-lovers will do when they
are forced to confront, the terrible reality."

"I think," replied Archibius, "they will afford the world a remarkable
spectacle; friends won in prosperity who remain constant in adversity."

"Do you?"  asked Iras, with sparkling eyes.  "If that proves true, how I
would praise and value men--the majority of whom without their wealth
would be poorer than beggars.  But look at yonder figure in the white
robe beside the left obelisk--is it not Dion?  The crowd is bearing him
away--I think it was he."

But she had been deceived; the man whom she fancied she had seen, because
her heart so ardently yearned for him, was not near the Sebasteum, and
his thoughts were still farther away.

At first he had intended to give the architect the letter which was
addressed to him.  He would be sure to find him at the triumphal arch
which was being erected on the shore of the Bruchium.  But on reaching
the former place he learned that Gorgias had gone to remove the statues
of Cleopatra and Antony from the house of Didymus, and erect them in
front of the Theatre of Dionysus.  The Regent, Mardion, had ordered it.
Gorgias was already superintending the erection of the foundation.

The huge hewn stones which he required for this purpose had been taken
from the Temple of Nemesis, which he was supervising.  Whatever number of
government slaves he needed were at his disposal, so Gorgias's foreman
reported, proudly adding that before the sun went down, the architect
would have shown the Alexandrians the marvel of removing the twin statues
from one place to another in a single day, and yet establishing them as
firmly as the Colossus which had been in Thebes a thousand years.

Dion found the piece of sculpture in front of Didymus's garden, ready for
removal, but the slaves who had placed before the platform the rollers on
which it was to be moved had already been kept waiting a long time by the
architect.

This was his third visit to the old philosopher's house.  First, he had
been obliged to inform him and his family that their property was no
longer in danger; then he had come to tell them at what hour he would
remove the statues, which still attracted many curious spectators; and,
finally, he had again appeared, to announce that they were to be taken
away at once.  His foreman or a slave could probably have done this, but
Helena--Didymus's granddaughter, Barine's sister--drew him again and
again to the old man's home.  He would gladly have come still more
frequently, for at every meeting he had discovered fresh charms in the
beautiful, quiet, thoughtful maiden, who cared so tenderly for her aged
grandparents.  He believed that he loved her, and she seemed glad to
welcome him.  But this did not entitle him to seek her hand, though his
large, empty house so greatly needed a mistress.  His heart had glowed
with love for too many.  He wished first to test whether this new fancy
would prove more lasting.  If he succeeded in remaining faithful even a
few days, he would, as it were, reward himself for it, and appear before
Didymus as a suitor.

He excused his frequent visits to himself on the pretext of the necessity
of becoming acquainted with his future wife, and Helena made the task
easier for him.  The usual reserve of her manner lessened more and more;
nay, the great confidence with which he at first inspired her was
increased by his active assistance.  When he entered just now, she had
even held out her hand to him, and inquired about the progress of his
work.

He was overwhelmed with business, but so great was his pleasure in
talking with her that he lingered longer than he would have deemed right
under any other circumstances, and regarded it as an unpleasant
interruption when Barine--for whom his heart had throbbed so warmly only
yesterday--entered the tablinum.

The young beauty was by no means content with a brief greeting; but drew
Helena entirely away from him.  Never had he seen her embrace and kiss
her sister so passionately as while hurriedly telling her that she had
come to bid farewell to the loved ones in her grandparents' house.

Berenike had arrived with her, but went first to the old couple.

While Barine was telling Helena and Gorgias, also, why all this plan had
been formed so hastily, Gorgias was silently comparing the two sisters.
He found it natural that he had once believed that he loved Barine; but
she would not have been a fitting mistress of his house.  Life at her
side would have been a chain of jealous emotions and anxieties, and her
stimulating remarks and searching questions, which demanded absolute
attention, would not have permitted him, after his return home, wearied
by arduous toil, to find the rest for which he longed.  His eye wandered
from her to her sister, as if testing the space between two newly erected
pillars; and Barine, who had noticed his strange manner, suddenly laughed
merrily, and asked whether they might know what building was occupying
his thoughts, while a good friend was telling him that the pleasant hours
in her house were over.

Gorgias started, and the apology he stammered showed so plainly how
inattentively he had listened, that Barine would have had good reason to
feel offended.  But one glance at her sister and another at him enabled
her speedily to guess the truth.  She was pleased; for she esteemed
Gorgias, and had secretly feared that she might be forced to grieve him
by a refusal, but he seemed as if created for her sister.  Her arrival
had probably interrupted them so, turning to Helena, she exclaimed:
"I must see my mother and our grandparents.  Meanwhile entertain our
friend here.  We know each other well.  He is one of the few men who can
be trusted.  That is my honest opinion, Gorgias, and I say it to you
also, Helena."

With these words she nodded to both, and Gorgias was again alone with the
maiden whom he loved.

It was difficult to begin the conversation anew, and when, spite of many
efforts, it would not flow freely, the shout of the overseer, which
reached his ear through the opening of the roof, urging the men to work,
was like a deliverance.  Promising to return again soon, as eagerly as if
he had been requested to do so, he took his leave and opened the door
leading into the adjoining room.  But on the threshold he started back,
and Helena, who had followed him, did the same, for there stood his
friend Dion, and Barine's beautiful head lay on his breast, while his
hand rested as if in benediction on her fair hair.  And--no, Gorgias was
not mistaken-the slender frame of the lovely woman, whose exuberant
vivacity had so often borne him and others away with it, trembled as if
shaken by deep and painful emotion.
