ungovernable, but not wicked."

"Only ask him!" cried the girl, pointing with flashing eyes to Hermas,
who, on his part, looked down a the floor in confusion.  The senator
exchanged a hasty glance with his wife, they were accustomed to under
stand each other without speech, and Dorothea said: "He who feels that
he is not what he ought to be is already on the high-road to amendment.
We let you keep the goats because you were always running after the
flocks, and never can rest in the house.  You are up on the mountain
before morning-prayer, and never come home till after supper is over, and
no one takes any thought for the better part of you.  Half of your guilt
recoils upon us, and we have no right to punish you.  You need not be so
astonished; every one some times does wrong.  Petrus and I are human
beings like you, neither more nor less; but we are Christians, and it is
our duty to look after the souls which God has entrusted to our care, be
they our children or our slaves.  You must go no more up the mountain,
but shall stay with us in the house.  I shall willingly forgive your
hasty deed if Petrus does not think it necessary to punish you."

The senator gravely shook his head in sign of agreement, and Dorothea
turned to enquire of Jethro: "Is Anubis badly wounded and does he need
any care?'

"He is lying in a fever and wanders in his talk, was the answer.  "Old
Praxinoa is cooling his wound with water."

"Then Miriam can take her place and try to remedy the mischief which she
was the cause of," said Dorothea.  "Half of your guilt will be atoned for,
girl, if Anubis recovers under your care.  I will come presently with
Marthana, and show you how to make a bandage."  The shepherdess cast down
her eyes, and passively allowed herself to be conducted to the wounded
man.

Meanwhile Marthana had prepared the brown mixture.  Petrus had his staff
and felt-hat brought to him, gave Hermas the medicine and desired him to
follow him.

Sirona looked after the couple as they went.  "What a pity for such a
fine lad!" she exclaimed.  "A purple coat would suit him better than that
wretched sheepskin."

The mistress shrugged her shoulders, and signing to her daughter said:
"Come to work, Marthana, the sun is already high.  How the days fly!
the older one grows the quicker the hours hurry away."

"I must be very young then," said the centurion's wife, "for in this
wilderness time seems to me to creep along frightfully slow.  One day is
the same as another, and I often feel as if life were standing perfectly
still, and my heart pulses with it.  What should I be without your house
and the children?--always the same mountain, the same palm-trees, the
same faces!--"

"But the mountain is glorious, the trees are beautiful!" answered
Dorothea.  "And if we love the people with whom we are in daily
intercourse, even here we may be contented and happy.  At least we
ourselves are, so far as the difficulties of life allow.  I have often
told you, what you want is work."

"Work! but for whom?" asked Sirona.  "If indeed I had children like you!
Even in Rome I was not happy, far from it; and yet there was plenty to do
and to think about.  Here a procession, there a theatre; but here!  And
for whom should I dress even?  My jewels grow dull in my chest, and the
moths eat my best clothes.  I am making doll's clothes now of my colored
cloak for your little ones.  If some demon were to transform me into a
hedge-hog or a grey owl, it would be all the same to me."

"Do not be so sinful," said Dorothea gravely, but looking with kindly
admiration at the golden hair and lovely sweet face of the young woman.
"It ought to be a pleasure to you to dress yourself for your husband."

"For him?" said Sirona.  "He never looks at me, or if he does it is only
to abuse me.  The only wonder to me is that I can still be merry at all;
nor am I, except in your house, and not there even but when I forget him
altogether."

"I will not hear such things said--not another word," interrupted
Dorothea severely.  "Take the linen and cooling lotion, Marthana, we will
go and bind up Anubis' wound."




CHAPTER IV.

Petrus went up the mountain side with Hermas.  The old man followed the
youth, who showed him the way, and as he raised his eyes from time to
time, he glanced with admiration at his guide's broad shoulders and
elastic limbs.  The road grew broader when it reached a little mountain
plateau, and from thence the two men walked on side by side, but for some
time without speaking till the senator asked: "How long now has your
father lived up on the mountain?"

"Many years," answered Hermas.  "But I do not know how many--and it is
all one.  No one enquires about time up here among us."

The senator stood still a moment and measured his companion with a
glance.

"You have been with your father ever since he came?"  he asked.

"He never lets me out of his sight;" replied Hermas.  "I have been only
twice into the oasis, even to go to the church."

"Then you have been to no school?"

"To what school should I go!  My father has taught me to read the Gospels
and I could write, but I have nearly forgotten how.  Of what use would it
be to me?  We live like praying beasts."

Deep bitterness sounded in the last words, and Petrus could see into
the troubled spirit of his companion, overflowing as it was with weary
disgust, and he perceived how the active powers of youth revolted in
aversion against the slothful waste of life, to which he was condemned.
He was grieved for the boy, and he was not one of those who pass by those
in peril without helping them.  Then he thought of his own sons, who had
grown up in the exercise and fulfilment of serious duties, and he owned
to himself that the fine young fellow by his side was in no way their
inferior, and needed nothing but to be guided aright.  He thoughtfully
looked first at the youth and then on the ground, and muttered
unintelligible words into his grey beard as they walked on.  Suddenly he
drew himself up and nodded decisively; he would make an attempt to save
Hermas, and faithful to his own nature, action trod on the heels of
resolve.  Where the little level ended the road divided, one path
continued to lead upwards, the other deviated to the valley and ended at
the quarries.  Petrus was for taking the latter, but Hermas cried out,
"That is not the way to our cave; you must follow me."

"Follow thou me!"  replied the senator, and the words were spoken with a
tone and expression, that left no doubt in the youth's mind as to their
double meaning.  "The day is yet before us, and we will see what my
laborers are doing.  Do you know the spot where they quarry the stone?"

"How should I not know it?" said Hermas, passing the senator to lead the
way.  "I know every path from our mountain to the oasis, and to the sea.
A panther had its lair in the ravine behind your quarries."

"So we have learnt," said Petrus.  "The thievish beasts have slaughtered
two young camels, and the people can neither catch them in their toils
nor run them down with dogs."

"They will leave you in peace now," said the boy laughing.  "I brought
down the male from the rock up there with an arrow, and I found the
mother in a hollow with her young ones.  I had a harder job with her;
my knife is so bad, and the copper blade bent with the blow; I had to
strangle the gaudy devil with my hands, and she tore my shoulder and bit
my arm.  Look! there are the scars.  But thank God, my wounds heal
quicker than my father's.  Paulus says, I am like an, earth-worm; when it
is cut in two the two halves say good-bye to each other, and crawl off
sound and gay, one way, and the other another way.  The young panthers
were so funny and helpless, I would not kill them, but I did them up in
my sheepskin, and brought them to my father.  He laughed at the little
beggars, and then a Nabataean took them to be sold at Clysma to a
merchant from Rome.  There and at Byzantium, there is a demand for all
kinds of living beasts of prey.  I got some money for them, and for
the skins of the old ones, and kept it to pay for my journey, when I
went with the others to Alexandria to ask the blessing of the new
Patriarch."

"You went to the metropolis?" asked Petrus.  "You saw the great
structures, that secure the coast from the inroads of the sea, the tall
Pharos with the far-shining fire, the strong bridges, the churches, the
palaces and temples with their obelisks, pillars, and beautiful paved
courts?  Did it never enter your mind to think that it would be a proud
thing to construct such buildings?"

Hermas shook his head.  "Certainly I would rather live in an airy house
with colonnades than in our dingy cavern, but building would never be in
my way.  What a long time it takes to put one stone on another!  I am not
patient, and when I leave my father I will do something that shall win me
fame.  But there are the quarries--"  Petrus did not let his companion
finish his sentence, but interrupted him with all the warmth of youth,
exclaiming: "And do you mean to say that fame cannot be won by the arts
of building?  Look there at the blocks and flags, here at the pillars of
hard stone.  These are all to be sent to Aila, and there my son Antonius,
the elder of the two that you saw just now, is going to build a House of
God, with strong walls and pillars, much larger and handsomer than our
church in the oasis, and that is his work too.  He is not much older than
you are, and already he is famous among the people far and wide.  Out of
those red blocks down there my younger son Polykarp will hew noble lions,
which are destined to decorate the finest building in the capital itself.
When you and I, and all that are now living, shall have been long since
forgotten, still it will be said these are the work of the Master
Polykarp, the son of Petrus, the Pharanite.  What he can do is certainly
a thing peculiar to himself, no one who is not one of the chosen and
gifted ones can say, 'I will learn to do that.'  But you have a sound
understanding, strong hands and open eyes, and who can tell what else
there is hidden in you.  If you could begin to learn soon, it would not
yet be too late to make a worthy master of you, but of course he who
would rise so high must not be afraid of work.  Is your mind set upon
fame?  That is quite right, and I am very glad of it; but you must know
that he who would gather that rare fruit must water it, as a noble
heathen once said, with the sweat of his brow.  Without trouble and labor
and struggles there can be no victory, and men rarely earn fame without
fighting for victory."

The old man's vehemence was contagious; the lad's spirit was roused, and
he exclaimed warmly: "What do you say? that I am afraid of struggles and
trouble?  I am ready to stake everything, even my life, only to win fame.
But to measure stone, to batter defenceless blocks with a mallet and
chisel, or to join the squares with accurate pains--that does not tempt
me.  I should like to win the wreath in the Palaestra by flinging the
strongest to the ground, or surpass all others as a warrior in battle; my
father was a soldier too, and he may talk as much as he will of 'peace,'
and nothing but 'peace,' all the same in his dreams he speaks of bloody
strife and burning wounds.  If you only cure him I will stay no longer on
this lonely mountain, even if I must steal away in secret.  For what did
God give me these arms, if not to use them?"

Petrus made no answer to these words, which came is a stormy flood from
Hermas' lips, but he stroked his grey beard, and thought to himself,
"The young of the eagle does not catch flies.  I shall never win over
this soldier's son to our peaceful handicraft, but he shall not remain on
the mountain among these queer sluggards, for there he is being ruined,
and yet he is not of a common sort."

When he had given a few orders to the overseer of his workmen, he
followed the young man to see his suffering father.

It was now some hours since Hermas and Paulus had left the wounded
anchorite, and he still lay alone in his cave.  The sun, as it rose
higher and higher, blazed down upon the rocks, which began to radiate
their heat, and the hermit's dwelling was suffocatingly hot.  The pain of
