offered--with many affectionate exclamations up the steps and into the
sitting-room.  Petrus and Dorothea met her on the threshold, and the
latter pressed her to her heart, kissed her forehead and said, "Poor
woman; we know now that we have done you an injustice, and will try to
make it good."  The senator too went up to her, took her hand and added
his greetings to those of his wife, for he knew not whether she had as
yet heard of her husband's end.

Sirona could not find a word in reply.  She had expected to be expelled
as a castaway when she came down the mountain, losing her way in the
darkness.  Her sandals were cut by the sharp rocks, and hung in strips to
her bleeding feet, her beautiful hair was tumbled by the night-wind, and
her white robe looked like a ragged beggar's garment, for she had torn it
to make bandages for Polykarp's wound.

Some hours had already passed since she had left her patient--her heart
full of dread for him and of anxiety as to the hard reception she might
meet with from his parents.

How her hand shook with fear of Petrus and Dorothea as she raised the
brazen knocker of the senator's door, and now--a father, a mother, a
sister opened their arms to her, and an affectionate home smiled upon
her.  Her heart and soul overflowed with boundless emotion and unlimited
thankfulness, and weeping loudly, she pressed her clasped hands to her
breast.

But she spared only a few moments for the enjoyment of these feelings of
delight, for there was no happiness for her without Polykarp, and it was
for his sake that she had undertaken this perilous night-journey.
Marthana had tenderly approached her, but she gently put her aside,
saying, "Not just now, dear girl.  I have already wasted an hour, for I
lost my way in the ravines.  Get ready Petrus to come back to the
mountain with me at once, for--but do not be startled Dorothea, Paulus
says that the worst danger is over, and if Polykarp--"

"For God's sake, do you know where he is?"  cried Dorothea, and her
cheeks crimsoned while Petrus turned pale, and, interrupting her, asked
in breathless anxiety, "Where is Polykarp, and what has happened to him?"

"Prepare yourself to hear bad news," said Sirona, looking at the pair
with mournful anxiety as if to crave their pardon for the evil tidings
she was obliged to bring.  "Polykarp had a fall on a sharp stone and so
wounded his head.  Paulus brought him to me this morning before he set
out against the Blemmyes, that I might nurse him.  I have incessantly
cooled his wound, and towards mid-day he opened his eyes and knew me
again, and said you would be anxious about him.  After sundown he went to
sleep, but he is not wholly free from fever, and as soon as Paulus came
in I set out to quiet your anxiety and to entreat you to give me a
cooling potion, that I may return to him with it at once."  The deepest
sorrow sounded in Sirona's accents as she told her story, and tears had
started to her eyes as she related to the parents what had befallen their
son.  Petrus and Dorothea listened as to a singer, who, dressed indeed in
robes of mourning, nevertheless sings a lay of return and hope to a harp
wreathed with flowers.

Quick, quick, Marthana," cried Dorothea eagerly and with sparkling eyes,
before Sirona had ended.  "Quick, the basket with the bandages.  I will
mix the fever-draught myself."  Petrus went up to the Gaulish woman.

"It is really no worse than you represent?"  he asked in a low voice.
"He is alive? and Paulus--"

"Paulus says," interrupted Sirona, "that with good nursing the sick man
will be well in a few weeks."

"And you can lead me to him?"

"Oh, alas! alas!"  Sirona cried, striking her hand against her forehead.
"I shall never succeed in finding my way back, for I noticed no way-
marks!  But stay--Before us a penitent from Memphis, who has been dead a
few weeks--"

"Old Serapion?"  asked Petrus.

"That was his name," exclaimed Sirona.  "Do you know his cave?"

"How should I?"  replied Petrus.  "But perhaps Agapitus--"

"The spring where I got the water to cool Polykarp's wound, Paulus calls
the partridge's-spring."

"The partridge's-spring," repeated the senator, "I know that."  With a
deep sigh he took his staff, and called to Dorothea, "Do you prepare the
draught, the bandages, torches, and your good litter, while I knock at
our neighbor Magadon's door, and ask him to lend us slaves."

"Let me go with you," said Marthana.  "No, no; you stay here with your
mother."

"And do you think that I can wait here?"  asked Dorothea.  "I am going
with you."

"There is much here for you to do," replied Petrus evasively, "and we
must climb the hill quickly."

"I should certainly delay you," sighed the mother, "but take the girl
with you; she has a light and lucky hand."

"If you think it best," said the senator, and he left the room.

While the mother and daughter prepared everything for the night-
expedition, and came and went, they found time to put many questions and
say many affectionate words to Sirona.  Marthana, even without
interrupting her work, set food and drink for the weary woman on the
table by which she had sunk on a seat; but she hardly moistened her lips.

When the young girl showed her the basket that she had filled with
medicine and linen bandages, with wine and pure water, Sirona said, "Now
lend me a pair of your strongest sandals, for mine are all torn, and I
cannot follow the men without shoes, for the stones are sharp, and cut
into the flesh."

Marthana now perceived for the first time the blood on her friend's feet,
she quickly took the lamp from the table and placed it on the pavement,
exclaiming, as she knelt down in front of Sirona and took her slender
white feet in her hand to look at the wounds on the soles, "Good heavens!
here are three deep cuts!"

In a moment she had a basin at hand, and was carefully bathing the wounds
in Sirona's feet; while she was wrapping the injured foot in strips of
linen Dorothea came up to them.

"I would," she said, "that Polykarp were only here now, this roll would
suffice to bind you both."  A faint flush overspread Sirona's cheeks, but
Dorothea was suddenly conscious of what she had said, and Marthana gently
pressed her friend's hand.

When the bandage was securely fixed, Sirona attempted to walk, but she
succeeded so badly that Petrus, who now came back with his friend Magadon
and his sons, and several slaves, found it necessary to strictly forbid
her to accompany them.  He felt sure of finding his son without her, for
one of Magadon's people had often carried bread and oil to old Serapion
and knew his cave.

Before the senator and his daughter left the room he whispered a few
words to his wife, and together they went up to Sirona.

"Do you know," he asked, "what has happened to your husband?"

"Sirona nodded.  "I heard it from Paulus," she answered.  "Now I am quite
alone in the world."

"Not so," replied Petrus.  "You will find shelter and love under our roof
as if it were your father's, so long as it suits you to stay with us.
You need not thank us--we are deeply in your debt.  Farewell till we meet
again wife.  I would Polykarp were safe here, and that you had seen his
wound.  Come, Marthana, the minutes are precious."

When Dorothea and Sirona were alone, the deaconess said, "Now I will go
and make up a bed for you, for you must be very tired."

"No, no!"  begged Sirona.  "I will wait and watch with you, for I
certainly could not sleep till I know how it is with him."  She spoke so
warmly and eagerly that the deaconess gratefully offered her hand to her
young friend.  Then she said, "I will leave you alone for a few minutes,
for my heart is so full of anxiety that I must needs go and pray for help
for him, and for courage and strength for myself."

"Take me with you," entreated Sirona in a low tone.  "In my need I opened
my heart to your good and loving God, and I will never more pray to any
other.  The mere thought of Him strengthened and comforted me, and now,
if ever, in this hour I need His merciful support."

"My child, my daughter!"  cried the deaconess, deeply moved; she bent
over Sirona, kissed her forehead and her lips, and led her by the hand
into her quiet sleeping-room.

"This is the place where I most love to pray," she said, "although there
is here no image and no altar.  My God is everywhere present and in every
place I can find Him."

The two women knelt down side by side, and both besought the same God for
the same mercies--not for themselves, but for another; and both in their
sorrow could give thanks--Sirona, because in Dorothea she had found a
mother, and Dorothea, because in Sirona she had found a dear and loving
daughter.




CHAPTER XXII.

Paulus was sitting in front of the cave that had sheltered Polykarp and
Sirona, and he watched the torches whose light lessened as the bearers
went farther and farther towards the valley.  They lighted the way for
the wounded sculptor, who was being borne home to the oasis, lying in his
mother's easy litter, and accompanied by his father and his sister.

"Yet an hour," thought the anchorite, "and the mother will have her son
again, yet a week and Polykarp will rise from his bed, yet a year and he
will remember nothing of yesterday but a scar--and perhaps a kiss that he
pressed on the Gaulish woman's rosy lips.  I shall find it harder to
forget.  The ladder which for so many years I had labored to construct,
on which I thought to scale heaven, and which looked to me so lofty and
so safe, there it lies broken to pieces, and the hand that struck it down
was my own weakness.  It would almost seem as if this weakness of mine
had more power than what we call moral strength for that which it took
the one years to build up, was wrecked by the other in a' moment.  In
weakness only am I a giant."

Paulus shivered at these words, for he was cold.  Early in that morning
when he had taken upon himself Hermas' guilt he had abjured wearing his
sheepskin; now his body, accustomed to the warm wrap, suffered severely,
and his blood coursed with fevered haste through his veins since the
efforts, night-watches, and excitement of the last few days.  He drew his
little coat close around him with a shiver and muttered, "I feel like a
sheep that has been shorn in midwinter, and my head burns as if I were a
baker and had to draw the bread out of the oven; a child might knock me
down, and my eyes are heavy.  I have not even the energy to collect my
thoughts for a prayer, of which I am in such sore need.  My goal is
undoubtedly the right one, but so soon as I seem to be nearing it, my
weakness snatches it from me, as the wind swept back the fruit-laden
boughs which Tantalus, parched with thirst, tried to grasp.  I fled from
the world to this mountain, and the world has pursued me and has flung
its snares round my feet.  I must seek a lonelier waste in which I may
be alone--quite alone with my God and myself.  There, perhaps I may find
the way I seek, if indeed the fact that the creature that I call "I," in
which the whole world with all its agitations in little finds room--and
which will accompany me even there--does not once again frustrate all my
labor.  He who takes his Self with him into the desert, is not alone."

Paulus sighed deeply and then pursued his reflections: "How puffed up
with pride I was after I had tasted the Gaul's rods in place of Hermas,
and then I was like a drunken man who falls down stairs step by step.
And poor Stephanus too had a fall when he was so near the goal!  He
