beings whom the Christians can win over--a patch-work medley of loathsome
Barbarians--let them wear out their lives as they choose!  We are Greeks
--the thinking brain, the subtle and sentient soul of the world.  The
polity, the empire, that we shall found on the overthrow of Theodosius
and of Rome shall be Hellenic, purely Hellenic.  The old national spirit,
which made the Greeks omnipotent against the millions of Darius and
Xerxes, shall live again, and we will keep the Barbarians at a distance
as a Patrician forbids his inferiors to count themselves as belonging to
his illustrious house.  The Greek gods, Greek heroism, Greek art and
Greek learning, under our rule shall rise from the dust--all the more
promptly for the stringent oppression under which their indomitable
spirit has so long languished."

"You speak to my heart!"  cried Karnis.  "My old blood flows more swiftly
already, and if I only had a thousand talents left to give. . ."

"You would  stake  them on the  future  Greek Empire,"  said Olympius
eagerly.  "And  we  have adherents without number who feel as you do,
my trusty friend.  We shall succeed--as the great Julian would have
succeeded but for the assassins who laid him low at so early an age;
for Rome. . ."

"Rome is still powerful."

"Rome is a colossus built up of a thousand blocks; but among them a
hundred and more be but loosely in their places, and are ready to drop
away from the body of the foul monster--sooner rather than later.  Our
shout alone will shake them down, and they will fall on our side, we may
choose the best for our own use.  Ere long--a few months only--the hosts
will gather in the champaign country at the foot of Vesuvius, by land and
by sea; Rome will open its gates wide to us who bring her back her old
gods; the Senate will proclaim the emperor deposed and the Republic
restored.  Theodosius will come out against us.  But the Idea for which
we go forth to fight will hover before us, will stir the hearts of those
soldiers and officers who would gladly--ah!  how gladly-sacrifice to the
Olympian gods and who only kiss the wounds of the crucified Jew under
compulsion.  They will desert from the labarum, which Constantine carried
to victory, to our standards; and those standards are all there, ready
for use; they have been made in this city and are lying hidden in the
house of Apollodorus.  Heaven-sent daemons showed them in a vision to my
disciple Ammonius, when he was full of the divinity and lost in ecstasy,
and I have had them made from his instructions."

"And what do they represent?"

"The bust of Serapis with the 'modius' on his head.  It is framed in a
circle with the signs of the zodiac and the images of the great Olympian
deities.  We have given our god the head of Zeus, and the corn-measure on
his head is emblematic of the blessing that the husbandman hopes for.
The zodiac promises us a good star, and the figures representing it are
not the common emblems, but each deeply significant.  The Twins, for
instance, are the mariner's divinities, Castor and Pollux; Hercules
stands by the Lion whom he has subdued; and the Fishes are dolphins,
which love music.  In the Scales, one holds the cross high in the air
while the other is weighed down by Apollo's laurel-wreath and the bolts
of Zeus; in short, our standard displays everything that is most dear to
the soul of a Greek or that fills him with devotion.  Above all, Nike
hovers with the crown of victory.  If only fitting leaders are to be
found at the centres of the movement, these standards will at once be
sent out, and with them arms for the country-folk.  A place of meeting
has already been selected in each province, the pass-word will be given,
and a day fixed for a general rising."

"And they will flock round you!"  interrupted Karnis, "and--I, my son,
will not be absent.  Oh glorious, happy, and triumphant day!  Gladly will
I die if only I may first live to see the smoking offerings sending up
their fragrance to the gods before the open doors of every temple in
Greece; see the young men and maidens dancing in rapt enthusiasm to the
sound of lutes and pipes, and joining their voices in the chorus!  Then
light will shine once more on the world, then life will once more mean
joy, and death a departure from a scene of bliss."

"Aye, and thus shall it be!" cried Olympius, fired by this eager
exposition of his own excitement, and he wrung the musician's hand.
"We will restore life to the Greeks and teach them to scorn death as of
yore.  Let the Christians, the Barbarians, make life miserable and seek
joy in death, if they list!  But the girls have ceased singing.  There is
still much to be done to-day, and first of all I must confute the
objections of your recalcitrant pupil."

"You will not find it an easy task," said Karnis.  "Reason is a feeble
weapon in contending with a woman."

"Not always," replied the philosopher.  "But you must know how to use it.
Leave me to deal with the child.  There are really no singing-women left
here; we have tried three, but they were all vulgar and ill taught.  This
girl, when she sings with Gorgo, has a voice that will go to the heart of
the audience.  What we want is to fire the crowd with enthusiasm, and she
will help us to do it."

"Well, well.  But you, Olympius, you who are the very soul of the
revulsion we hope for, you must not be present at the festival.  Indeed,
sheltered as you are under Porphyrius' roof, there is a price on your
head, and this house swarms with slaves, who all know you; if one of
them, tempted by filthy lucre . . ."

"They will not betray me," smiled the philosopher.  "They know that their
aged mistress, Damia, and I myself command the daemons of the upper and
lower spheres, and that at a sign from her or from me they would
instantly perish; and even if there were an Ephialtes among them,
a spring through that loop-hole would save me.  Be easy, my friend.
Oracles and stars alike foretell me death from another cause than the
treason of a slave."




CHAPTER X.

Olympius followed Agne into the garden where he found her sitting by the
marble margin of a small pool, giving her little brother pieces of bread
to feed the swans with.  He greeted her kindly and, taking up the child,
showed him a ball which rose and fell on the jet of water from the
fountain.  Papias was not at all frightened by the big man with his white
beard, for a bright and kindly gleam shone in his eyes, and his voice was
soft and attractive as he asked him whether he had such another ball and
could toss it as cleverly as the fountain did.

Papias said: "No," and Olympius, turning to Agne, went on:

"You should get him a ball.  There is no better plaything, for play ought
to consist in pleasant exertion which is in itself its object and gain.
Play is the toil of a little child; and a ball, which he can throw and
run after or catch, trains his eye, gives exercise to his limbs and
includes a double moral which men of every age and position should act
upon: To look down on the earth and keep his gaze on the heavens."

Agne nodded agreement and thanks, while Olympius set the child down and
bid him run away to the paddock where some tame gazelles were kept.
Then, going straight to the point, he said:

"I hear you have declined to sing in the temple of Isis; you have been
taught to regard the goddess to whom many good men turn in faith and
confidence, as a monster of iniquity, but, tell me, do you know what she
embodies?"

"No," replied Agne looking down; but she hastily rose from her seat and
added with some spirit: "And I do not want to know, for I am a Christian
and your gods are not mine."

"Well, well; your beliefs, of course, differ from ours in many points:
still, I fancy that you and I have much in common.  We belong to those
who have learnt to 'look upwards'--there goes the ball, up again!--and
who find comfort in doing so.  Do you know that many men believe that the
universe was formed by concurrence of mechanical processes and is still
slowly developing, that there is no divinity whose love and power guard,
guide and lend grace to the lives of men?"

"Oh! yes, I have been obliged to hear many such blasphemous things in
Rome!"

"And they ran off you like water off the silvery sheen of that swan's
plumage as he dips and raises his neck.  Those who deny a God are, in
your estimation, foolish or perhaps abominable?"

"I pity them, with all my heart."

"And with very good reason.  You are an orphan and what its parents are
to a child the divinity is to every member of the human race.  In this
Gorgo, and I, and many others whom you call heathen, feel exactly as you
do; but you--have you ever asked yourself why and how it is that you, to
whom life has been so bitter, have such a perfect conviction that there
is a benevolent divinity who rules the world and your own fate to kindly
ends?  Why, in short, do you believe in a God?"

"I?"  said Ague, looking puzzled, but straight into his face.  "How could
anything exist without God?  You ask such strange questions.  All I can
see was created by our Father in Heaven."

"But there are men born blind who nevertheless believe in Him."

"They feel Him just as I see Him."

"Nay you should say: 'As I believe that I see and feel Him.'  But I, for
my part, think that the intellect has a right to test what the soul only
divines, and that it must be a real happiness to see this divination
proved by well-founded arguments, and thus transformed to certainty.
Did you ever hear of Plato, the philosopher?"

"Yes, Karnis often speaks of him when he and Orpheus are discussing
things which I do not understand."

"Well, Plato, by his intellect, worked out the proof of the problem which
our feelings alone are so capable of apprehending rightly.  Listen to me:
If you stand on a spit of land at the entrance to a harbor and see a ship
in the distance sailing towards you--a ship which carefully avoids the
rocks, and makes straight for the shelter of the port--are you not
justified in concluding that there is, on board that ship, a man who
guides and steers it?  Certainly.  You not only may, but must infer that
it is directed by a pilot.  And if you look up at the sky and contemplate
the well-ordered courses of the stars--when you see how everything on
earth, great and small, obeys eternal laws and unerringly tends to
certain preordained ends and issues, you may and must infer the existence
of a ruling hand.  Whose then but that of the Great Pilot of the
universe--the Almighty Godhead.--Do you like my illustration?"

"Very much.  But it only proves what I knew before."

"Nevertheless, you must, I think, be pleased to find it so beautifully
expressed."

"Certainly."

"And must admire the wise man who thought out the comparison.  Yes?--
Well, that man again was one of those whom you call heathen, who believed
as we believe, and who at the same time worked out the evidence of the
foundations of his faith for you as well as himself.  And we, the later
disciples of Plato--[Known as the school of the Neo-Platonists]--have
gone even further than our master, and in many respects are much nearer
to you Christians than you perhaps suspect.  You see at once, of course,
that we are no more inclined than you to conceive of the existence of the
world and the destiny of man as independent of a God?  However, I dare
say you still think that your divinity and ours are as far asunder as the
east from the west.  But can you tell me where any difference lies?"

"I do not know,"  said Ague  uneasily.  "I am only an ignorant girl; and
who can learn the names even of all your gods?"

"Very true," said Olympius.  "There is great Serapis, whose temple you
saw yesterday; there is Apollo, to whom Karnis prefers to offer
sacrifice; there is Isis the bountiful, and her sister Nephthys, whose
lament you and my young friend sing together so thrillingly; and besides
these there are more immortals than I could name while Gorgo--who is
leading your little brother to the lake out there--walked ten times from
the shore to us and back; and yet--and yet my child, your God is ours and
ours is yours."

"No, no, He is not, indeed!"  cried Agne with increasing alarm.

"But listen," Olympius went on, with the same kind urgency but with
extreme dignity, "and answer my questions simply and honestly.  We are
agreed, are we not?--that we perceive the divinity in the works of his
creation, and even in his workings in our own souls.  Then which are the
phenomena of nature in which you discern Him as especially near to you?
You are silent.  I see, you have outlived your school-days and do not
choose to answer to an uninvited catechism.  And yet the things I wish
you to name are lovely in themselves and dear to your heart; and if only
you did not keep your soft lips so firmly closed, but would give me the
answer I ask for, you would remember much that is grand and beautiful.
You would speak of the pale light of dawn, the tender flush that tinges
the clouds as the glowing day-star rises from the waves, of the splendor
of the sun-as glorious as truth and as warm as divine love.  You would
say: In the myriad blossoms that open to the morning, in the dew that
bathes them and covers them with diamonds, in the ripening ears in the
field, in the swelling fruit on the trees--in all these I see the mercy
and wisdom of the divinity.  I feel his infinite greatness as I gaze on
the wide expanse of deep blue sea; it comes home to me at night when I
lift my eyes to the skies and see the sparkling hosts of stars roll over
