This was the first long sentence the Mukaukas had uttered since the
beginning of the game.  Orion listened respectfully to the end, but then
he said with a laugh: "But there are some young people who seem to take
pleasure in being cool and icy--for what cause God alone knows!"

As he spoke he looked the girl at whom the words were aimed, full in the
face; but she turned silently and proudly away, and an angry shade passed
over her lovely features.



CHAPTER V.

When the Arab was at last admitted to the governor's presence his
attendants unfolded a hanging before him.  The giant Masdakite did the
chief share of the work; but as soon as the Mukaukas caught sight of the
big man, with his bushy, mane-like hair, and a dagger and a battle-axe
stuck through his belt, he cried out:

"Away, away with him!  That man--those weapons--I will not look at the
hanging till he is gone."

His hands were trembling, and the merchant at once desired his faithful
Rustem, the most harmless of mortals, to quit the room.  The governor,
whose sensitive nerves had been liable to such attacks of panic ever
since an exiled Greek had once attempted to murder him, now soon
recovered his composure, and looked with great admiration at the hanging
round which the family were standing.  They all confessed they had never
seen anything like it, and the vivacious Dame Susannah proposed to send
for her daughter and her visitors; but it was already late, and her house
was so far from the governor's that she gave that up.  The father and son
had already heard of this marvellous piece of work, which had formed part
of the plunder taken by the Arab conquerors of the Persian Empire at the
sack of the "White Tower"--the royal palace of Madam, the capital of the
Sassanidze.  They knew that it had been originally 300 ells long and 60
ells wide, and had heard with indignation that the Khaliff Omar, who
always lived and dressed and ate like the chief of a caravan, and
looked down with contempt on all such objects of luxury, had cut this
inestimable treasure of art into pieces and divided it among the
Companions of the Prophet.

Haschim explained to them that this particular fragment had been the
share of the booty allotted to Ali, the Prophet's son-in-law.  Haschim
himself had seen the work before its dismemberment at Madain, where it
hung on the wall of the magnificent throne-room, and subsequently, at
Medina.

His audience eagerly requested him to describe the other portions; he,
however, seemed somewhat uneasy, looking down at his bare feet which were
standing on the mosaic pavement, damp from the fountain; for, after the
manner of his nation, he had left his shoes in the outer room.  The
governor had noticed the old man's gestures as he repeatedly put his hand
to his mouth, and while his wife, Orion, and the widow were besieging the
merchant with questions, he whispered a few words to one of the slaves.
The man vanished, and returned bringing in, by his master's orders, a
long strip of carpet which he laid in front of the Arab's brown and
strong but delicately-formed feet.

A wonderful change came over the merchant's whole being as this was done.
He drew himself up with a dignity which none of those present had
suspected in the man who had so humbly entered the room and so diligently
praised his wares; an expression of satisfaction overspread his calm,
mild features, a sweet smile parted his lips, and his kind eyes sparkled
through tears like those of a child unexpectedly pleased.  Then he bowed
before the Mukaukas, touching his brow, lips and breast with the finger-
tips of the right hand to express: "All my thoughts, words and feelings
are devoted to you,"--while he said: "Thanks, Son of Menas.  That was the
act of Moslem."

"Of a Christian!"  cried Orion hastily.  But his father shook his head
gently, and said, slowly and impressively: "Only of a man."

"Of a man," repeated the merchant, and then he added thoughtfully: "Of a
man!  Yes, that is the highest mark so long as we are what we ought to be
The image of the one God.  Who is more compassionate than He?  And every
mother's son who is likewise compassionate, is like him."

"Another Christian rule, thou strange Moslem!"  said Orion interrupting
him.

"And yet," said Haschim, with tranquil dignity, "it corresponds word
for word with the teaching of the Best of men--our Prophet.  I am one of
those who knew him here on earth.  His brother's smallest pain filled his
soft heart with friendly sympathy; his law insists on charity, even
towards the shrub by the, wayside; he pronounces it mortal sin to injure
it, and every Moslem must obey him.  Compassion for all is the command of
the Prophet. . . ."  Here the Arab was suddenly and roughly interrupted;
Paula, who, till now, had been leaning against a pilaster, contemplating
the hanging and silently listening to the conversation, hastily stepped
nearer to the old man, and with flaming cheeks and flashing eyes pointed
at him wrathfully, while she exclaimed in a trembling voice-heedless
alike of the astonished and indignant bystanders, and of the little dog
which flew at the Arab, barking furiously:

"You--you, the followers of the false prophet--you, the companions of the
bloodhound Khalid--you and Charity!  I know you!  I know what you did in
Syria.  With these eyes have I seen you, and your bloodthirsty women, and
the foam on your raging lips.  Here I stand to bear witness against you
and I cast it in your teeth:  You broke faith in Damascus, and the
victims of your treachery--defenceless women and tender infants as well
as men--you killed with the sword or strangled with your hands.  You--you
the Apostle of Compassion?--have you ever heard of Abyla?  You, the
friend of your Prophet--I ask you what did you, who so tenderly spare the
tree by the wayside, do to the innocent folk of Abyla, whom you fell upon
like wolves in a sheepfold?  You--you and Compassionate!"  The vehement
girl, to whom no one had ever shown any pity, and on whose soul the word
had fallen like a mockery, who for long hours had been suffering
suppressed and torturing misery, felt it a relief to give free vent to
the anguish of her soul; she ended with a hard laugh, and waved her hand
round her head as though to disperse a swarm of gadflies.

What a woman!

Orion's gaze was fixed on her in horror--but in enchantment.  Yes, his
mother had judged her rightly.  No gentle, tender-hearted woman laughed
like that; but she was grand, splendid, wonderful in her wrath.  She
reminded him of the picture of the goddess of vengeance, by Apelles,
which he had seen in Constantinople.  His mother shrugged her shoulders
and cast a meaning glance at the widow, and even his father was startled
at the sight.  He knew what had roused her; still he felt that he could
not permit this, and he recalled the excited girl to her senses by
speaking her name, half-reproachfully and half-regretfully, at first
quite gently but then louder and more severely.

She started like a sleep-walker suddenly awaked from her trance, passed
her hand over her eyes, and said, as she bowed her head before the
governor:

"Forgive me, Uncle, I am sorry for what has occurred--but it was too much
for me.  You know what my past has been, and when I am reminded--when I
must listen to the praises even of the wretches to whom my father and
brother...."

A loud sob interrupted her; little Mary was clinging to her and weeping.
Orion could hardly keep himself from hastening to her and clasping her in
his arms.  Ah, how well her woman's weakness became the noble girl!  How
strongly it drew him to her!

But Paula soon recovered from it; even while the governor was soothing
her with kind words she mastered her violent agitation, and said gently,
though her tears still quietly flowed: "Let me go to my room, I beg...."

"Good-night, then, child,"  said  the Mukaukas affectionately, and Paula
turned towards the door with a silent greeting to the rest of the party;
but the Moslem detained her and said:

"I know who you are, noble daughter of Thomas, and I have heard that
your brother was the bridegroom who had come to Abyla to solemnize his
marriage with the daughter of the prefect of Tripolis.  Alas, alas!
I myself was there with my merchandise at the fair, when a maddened horde
of my fellow-believers fell upon the peaceful town.  Poor child, poor
child!  Your father was the greatest and most redoubtable of our foes.
Whether still on earth or in heaven he yet, no doubt honors our sword
as we honor his.  But your brother, whom we sent to his grave as a
bridegroom--he cursed us with his dying breath.  You have inherited his
rancor; and when it surges up against me, a Moslem, I can do no more than
bow my head and do penance for the guilt of those whose blood runs in my
veins and whose faith I confess.  I have nothing to plead--no, noble
maiden, nothing that can excuse the deed of Abyla.  There--there alone it
was the fate of my grey hairs to be ashamed of my fellow-Moslems--believe
me, maiden, it was grievous to me.  War, and the memory of many friends
slain and of wealth lightly plundered had unchained men's passion; and
where passion's pinions wave, whether in the struggle for mine and thine
or for other possessions, ever since the days of Cain and Abel, it is
always and everywhere the same."

Paula, who till now had stood motionless in front of the old man, shook
her head and said bitterly:

"But all this will not give me back my father and brother.  You yourself
look like a kind-hearted man; but for the future--if you are as just as
you are kind--find out to whom you are speaking before you talk of the
compassion of the Moslems!"

She once more bowed good-night and left the room.  Orion followed her;
come what might he must see her.  But he returned a few minutes after,
breathing hard and with his teeth set.  He had taken her hand, had tried
to tell her all a loving heart could find to say; but how sharply, how
icily had he been repulsed, with what an air of intolerable scorn had she
turned her back upon him!  And now that he was in their midst again he
scarcely heard his father express his regrets that so painful a scene
should have occurred under his roof, while the Arab said that he could
quite understand why the daughter of Thomas should have been betrayed
to anger: the massacre of Abyla was quite inexcusable.

"But then," the old man went on, "in what war do not such things take
place?  Even the Christian is not always master of himself: you yourself
I know, lost two promising sons--and who were the murderers?  Christians
--your own fellow-believers. . ."

"The bitterest foes of my beliefs," said the governor slowly, and every
syllable was a calm and dignified reproof to the Moslem for supposing
that the creed of those who had killed his sons could be his.  As he
spoke he opened his eyes wide with the look of those hard, opaquely-
glittering stones which his ancestors had been wont to set for eyes in
their portrait statues.  But he suddenly closed them again and said
indifferently:

"At what price do you value your hanging?  I have a fancy to buy it.
Name your lowest terms: I cannot bear to bargain."

"I had thought of asking five hundred thousand drachmae," said the
dealer.  "Four hundred thousand drachmae, and it is yours."

The governor's wife clasped her hands at such a sum and made warning
signals to her husband, shaking her head disapprovingly, when Orion,
making a great effort to show that he too took an interest in this
important transaction, said: "It may be worth three hundred thousand."

"Four hundred thousand," repeated the merchant coolly.  "Your father
