melancholy you look!"  The lamplight fell full on his face.  "Look here,
I have just made such a smart little man out of wax. . ."

She hoped to amuse the friend who was always so kind to her with this
comical work of art; but, as she leaned forward to reach it, she caught
sight of her uncle and exclaimed: "Philippus comes here to cure me, but
he looks as if he wanted a draught himself.  Take care, or you will have
to drink that bitter brown stuff you sent yesterday; then you will know
for once how nasty it can be."  Though the child's exclamation was well-
meant, neither of the men took any notice of it.  They stood face to face
in utter silence and with only a formal greeting; for Orion, without
Mary's remark, had been struck by the change that had come over the
physician since yesterday.  Ignoring Orion's presence, he asked the child
a few brief questions, begged Eudoxia to persevere in the same course of
treatment, and then hastily bid a general farewell to all present; Orion,
however, did not respond, but said, with an affectionate glance at the
little patient:  "One word with you presently."

This made Philippus turn to look at Mary and, as the eyes of the rivals
met, they knew that on one subject at any rate they thought and felt
alike.  The leech already knew how tenderly the young man had taken to
Mary, and he followed him into the room which Orion now occupied, and
which, as Philippus was aware, had formerly been Paula's.

"In the cause of duty," he said to himself again and again, to keep
himself calm and enable him to gather at least the general sense of what
the handsome young fellow opposite to him was saying in his rich,
pleasant voice, and urging as a request with more warmth than the leech
had given him credit for.  Philippus, of course, had heard of the
grandmother's lamentable revulsion of feeling against her grandchild,
and he thought Orion's wish to remove the little girl fully justified.
But, on learning that she was to be placed under Paula's care, he seemed
startled, and gazed at the floor in such sullen gloom that the other
easily guessed what was going on in his mind.  In fact, the physician
suspected that the child was to serve merely as an excuse for the more
frequent meetings of the lovers.  Unable to bury this apprehension in his
own breast he started to his feet, and was about to put it into words,
when Orion took the words out of his mouth, saying modestly but frankly,
with downcast eyes:

"I speak only for the child's--for Mary's sake.  By my father's soul...."

But Philippus shook his head dismally, went up to his rival, and murmured
dully:

"For the sake of that child I am capable of doing or enduring a great
deal.  She could not be better cared for than with Rufinus and Paula;
but if I could suppose," and he raised his voice, while his eyes took a
sinister and threatening expression, "if I could suppose that her sacred
and suffering innocence were merely an excuse.  .  .  ."

"No, no," said Orion urgently.  "Again, on my sacred word, I assure you
that I have no aim in view but the child's safety; and, as we have said
so much, I will not stick at a word more or less!  "Rufinus' house is
open to you day and night, and I, if all turns out as I expect, shall ere
long be far from hence--from Memphis--from Paula.  There is mischief
brewing--I dare say no more--an act of treachery; and I will try to
prevent it at the risk of my life.  You, every one, shall no longer have
a right to think me capable of things which are as repulsive to my nature
as to yours.  You and I, if I mistake not, strive for the same prize,
and so far are rivals; but why should the child therefor suffer?  Forget
it in her presence, and that forgetting will, as you well know, enhance
your merit in her--her eyes."

"My merit?"  retorted the other scornfully.  "Merit is not in the
balance; nothing but the gifts of blind Fortune--a nose, a chin, an eye,
anything in short--a crime as much as a deed of heroism--that happens to
make a deep impression on the wax of a girl's soft heart.  But curse me,"
and he shouted the words at Orion as if he were beside himself, "if I
know how we came to talk of such things!  Has my folly gone running
through the streets, bare-bosomed, to display itself to the world at
large?  How do you know what my feelings are?  She, perhaps, has laughed
with you at her ridiculous lover?--Well, no matter.  You know already,
or will know by to-morrow, which of us has won the cock-fight.  You
have only to look at me!  What woman ever broke her heart for such a
Thersites-face.  Good-luck to the winner, and the other one--well, since
it must be so, farewell till to-morrow."

He hastily made his way towards the door; Orion, however, detained him,
imploring him to set aside his ill-feeling--at any rate for the present;
assured him that Paula had not betrayed what his feelings were; that, on
the contrary, he himself, seeing him with her so late on the previous
night, had been consumed by jealousy, and entreated him to vent his wrath
on him in abusive words, if that could ease his heart, only, by all that
was good, not to withdraw his succor from that poor, innocent child.

The physician's humane heart was not proof against his prayer; and when
at length he prepared to depart, in the joyful and yet painful conviction
that his happier rival had become more worthy of the prize, he had agreed
that he would impress on Neforis, whose mind he suspected to be slightly
affected, that the air of the governor's residence did not suit Mary, and
that she should place her in the care of a physician outside the town.

As soon as Philippus had quitted the house, Orion went to see Rufinus,
who, on his briefly assuring him that he had come on grave and important
business, begged him to accompany him to his private room.  The young
man, however, detained him till he had made all clear with the women as
to the reception of little Mary.

"By degrees all the inhabitants of the residence will be transplanted
into our garden!"  exclaimed Rufinus.  "Well, I have no objection; and
you, old woman, what do you say to it?"

"I have none certainly," replied his wife.  "Besides, neither you nor I
have to decide in this case: the child is to be Paula's guest."

"I only wish she were here already," said Paula, "for who can say whether
your mother, Orion--the air here is perilously Melchite."

"Leave Philippus and me to settle that.--You should have seen how pleased
Mary was."

Then, drawing Paula aside, he hastily added:

"Have I not hoped too much?  Is your heart mine?  Come what may, can I
count on you--on your lov-?"

"Yes, Yes!"  The words rushed up from the very bottom of her heart, and
Orion, with a sigh of relief, followed the old man, glad and comforted.

The study was lighted up, and there, without mentioning Katharina, he
told Rufinus of the patriarch's scheme for dispersing the nuns of St.
Cecilia.  What could he care for these Melchite sisters?  But, since that
consoling hour in the church, he felt as though it were his duty to stand
forth for all that was right, and to do battle against everything that
was base.  Besides, he knew how warmly and steadfastly his father had
taken the part of this very convent against the patriarch.  Finally, he
had heard how strongly his beloved was attached to this retreat and its
superior, so he prepared himself gleefully to come forth a new man of
deeds, and show his prowess.

The old man listened with growing surprise and horror, and when Orion had
finished his story he rose, helplessly wringing his hands.  Orion spoke
to him encouragingly, and told him that he had come, not merely to give
the terrible news, but to hold council with him as to how the innocent
victims might be rescued.  At this the grey-headed philanthropist and
wanderer pricked up his ears; and as an old war horse, though harnessed
to the plough, when he hears the trumpet sound lifts his head and arches
his neck as proudly and nobly as of yore under his glittering trappings,
so Rufinus drew himself up, his old eyes sparkled, and he exclaimed with
all the enthusiasm and eagerness of youth:

"Very good, very good;  I am with you;  not merely as an adviser; no, no.
Head, and hand, and foot, from crown to heel!  And as for you, young man
--as for you!  I always saw the stuff that was in you in spite--in spite.
--But, as surely as man is the standard of all things, those who reach
the stronghold of virtue by a winding road are often better citizens than
those who are born in it.--It is growing late, but evensong will not yet
have begun and I shall still be able to see the abbess.  Have you any
plan to propose?"

"Yes; the day after to-morrow at this hour. . . ."

"And why not to-morrow?"  interrupted the ardent old man.

"Because I have preparations to make which cannot be done in twelve hours
of daylight."

"Good! Good!"

"The day after to-morrow at dusk, a large barge--not one of ours--will be
lying by the bank at the foot of the convent garden.  I will escort the
sisters as far as Doomiat on the Lake.  I will send on a mounted
messenger to-night, and I will charter a ship for the fugitives by the
help of my cousin Columella, the greatest ship-owner of that town.  That
will take them over seas wherever the abbess may command."

"Capital, splendid!"  cried Rufinus enthusiastically.  He took up his hat
and stick, and the radiant expression of his face changed to a very grave
one.  He went up to the young man with solemn dignity, looked at him with
fatherly kindliness, and said:

"I know what woes befell your house through those of our confession, the
fellow-believers of these whom you propose to protect with so much
prudence and courage; and that, young man, is noble, nay, is truly great.
I find in you--you who were described to me as a man of the world and not
over-precise--for the first time that which I have sought in vain for
many years and in many lands, among the pious and virtuous: the spirit
of willing self-sacrifice to save an enemy of a different creed from
pressing peril.--But you are young, Orion, and I am old.  You triumph
in the action only, I foresee the consequences.  Do you know what lies
before you, if it should be discovered that you have covered the escape
of the prey whom the patriarch already sees in his net?  Have you
considered that Benjamin, the most implacable and most powerful hater
among the Jacobites, will pursue you as his mortal foe with all the
fearful means at his command?"

"I have considered it," replied Orion.

Rufinus laid his left hand on the young man's shoulder, and his right
hand on his head, saying,  "Then take with you, to begin with, an old
man's--a father's blessing."

"Yes, a father's," repeated Orion softly.  A happy thrill ran through his
body and soul, and he fell on the old man's neck deeply moved.

For a minute they stood clasped in each other's arms; then Rufinus freed
himself, and set out to seek the abbess.  Orion returned to the women,
