a short time to gaze at the sleeper, and then requested the deaconess to
find a room for the two damsels, who needed rest.

The worthy woman rose at once; but Melissa urgently entreated to be
allowed to remain by her lover's side, and glanced anxiously at the keys
in the matron's hand.

At this Andreas whispered to her: "You are afraid lest I should prevent
your coming with us? But it is not so; and, indeed, of what use would it
be? You made your way past the guards to the senator's coach; you came
across the lake, and through the darkness and the drunken rabble in the
streets; if I were to lock you in, you would be brave enough to jump
out of the window. No, no; I confess you have conquered my
objections--indeed, if you should now refuse your assistance, I should
be obliged to crave it. But Ptolemaeus wishes to leave Diodoros quite
undisturbed till daybreak. He is now gone to the Serapeum to find a good
place for him. You, too, need rest, and you shall be waked in good
time. Go, now, with Dame Katharine.--As to your relations," he added, to
Agatha, "do not be uneasy. A boy is already on his way to your father,
to tell him where you are for the night."

The deaconess led the two girls to a room where there was a large double
bed. Here the new friends stretched their weary limbs; but, tired as
they were, neither of them seemed disposed to sleep; they were so happy
to have found each other, and had so much to ask and tell each other!
As soon as Katharine had lighted a three-branched lamp she left them to
themselves, and then their talk began.

Agatha, clinging to her new friend, laid her head on Melissa's shoulder;
and as Melissa looked on the beautiful face, and remembered the fond
passion which her heedless brother had conceived for its twin image, or
as now and again the Christian girl's loving words appealed to her more
especially, she stroked the long, flowing tresses of her brown hair.

It needed, indeed, no more than a common feeling, an experience gone
through together, an hour of confidential solitude, to join the hearts
of the two maidens; and as they awaited the day, shoulder to shoulder
in uninterrupted chat, they felt as though they had shared every joy and
sorrow from the cradle. Agatha's weaker nature found a support in the
calm strength of will which was evident in many things Melissa said; and
when the Christian opened her tender and pitying heart to Melissa with
touching candor, it was like a view into a new but most inviting world.

Agatha's extreme beauty, too, struck the artist's daughter as something
divine, and her eye often rested admiringly on her new friend's pure and
regular features.

When Agatha inquired of her about her father, Melissa briefly replied,
that since her mother's death he was often moody and rough, but that he
had a good, kind heart. The Christian girl, on the contrary, spoke with
enthusiasm of the warm, human loving-kindness of the man to whom she
owed her being; and the picture she drew of her home life was so fair,
that the little heathen could hardly believe in its truth. Her father,
Agatha said, lived in constant warfare with the misery and suffering of
his fellow-creatures, and he was, in fact, able to make those about him
happy and prosperous. The poorest were dearest to his loving heart, and
on his estate across the lake he had collected none but the sick and
wretched. The care of the children was left to her, and the little ones
clung to her as if she were their mother. She had neither brother nor
sister.--And so the conversation turned on Alexander, of whom Agatha
could never hear enough.

And how proud was Melissa to speak of the bright young artist, who till
now had been the sun of her joyless life! There was much that was good
to be said about him: for the best masters rated his talent highly in
spite of his youth; his comrades were faithful; and none knew so well as
he how to cheer his father's dark moods. Then, there were many amiable
and generous traits of which she had been told, or had herself known.
With his very first savings, he had had the Genius with a reversed
torch cast in bronze to grace his mother's grave, and give his father
pleasure. Once he had been brought home half dead after saving a woman
and child from drowning, and vainly endeavoring to rescue another child.
He might be wild and reckless, but he had always been faithful to his
art and to his love for his family.

Agatha's eyes opened widely when Melissa told her anything good about
her brother, and she clung in terror to her new friend as she heard of
her excited orgy with her lover.

Scared as though some imminent horror threatened herself, she clasped
Melissa's hand as she listened to the tale of the dangers Alexander had
so narrowly escaped.

Such things had never before reached the ears of the girl in her retired
Christian home beyond the lake; they sounded to her as the tales of some
bold seafarer to the peaceful husbandman on whose shores the storm has
wrecked him.

"And do you know," she exclaimed, "all this seems delightful to me,
though my father, I am sure, would judge it hardly! When your brother
risks his life, it is always for others, and that is right--that is the
highest life. I think of him as an angel with a flaming sword. But you
do not know our sacred scriptures."

Then Melissa would hear more of this book, of which Andreas had
frequently spoken; but there was a knock at the door, and she sprang out
of bed.

Agatha did the same; and when a slave-girl had brought in fresh, cold
water, she insisted on handing her friend the towels, on plaiting her
long hair, pinning her peplos in its place, and arranging its folds. She
had so often longed for a sister, and she felt as though she had found
one in Melissa! While she helped her to dress she kissed her preserver's
sister on the eyes and lips, and entreated her with affectionate urgency
to come to see her, as soon as she had done all she could for her lover.
She must be made acquainted with her father, and Agatha longed to show
her her poor children, her dogs, and her pigeons. And she would go to
see Melissa, when she was staying with Polybius.

"And there," Melissa put in, "you will see my brother, too."

On which the Christian girl exclaimed: "You must bring him to our house.
My father will be glad to thank him--" Here she paused, and then added,
"Only he must not again risk his life so rashly."

"He will be well hidden at the house of Polybius," replied Melissa,
consolingly. "And Andreas has him fast by this time."

She once more kissed Agatha, and went to the door, but her friend held
her back, and whispered "In my father's grounds there is a famous hiding
place, where no one would ever find him. It has often been a refuge
for weeks and months for persecuted members of our faith. When he is
seriously threatened, bring him to us. We will gladly provide for his
safety, and all else. Only think, if they should catch him! It would be
for my sake, and I should never be happy again. Promise me that you will
bring him."

"Yes, certainly," cried Melissa, as she hurried out into the vestibule,
where Andreas and the leech were waiting for her.

They had done well to enlist the girl's services, for, since nursing her
mother, she knew, as few did, how to handle the sick. It was not till
they had fairly set out that Melissa observed that Dame Katharine was
of the party; she had no doubt become reconciled to the idea of the sick
man's removal to the Serapeum, for she had the same look of kindly calm
which had so much attracted the girl at their first meeting.

The streets along which they passed in the pale morning light were now
deserted, and a film of mist, behind which glowed the golden light of
the newly risen sun, shrouded the horizon. The fresh air of morning was
delicious, and at this early hour there was no one to avoid--only the
peasants and their wives carrying the produce of their gardens and
fields to market on asses, or wagons drawn by oxen. The black slaves
of the town were sweeping the roadway. Here there were parties of men,
women, and children on their way to work in factories, which were at
rest but for a few hours in the bustling town. The bakers and
other provision-dealers were opening their shops; the cobblers and
metalworkers were already busy or lighting fires in their open stalls;
and Andreas nodded to a file of slave-girls who had come across from
the farm and gardens of Polybius, and who now walked up the street with
large milk-jars and baskets of vegetables poised on their heads and
supported with one gracefully raised arm.

They presently crossed the Aspendia Canal, where the fog hung over the
water like white smoke, hiding the figure of the tutelary goddess of the
town on the parapet of the bridge from those who crossed by the roadway.
The leaves of the mimosa-trees by the quay--nay, the very stones of the
houses and the statues, wet with the morning dew--looked revived and
newly washed; and a light breeze brought up from the Serapeum broken
tones of the chant, sung there every morning by a choir of priests, to
hail the triumph of light over darkness.

The crisp morning air was as invigorating to Melissa as her cold bath
had been, after a night which had brought her so little rest. She felt
as though she, and all Nature with her, had just crossed the threshold
of a new day, bidding her to fresh life and labor. Now and then a flame
from Lucifer's torch swallowed up a stretch of morning mist, while the
Hours escorted Phoebus Apollo, whose radiant diadem of beams was just
rising above the haze; Melissa could have declared she saw them dancing
forth before him and strewing the path of the sun with flowers. All
this was beautiful--as beautiful as the priest's chant, the aromatic
sweetness of the air, and the works of art in cast bronze or hewn marble
which were to be seen on the bridge, on the temple to Isis and Anubis to
the right of the street, under the colonnades of the handsomest houses,
on the public fountains--in short, wherever the eye might turn. Her
lover, borne before her in a litter, was on the way to the physician in
whose hands lay the power to cure him. She felt as though Hope led the
way.

Since love had blossomed in her breast her quiet life had become an
eventful one. Most of what she had gone through had indeed filled her
with alarms. Serious questions to which she had never given a thought
had been brought before her; and yet, in this brief period of anxiety
she had gained the precious sense of youthfulness and of capacity
for action when she had to depend on herself. The last few hours had
revealed to her the possession of powers which only yesterday she had
never suspected. She, who had willingly yielded to every caprice of her
father's, and who, for love of her brothers, had always unresistingly
done their bidding, now knew that she had a will of her own and strength
enough to assert it; and this, again, added to her contentment this
morning.

Alexander had told her, and old Dido, and Diodoros, that she was fair to
look upon--but these all saw her with the eyes of affection; so she had
always believed that she was a well-looking girl enough, but by no means
highly gifted in any respect--a girl whose future would be to bloom
and fade unknown in her father's service. But now she knew that she was
indeed beautiful; not only because she had heard it repeatedly in
the crowd of yesterday, or even because Agatha had declared it while
braiding her hair--an inward voice affirmed it, and for her lover's sake
she was happy to believe it.

As a rule, she would have been ready to drop with fatigue after so many
sleepless hours and such severe exertions; but to-day she felt as fresh
as the birds in the trees by the roadside, which greeted the sun with
cheerful twitterings.

"Yes, the world is indeed fair!" thought she; but at that very moment
Andreas's grave voice was heard ordering the bearers to turn down a dark
side alley which led into the street of Hermes, a few hundred paces from
the Rhakotis Canal.

How anxious the good man looked! Her world was not the world of the
Christian freedman; that she plainly understood when the litter in which
Diodoros lay was carried into one of the houses in the side street.

It was a large, plain building, with only a few windows, and those
high up-in fact, as Melissa was presently informed, it was a Christian
church. Before she could express her surprise, Andreas begged her to
have a few minutes' patience; the daemons of sickness were here to be
exorcised and driven out of the sufferer. He pointed to a seat in the
vestibule to the church, a wide but shallow room. Then, at a sign from
Andreas, the slaves carried the litter into a long, low hall with a flat
roof.

From where she sat, Melissa could now see that a Christian in priest's
robes, whom they called the exorcist, spoke various invocations over
the sick man, the others listening so attentively that even she began to
hope for some good effect from these incomprehensible formulas; and
at the same time she remembered that her old slave-woman Dido, who
worshiped many gods, wore round her neck, besides a variety of heathen
amulets, a little cross which had been given her by a Christian woman.
To her question why she, a heathen, wore this about her, the old woman
replied, "You can never tell what may help you some day." So perhaps
these exorcisms might not be without some effect on her lover,
particularly as the God of the Christians must be powerful and good.

She herself strove to uplift her soul in prayer to the manes of her lost
mother; but the scene going on around her in the vestibule distracted
her mind with horror. Men, young and old, were slashing themselves with
vehement scourgings on their backs. One white-haired old man, indeed,
handed his whip of hippopotamus-hide to a stalwart lad whose shoulders
were streaming with blood, and begged him as a brother, as fervently
as though it were the greatest favor, to let him feel the lash. But the
younger man refused, and she saw the weak old fellow trying to apply it
to his own back.

All this was quite beyond her comprehension, and struck her as,
disgusting; and how haggard and hideous were the limbs of these people
who thus sinned against their own bodies--the noble temples of the
Divine Spirit!

When, a few minutes later, the litter was borne out of the church
again, the sun had triumphed over the mists and was rising with blinding
splendor in the cloudless sky. Everything was bathed in light; but the
dreadful sight of the penitents had cast a gloom over the clear gladness
she had been so full of but just now. It was with a sense of oppression
that she took leave of the deaconess, who left her with cheerful
contentment in the street of Hermes, and followed the litter to the open
square in front of the Serapeum.

Here every thought of gloom vanished from her mind as at the touch of a
magician, for before her stood the vast Temple of Serapis, founded,
as it were, for eternity, on a substructure of rock and closely fitted
masonry, the noblest building on earth of any dedicated to the gods.
The great cupola rose to the blue sky as though it fain would greet the
sister vault above with its own splendor, and the copper-plating which
covered it shone as dazzling as a second sun. From the wide front of the
temple, every being to whom the prayers and worship of mortals could be
offered looked down on her, hewn in marble or cast in bronze; for on
the roof, on brackets or on pedestals; in niches or as supporting the
parapets and balconies, were statues of all the guests at the Olympian
banquet, with images or busts of every hero or king, philosopher, poet,
or artist whose deeds or works had earned him immortality.

From infancy Melissa had looked up at this temple with admiration
and pride, for here every art had done its utmost to make it without
parallel on earth. It was the work of her beloved native city, and her
mother had often taken her into the Serapeum, where she herself had
found comfort in many a sorrow and disappointment, and had taught the
child to love it. That it had afterward been spoiled for her she forgot
in her present mood.

Never had she seen the great temple surrounded by so much gay and busy
life. The front of the building, toward the square, had in the early
hours of the morning been decked with garlands and heavy wreaths of
flowers, by a swarm of slaves standing on ladders and planks and benches
let down from the roof by ropes. The inclined ways, by which vehicles
drove up to the great door, were still deserted, and on the broad steps
in the middle no one was to be seen as yet but a few priests in gala
robes, and court officials; but the immense open space in front of the
sanctuary was one great camp, where, among the hastily pitched canvas
tents, horses were being dressed and weapons polished. Several maniples
of the praetorians and of the Macedonian phalanx were already drawn
up in compact ranks, to relieve guard at the gate of the imperial
residence, and stand at Caesar's orders.

But more attractive to the girl than all this display were a number of
altars which had been erected at the extreme edge of the great square,
and on each of which a fire was burning. Heavy clouds of smoke went up
from them in the still, pure atmosphere, like aerial columns, while the
flames, paling in the beams of the morning sun, flew up through the reek
as though striving to rise above it, with wan and changeful gleams of
red and yellow, now curling down, and now writhing upward like snakes.
Of all these fires there was not one from which the smoke did not mount
straight to heaven, though each burned to a different god; and Melissa
regarded it as a happy sign that none spread or failed to rise. The
embers were stirred from time to time by the priests and augurs of every
god of the East and West, who also superintended the sacrifices, while
warriors of every province of the empire stood round in prayer.

Melissa passed by all these unwonted and soul-stirring sights without a
regret; her hope for the cure soon to be wrought on her lover cast all
else into the shade. Still, while she looked around at the thousands who
were encamped here, and gazed up at the temple where so many men were
busied, like ants, it struck her that in fact all this belonged to
one and was done for one alone. Those legions followed him as the dust
follows the wind, the whole world trembled at his nod, and in his hand
lay the life and happiness of the millions he governed. And it was at
this omnipotent being, this god in human form, that her brother had
mocked; and the pursuers were at his heels. This recollection troubled
her joy, and when she looked in the freedman's grave and anxious face
her heart began to beat heavily again.




CHAPTER XII.

Melissa had supposed that, according to custom, the litter would be
carried up the incline or the steps, and into the Serapeum by the great
door; but in consequence of the emperor's visit this could not be. The
sick man was borne round the eastern side of the huge building, which
covered a space on which a whole village might have stood. The door at
the back, to the south, through which he was finally admitted, opened
into a gallery passing by the great quadrangle where sacrifice was made,
and leading to the inner rooms of the temple, to the cubicles among
others.

In these it was revealed to the sick in dreams by what means or remedies
they might hope to be healed: and there was no lack of priests to
interpret the visions, nor of physicians who came hither to watch
peculiar cases, to explain to the sufferers the purport of the counsel
of the gods--often very dark--or to give them the benefit of their own.

One of these, a friend of Ptolemaeus, who, though he had been secretly
baptized, still was one of the pastophori of the temple, was awaiting
the little party, and led the way as guide.

The bellowing of beasts met them on the very threshold. These were to be
slaughtered at this early hour by the special command of Caracalla; and,
as Caesar himself had promised to be present at the sacrificial
rites, none but the priests or "Caesar's friends" were admitted to the
court-yard. The litter was therefore carried up a staircase and through
a long hall forming part of the library, with large windows looking
down on the open place where the beasts were killed and the entrails
examined. Diodoros saw and heard nothing, for the injury to the skull
had deprived him of all consciousness; Ptolemaeus, however, to soothe
Melissa, assured her that he was sleeping soundly.

As they mounted the stairs she had kept close to her lover's side; but
on this assurance she lingered behind and looked about her.

As the little procession entered the gallery, in which the rolls of
manuscript lay in stone or wooden cases on long rows of shelves, the
shout was heard of "Hail, Caesar!" mingling with a solemn chant, and
announcing the sovereign's approach.

At this the physician pointed to the court-yard, and said to the girl,
whose beauty had greatly attracted him: "Look down there if you want to
see Caesar. We must wait here, at any rate, till the crowd has gone past
in the corridor beyond that door." And Melissa, whose feminine curiosity
had already tempted her to the window, looked down into the quadrangle
and on to the steps down which a maniple of the praetorian guard were
marching, with noble Romans in togas or the uniform of legates, augurs
wearing wreaths, and priests of various orders. Then for a few minutes
the steps were deserted, and Melissa thought she could hear her own
heart beating, when suddenly the cry: "Hail, Caesar!" was again heard,
loud trumpets rang out and echoed from the high stone walls which
surrounded the inclosure, and Caracalla appeared on the broad marble
steps which led down into the court of sacrifice.

Melissa's eyes were riveted as if spell-bound on this figure, which was
neither handsome nor dignified, and which nevertheless had a strange
attraction for her, she knew not why. What was it in this man, who
was short rather than tall, and feeble rather than majestic, which so
imperatively forbade all confident advances? The noble lion which walked
by his side, and in whose mane his left hand was buried, was not more
unapproachable than he. He called this terrible creature, which he
treated with as much familiarity as if it were a lapdog, his "Persian
sword"; and as Melissa looked she remembered what fate might be in store
for her brother through this man, and all the crimes of which he was
accused by the world--the murders of his brother, of his wife, and of
thousands besides.

For the first time in her life she felt that she could hate; she longed
to bring down every evil on that man's head. The blood mounted to her
cheeks, and her little fists were clinched, but she never took her eyes
off him; for everything in his person impressed her, if not as fine,
still as exceptional--if not as great, still as noteworthy.

She knew that he was not yet thirty, but yesterday, as he drove past
her, he had looked like a surly misanthropist of more than middle age.
To-day how young he seemed! Did he owe it to the laurel crown which
rested on his head, or to the white toga which fell about him in ample
folds, leaving only the sinewy arm bare by which he led the lion?

From where she stood she could only see his side-face as he came down
the steps, and indeed it was not ill-favored; brow, nose, and chin were
finely and nobly formed; his beard was thin, and a mustache curled over
his lips. His eyes, deeply set under the brows, were not visible to her,
but she had not forgotten since yesterday their sinister and terrible
scowl.

At this moment the lion crept closer to his master.

If only the brute should spring on that more blood-stained and terrible
beast of prey who could kill not only with claws and teeth but with a
word from his lips, a wave of his hand!--the world would be rid of the
ferocious curse. Ay, his eye, which had yesterday scorned to look at the
multitudes who had hailed his advent, was that of a cruel tyrant.

And then--she felt as if he must have guessed her thoughts--while he
patted the lion and gently pushed him aside he turned his face full on
her, and she knew not whether to be pleased or angry, for the odious,
squinting eyes were not now terrible or contemptuous; nay, they had
looked kindly on the beast, and with a somewhat suffering expression.
The dreadful face of the murderer was not hideous now, but engaging--the
face of a youth enduring torments of soul or of body.

She was not mistaken. On the very next step Caracalla stood still,
pressed his right hand to his temples, and set his lips as if to control
some acute pain. Then he sadly shook his head and gazed up at the walls
of the court, which had been decorated in his honor with hangings and
garlands of flowers. First he studied the frieze and the festal display
on his right, and when he turned his head to look at the side where
Melissa stood, an inward voice bade her withdraw, that the gaze of this
monster might not blight her. But an irresistible attraction held her
fast; then suddenly she felt as if the ground were sinking from under
her feet, and, as a shipwrecked wretch snatches at a floating spar, she
clung to the little column at the left of the window, clutching it with
her hand; for the dreadful thing had happened-Caracalla's eye had met
hers and had even rested on her for a while! And that gaze had nothing
bloodthirsty in it, nor the vile leer which had sparkled in the eyes
of the drunken rioters she had met last night in the streets; he only
looked astonished as at some wonderful thing which he had not expected
to see in this place. But presently a fresh attack of pain apparently
made him turn away, for his features betrayed acute suffering, as he
slowly set his foot on the next step below.

Again, and more closely, he pressed his hand to his brow, and then
beckoned to a tall, well-built man with flowing hair, who walked behind
him, and accepted the support of his offered arm.

"Theocritus, formerly an actor and dancer," the priest whispered to
Melissa. "Caesar's whim made the mimic a senator, a legate, and a
favorite."

But Melissa only knew that he was speaking, and did not take in the
purport of his speech; for this man, slowly descending the steps,
absorbed her whole sympathy. She knew well the look of those who suffer
and conceal it from the eyes of the world; and some cruel disease was
certainly consuming this youth, who ruled the earth, but whose purple
robes would be snatched at soon enough by greedy hands if he should
cease to seem strong and able. And now, again, he looked old and
worn--poor wretch, who yet was so young and born to be so abundantly
happy! He was, to be sure, a base and blood-stained tyrant, but not the
less a miserable and unhappy man. The more severe the pain he had to
endure, the harder must he find it to hide it from the crowd who were
constantly about him. There is but one antidote to hatred, and that is
pity; it was with the eager compassion of a woman's heart that
Melissa marked every movement of the imperial murderer, as soon as she
recognized his sufferings, and when their eyes had met. Nothing now
escaped her keen glance which could add to her sympathy for the man she
had loathed but a minute before. She noticed a slight limp in his
gait and a convulsive twitching of his eyelids; his slender, almost
transparent hand, she reflected, was that of a sick man, and pain and
fever, no doubt, had thinned his hair, which had left many places bald.

And when the high--priest of Serapis and the augurs met him at the
bottom of the steps and Caesar's eye again put on the cruel scowl of
yesterday, she would not doubt that it was stern self-command which gave
him that threatening glare, to seem terrible, in spite of his anguish,
to those whose obedience he required. He had really needed his
companion's support as they descended the stair, that she could plainly
see; and she had observed, too, how carefully his guide had striven to
conceal the fact that he was upholding him; but the courtier was too
tall to achieve the task he had set himself. Now, she was much shorter
than Caesar, and she was strong, too. Her arm would have afforded him a
much better support.

But how could she think of such a thing?--she, the sister of Alexander,
the betrothed of Diodoros, whom she truly loved!

Caesar mingled with the priests, and her guide told her that the
corridor was now free. She peeped into the litter, and, seeing that
Diodoros still slept, she followed him, lost in thought, and giving
short and heedless answers to Andreas and the physicians She had not
listened to the priest's information, and scarcely turned her head to
look out, when a tall, thin man with a bullet-head and deeply wrinkled
brow was pointed out to her as Macrinus, the prefect of the body-guard,
the most powerful man in Rome next to Caesar; and then the "friends" of
Caracalla, whom she had seen yesterday, and the historian Dion Cassius,
with other senators and members of the imperial train.

Now, as they made their way through halls and passages where the foot of
the uninitiated rarely intruded, she looked about her with more interest
when the priest drew her attention to some particularly fine statue
or picture, or some symbolical presentment. Even now, however, though
association with her brothers had made her particularly alive to
everything that was beautiful or curious, she glanced round with less
interest than she otherwise might have done, for she had much else to
think of. In the first place, of the benefits Diodoros was to derive
from the great Galen; then of her father, who this day must dispense
with her assistance; and, finally, of the state of mind of her grave
brother Philip. He and Alexander, who usually were such united friends,
now both were in love with Agatha, and what could come of that? And from
time to time her thoughts flew back to Caesar, and she felt as though
some tie, she knew not what, linked them together.

As soon as the litter had to be carried up or down steps, she kept an
eye on the bearers, and gave such help as was needed when the sleeper's
position was changed. Whenever she looked in his handsome face, flushed
as it was by fever and framed in tumbled curls, her heart swelled, and
she felt that she had much to thank the gods for, seeing that her
lover was so full of splendid youth and in no respect resembled the
prematurely decrepit and sickly wearer of the purple. Nevertheless, she
thought a good deal of Caracalla, and it even occurred to her once that
if it were he who was being carried instead of Diodoros, she would tend
him no less carefully than her betrothed. Caesar, who had been as far
out of her ken as a god, and of whose overwhelming power she had heard,
had suddenly come down to her. She involuntarily thought of him as one
of those few with whom she had come into personal contact, and in
whose weal or woe she had some sympathetic interest. He could not be
altogether evil and hardened. If he could only know what pain it caused
her to see him suffer, he would surely command Zminis to abandon the
pursuit of her brother.

Just as they were reaching the end of their walk, the trumpets rang out
once more, reminding her that she was under the same roof with him. She
was so close to him--and yet how far he was from guessing the desires of
a heart which beat with compassion for him!

Several sick persons, eager for some communication from the gods, and
some who, without being sick, had slept in the Serapeum, had by this
time left their beds, and were taking counsel in the great hall with
interpreters and physicians. The bustle was like that of a market-place,
and there was one old man with unkempt hair and fiery eyes who repeated
again and again in a loud voice, "It was the god himself who appeared to
me, and his three-headed dog licked my cheeks." And presently a hideous
old woman plucked at Melissa's robe, whispering: "A healing draught for
your lover; tears from the eyes of the infant Horus. I have them from
Isis herself. The effect is rapid and certain. Come to Hezron, the
dealer in balsams in the street of the Nekropolis. Your lover's
recovery--for five drachmae."

But Melissa, who was no stranger here since her mother's last sickness,
went on without pausing, following the litter down the long hall full
of beds, a room with a stone roof resting on two rows of tall columns.
Familiar to her too was the aromatic scent of kyphi,--[incense]--which
filled the hall, although fresh air was constantly pouring in from
outside through the high windows. Red and green curtains hung in
front of them, and the subdued light which came through fell in tinted
twilight on the colored pictures in relief of the history of the gods,
which covered the walls. Speech was forbidden here, and their steps fell
noiseless on the thick, heavy mats.

Most of the beds were already empty; only those between the long wall
and the nearest row of columns were still for the most part occupied by
the sick who sought the help of the god. On one of these Diodoros was
laid, Melissa helping in silence, and with such skill as delighted even
the physicians. Still, this did not wake him, though on the next bed lay
a man who never ceased speaking, because in his dream he had been bidden
to repeat the name of Serapis as many times as there were drops in a cup
of water filled from the Agathodaemon Canal.

"A long stay in this strong perfume will be bad for him," whispered
Ptolemaeus to the freedman. "Galenus sent word that he would visit the
sick early to-day; but he is not here yet. He is an old man, and in
Rome, they say, it is the custom to sleep late."

He was interrupted by a stir in the long hall, which broke in on the
silence, no one knew from whence; and immediately after, officious hands
threw open the great double doors with a loud noise.

"He is coming," whispered their priestly guide; and the instant after
an old man crossed the threshold, followed by a troop of pastophori, as
obsequious as the courtiers at the heels of a prince.

"Gently, brothers," murmured the greatest physician of his age in a low
voice, as, leaning on a staff, he went toward the row of couches. It
was easy to see the traces of his eighty years, but his fine eyes still
gleamed with youthful light.

Melissa blushed to think that she could have mistaken Serenus Samonicus
for this noble old man. He must once have been a tall man; his back
was bent and his large head was bowed as though he were forever seeking
something. His face was pale and colorless, with a well-formed nose
and mouth, but not of classic mold. Blue veins showed through the clear
white skin, and the long, silky, silvery hair still flowed in unthinned
waves round his massive head, bald only on the crown. A snowy beard fell
over his breast. His aged form was wrapped in a long and ample robe
of costly white woolen stuff, and his whole appearance would have been
striking for its peculiar refinement, even if the eyes had not sparkled
with such vivid and piercing keenness from under the thick brows, and if
the high, smooth, slightly prominent forehead had not borne witness to
the power and profundity of his mind. Melissa knew of no one with whom
to compare him; he reminded Andreas of the picture of John as an old
man, which a wealthy fellow-Christian had presented to the church of
Saint Mark.

If this man could do nothing, there was no help on earth. And how
dignified and self-possessed were the movements of this bent old man as
he leaned on his staff! He, a stranger here, seemed to be showing the
others the way, a guide in his own realm. Melissa had heard that the
strong scent of the kyphi might prove injurious to Diodoros, and her one
thought now was the desire that Galenus might soon approach his couch.
He did not, in fact, begin with the sick nearest to the door, but stood
awhile in the middle of the hall, leaning against a column and surveying
the place and the beds.

When his searching glance rested on that where Diodoros was lying, an
answering look met his with reverent entreaty from a pair of beautiful,
large, innocent eyes. A smile parted his bearded lips, and going up to
the girl he said: "Where beauty bids, even age must obey. Your lover,
child, or your brother?"

"My betrothed," Melissa hastened to reply; and the maidenly
embarrassment which flushed her cheek became her so well that he added:

"He must have much to recommend him if I allow him to carry you off,
fair maid."

With these words he went up to the couch, and looking at Diodoros as he
lay, he murmured, as if speaking to himself and without paying any heed
to the younger men who crowded round him:

"There are no true Greeks left here; but the beauty of the ancestral
race is not easily stamped out, and is still to be seen in their
descendants. What a head, what features, and what hair!"

Then he felt the lad's breast, shoulders, and arms, exclaiming in honest
admiration, "What a godlike form!"

He laid his delicate old hand, with its network of blue veins, on the
sick man's forehead, again glanced round the room, and listened to
Ptolemaeus, who gave him a brief and technical report of the case; then,
sniffing the heavy scent that filled the hall, he said, as the Christian
leech ceased speaking:

"We will try; but not here--in a room less full of incense. This perfume
brings dreams, but no less surely induces fever. Have you no other room
at hand where the air is purer?"

An eager "Yes," in many voices was the reply; and Diodoros was forthwith
transferred into a small cubicle adjoining.

While he was being moved, Galenus went from bed to bed, questioning the
chief physician and the patients. He seemed to have forgotten Diodoros
and Melissa; but after hastily glancing at some and carefully examining
others, and giving advice where it was needful, he desired to see the
fair Alexandrian's lover once more.

As he entered the room he nodded kindly to the girl. How gladly would
she have followed him! But she said to herself that if he had wished
her to be present he would certainly have called her; so she modestly
awaited his return. She had to wait a long time, and the minutes seemed
hours while she heard the voices of men through the closed door, the
moaning and sighing of the sufferer, the splashing of water, and the
clatter of metal instruments; and her lively imagination made her fancy
that something almost unendurable was being done to her lover.

At last the physician came out. His whole appearance betokened perfect
satisfaction. The younger men, who followed him, whispered among
themselves, shaking their heads as though some miracle had been
performed; and every eye that looked on him was radiant with
enthusiastic veneration. Melissa knew, as soon as his eyes met hers,
that all was well, and as she grasped the old man's hand she concluded
from its cool moisture that he had but just washed it, and had done with
his own hand all that Ptolemaeus had expected of his skill. Her eyes
were dim with grateful emotion, and though Galenus strove to hinder
her from pressing her lips to his hand she succeeded in doing so;
he, however, kissed her brow with fatherly delight in her warmhearted
sweetness, and said:

"Now go home happy, my child. That stone had hit your lover's brain-roof
a hard blow; the pressure of the broken beam--I mean a piece of
bone--had robbed him of his consciousness of what a sweet bride the gods
have bestowed on him. But the knife has done its work; the beam is in
its place again; the splinters which were not needed have been taken
out; the roof is mended, and the pressure removed. Your friend has
recovered consciousness, and I will wager that at this moment he is
thinking of you and wishes you were with him. But for the present you
had better defer the meeting. For forty-eight hours he must remain in
that little room, for any movement would only delay his recovery."

"Then I shall stay here to nurse him," cried Melissa, eagerly. But
Galenus replied, decisively:

"That must not be if he is to get well. The presence of a woman for whom
the sufferer's heart is on fire is as certain to aggravate the fever as
the scent of incense. Besides, child, this is no place for such as you."

Her head drooped sadly, but he nodded to her cheeringly as he added:

"Ptolemaeus, who is worthy of your entire confidence, speaks of you as
a girl of much sense, and you will surely not do anything to spoil
my work, which was not easy. However, I must say farewell; other sick
require my care."

He held out his hand, but, seeing her eyes fixed on his and glittering
through tears, he asked her name and family. It seemed to him of good
augury for the long hours before him which he must devote to Caesar,
that he should, so early in the day, have met so pure and fair a flower
of girlhood.

When she had told him her own name and her father's, and also mentioned
her brothers, Philip the philosopher, and Alexander the painter, who
was already one of the chief masters of his art here, Galenus answered
heartily:

"All honor to his genius, then, for he is the one-eyed king in the land
of the blind. Like the old gods, who can scarce make themselves heard
for the new, the Muses too have been silenced. The many really
beautiful things to be seen here are not new; and the new, alas! are
not beautiful. But your brother's work," he added, kindly, "may be the
exception."

"You should only see his portraits!" cried Melissa.

"Yours, perhaps, among them?" said the old man, with interest. "That is
