finished the message, his features smoothed--he thought he had already
found the right man.

After assuring himself that the imperial messenger had fulfilled his
commission, he took a hasty leave of him and his daughter.

His kind heart impelled him to show his chosen companion his friendly
remembrance of him, and thereby atone for the offence which had been
inflicted upon him in his house.  To Barbara's inquiry whom he would take
with him, he hurriedly replied that he should not decide until he joined
his military comrades in the Black Bear.  As soon as this important
matter was settled he would return home, for it had now become
unnecessary to inform Wolf.  The maid-servant could be sent to summon
him to the Golden Cross.  Barbara might go herself at once to Ursel and
soothe her--anxiety about her beloved young knight weighed heavily upon
her soul.

During this conversation?  Master Adrian had gone to her side; but as
soon as Blomberg had retired, he informed Barbara, in his master's name,
that he should expect her after vespers in the apartments of the Queen of
Hungary.  He longed to hear her voice.  The regent desired to know
whether she had any special wishes concerning the Prebrunn house.  She
need not restrict herself on the score of expense; the Prebrunn steward
would be authorized to pay everything.  True, most of the furniture was
supplied and the necessary servants had been obtained, but her Majesty
the Queen advised her to take with her a maid or companion whom she
personally liked.

Barbara's face crimsoned as she listened, and then asked anxiously
whether the Emperor Charles knew of these arrangements.

He had no doubt of it, the man replied, for he had heard his Majesty
remark that, if the marquise's companion was not to become the toy of
her caprices, she must be enabled to obtain what she desired
independently of the old lady.  He was anxious to make Barbara's
life in Prebrunn a pleasant one.

The latter, with downcast eyes, thanked Master Adrian and turned away;
but he detained her with the inquiry whether he should probably find Sir
Wolf Hartschwert at home, and received the answer that he had gone to
Syndic Hiltner's.

The valet then hastily took his leave, because just at that time his
royal master needed him.  Any one else could summon the knight to the
regent in his place.

In the corridor of the Golden Cross he met Brother Cassian, the body
servant of the Confessor de Soto, a middle-aged Swabian, who had formerly
as a lay brother worked as a bookbinder in the Dominican monastery at
Cologne.  He was clad in a half-secular, half-priestly garb, and was an
humble, extremely devout man, whose yielding nature had rendered him
popular among the servants at the court.  His bullet-shaped head was
unusually large, and his face, with its narrow brow and small, lustreless
eyes, showed that he was not prone to thinking.  Yet he fulfilled every
order precisely according to directions, and possessed his full share of
the cunning which is often a characteristic of narrow minds.

He willingly undertook to summon Sir Wolf Hartschwert, whom he knew, to
the presence of the Queen of Hungary.  No special haste was needful, and,
as he loved good wine and did not lack gifts from those who desired an
audience with his master, he went first to the English Greeting, where
the travelling clergy lodged and often deigned to accost him.

Barbara had returned home with bowed head, and threw herself into her
father's arm-chair in his workshop.  She gazed into vacancy with a sore
and anxious heart, and, as an insane violinist lures the same tone from
the instrument again and again, she constantly returned to the same
thought, "Lost!  lost!--too late!  too late!"

Barbara gave herself up to this mood for several minutes, but at last she
remembered her lover's summons for that evening.

He longed to hear her voice, Master Adrian had said.

Surely, surely he himself had clothed the expression in a totally
different, a hundred times warmer form.  How bewitchingly he, the great
Emperor, understood how to flatter, and, with the memory of the charm of
his manner, the thought of the blissful hours which she had enjoyed
through his love returned to her mind.  It was in his power to bestow the
highest happiness which earth can give; after all, his love outweighed
everything that she must sacrifice for it.  To enjoy it, though but for a
brief season, she ought not to refuse to bear the hardest, most terrible
things, and, if what was now her secret became rumoured among the people,
to accept humiliation, shame, and scorn.  Let the respectable women of
Ratisbon, in their pride of virtue, maliciously cast stones at her; they
could not look down upon her, for, as the object of the most illustrious
sovereign's love, she was raised far above them.

Meanwhile, with a feeling of defiant self-confidence, she was again
braiding her hair.  But the mental firmness which she had regained did
not last; more than once her hand faltered while the comb was dividing
the wealth of her golden tresses.  How ardently Charles had praised their
luxuriant beauty!-and to-day he was to rejoice in it again.  But why had
not even one poor word from his own hand accompanied the summons?

Why had his messenger been only a valet?  Why had he wounded her so
deeply the night before?

Why did leaden weights seem to hang upon her soul when she attempted to
soar upward?

Oh, what a state of things!

Who had given the regent, to whom nothing attracted her, the right to
dispose of her as though she were a chattel or her captive?

Had she, with her heart and her honour, also resigned her freedom to her
lover?

If she had only possessed one, one single person to whom she could utter
her thoughts!

Then her glance fell upon the knapsack, and she remembered Wolf.  He was
to set out on his journey early the next morning; her lover expected her
after vespers; so perhaps she would not be permitted to see him again,
for she scarcely dared to hope that, after the rebuff which he had
experienced, he would seek her again.  Yet she longed once more to clasp
the hand of the man for whom she felt a sister's affection and yet had so
deeply wounded.

Without one kind farewell word from him, the bitterest drop of all would
fall into the wormwood which already mingled in her happiness.  It seemed
incomprehensible that he who from childhood had given her his whole heart
would henceforth deny her every friendly feeling.  For her own sake, and
also for his, this should not be.

How many had sought her love!  But perhaps the time would soon come when,
on account of the one who must supply the place of all others, no one
would care for her.  Then she wished at least to be sure of the sympathy,
the friendship of this good loyal man.

There were still many things for her to do, but to seek Wolf she left
them all, even the visit to Frau Lerch, whom she wished to ask to devote
herself exclusively to her service in Prebrunn.

Full of anxious cares, lofty anticipations, and the ardent desire to
conciliate Wolf, she took the by no means lengthy walk to the Hiltners.
Not until she reached the doctor's house did it occur to her that she had
forgotten to execute her father's commission and relieve Ursel's anxiety
about her darling.

How did it happen that, if any affair of her own interested her, she
always forgot what she owed to others?

Barbara was obliged to wait in the broad, lofty hall of the syndic's
house for the maid-servant, who announced her; and the stout man with the
big head, who had seized the knocker just before she entered, shared her
fate.

He was now leaning with bowed head against the wall, both hands clasped
under his beardless chin, and might have been taken for a monk re peating
his prayers.  The long, brown doublet fastened around his hips by a Hemp
rope, instead of a girdle, made him resemble a Franciscan.  But his
thick, flaxen hair lacked the tonsure, the rope the rosary, and he wore
coarse leather shoes on his large feet.

Barbara fancied that she had seen this strange figure somewhere, and he,
too, must have recognised her, for he bowed when she looked at him.
There was not the slightest movement of the body except the small eyes,
which wandered restlessly around the spacious room as if they missed
something.

The inquiry what he found lacking here was already rising to Barbara's
lips when the syndic's wife came toward her, preceded by her daughter
Martina, who, radiant with joy at seeing the ardently admired singer in
her own house, kissed her with fervent affection.

The mother merely extended her hand to Barbara, yet the whole manner of
the gentle, reserved woman showed that she was a welcome guest.

Frau Sabina loved and understood music, still enjoyed singing hymns with
the members of her household, and had done everything in her power to aid
the establishment of the Convivium musicum and foster its progress.

Interest in music had also united her to Dr. Martin Luther, her husband's
friend, and mane a composition of the Wittenberg ecclesiastic had first
been performed at the Hiltners.

The old faith offered so much more to charm the senses than the new one!
Therefore it seemed a special cause for thanksgiving that singing and
playing upon the organ occupied a prominent place in the Protestant
religious service, and that Luther most warmly commended the fostering of
music to those who professed the evangelical belief.  Besides, her
adopted son Erasmus, the new Wittenberg master of arts, had devoted
himself eagerly to music, and composed several hymns which, if Damian
Feys permitted it, would be sung in the Convivium musicum.

Frau Sabina Hiltner had often met Barbara there, and had noticed with
admiration and pleasure the great progress which this richly gifted young
creature had made under the direction of the Netherland master.

Other members of the Convivium, on the contrary, bore Barbara a grudge
because she remained a Catholic, and many a mother of a daughter whom
Barbara, as a singer, had cast too far into the shade, would gladly have
thrust her out of the circle of music-loving citizens.

Frau Sabina and Master Feys, who, like the much-envied girl, was a
professor of the old faith, interceded for her all the more warmly.

Besides, it afforded Frau Hiltner scarcely less pleasure to hear Barbara
than it did Martina, and she could also fix her eyes with genuine
devotion upon the girl's wonderfully beautiful and nobly formed features.
The mother and daughter owed to this peerless singer the best enjoyment
which the Collegium afforded them, and, when envy and just displeasure
approached Frau Sabina to accuse Barbara of insubordination, obstinacy,
pride, and forwardness, which were unseemly for one so young, as well as
exchanging coquettish glances with the masculine members of the choir,
the profoundly respected wife of the syndic and her young daughter warmly
defended the persecuted girl.

In this her husband strongly supported her, for, when necessary, he dealt
weighty blows and upheld what he deemed just without fear of man and with
the powerful aids of his strong intellect and the weight of the esteem he
had won by a stainless, industrious life.

Doubtless Frau Sabina also perceived something unusual in Barbara's
nature and conduct, traits of defiance, almost rebellion, which would
have troubled her in her Martina, who, though no beauty, was a pretty
girl, with the most winning, childlike charm; but she secretly asked
herself whether she would not accept it gratefully if, in exchange, her
girl could possess such a wonderful gift of God; for, sharply as the eye
of envy followed Barbara's every act, she had never given cause to doubt
her chastity, and this Frau Hiltner considered greatly in her favour;
for what tremendous temptations must have assailed this marvellously
beautiful creature, this genuine artist, who had grown to womanhood
without a mother, and whose only counsellor and protector was a crippled,
eccentric old soldier.

As Martina opened the door of the sitting room a loud conversation in
men's voices became audible, and with the deep, resonant tones of the
syndic Barbara recognised the higher, less powerful ones of the man whom
she was seeking.

The kiss of the scarcely unfolded bud of girlhood, the child of a mother
whose presence in the Convivium had often helped her to curb an impetuous
impulse, pleased Barbara, and yet awakened the painful feeling that in
accepting it without resistance she was guilty of a deception.  Besides,
she had not confessed, and it seemed as if, in feeling the young
heretic's kiss an honour, she were adding to the burden which had
not yet been removed from her conscience.

Yet she could not overcome an emotion of rare pleasure when Frau Sabina,
after beckoning to her husband, took her hand and led her into the
reception room.  Erasmus Eckhart, the adopted son of the house, hastened
