"I've heard you already!" he answered quickly; "magical, bewildering,
magnificent!  Who in the world wrought this miracle with your voice?"

"There we have it!" she cried, laughing merrily and clapping her hands.
"To make you speak, one need only allude distantly to music.  That, too,
has remained unchanged, and I am glad, for I have much to ask you in
relation to it.  I can learn many things from you still.  But what have
you there in your hand?  Is it anything pretty from Brabant?" This
question flowed from her lips with coaxing tenderness, and she passed
her soft hand swiftly over his cheek.

How happy it made him!

Hitherto he had been the receiver--nay, an unfair taker--but now he was
to become the giver and she would be pleased with his present.

As if relieved from a nightmare, he now told her that he had gone from
Rome, through the Papal Legate Contarini, whom he had accompanied to
Italy as a secretary skilled in German and music--to the imperial court,
where he now enjoyed the special favour of the Regent of the Netherlands,
the widowed Queen of Hungary; that the royal lady, the sister of the
Emperor Charles, had chosen him to be director of her lessons in singing,
and also permitted him to write German letters for her; and what
assistance worthy of all gratitude he had enjoyed through the director
of the imperial musicians, Gombert, the composer and leader of the royal
orchestra, and his colleague Appenzelder, who directed the Queen's boy
choir.

At the mention of these names, Barbara listened intently.  She had sung
several of Gombert's compositions, and was familiar with one of
Appenzelder's works.

When she learned that both must have arrived in Ratisbon several hours
before, she anxiously asked Wolf if he would venture to make her
acquainted with these great masters.

Wolf assented with joyous eagerness, while Barbara's cheeks crimsoned
with pleasure at so valuable a promise.

Yet this subject speedily came to a close, for while talking Wolf had
ripped the linen cover in which the roll of velvet was sewed, and, as
soon as he unfolded the rich wine-coloured material, Barbara forgot
everything else, and burst into loud exclamations of pleasure and
admiration.  Then, when Wolf hastened out and with hurrying fingers
opened the little package he had brought and gave her the costly fur
which was to serve as trimming for the velvet jacket, she again laughed
gleefully, and, ere Wolf was aware of it, she had thrown her arms around
his neck and kissed him on both cheeks.

He submitted as if dazed, and did not even regain his senses sufficiently
to profit by what she had granted him with such unexpected liberality.
Nor did she allow him to speak as she loosed her arms from his neck, for,
with a bewitching light in her large, blue eyes, fairly overflowing with
grateful tenderness, she cried:

"You dear, dear, kind little Wolf!  To think that you should have
remembered me so generously!  And how rich you must be!  If I had become
so before you, I should have given myself a dress exactly like this.  Now
it's mine, just as though it had dropped from the sky.  Wine-coloured
Flanders velvet, with a border of dark-brown marten fur!  I'll parade in
it like the Duchess of Bavaria or rich Frau Fugger.  Holy Virgin! if that
isn't becoming to my golden hair!  Doesn't it just suit me, you little
Wolf and great spendthrift?  And when I wear it at the dance in the New
Scale or sing in it at the Convivium musicum, my Woller cousins and the
Thun girl will turn yellow with envy."

Wolf had only half listened to this outburst of delight, for he had
reserved until the last his best offering--a sky-blue turquoise breastpin
set with small diamonds.  It brought him enthusiastic thanks, and Barbara
even allowed him to fasten the magnificent ornament with his own fingers,
which moved slowly and clumsily enough.

Then she hurried into her chamber to bring the hand-mirror, and when in
an instant she returned and, at her bidding, he held the shining glass
before her, she patted his cheeks with their thin, fair, pointed beard,
and called him her faithful little Wolf, her clear, stupid pedant and
Satan in person, who would fill her mind with vanity.

Finally, she laid the piece of velvet over the back of a chair, let it
fall down to the floor, and threw the bands of fur upon it.  Every graver
word, every attempt to tell her what he expected from her, the girl cut
short with expressions of gratitude and pleasure until her father
returned from the suffering Ursel.

Then, radiant with joy, she showed the old man her new treasures, and the
father's admiration and expressions of gratitude were not far behind the
daughter's.

It seemed as though Fate had blessed the modest rooms in Red Cock Street
with its most precious treasures.

It might be either Wolf's return, the hopes for his daughter which were
associated with it in the crippled old warrior's heart, or the unexpected
costly gifts, to which Wolf had added for his old friend a Netherland
drinking vessel in the form of a silver ship, which had moved the old
gentleman so deeply, but at any rate he allowed himself to be tempted
into an act of extravagance, and, in an outburst of good spirits which he
had not felt for a long time, he promised Wolf to fetch from the cellar
one of the jugs of wine which he kept there for his daughter's wedding.

"Over this liquid we will open our hearts freely to each other, my boy,"
he said.  "The night is still long, and even at the Emperor's court there
is nothing better to be tasted.  My dead mother used to say that there
are always more good things in a poor family which was once rich than in
a rich one which was formerly poor."




CHAPTER V.

The captain limped out into the cellar, but Barbara was already standing
behind the table again, moving the irons.

"When I am rich," she exclaimed, in reply to Wolf, who asked her to stop
her work in this happy hour and share the delicious wine with him and her
father, "I shall shun such maid-servant's business.  But what else can be
done?  We have less money than we need to keep up our position, and that
must be remedied.  Besides, a neatly crimped ruff is necessary if a poor
girl like me is to stand beside the others in the singing rehearsal early
to-morrow morning.  Poor folks are alike everywhere, and, so long as I
can do no better--but luck will come to me, too, some day--this right
hand must be my maid.  Let it alone, or my iron will burn your fingers!"

This threat was very nearly fulfilled, for Wolf had caught her right hand
to hold it firmly while he at last compelled her to hear that his future
destiny depended upon her decision.

How much easier he had expected to find the wooing!  Yet how could it
be otherwise?  Every young man in Ratisbon was probably courting this
peerless creature.  No doubt she had already rebuffed many another as
sharply as she had just prevented him from seizing her hand.  If her
manner had grown more independent, she had learned to defend herself
cleverly.

He would first try to assail her heart with words, and they were at his
disposal in black and white.  He had placed in the little box with the
breastpin a piece of paper on which he had given expression to his
feelings in verse.  Hitherto it had remained unnoticed and fluttered to
the ground.  Picking it up, he introduced his suit, after a brief
explanation, by reading aloud the lines which he had composed in
Brussels to accompany his gifts to her.

It was an easy task, for he had painted rather than written his poetic
homage, with beautiful ornaments on the initial letters, and in the most
careful red and black Gothic characters, which looked like print.  So,
with a vivacity of intonation which harmonized with the extravagance of
the poetry, he began:

              "Queen of my heart wert thou in days of old,
               Beloved maid, in childhood's garb so plain;
               I bring thee velvet now, and silk and gold
               Though I am but a poor and simple swain
               That in robes worthy of thee may be seen
               My sovereign, of all thy sex the queen."

Barbara nodded pleasantly to him, saying: "Very pretty.  Perhaps you
might arrange your little verse in a duo, but how you must have taxed
your imagination, you poor fellow, to transform the flighty good-for-
nothing whom you left five years ago into a brilliant queen!"

"Because, even at that time," he ardently exclaimed.  "I had placed you
on the throne of my heart, because the bud already promised--Yet no!  In
those days I could not suspect that it would unfold into so marvellous a
rose.  You stand before me now more glorious than I beheld you in the
most radiant of all my dreams, and therefore the longing to possess you,
which I could never relinquish, will make me appear almost insolently
bold.  But it must be risked, and if you will fulfil the most ardent
desire of a faithful heart--"

"Gently, my little Wolf, gently," she interposed soothingly.  "If I am
right, you mounted our narrow stairs to seek a wife and, when my father
returns, you will ask for my hand."

"That I will," the young knight declared with eager positiveness.  "Your
'Yes' or 'No,' Wawerl, is to me the decree of Fate, to which even the
gods submit without opposition."

"Indeed?" she answered, uttering the word slowly, with downcast eyes.
Then suddenly drawing herself to her full height, she added with a graver
manner than he had ever seen her wear: "It is fortunate that I have
learned the stories of the gods which are so popular in the Netherlands.
If any one else should come to me with such pretences, I would scarcely
believe that he had honest intentions.  You are in earnest, Wolf, and
wish to make me your wife.  But 'Yes' and 'No' can not be spoken as
quickly as you probably imagine.  You were always a good, faithful
fellow, and I am sincerely attached to you.  But have I even the
slightest knowledge of what you obtained abroad or what awaits you here?"

"Wawerl!"  he  interrupted  reproachfully.  "Would I as an honest man
seek your hand if I had not made money enough to support a wife whose
expectations were not too extravagant?  You can not reasonably doubt
that, and now, when the most sacred of bonds is in question, it ought--"

"It ought, you think, to satisfy me?"  she interrupted with confident
superiority.  "But one of two things must follow this sacred bond-
happiness or misery in the earthly life which is entered from the church
steps.  I am tired of the miserable starving and struggling, my dear
Wolf.  Marriage must at least rid me of these gloomy spectres.  My father
will not let you leave soon the good wine he allows himself and you to
enjoy--you know that.  Tell him how you are situated at the court, and
what prospects, you have here in Ratisbon or elsewhere; for instance,
I would gladly go to the magnificent Netherlands with my husband.  Inform
yourself better, too, of the amount of your inheritance.  The old man
will take me into his confidence early to-morrow morning.  But I will
confess this to you now: The most welcome husband to me would be a
zealous and skilful disciple of music, and I know that wish will be
fulfilled with you.  If, perhaps, you are already what I call a
successful man, we will see.  But--I have learned that--no happiness will
thrive on bread and water, and even a modest competence, as it is called,
won't do for me."

"But Wawerl," he interrupted dejectedly, "what could be better than true,
loyal love?  Just hear what I was going to tell you, and have not yet
reached."

But Barbara would not listen, cutting his explanation short with the
words:

"All that is written as distinctly on the tender swain's face as if
I had it before me in black letter, but unfortunately it has as little
power to move me to reckless haste as the angry visage into which your
affectionate one is now transformed.  The Scripture teaches us to prove
