yes, so many for the father and half as many for the son. Well, I shall
live to be old, I know that I shall live to be old, and the count will
be discharged, ay, to the last stiver."

As she spoke, the outlawed Water Wife had risen, and the flare of the
fire struck full upon her. It was an awful face that Lysbeth beheld by
the light of it, full of fierceness and energy, the face of an inspired
avenger, dread and unnatural, yet not altogether repulsive. Indeed, that
countenance was such as an imaginative artist might give to one of the
beasts in the Book of Revelation. Amazed and terrified, Lysbeth said
nothing.

"I frighten you, gentle one," went on the Mare, "you who, although
you have suffered, are still full of the milk of human kindness. Wait,
woman, wait till they have murdered the man you love, till your heart is
like my heart, and you also live on, not for love's sake, not for life's
sake, but to be a Sword, a Sword, a Sword in the hand of God!"

"Cease, I pray you," said Lysbeth in a low voice; "I am faint, I am
ill."

Ill she was indeed, and before morning there, in that lonely hovel on
the island of the mere, a son was born to her.



When she was strong enough her nurse spoke:

"Will you keep the brat, or shall I kill it?" she asked.

"How can I kill my child?" said Lysbeth.

"It is the Spaniard's child also, and remember the curse you told me of,
your own curse uttered on this thing before ever you were married? If
it lives that curse shall cling to it, and through it you, too, shall be
accursed. Best let me kill it and have done."

"How can I kill my own child? Touch it not," answered Lysbeth sullenly.

So the black-eyed boy lived and throve.



Somewhat slowly, lying there in the island hut, Lysbeth won back her
strength. The Mare, or Mother Martha, as Lysbeth had now learned to call
her, tended her as few midwives would have done. Food, too, she had
in plenty, for Martha snared the fowl and caught the fish, or she made
visits to the mainland, and thence brought eggs and milk and flesh,
which, so she said, the boors of that country gave her as much as she
wanted of them. Also, to while away the hours, she would read to her out
of the Testament, and from that reading Lysbeth learnt many things which
until then she had not known. Indeed, before it was done with--Catholic
though she was--she began to wonder in what lay the wickedness of these
heretics, and how it came about that they were worthy of death and
torment, since, sooth to say, in this Book she could find no law to
which their lives and doctrine seemed to give offence.

Thus it happened that Martha, the fierce, half-crazy water-dweller,
sowed the seed in Lysbeth's heart that was to bear fruit in due season.

When three weeks had gone by and Lysbeth was on her feet again, though
as yet scarcely strong enough to travel, Martha told her that she had
business which would keep her from home a night, but what the business
was she refused to say. Accordingly on a certain afternoon, having left
good store of all things to Lysbeth's hand, the Mare departed in her
skiff, nor did she return till after midday on the morrow. Now Lysbeth
talked of leaving the island, but Martha would not suffer it, saying
that if she desired to go she must swim, and indeed when Lysbeth went
to look she found that the boat had been hidden elsewhere. So, nothing
loth, she stayed on, and in the crisp autumn air her health and beauty
came back to her, till she was once more much as she had been before the
day when she went sledging with Juan de Montalvo.

On a November morning, leaving her infant in the hut with Martha, who
had sworn to her on the Bible that she would not harm it, Lysbeth walked
to the extremity of the island. During the night the first sharp frost
of late autumn had fallen, making a thin film of ice upon the surface
of the lake, which melted rapidly as the sun grew high. The air too was
very clear and calm, and among the reeds, now turning golden at their
tips, the finches flew and chirped, forgetful that winter was at hand.
So sweet and peaceful was the scene that Lysbeth, also forgetful of many
things, surveyed it with a kind of rapture. She knew not why, but her
heart was happy that morning; it was as though a dark cloud had passed
from her life; as though the blue skies of peace and joy were spread
about her. Doubtless other clouds might appear upon the horizon;
doubtless in their season they would appear, but she felt that this
horizon was as yet a long way off, and meanwhile above her bent the
tender sky, serene and sweet and happy.

Upon the crisp grass behind her suddenly she heard a footfall, a new
footfall, not that of the long, stealthy stride of Martha, who was
called the Mare, and swung round upon her heel to meet it.

Oh, God! Who was this? Oh, God! there before her stood Dirk van Goorl.
Dirk, and no other than Dirk, unless she dreamed, Dirk with his kind
face wreathed in a happy smile, Dirk with his arms outstretched towards
her. Lysbeth said nothing, she could not speak, only she stood still
gazing, gazing, gazing, and always he came on, till now his arms were
round her. Then she sprang back.

"Do not touch me," she cried, "remember what I am and why I stay here."

"I know well what you are, Lysbeth," he answered slowly; "you are the
holiest and purest woman who ever walked this earth; you are an angel
upon this earth; you are the woman who gave her honour to save the man
she loved. Oh! be silent, be silent, I have heard the story; I know it
every word, and here I kneel before you, and, next to my God, I worship
you, Lysbeth, I worship you."

"But the child," she murmured, "it lives, and it is mine and the man's."

Dirk's face hardened a little, but he only answered:

"We must bear our burdens; you have borne yours, I must bear mine," and
he seized her hands and kissed them, yes, and the hem of her garment and
kissed it also.

So these two plighted their troth.

Afterwards Lysbeth heard all the story. Montalvo had been put upon his
trial, and, as it chanced, things went hard with him. Among his judges
one was a great Netherlander lord, who desired to uphold the rights of
his countrymen; one was a high ecclesiastic, who was furious because of
the fraud that had been played upon the Church, which had been trapped
into celebrating a bigamous marriage; and a third was a Spanish grandee,
who, as it happened, knew the family of the first wife who had been
deserted.

Therefore, for the luckless Montalvo, when the case had been proved
to the hilt against him by the evidence of the priest who brought the
letter, of the wife's letters, and of the truculent Black Meg, who now
found an opportunity of paying back "hot water for cold," there was
little mercy. His character was bad, and it was said, moreover, that
because of his cruelties and the shame she had suffered at his hands,
Lysbeth van Hout had committed suicide. At least, this was certain, that
she was seen running at night towards the Haarlemer Meer, and that after
this, search as her friends would, nothing more could be heard of her.

So, that an example might be made, although he writhed and fenced his
best, the noble captain, Count Juan de Montalvo, was sent to serve for
fourteen years in the galleys as a common slave. And there, for the
while, was an end of him.



There also was an end of the strange and tragic courtship of Dirk van
Goorl and Lysbeth van Hout.

Six months afterwards they were married, and by Dirk's wish took the
child, who was christened Adrian, to live with them. A few months later
Lysbeth entered the community of the New Religion, and less than two
years after her marriage a son was born to her, the hero of this story,
who was named Foy.

As it happened, she bore no other children.





BOOK THE SECOND

THE RIPENING



CHAPTER IX

ADRIAN, FOY, AND MARTIN THE RED

Many years had gone by since Lysbeth found her love again upon the
island in the Haarlemer Meer. The son that she bore there was now a
grown man, as was her second son, Foy, and her own hair showed grey
beneath the lappets of her cap.

Fast, fast wove the loom of God during those fateful years, and the web
thereof was the story of a people's agony and its woof was dyed red with
their blood. Edict had followed edict, crime had been heaped upon crime.
Alva, like some inhuman and incarnate vengeance, had marched his army,
quiet and harmless as is the tiger when he stalks his prey, across the
fields of France. Now he was at Brussels, and already the heads of
the Counts Egmont and Hoorn had fallen; already the Blood Council was
established and at its work. In the Low Countries law had ceased to
exist, and there anything might happen however monstrous or inhuman.
Indeed, with one decree of the Holy Office, confirmed by a proclamation
of Philip of Spain, all the inhabitants of the Netherlands, three
millions of them, had been condemned to death. Men's minds were full
of terror, for on every side were burnings and hangings and torturings.
Without were fightings, within were fears, and none knew whom they could
trust, since the friend of to-day might be the informer or judge of
to-morrow. All this because they chose to worship God in their own
fashion unaided by images and priests.



Although so long a time had passed, as it chanced those personages with
whom we have already made acquaintance in this history were still alive.
Let us begin with two of them, one of whom we know and one of
whom, although we have heard of him before, will require some
introduction--Dirk van Goorl and his son Foy.



Scene--an upper room above a warehouse overlooking the market-place
of Leyden, a room with small windows and approached by two staircases;
time, a summer twilight. The faint light which penetrated into this
chamber through the unshuttered windows, for to curtain them would have
been to excite suspicion, showed that about twenty people were gathered
there, among whom were one or two women. For the most part they were men
of the better class, middle-aged burghers of sober mien, some of whom
stood about in knots, while others were seated upon stools and benches.
At the end of the room addressing them was a man well on in middle life,
with grizzled hair and beard, small and somewhat mean of stature, yet
one through whose poor exterior goodness seemed to flow like light
through some rough casement of horn. This was Jan Arentz, the famous
preacher, by trade a basket-maker, a man who showed himself steadfast
to the New Religion through all afflictions, and who was gifted with a
spirit which could remain unmoved amidst the horrors of perhaps the most
terrible persecution that Christians have suffered since the days of
the Roman Emperors. He was preaching now and these people were his
congregation.

"I come not to bring peace but a sword," was his text, and certainly
this night it was most appropriate and one easy of illustration. For
there, on the very market-place beneath them, guarded by soldiers and
surrounded with the rabble of the city, two members of his flock, men
who a fortnight before had worshipped in that same room, at this moment
were undergoing martyrdom by fire!

Arentz preached patience and fortitude. He went back into recent history
and told his hearers how he himself had passed a hundred dangers; how he
had been hunted like a wolf, how he had been tried, how he had escaped
from prisons and from the swords of soldiers, even as St. Paul had done
before him, and how yet he lived to minister to them this night. He
told them that they must have no fear, that they must go on quite happy,
quite confident, taking what it pleased God to send them, feeling that
it would all be for the best; yes, that even the worst would be for the
best. What was the worst? Some hours of torment and death. And what lay
beyond the death? Ah! let them think of that. The whole world was but a
brief and varying shadow, what did it matter how or when they walked
out of that shadow into the perfect light? The sky was very black, but
behind it the sun shone. They must look forward with the eye of faith;
perhaps the sufferings of the present generation were part of the scheme
of things; perhaps from the earth which they watered with their blood
would spring the flower of freedom, that glorious freedom in whose day
all men would be able to worship their Creator responsible only to the
Bible law and their own conscience, not to the dogmas or doctrines of
other men.

As Arentz spoke thus, eloquently, sweetly, spoke like one inspired, the
twilight deepened and the flare of those sacrificial fires flickered on
the window pane, and the mixed murmurs of the crowd of witnesses broke
upon his listeners' ears. The preacher paused and looked down upon the
dreadful scene below, for from where he stood he could behold it all.

"Mark is dead," he said, "and our dear brother, Andreas Jansen, is
dying; the executioners heap the faggots round him. You think it cruel,
you think it piteous, but I say to you, No. I say that it is a holy
and a glorious sight, for we witness the passing of souls to bliss.
Brethren, let us pray for him who leaves us, and for ourselves who stay
behind. Yes, and let us pray for those who slay him that know not what
they do. We watch his sufferings, but I tell you that Christ his Lord
watches also; Christ who hung upon the Cross, the victim of such men as
these. He stands with him in the fire, His hand compasses him, His voice
supports him. Brethren, let us pray."

Then at his bidding every member of that little congregation knelt in
prayer for the passing spirit of Andreas Jansen.

Again Arentz looked through the window.

"He dies!" he cried; "a soldier has thrust him through with a pike in
mercy, his head falls forward. Oh! God, if it be Thy will, grant to us a
sign."

Some strange breath passed through that upper chamber, a cold breath
which blew upon the brows of the worshippers and stirred their hair,
bringing with it a sense of the presence of Andreas Jansen, the martyr.
Then, there upon the wall opposite to the window, at the very spot where
their brother and companion, Andreas, saint and martyr, was wont to
kneel, appeared the sign, or what they took to be a sign. Yes, there
upon the whitewashed wall, reflected, mayhap, from the fires below, and
showing clearly in the darkened room, shone the vision of a fiery cross.
For a second it was seen. Then it was gone, but to every soul in
this room the vision of that cross had brought its message; to each a
separate message, an individual inspiration, for in the light of it they
read strange lessons of life and death. The cross vanished and there was
silence.

"Brethren," said the voice of Arentz, speaking in the darkness, "you
have seen. Through the fire and through the shadow, follow the Cross and
fear not."



The service was over, and below in the emptied market-place the
executioners collected the poor calcined fragments of the martyrs to
cast them with contumely and filthy jests into the darkling waters of
the river. Now, one by one and two by two, the worshippers slipped away
through some hidden door opening on an alley. Let us look at three of
their number as they crept through bye streets back to a house on the
Bree Straat with which we are acquainted, two of them walking in front
and one behind.

The pair were Dirk van Goorl and his son Foy--there was no mistaking
their relationship. Save that he had grown somewhat portly and
thoughtful, Dirk was the Dirk of five and twenty years ago, thickset,
grey-eyed, bearded, a handsome man according to the Dutch standard,
whose massive, kindly countenance betrayed the massive, kindly mind
within. Very like him was his son Foy, only his eyes were blue instead
of grey, and his hair was yellow. Though they seemed sad enough just
now, these were merry and pleasant eyes, and the round, the somewhat
childlike face was merry also, the face of a person who looked upon the
bright side of things.

There was nothing remarkable or distinguished about Foy's appearance,
but from it the observer, who met him for the first time, received an
impression of energy, honesty, and good-nature. In truth, such were
apt to set him down as a sailor-man, who had just returned from a long
journey, in the course of which he had come to the conclusion that this
world was a pleasant place, and one well worth exploring. As Foy walked
down the street with his quick and nautical gait, it was evident that
even the solemn and dreadful scene which he had just experienced had not
altogether quenched his cheery and hopeful spirit. Yet of all those who
listened to the exhortation of the saint-like Arentz, none had laid its
burden of faith and carelessness for the future to heart more entirely
than Foy van Goorl.

But of this power of looking on the bright side of things the credit
must be given to his nature and not to his piety, for Foy could not be
sad for long. _Dum spiro, spero_ would have been his motto had he known
Latin, and he did not mean to grow sorrowful--over the prospect of being
burnt, for instance--until he found himself fast to the stake. It was
this quality of good spirits in a depressing and melancholy age that
made of Foy so extraordinarily popular a character.

Behind these two followed a much more remarkable-looking personage, the
Frisian, Martin Roos, or Red Martin, so named from his hair, which was
red to the verge of flame colour, and his beard of a like hue that hung
almost to his breast. There was no other such beard in Leyden; indeed
the boys, taking advantage of his good nature, would call to him as he
passed, asking him if it was true that the storks nested in it every
spring. This strange-looking man, who was now perhaps a person of forty
years of age, for ten years or more had been the faithful servant of
Dirk van Goorl, whose house he had entered under circumstances which
shall be told of in their place.

Any one glancing at Martin casually would not have said that he was
a giant, and yet his height was considerable; to be accurate, when he
stood upright, something over six feet three inches. The reason why he
did not appear to be tall was that in truth his great bulk shortened him
to the eye, and also because his carried himself ill, more from a desire
to conceal his size than for any other reason. It was in girth of
chest and limb that Martin was really remarkable, so much so that a
short-armed man standing before him could not make his fingers touch
behind his back. His face was fair as a girl's, and almost as flat as a
full moon, for of nose he had little. Nature, indeed, had furnished him
with one of ordinary, if not excessive size, but certain incidents in
Martin's early career, which in our day would be designated as that of
a prize-fighter, had caused it to spread about his countenance in
an interesting and curious fashion. His eyebrows, however, remained
prominent. Beneath them appeared a pair of very large, round, and rather
mild blue eyes, covered with thick white lids absolutely devoid of
lashes, which eyes had a most unholy trick of occasionally taking fire
when their owner was irritated. Then they could burn and blaze like
lamps tied to a barge on a dark night, with an effect that was all the
more alarming because the rest of his countenance remained absolutely
impassive.

Suddenly while this little company went homewards a sound arose in the
quiet street as of people running. Instantly all three of them pressed
themselves into the doorway of a house and crouched down. Martin lifted
his ear and listened.

"Three people," he whispered; "a woman who flies and two men who
follow."

At that moment a casement was thrown open forty paces or so away, and a
hand, bearing a torch, thrust out of it. By its light they saw the
pale face of a lady speeding towards them, and after her two Spanish
soldiers.

"The Vrouw Andreas Jansen," whispered Martin again, "flying from two of
the guard who burned her husband."

The torch was withdrawn and the casement shut with a snap. In those
days quiet burghers could not afford to be mixed up in street troubles,
especially if soldiers had to do with them. Once more the place was
empty and quiet, except for the sound of running feet.

Opposite to the doorway the lady was overtaken. "Oh! let me go,"
she sobbed, "oh! let me go. Is it not enough that you have killed my
husband? Why must I be hunted from my house thus?"

"Because you are so pretty, my dear," answered one of the brutes, "also
you are rich. Catch hold of her, friend. Lord! how she kicks!"

Foy made a motion as though to start out of the doorway, but Martin
pressed him back with the flat of his hand, without apparent effort, and
yet so strongly that the young man could not move.

"My business, masters," he muttered; "you would make a noise," and they
heard his breath come thick.

Now, moving with curious stealthiness for one of so great a bulk, Martin
was out of the porch. By the summer starlight the watchers could see
that, before they had caught sight of, or even heard, him, he gripped
the two soldiers, small men, like most Spaniards, by the napes of their
necks, one in either hand, and was grinding their faces together. This,
indeed, was evident, for his great shoulders worked visibly and their
breastplates clicked as they touched. But the men themselves made no
sound at all. Then Martin seemed to catch them round the middle, and
behold! in another second the pair of them had gone headlong into the
canal, which ran down the centre of the street.

"My God! he has killed them," muttered Dirk.

"And a good job, too, father," said Foy, "only I wish that I had shared
in it."

Martin's great form loomed in the doorway. "The Vrouw Jansen has fled
away," he said, "and the street is quite quiet now, so I think that we
had better be moving before any see us, my masters."

Some days later the bodies of these Spanish soldiers were found with
their faces smashed flat. It was suggested in explanation of this
plight, that they had got drunk and while fighting together had fallen
from the bridge on to the stonework of a pier. This version of their end
found a ready acceptance, as it consorted well with the reputations of
the men. So there was no search or inquiry.

"I had to finish the dogs," Martin explained apologetically--"may the
Lord Jesus forgive me--because I was afraid that they might know me
again by my beard."

"Alas! alas!" groaned Dirk, "what times are these. Say nothing of this
dreadful matter to your mother, son, or to Adrian either." But Foy
nudged Martin in the ribs and muttered, "Well done, old fellow, well
done!"

After this experience, which the reader must remember was nothing
extraordinary in those dark and dreadful days when neither the lives of
men nor the safety of women--especially Protestant men and women--were
things of much account, the three of them reached home without further
incident, and quite unobserved. Arriving at the house, they entered it
near the Watergate by a back door that led into the stableyard. It was
opened by a woman whom they followed into a little room where a light
burned. Here she turned and kissed two of them, Dirk first and then Foy.

"Thank God that I see you safe," she said. "Whenever you go to the
Meeting-place I tremble until I hear your footsteps at the door."

"What's the use of that, mother?" said Foy. "Your fretting yourself
won't make things better or worse."

"Ah! dear, how can I help it?" she replied softly; "we cannot all be
young and cheerful, you know."

"True, wife, true," broke in Dirk, "though I wish we could; we should be
lighter-hearted so," and he looked at her and sighed.

Lysbeth van Goorl could no longer boast the beauty which was hers when
first we met her, but she was still a sweet and graceful woman, her
figure remaining almost as slim as it had been in girlhood. The grey
eyes also retained their depth and fire, only the face was worn, though
more by care and the burden of memories than with years. The lot of the
loving wife and mother was hard indeed when Philip the King ruled in
Spain and Alva was his prophet in the Netherlands.

"Is it done?" she asked.

"Yes, wife, our brethren are now saints in Paradise, therefore rejoice."

"It is very wrong," she answered with a sob, "but I cannot. Oh!" she
added with a sudden blaze of indignation, "if He is just and good, why
does God suffer His servants to be killed thus?"

"Perhaps our grandchildren will be able to answer that question,"
replied Dirk.

"That poor Vrouw Jansen," broke in Lysbeth, "just married, and so young
and pretty. I wonder what will become of her."

Dirk and Foy looked at each other, and Martin, who was hovering about
near the door, slunk back guiltily into the passage as though _he_ had
attempted to injure the Vrouw Jansen.

"To-morrow we will look to it, wife. And now let us eat, for we are
faint with hunger."

Ten minutes later they were seated at their meal. The reader may
remember the room; it was that wherein Montalvo, ex-count and captain,
made the speech which charmed all hearers on the night when he had lost
the race at the ice-carnival. The same chandelier hung above them, some
portion of the same plate, even, repurchased by Dirk, was on the table,
but how different were the company and the feast! Aunt Clara, the
fatuous, was long dead, and with her many of the companions of that
occasion, some naturally, some by the hand of the executioner, while
others had fled the land. Pieter van de Werff still lived, however, and
though regarded with suspicion by the authorities, was a man of weight
and honour in the town, but to-night he was not present there. The food,
too, if ample was plain, not on account of the poverty of the household,
for Dirk had prospered in his worldly affairs, being hard-working and
skilful, and the head of the brass foundry to which in those early days
he was apprenticed, but because in such times people thought little
of the refinements of eating. When life itself is so doubtful, its
pleasures and amusements become of small importance. The ample waiting
service of the maid Greta, who long ago had vanished none knew where,
and her fellow domestics was now carried on by the man, Martin, and
one old woman, since, as every menial might be a spy, even the richest
employed few of them. In short all the lighter and more cheerful parts
of life were in abeyance.

"Where is Adrian?" asked Dirk.

"I do not know," answered Lysbeth. "I thought that perhaps----"

"No," replied her husband hastily; "he did not accompany us; he rarely
does."

"Brother Adrian likes to look underneath the spoon before he licks it,"
said Foy with his mouth full.

The remark was enigmatic, but his parents seemed to understand what
Foy meant; at least it was followed by an uncomfortable and acquiescent
silence. Just then Adrian came in, and as we have not seen him since,
some four and twenty years ago, he made his entry into the world on the
secret island in the Haarlemer Meer, here it may be as well to describe
his appearance.

He was a handsome young man, but of quite a different stamp from his
half-brother, Foy, being tall, slight, and very graceful in figure;
advantages which he had inherited from his mother Lysbeth. In
countenance, however, he differed from her so much that none would have
guessed him to be her son. Indeed, Adrian's face was pure Spanish, there
was nothing of a Netherlander about his dark beauty. Spanish were the
eyes of velvet black, set rather close together, Spanish also the finely
chiselled features and the thin, spreading nostrils, Spanish the cold,
yet somewhat sensual mouth, more apt to sneer than smile; the straight,
black hair, the clear, olive skin, and that indifferent, half-wearied
mien which became its wearer well enough, but in a man of his years of
Northern blood would have seemed unnatural or affected.

He took his seat without speaking, nor did the others speak to him till
his stepfather Dirk said:

"You were not at the works to-day, Adrian, although we should have been
glad of your help in founding the culverin."

"No, father"--he called him father--answered the young man in a measured
and rather melodious voice. "You see we don't quite know who is going to
pay for that piece. Or at any rate I don't quite know, as nobody seems
to take me into confidence, and if it should chance to be the losing
side, well, it might be enough to hang me."

Dirk flushed up, but made no answer, only Foy remarked:

"That's right, Adrian, look after your own skin."

"Just now I find it more interesting," went on Adrian loftily and
disregardful of his brother, "to study those whom the cannon may shoot
than to make the cannon which is to shoot them."

"Hope you won't be one of them," interrupted Foy again.

"Where have you been this evening, son?" asked Lysbeth hastily, fearing
a quarrel.

"I have been mixing with the people, mother, at the scene on the
market-place yonder."

"Not the martyrdom of our good friend, Jansen, surely?"

"Yes, mother, why not? It is terrible, it is a crime, no doubt, but
the observer of life should study these things. There is nothing more
fascinating to the philosopher than the play of human passions. The
