
"Why, now you are angry, mother," said Margaret, detaining her; "this
comes of your coming out at eventide without eating your supper--I
never heard you utter a cross word after you had finished your little
morsel.--Here, Janet, a trencher and salt for Dame Ursula;--and what
have you in that porringer, dame?--Filthy clammy ale, as I would
live--Let Janet fling it out of the window, or keep it for my father's
morning draught; and she shall bring you the pottle of sack that was set
ready for him--good man, he will never find out the difference, for ale
will wash down his dusty calculations quite as well as wine."

"Truly, sweetheart, I am of your opinion," said Dame Ursula, whose
temporary displeasure vanished at once before these preparations for
good cheer; and so, settling herself on the great easy-chair, with
a three-legged table before her, she began to dispatch, with good
appetite, the little delicate dish which she had prepared for herself.
She did not, however, fail in the duties of civility, and earnestly, but
in vain, pressed Mistress Margaret to partake her dainties. The damsel
declined the invitation.

"At least pledge me in a glass of sack," said Dame Ursula; "I have heard
my grandame say, that before the gospellers came in, the old Catholic
father confessors and their penitents always had a cup of sack together
before confession; and you are my penitent."

"I shall drink no sack, I am sure," said Margaret; "and I told you
before, that if you cannot find out what ails me, I shall never have the
heart to tell it."

So saying, she turned away from Dame Ursula once more, and resumed her
musing posture, with her hand on her elbow, and her back, at least one
shoulder, turned towards her confidant.

"Nay, then," said Dame Ursula, "I must exert my skill in good
earnest.--You must give me this pretty hand, and I will tell you by
palmistry, as well as any gipsy of them all, what foot it is you halt
upon."

"As if I halted on any foot at all," said Margaret, something
scornfully, but yielding her left hand to Ursula, and continuing at the
same time her averted position.

"I see brave lines here," said Ursula, "and not ill to read
neither--pleasure and wealth, and merry nights and late mornings to my
Beauty, and such an equipage as shall shake Whitehall. O, have I touched
you there?--and smile you now, my pretty one?--for why should not he be
Lord Mayor, and go to Court in his gilded caroch, as others have done
before him?"

"Lord Mayor? pshaw!" replied Margaret.

"And why pshaw at my Lord Mayor, sweetheart? or perhaps you pshaw at my
prophecy; but there is a cross in every one's line of life as well as
in yours, darling. And what though I see a 'prentice's flat cap in this
pretty palm, yet there is a sparking black eye under it, hath not its
match in the Ward of Farringdon-Without."

"Whom do you mean, dame?" said Margaret coldly.

"Whom should I mean," said Dame Ursula, "but the prince of 'prentices,
and king of good company, Jenkin Vincent?"

"Out, woman--Jenkin Vincent?--a clown--a Cockney!" exclaimed the
indignant damsel.

"Ay, sets the wind in that quarter, Beauty!" quoth the dame; "why, it
has changed something since we spoke together last, for then I would
have sworn it blew fairer for poor Jin Vin; and the poor lad dotes on
you too, and would rather see your eyes than the first glimpse of the
sun on the great holiday on May-day."

"I would my eyes had the power of the sun to blind his, then," said
Margaret, "to teach the drudge his place."

"Nay," said Dame Ursula, "there be some who say that Frank Tunstall
is as proper a lad as Jin Vin, and of surety he is third cousin to
a knighthood, and come of a good house; and so mayhap you may be for
northward ho!"

"Maybe I may"--answered Margaret, "but not with my father's 'prentice--I
thank you, Dame Ursula."

"Nay, then, the devil may guess your thoughts for me," said Dame Ursula;
"this comes of trying to shoe a filly that is eternally wincing and
shifting ground!"

"Hear me, then," said Margaret, "and mind what I say.--This day I dined
abroad--"

"I can tell you where," answered her counsellor,--"with your godfather
the rich goldsmith--ay, you see I know something--nay, I could tell you,
as I would, with whom, too."

"Indeed!" said Margaret, turning suddenly round with an accent of strong
surprise, and colouring up to the eyes.

"With old Sir Mungo Malagrowther," said the oracular dame,--"he was
trimmed in my Benjamin's shop in his way to the city."

"Pshaw! the frightful old mouldy skeleton!" said the damsel.

"Indeed you say true, my dear," replied the confidant,--"it is a shame
to him to be out of Saint Pancras's charnel-house, for I know no
other place he is fit for, the foul-mouthed old railer. He said to my
husband--"

"Somewhat which signifies nothing to our purpose, I dare say,"
interrupted Margaret. "I must speak, then.--There dined with us a
nobleman--"

"A nobleman! the maiden's mad!" said Dame Ursula.

"There dined with us, I say," continued Margaret, without regarding the
interruption, "a nobleman--a Scottish nobleman."

"Now Our Lady keep her!" said the confidant, "she is quite
frantic!--heard ever any one of a watchmaker's daughter falling in love
with a nobleman--and a Scots nobleman, to make the matter complete,
who are all as proud as Lucifer, and as poor as Job?--A Scots nobleman,
quotha? I had lief you told me of a Jew pedlar. I would have you think
how all this is to end, pretty one, before you jump in the dark."

"That is nothing to you, Ursula--it is your assistance," said Mistress
Margaret, "and not your advice, that I am desirous to have, and you know
I can make it worth your while."

"O, it is not for the sake of lucre, Mistress Margaret," answered
the obliging dame; "but truly I would have you listen to some
advice--bethink you of your own condition."

"My father's calling is mechanical," said Margaret, "but our blood is
not so. I have heard my father say that we are descended, at a distance
indeed, from the great Earls of Dalwolsey." [Footnote: The head of the
ancient and distinguished house of Ramsay, and to whom, as their chief,
the individuals of that name look as their origin and source of gentry.
Allan Ramsay, the pastoral poet, in the same manner, makes

    "Dalhousie of an auld descent,
     My chief, my stoup, my ornament."]

"Ay, ay," said Dame Ursula; "even so--I never knew a Scot of you but was
descended, as ye call it, from some great house or other; and a piteous
descent it often is--and as for the distance you speak of, it is so
great as to put you out of sight of each other. Yet do not toss your
pretty head so scornfully, but tell me the name of this lordly northern
gallant, and we will try what can be done in the matter."

"It is Lord Glenvarloch, whom they call Lord Nigel Olifaunt," said
Margaret in a low voice, and turning away to hide her blushes.

"Marry, Heaven forefend!" exclaimed Dame Suddlechop; "this is the very
devil, and something worse!"

"How mean you?" said the damsel, surprised at the vivacity of her
exclamation.

"Why, know ye not," said the dame, "what powerful enemies he has at
Court? know ye not--But blisters on my tongue, it runs too fast for my
wit--enough to say, that you had better make your bridal-bed under a
falling house, than think of young Glenvarloch."

"He IS unfortunate then?" said Margaret; "I knew it--I divined it--there
was sorrow in his voice when he said even what was gay--there was a
touch of misfortune in his melancholy smile--he had not thus clung to my
thoughts had I seen him in all the mid-day glare of prosperity."

"Romances have cracked her brain!" said Dame Ursula; "she is a castaway
girl--utterly distraught--loves a Scots lord--and likes him the better
for being unfortunate! Well, mistress, I am sorry this is a matter I
cannot aid you in--it goes against my conscience, and it is an affair
above my condition, and beyond my management;--but I will keep your
counsel."

"You will not be so base as to desert me, after having drawn my secret
from me?" said Margaret, indignantly; "if you do, I know how to have my
revenge; and if you do not, I will reward you well. Remember the house
your husband dwells in is my father's property."

"I remember it but too well, Mistress Margaret," said Ursula, after
a moment's reflection, "and I would serve you in any thing in my
condition; but to meddle with such high matters--I shall never forget
poor Mistress Turner, my honoured patroness, peace be with her!--she had
the ill-luck to meddle in the matter of Somerset and Overbury, and so
the great earl and his lady slipt their necks out of the collar, and
left her and some half-dozen others to suffer in their stead. I shall
never forget the sight of her standing on the scaffold with the ruff
round her pretty neck, all done up with the yellow starch which I had so
often helped her to make, and that was so soon to give place to a rough
hempen cord. Such a sight, sweetheart, will make one loath to meddle
with matters that are too hot or heavy for their handling."

"Out, you fool!" answered Mistress Margaret; "am I one to speak to you
about such criminal practices as that wretch died for? All I desire of
you is, to get me precise knowledge of what affair brings this young
nobleman to Court."

"And when you have his secret," said Ursula, "what will it avail you,
sweetheart?--and yet I would do your errand, if you could do as much for
me."

"And what is it you would have of me?" said Mistress Margaret.

"What you have been angry with me for asking before," answered Dame
Ursula. "I want to have some light about the story of your godfather's
ghost, that is only seen at prayers."

"Not for the world," said Mistress Margaret, "will I be a spy on my kind
godfather's secrets--No, Ursula--that I will never pry into, which he
desires to keep hidden. But thou knowest that I have a fortune, of my
own, which must at no distant day come under my own management--think of
some other recompense."

"Ay, that I well know," said the counsellor--"it is that two hundred
per year, with your father's indulgence, that makes you so wilful,
sweetheart."

"It may be so,"--said Margaret Ramsay; "meanwhile, do you serve me
truly, and here is a ring of value in pledge, that when my fortune is in
my own hand, I will redeem the token with fifty broad pieces of gold."

"Fifty broad pieces of gold!" repeated the dame; "and this ring,
which is a right fair one, in token you fail not of your word!--Well,
sweetheart, if I must put my throat in peril, I am sure I cannot risk it
for a friend more generous than you; and I would not think of more than
the pleasure of serving you, only Benjamin gets more idle every day, and
our family----"

"Say no more of it," said Margaret; "we understand each other. And now,
tell me what you know of this young man's affairs, which made you so
unwilling to meddle with them?"

"Of that I can say no great matter as yet," answered Dame Ursula; "only
I know, the most powerful among his own countrymen are against him, and
also the most powerful at the Court here. But I will learn more of it;
for it will be a dim print that I will not read for your sake, pretty
Mistress Margaret. Know you where this gallant dwells?"

"I heard by accident," said Margaret, as if ashamed of the minute
particularity of her memory upon such an occasion,--"he lodges,
I think--at one Christie's--if I mistake not--at Paul's Wharf--a
ship-chandler's."

"A proper lodging for a young baron!--Well, but cheer you up, Mistress
Margaret--If he has come up a caterpillar, like some of his countrymen,
he may cast his slough like them, and come out a butterfly.--So I drink
good-night, and sweet dreams to you, in another parting cup of sack;
and you shall hear tidings of me within four-and-twenty hours. And, once
more, I commend you to your pillow, my pearl of pearls, and Marguerite
of Marguerites!"

So saying, she kissed the reluctant cheek of her young friend, or
patroness, and took her departure with the light and stealthy pace of
one accustomed to accommodate her footsteps to the purposes of dispatch
and secrecy.

Margaret Ramsay looked after her for some time, in anxious silence. "I
did ill," she at length murmured, "to let her wring this out of me; but
she is artful, bold and serviceable--and I think faithful--or, if not,
she will be true at least to her interest, and that I can command. I
would I had not spoken, however--I have begun a hopeless work. For what
has he said to me, to warrant my meddling in his fortunes?--Nothing but
words of the most ordinary import--mere table-talk, and terms of course.
Yet who knows"--she said, and then broke off, looking at the glass the
while, which, as it reflected back a face of great beauty, probably
suggested to her mind a more favourable conclusion of the sentence than
she cared to trust her tongue withal.




CHAPTER IX


  So pitiful a thing is suitor's state!
  Most miserable man, whom wicked fate
  Hath brought to Court to sue, for _had I wist_,
  That few have found, and many a one hath miss'd!
  Full little knowest thou, that hast not tried,
  What hell it is, in sueing long to bide:
  To lose good days that might be better spent;
  To waste long nights in pensive discontent;
  To speed to-day, to be put back to-morrow;
  To feed on hope, to pine with fear and sorrow;
  To have thy Prince's grace, yet want her Peers';
  To have thy asking, yet wait many years;
  To fret thy soul with crosses and with cares--
  To eat thy heart through comfortless despairs.
  To fawn, to crouch, to wait, to ride, to run,
  To spend, to give, to want, to be undone.
                          _Mother Hubbard's Tale._

On the morning of the day on which George Heriot had prepared to escort
the young Lord of Glenvarloch to the Court at Whitehall, it may be
reasonably supposed, that the young man, whose fortunes were likely to
depend on this cast, felt himself more than usually anxious. He rose
early, made his toilette with uncommon care, and, being enabled, by the
generosity of his more plebeian countryman, to set out a very handsome
person to the best advantage, he obtained a momentary approbation from
himself as he glanced at the mirror, and a loud and distinct plaudit
from his landlady, who declared at once, that, in her judgment, he would
take the wind out of the sail of every gallant in the presence--so much
had she been able to enrich her discourse with the metaphors of those
with whom her husband dealt.

At the appointed hour, the barge of Master George Heriot arrived,
handsomely manned and appointed, having a tilt, with his own cipher, and
the arms of his company, painted thereupon.

The young Lord of Glenvarloch received the friend, who had evinced such
disinterested attachment, with the kind courtesy which well became him.

Master Heriot then made him acquainted with the bounty of his sovereign;
which he paid over to his young friend, declining what he had himself
formerly advanced to him. Nigel felt all the gratitude which the
citizen's disinterested friendship had deserved, and was not wanting in
expressing it suitably.

Yet, as the young and high-born nobleman embarked to go to the
presence of his prince, under the patronage of one whose best, or most
distinguished qualification, was his being an eminent member of the
Goldsmiths' Incorporation, he felt a little surprised, if not abashed,
at his own situation; and Richie Moniplies, as he stepped over
the gangway to take his place forward in the boat, could not help
muttering,--"It was a changed day betwixt Master Heriot and his honest
father in the Kraemes;--but, doubtless, there was a difference between
clinking on gold and silver, and clattering upon pewter."

On they glided, by the assistance of the oars of four stout watermen,
along the Thames, which then served for the principal high-road betwixt
London and Westminster; for few ventured on horseback through the narrow
and crowded streets of the city, and coaches were then a luxury reserved
only for the higher nobility, and to which no citizen, whatever was his
wealth, presumed to aspire. The beauty of the banks, especially on the
northern side, where the gardens of the nobility descended from their
hotels, in many places, down to the water's edge, was pointed out to
Nigel by his kind conductor, and was pointed out in vain. The mind of
the young Lord of Glenvarloch was filled with anticipations, not the
most pleasant, concerning the manner in which he was likely to be
received by that monarch, in whose behalf his family had been nearly
reduced to ruin; and he was, with the usual mental anxiety of those
in such a situation, framing imaginary questions from the king, and
over-toiling his spirit in devising answers to them.

His conductor saw the labour of Nigel's mind, and avoided increasing it
by farther conversation; so that, when he had explained to him briefly
the ceremonies observed at Court on such occasions of presentation, the
rest of their voyage was performed in silence.

They landed at Whitehall Stairs, and entered the Palace after announcing
their names,--the guards paying to Lord Glenvarloch the respect and
honours due to his rank.

The young man's heart beat high and thick within him as he came into the
royal apartments. His education abroad, conducted, as it had been, on
a narrow and limited scale, had given him but imperfect ideas of the
grandeur of a Court; and the philosophical reflections which taught him
to set ceremonial and exterior splendour at defiance, proved, like other
maxims of mere philosophy, ineffectual, at the moment they were weighed
against the impression naturally made on the mind of an inexperienced
youth, by the unusual magnificence of the scene. The splendid apartments
through which they passed, the rich apparel of the grooms, guards, and
 apartments, had something in it, trifling and commonplace as it might
appear to practised courtiers, embarrassing, and even alarming, to one,
who went through these forms for the first time, and who was doubtful
what sort of reception was to accompany his first appearance before his
sovereign.

Heriot, in anxious attention to save his young friend from any momentary
awkwardness, had taken care to give the necessary password to the
warders, grooms of the chambers, ushers, or by whatever name they were
designated; so they passed on without interruption.

In this manner they passed several ante-rooms, filled chiefly with
guards, attendants of the Court, and their acquaintances, male and
female, who, dressed in their best apparel, and with eyes rounded by
eager curiosity to make the most of their opportunity, stood, with
beseeming modesty, ranked against the wall, in a manner which indicated
that they were spectators, not performers, in the courtly exhibition.

Through these exterior apartments Lord Glenvarloch and his city friend
advanced into a large and splendid withdrawing-room, communicating with
the presence-chamber, into which ante-room were admitted those only who,
from birth, their posts in the state or household, or by the particular
grant of the kings, had right to attend the Court, as men entitled to
pay their respects to their sovereign.

Amid this favoured and selected company, Nigel observed Sir Mungo
Malagrowther, who, avoided and discountenanced by those who knew how
low he stood in Court interest and favour, was but too happy in the
opportunity of hooking himself upon a person of Lord Glenvarloch's rank,
who was, as yet, so inexperienced as to feel it difficult to shake off
an intruder.

The knight forthwith framed his grim features to a ghastly smile, and,
after a preliminary and patronising nod to George Heriot, accompanied
with an aristocratic wave of the hand, which intimated at once
superiority and protection, he laid aside altogether the honest citizen,
to whom he owed many a dinner, to attach himself exclusively to the
young lord, although he suspected he might be occasionally in the
predicament of needing one as much as himself. And even the notice
of this original, singular and unamiable as he was, was not entirely
indifferent to Lord Glenvarloch, since the absolute and somewhat
constrained silence of his good friend Heriot, which left him at liberty
to retire painfully to his own agitating reflections, was now relieved;
while, on the other hand, he could not help feeling interest in the
sharp and sarcastic information poured upon him by an observant, though
discontented courtier, to whom a patient auditor, and he a man of
title and rank, was as much a prize, as his acute and communicative
disposition rendered him an entertaining companion to Nigel Olifaunt.
Heriot, in the meantime, neglected by Sir Mungo, and avoiding every
attempt by which the grateful politeness of Lord Glenvarloch strove to
bring him into the conversation, stood by, with a kind of half smile on
his countenance; but whether excited by Sir Mungo's wit, or arising at
his expense, did not exactly appear.

In the meantime, the trio occupied a nook of the ante-room, next to
the door of the presence-chamber, which was not yet thrown open, when
Maxwell, with his rod of office, came bustling into the apartment, where
most men, excepting those of high rank, made way for him. He stopped
beside the party in which we are interested, looked for a moment at
the young Scots nobleman, then made a slight obeisance to Heriot, and
lastly, addressing Sir Mungo Malagrowther, began a hurried complaint
to him of the misbehaviour of the gentlemen-pensioners and warders, who
suffered all sort of citizens, suitors, and scriveners, to sneak into
the outer apartments, without either respect or decency.--"The English,"
he said, "were scandalised, for such a thing durst not be attempted in
the queen's days. In her time, there was then the court-yard for the
mobility, and the apartments for the nobility; and it reflects on your
place, Sir Mungo," he added, "belonging to the household as you do, that
such things should not be better ordered."

Here Sir Mungo, afflicted, as was frequently the case on such occasions,
with one of his usual fits of deafness, answered, "It was no wonder
the mobility used freedoms, when those whom they saw in office were so
little better in blood and havings than themselves."

"You are right, sir--quite right," said Maxwell, putting his hand on the
tarnished embroidery on the old knight's sleeve,--"when such fellows see
men in office dressed in cast-off suits, like paltry stage-players, it
is no wonder the Court is thronged with intruders."

"Were you lauding the taste of my embroidery, Maister Maxwell?" answered
the knight, who apparently interpreted the deputy-chamberlain's meaning
rather from his action than his words;--"it is of an ancient and liberal
pattern, having been made by your mother's father, auld James Stitchell,
a master-fashioner of honest repute, in Merlin's Wynd, whom I made
a point to employ, as I am now happy to remember, seeing your father
thought fit to intermarry with sic a person's daughter."

Maxwell looked stern; but, conscious there was nothing to be got of Sir
Mungo in the way of amends, and that prosecuting the quarrel with
such an adversary would only render him ridiculous, and make public
a mis-alliance of which he had no reason to be proud, he covered his
resentment with a sneer; and, expressing his regret that Sir Mungo was
become too deaf to understand or attend to what was said to him,
walked on, and planted himself beside the folding-doors of
the presence-chamber, at which he was to perform the duty of
deputy-chamberlain, or usher, so soon as they should be opened.

"The door of the presence is about to open," said the goldsmith, in a
whisper, to his young friend; "my condition permits me to go no farther
with you. Fail not to present yourself boldly, according to your birth,
and offer your Supplication; which the king will not refuse to accept,
and, as I hope, to consider favourably."

As he spoke, the door of the presence-chamber opened accordingly, and,
as is usual on such occasions, the courtiers began to advance towards
it, and to enter in a slow, but continuous and uninterrupted stream.

As Nigel presented himself in his turn at the entrance, and mentioned
his name and title, Maxwell seemed to hesitate. "You are not known
to any one," he said. "It is my duty to suffer no one to pass to the
presence, my lord, whose face is unknown to me, unless upon the word of
a responsible person."

"I came with Master George Heriot," said Nigel, in some embarrassment at
this unexpected interruption.

"Master Heriot's name will pass current for much gold and silver, my
lord," replied Maxwell, with a civil sneer, "but not for birth and
rank. I am compelled by my office to be peremptory.--The entrance is
impeded--I am much concerned to say it--your lordship must stand back."

"What is the matter?" said an old Scottish nobleman, who had been
speaking with George Heriot, after he had separated from Nigel, and
who now came forward, observing the altercation betwixt the latter and
Maxwell.

"It is only Master Deputy-Chamberlain Maxwell," said Sir Mungo
Malagrowther, "expressing his joy to see Lord Glenvarloch at Court,
whose father gave him his office--at least I think he is speaking to
that purport--for your lordship kens my imperfection." A subdued laugh,
such as the situation permitted, passed round amongst those who heard
this specimen of Sir Mungo's sarcastic temper. But the old nobleman
stepped still more forward, saying,--"What!--the son of my gallant
old opponent, Ochtred Olifaunt--I will introduce him to the presence
myself."

So saying, he took Nigel by the arm, without farther ceremony, and was
about to lead him forward, when Maxwell, still keeping his rod across
the door, said, but with hesitation and embarrassment--"My lord, this
gentleman is not known, and I have orders to be scrupulous."

"Tutti--taiti, man," said the old lord, "I will be answerable he is his
father's son, from the cut of his eyebrow--and thou, Maxwell, knewest
his father well enough to have spared thy scruples. Let us pass, man."
So saying, he put aside the deputy-chamberlain's rod, and entered the
presence-room, still holding the young nobleman by the arm.

"Why, I must know you, man," he said; "I must know you. I knew your
father well, man, and I have broke a lance and crossed a blade with him;
and it is to my credit that I am living to brag of it. He was king's-man
and I was queen's-man during the Douglas wars--young fellows both,
that feared neither fire nor steel; and we had some old feudal quarrels
besides, that had come down from father to son, with our seal-rings,
two-harided broad-swords, and plate-coats, and the crests on our
burgonets."

"Too loud, my Lord of Huntinglen," whispered a gentleman of the
chamber,--"The King!--the King!"

The old earl (for such he proved) took the hint, and was silent;
and James, advancing from a side-door, received in succession the
compliments of strangers, while a little group of favourite courtiers,
or officers of the household, stood around him, to whom he addressed
himself from time to time. Some more pains had been bestowed on his
toilette than upon the occasion when we first presented the monarch to
our readers; but there was a natural awkwardness about his figure which
prevented his clothes from sitting handsomely, and the prudence or
timidity of his disposition had made him adopt the custom already
noticed, of wearing a dress so thickly quilted as might withstand the
stroke of a dagger, which added an ungainly stiffness to his whole
appearance, contrasting oddly with the frivolous, ungraceful, and
fidgeting motions with which he accompanied his conversation. And yet,
though the king's deportment was very undignified, he had a manner so
kind, familiar, and good-humoured, was so little apt to veil over or
conceal his own foibles, and had so much indulgence and sympathy for
those of others, that his address, joined to his learning, and a
certain proportion of shrewd mother-wit, failed not to make a favourable
impression on those who approached his person.

When the Earl of Huntinglen had presented Nigel to his sovereign, a
ceremony which the good peer took upon himself, the king received the
young lord very graciously, and observed to his introducer, that he
"was fain to see them twa stand side by side; for I trow, my Lord
Huntinglen," continued he, "your ancestors, ay, and e'en your lordship's
self and this lad's father, have stood front to front at the sword's
point, and that is a worse posture."

"Until your Majesty," said Lord Huntinglen, "made Lord Ochtred and me
cross palms, upon the memorable day when your Majesty feasted all the
nobles that were at feud together, and made them join hands in your
presence--"

"I mind it weel," said the king; "I mind it weel--it was a blessed day,
being the nineteen of September, of all days in the year--and it was a
blithe sport to see how some of the carles girned as they clapped loofs
together. By my saul, I thought some of them, mair special the Hieland
chiels, wad have broken out in our own presence; but we caused them to
march hand in hand to the Cross, ourselves leading the way, and there
drink a blithe cup of kindness with ilk other, to the stanching of feud,
and perpetuation of amity. Auld John Anderson was Provost that year--the
carle grat for joy, and the bailies and councillors danced bare-headed
in our presence like five-year-auld colts, for very triumph."

"It was indeed a happy day," said Lord Huntinglen, "and will not be
forgotten in the history of your Majesty's reign."

"I would not that it were, my lord," replied the monarch--"I would not
that it were pretermitted in our annals. Ay, ay--BEATI PACIFICI. My
English lieges here may weel make much of me, for I would have them
to know, they have gotten the only peaceable man that ever came of my
family. If James with the Fiery Face had come amongst you," he said,
looking round him, "or my great grandsire, of Flodden memory!"

"We should have sent him back to the north again," whispered one English
nobleman.

"At least," said another, in the same inaudible tone, "we should have
had a MAN to our sovereign, though he were but a Scotsman."

"And now, my young springald," said the king to Lord Glenvarloch, "where
have you been spending your calf-time?"

"At Leyden, of late, may it please your Majesty," answered Lord Nigel.

"Aha! a scholar," said the king; "and, by my saul, a modest and
ingenuous youth, that hath not forgotten how to blush, like most of our
travelled Monsieurs. We will treat him conformably."

Then drawing himself up, coughing slightly, and looking around him with
the conscious importance of superior learning, while all the courtiers
who understood, or understood not, Latin, pressed eagerly forward to
listen, the sapient monarch prosecuted his inquiries as follows:--

"Hem! hem! _salve bis, quaterque salve, glenvarlochides noster!
Nuperumne ab lugduno batavorum britanniam rediisti?_"

The young nobleman replied, bowing low--

"_Imo, rex augustissime--biennium fere apud lugdunenses Moratus sum._"

James proceeded--

"_Biennium dicis? Bene, bene, optume factum est--non uno Die, quod
dicunt,--intelligisti, domine glenvarlochiensis?_ Aha!"

Nigel replied by a reverent bow, and the king, turning to those behind
him, said--

"_Adolescens quidem ingenui vultus ingenuique pudoris._" Then resumed
his learned queries. "_Et quid hodie lugdunenses loquuntur--vossius
vester nihilne novi scripsit?--nihil certe, quod doleo, typis recenter
editit_."

"_Valet quidem vossius, rex benevole._" replied Nigel, "_ast senex
veneratissimus annum agit, ni fallor, septuagesimum._"

"_Virum, mehercle, vix tam grandaevum crediderim_," replied the
monarch. "_et vorstius iste?--arminii improbi successor aeque ac
sectator--herosne adhuc, ut cum homero loquar_, [ZOOS ESTI KAI EPI THONI
DERKOV]?" text in Greek

Nigel, by good fortune, remembered that Vorstius, the divine last
mentioned in his Majesty's queries about the state of Dutch literature,
had been engaged in a personal controversy with James, in which the
king had taken so deep an interest, as at length to hint in his public
correspondence with the United States, that they would do well to apply
the secular arm to stop the progress of heresy by violent measures
against the Professor's person--a demand which their Mighty
Mightinesses' principles of universal toleration induced them to elude,
though with some difficulty. Knowing all this, Lord Glenvarloch, though
a courtier of only five minutes' standing, had address enough to reply--

"_Vivum quidem, haud diu est, hominem videbam--vigere autem quis dicat
qui sub fulminibus eloquentiae tuae, rex magne, jamdudum pronus jacet,
et prostratus?_"

[Footnote: Lest any lady or gentleman should suspect there is aught of
mystery concealed under the sentences printed in Italics, they will be
pleased to understand that they contain only a few commonplace Latin
phrases, relating to the state of letters in Holland, which neither
deserve, nor would endure, a literal translation.]

This last tribute to his polemical powers completed James's happiness,
which the triumph of exhibiting his erudition had already raised to a
considerable height.

He rubbed his hands, snapped his fingers, fidgeted, chuckled,
exclaimed--"_Euge! Belle! Optime!_" and turning to the Bishops of Exeter
and Oxford, who stood behind him, he said.--"Ye see, my lords, no bad
specimen of our Scottish Latinity, with which language we would all our
subjects of England were as well embued as this, and other youths of
honourable birth, in our auld kingdom; also, we keep the genuine and
Roman pronunciation, like other learned nations on the continent, sae
that we hold communing with any scholar in the universe, who can but
speak the Latin tongue; whereas ye, our learned subjects of England,
have introduced into your universities, otherwise most learned, a
fashion of pronouncing like unto the 'nippit foot and clippit foot' of
the bride in the fairy tale, whilk manner of speech, (take it not amiss
that I be round with you) can be understood by no nation on earth saving
yourselves; whereby Latin, _quoad anglos_, ceaseth to be _communis
lingua_, the general dragoman, or interpreter, between all the wise men
of the earth."

The Bishop of Exeter bowed, as in acquiescence to the royal censure;
but he of Oxford stood upright, as mindful over what subjects his see
extended, and as being equally willing to become food for fagots in
defence of the Latinity of the university, as for any article of his
religious creed.

The king, without awaiting an answer from either prelate, proceeded to
question Lord Nigel, but in the vernacular tongue,--"Weel, my likely
Alumnus of the Muses, and what make you so far from the north?"

"To pay my homage to your Majesty," said the young nobleman, kneeling on
one knee, "and to lay before you," he added, "this my humble and dutiful
Supplication."

The presenting of a pistol would certainly have startled King James
more, but could (setting apart the fright) hardly have been more
unpleasing to his indolent disposition.

"And is it even so, man?" said he; "and can no single man, were it but
for the rarity of the case, ever come up frae Scotland, excepting EX
PROPOSITO--on set purpose, to see what he can make out of his loving
sovereign? It is but three days syne that we had weel nigh lost our
life, and put three kingdoms into dule-weeds, from the over haste of a
clumsy-handed peasant, to thrust a packet into our hand, and now we are
beset by the like impediment in our very Court. To our Secretary with
that gear, my lord--to our Secretary with that gear."

"I have already offered my humble Supplication to your Majesty's
Secretary of State," said Lord Glenvarloch--"but it seems----"

"That he would not receive it, I warrant?" said the king, interrupting
him; "bu my saul, our Secretary kens that point of king-craft, called
refusing, better than we do, and will look at nothing but what he
likes himsell--I think I wad make a better Secretary to him than he to
me.--Weel, my lord, you are welcome to London; and, as ye seem an acute
and learned youth, I advise ye to turn your neb northward as soon as ye
like, and settle yoursell for a while at Saint Andrews, and we will be
right glad to hear that you prosper in your studies.--_Incumbite Remis
Fortiter._"

While the king spoke thus, he held the petition of the young lord
carelessly, like one who only delayed till the supplicant's back was
turned, to throw it away, or at least lay it aside to be no more looked
at. The petitioner, who read this in his cold and indifferent looks, and
in the manner in which he twisted and crumpled together the paper,
arose with a bitter sense of anger and disappointment, made a profound
obeisance, and was about to retire hastily. But Lord Huntinglen, who
stood by him, checked his intention by an almost imperceptible touch
upon the skirt of his cloak, and Nigel, taking the hint, retreated
only a few steps from the royal presence, and then made a pause. In
