obstacle there."

"Both you and I know the contrary, Mr. Middlemas," said Hartley, very
seriously.

"I know?--How should I know any thing more than yourself about the state
of Miss Gray's inclinations?" said Middlemas. "I am sure we have had
equal access to know them."

"Perhaps so; but some know better how to avail themselves of
opportunities. Mr. Middlemas, I have long suspected that you have
had the inestimable advantages of possessing Miss Gray's affections,
and"----

"I?" interrupted Middlemas; "you are jesting, or you are jealous. You
do yourself less, and me more, than justice; but the compliment is so
great, that I am obliged to you for the mistake."

"That you may know," answered Hartley, "I do not speak either by guess,
or from what you call jealousy, I tell you frankly, that Menie Gray
herself told me the state of her affections. I naturally communicated to
her the discourse I had with her father. I told her I was but too well
convinced that at the present moment I did not possess that interest in
her heart, which alone might entitle me to request her acquiescence in
the views which her father's goodness held out to me; but I entreated
her not at once to decide against me, but give me an opportunity to make
way in her affections, if possible, trusting that time, and the services
which I should render to her father, might have an ultimate effect in my
favour."

"A most natural and modest request. But what did the young lady say in
reply?"

"She is a noble-hearted girl, Richard Middlemas; and for her frankness
alone, even without her beauty and her good sense, deserves an emperor.
I cannot express the graceful modesty with which she told me, that
she knew too well the kindliness, as she was pleased to call it, of my
heart, to expose me to the protracted pain of an unrequited passion.
She candidly informed me that she had been long engaged to you in
secret--that you had exchanged portraits;--and though without her
father's consent she would never become yours, yet she felt it
impossible that she should ever so far change her sentiments as to
afford the most distant prospect of success to another."

"Upon my word," said Middlemas, "she has been extremely candid indeed,
and I am very much obliged to her!"

"And upon _my_ honest word, Mr. Middlemas," returned Hartley, "you do
Miss Gray the greatest injustice--nay, you are ungrateful to her, if you
are displeased at her making this declaration. She loves you as a woman
loves the first object of her affection--she loves you better"--He
stopped, and Middlemas completed the sentence.

"Better than I deserve, perhaps?--Faith, it may well be so, and I love
her dearly in return. But after all, you know, the secret was mine as
well as hers, and it would have been better that she had consulted me
before making it public."

"Mr. Middlemas," said Hartley, earnestly, "if the least of this feeling,
on your part, arises from the apprehension that your secret is less safe
because it is in my keeping, I can assure you that such is my grateful
sense of Miss Gray's goodness, in communicating, to save me pain, an
affair of such delicacy to herself and you, that wild horses should tear
me limb from limb before they forced a word of it from my lips."

"Nay, nay, my dear friend," said Middlemas, with a frankness of manner
indicating a cordiality that had not existed between them for some time,
"you must allow me to be a little jealous in my turn. Your true lover
cannot have a title to the name, unless he be sometimes unreasonable;
and somehow, it seems odd she should have chosen for a confidant one
whom I have often thought a formidable rival; and yet I am so far from
being displeased, that I do not know that the dear sensible girl
could after all have made a better choice. It is time that the foolish
coldness between us should be ended, as you must be sensible that its
real cause lay in our rivalry. I have much need of good advice, and
who can give it to me better than the old companion, whose soundness of
judgment I have always envied, even when some injudicious friends have
given me credit for quicker parts?"

Hartley accepted Richard's proffered hand, but without any of the
buoyancy of spirit with which it was offered.

"I do not intend," he said, "to remain many days in this place, perhaps
not very many hours. But if, in the meanwhile, I can benefit you, by
advice or otherwise, you may fully command me. It is the only mode in
which I can be of service to Menie Gray."

"Love my mistress, love me; a happy _pendant_ to the old proverb, Love
me, love my dog. Well, then, for Menie Gray's sake, if not for Dick
Middlemas's, (plague on that vulgar tell-tale name,) will you, that are
a stander-by, tell us, who are the unlucky players, what you think of
this game of ours?"

"How can you ask such a question, when the field lies so fair before
you? I am sure that Dr. Gray would retain you as his assistant upon the
same terms which he proposed to me. You are the better match, in all
worldly respects, for his daughter, having some capital to begin the
world with."

"All true--but methinks Mr. Gray has showed no great predilection for me
in this matter."

"If he has done injustice to your indisputable merit," said Hartley,
dryly, "the preference of his daughter has more than atoned for it."

"Unquestionably; and dearly, therefore, do I love her; otherwise, Adam,
I am not a person to grasp at the leavings of other people."

"Richard," replied Hartley, "that pride of yours, if you do not check
it, will render you both ungrateful and miserable. Mr. Gray's ideas are
most friendly. He told me plainly that his choice of me as an assistant,
and as a member of his family, had been a long time balanced by his
early affection for you, until he thought he had remarked in you a
decisive discontent with such limited prospects as his offer contained,
and a desire to go abroad into the world, and push, as it is called,
your fortune. He said, that although it was very probable that you might
love his daughter well enough to relinquish these ambitious ideas for
her sake, yet the demons of Ambition and Avarice would return after
the exorciser Love had exhausted the force of his spells, and then
he thought he would have just reason to be anxious for his daughter's
happiness."

"By my faith, the worthy senior speaks scholarly and wisely," answered
Richard--"I did not think he had been so clear-sighted. To say
the truth, but for the beautiful Menie Gray, I should feel like a
mill-horse, walking my daily round in this dull country, while other gay
rovers are trying how the world will receive them. For instance, where
do you yourself go?"

"A cousin of my mother's commands a ship in the Company's service. I
intend to go with him as surgeon's mate. If I like the sea service, I
will continue in it; if not, I will enter some other line." This Hartley
said with a sigh.

"To India!" answered Richard; "Happy dog--to India! You may well bear
with equanimity all disappointments sustained on this side of the globe.
Oh, Delhi! oh, Golconda! have your names no power to conjure down idle
recollections?--India, where gold is won by steel; where a brave man
cannot pitch his desire for fame and wealth so high, but that he may
realize it, if he have fortune to his friend? Is it possible that the
bold adventurer can fix his thoughts on you, and still be dejected at
the thoughts that a bonny blue-eyed lass looked favourably on a less
lucky fellow than himself? Can this be?"

"Less lucky?" said Hartley. "Can you, the accepted lover of Menie Gray,
speak in that tone, even though it be in jest!"

"Nay, Adam," said Richard, "don't be angry with me, because, being
thus far successful, I rate my good fortune not quite so rapturously as
perhaps you do, who have missed the luck of it. Your philosophy should
tell you, that the object which we attain, or are sure of attaining,
loses, perhaps, even by that very certainty, a little of the extravagant
and ideal value, which attached to it while the object of feverish
hopes and aguish fears. But for all that, I cannot live without my sweet
Menie. I would wed her to-morrow, with all my soul, without thinking a
minute on the clog which so early a marriage would fasten on our heels.
But to spend two additional years in this infernal wilderness, cruising
after crowns and half-crowns, when worse men are making lacs and crores
of rupees--It is a sad falling off, Adam. Counsel me, my friend,--can
you not suggest some mode of getting off from these two years of
destined dulness?"

"Not I," replied Hartley, scarce repressing his displeasure; "and if
I could induce Dr. Gray to dispense with so reasonable a condition, I
should be very sorry to do so. You are but twenty-one, and if such a
period of probation was, in the Doctor's prudence, judged necessary for
me, who am full two years older, I have no idea that he will dispense
with it in yours."

"Perhaps not," replied Middlemas; "but do you not think that these two,
or call them three, years of probation, had better be spent in India,
where much may be done in a little while, than here, where nothing can
be done save just enough to get salt to our broth, or broth to our salt?
Methinks I have a natural turn for India, and so I ought. My father was
a soldier, by the conjecture of all who saw him, and gave me a love
of the sword, and an arm to use one. My mother's father was a rich
trafficker, who loved wealth, I warrant me, and knew how to get it.
This petty two hundred a-year, with its miserable and precarious
possibilities, to be shared with the old gentleman, sounds in the ears
of one like me, who have the world for the winning, and a sword to cut
my way through it, like something little better than a decent kind of
beggary. Menie is in herself a gem--a diamond--I admit it. But then, one
would not set such a precious jewel in lead or popper, but in pure
gold; ay, and add a circlet of brilliants to set it off with. Be a good
fellow, Adam, and undertake the setting my project in proper colours
before the Doctor. I am sure, the wisest thing for him and Menie both,
is to permit me to spend this short time of probation in the land of
cowries. I am sure my heart will be there at any rate, and while I am
bleeding some bumpkin for an inflammation, I shall be in fancy relieving
some nabob, or rajahpoot, of his plethora of wealth. Come--will you
assist, will you be auxiliary? Ten chances but you plead your own cause,
man, for I may be brought up by a sabre, or a bow-string, before I make
my pack up; then your road to Menie will be free and open, and, as you
will be possessed of the situation of comforter _ex officio_, you may
take her 'with the tear in her ee,' as old saws advise."

"Mr. Richard Middlemas," said Hartley, "I wish it were possible for me
to tell you, in the few words which I intend to bestow on you, whether
I pity you or despise you, the most. Heaven has placed happiness,
competence, and content within your power, and you are willing to cast
them away, to gratify ambition and avarice. Were I to give any advice on
this subject either to Dr. Gray or his daughter, it would be to break of
all connexion with a man, who, however clever by nature, may soon
show himself a fool, and however honestly brought up, may also, upon
temptation, prove himself a villain.--You may lay aside the sneer, which
is designed to be a sarcastic smile. I will not attempt to do this,
because I am convinced that my advice would be of no use, unless it
could come unattended with suspicion of my motives. I will hasten my
departure from this house, that we may not meet again; and I will leave
it to God Almighty to protect honesty and innocence against the dangers
which must attend vanity and folly." So saying, he turned contemptuously
from the youthful votary of ambition, and left the garden.

"Stop," said Middlemas, struck with the picture which had been held
up to his conscience--"Stop, Adam Hartley, and I will confess to
you"----But his words were uttered in a faint and hesitating manner, and
either never reached Hartley's ear, or failed in changing his purpose of
departure.

When he was out of the garden, Middlemas began to recall his usual
boldness of disposition--"Had he staid a moment longer," he said,
"I would have turned Papist, and made him my ghostly confessor. The
yeomanly churl!--I would give something to know how he has got such a
hank over me. What are Menie Gray's engagements to him? She has given
him his answer, and what right has he to come betwixt her and me? If old
Moncada had done a grandfather's duty, and made suitable settlements
on me, this plan of marrying the sweet girl, and settling here in her
native place, might have done well enough. But to live the life of the
poor drudge her father--to be at the command and call of every boor for
twenty miles round!--why, the labours of a higgler, who travels scores
of miles to barter pins, ribbons, snuff and tobacco, against the
housewife's private stock of eggs, mort-skins, and tallow, is more
profitable, less laborious, and faith I think, equally respectable. No,
no,--unless I can find wealth nearer home, I will seek it where every
one can have it for the gathering; and so I will down to the Swan Inn,
and hold a final consultation with my friend."




CHAPTER THE FIFTH.


The friend whom Middlemas expected to meet at the Swan, was a person
already mentioned in this history by the name of Tom Hillary, bred an
attorney's clerk in the ancient town of Novum Castrum--_doctus utriusque
juris_, as far as a few months in the service of Mr. Lawford, Town-clerk
of Middlemas, could render him so. The last mention that we made of this
gentleman, was when his gold-laced hat veiled its splendour before the
fresher mounted beavers of the 'prentices of Dr. Gray. That was now
about five years since, and it was within six months that he had made
his appearance in Middlemas, a very different sort of personage from
that which he seemed at his departure.

He was now called Captain; his dress was regimental, and his language
martial. He appeared to have plenty of cash, for he not only, to the
great surprise of the parties, paid certain old debts, which he had left
unsettled behind him, and that notwithstanding his having, as his old
practice told him, a good defence of prescription, but even sent the
minister a guinea, to the assistance of the parish poor. These acts of
justice and benevolence were bruited abroad greatly to the honour of
one, who, so long absent, had neither forgotten his just debts, nor
hardened his heart against the cries of the needy. His merits were
thought the higher, when it was understood he had served the Honourable
East India Company--that wonderful company of merchants, who may indeed,
with the strictest propriety, be termed princes. It was about the middle
of the eighteenth century, and the directors in Leadenhall Street were
silently laying the foundation of that immense empire, which afterwards
rose like an exhalation, and now astonishes Europe, as well as Asia,
with its formidable extent, and stupendous strength. Britain had now
begun to lend a wondering ear to the account of battles fought, and
cities won, in the East; and was surprised by the return of individuals
who had left their native country as adventurers, but now reappeared
there surrounded by Oriental wealth and Oriental luxury, which dimmed
even the splendour of the most wealthy of the British nobility. In this
new-found El Dorada, Hillary had, it seems, been a labourer, and, if he
told truth, to some purpose, though he was far from having completed
the harvest which he meditated. He spoke, indeed, of making investments,
and, as a mere matter of fancy, he consulted his old master, Clerk
Lawford, concerning the purchase of a moorland farm of three thousand
acres, for which he would be content to give three or four thousand
guineas, providing the game was plenty, and the trouting in the brook
such as had been represented by advertisement. But he did not wish to
make any extensive landed purchase at present. It was necessary to keep
up his interest in Leadenhall Street; and in that view, it would be
impolitic to part with his India stock and India bonds. In short, it was
folly to think of settling on a poor thousand or twelve hundred a year,
when one was in the prime of life, and had no liver complaint; and so
he was determined to double the Cape once again, ere he retired to the
chimney corner for life. All he wished was, to pick up a few clever
fellows for his regiment, or rather for his own company; and as in all
his travels he had never seen finer fellows than about Middlemas, he was
willing to give them the preference in completing his levy. In fact, it
was making men of them at once, for a few white faces never failed to
strike terror into these black rascals; and then, not to mention
the good things that were going at the storming of a Pettah, or the
plundering of a Pagoda, most of these tawny dogs carried so much
treasure about their persons, that a won battle was equal to a mine of
gold to the victors.

The natives of Middlemas listened to the noble Captain's marvels with
different feelings, as their temperaments were saturnine or sanguine.
But none could deny that such things had been; and, as the narrator
was known to be a bold dashing fellow, possessed of some abilities,
and according to the general opinion, not likely to be withheld by any
peculiar scruples of conscience, there was no giving any good reason why
Hillary should not have been as successful as others in the field, which
India, agitated as it was by war and intestine disorders, seemed to
offer to every enterprising adventurer. He was accordingly received by
his old acquaintances at Middlemas rather with the respect due to his
supposed wealth, than in a manner corresponding with his former humble
pretensions.

Some of the notables of the village did indeed keep aloof. Among these,
the chief was Dr. Gray, who was an enemy to every thing that approached
to fanfaronade, and knew enough of the world to lay it down as a sort
of general rule, that he who talks a great deal of fighting is seldom
a brave soldier, and he who always speaks about wealth is seldom a
rich man at bottom. Clerk Lawford was also shy, notwithstanding his
_communings_ with Hillary upon the subject of his intended purchase. The
coolness of the Captain's old employer towards him was by some supposed
to arise out of certain circumstances attending their former connexion;
but as the Clerk himself never explained what these were, it is
unnecessary to make any conjectures upon the subject.

Richard Middlemas very naturally renewed his intimacy with his former
comrade, and it was from Hillary's conversation, that he had adopted
the enthusiasm respecting India, which we have heard him express. It was
indeed impossible for a youth, at once inexperienced in the world, and
possessed of a most sanguine disposition, to listen without sympathy
to the glowing descriptions of Hillary, who, though only a recruiting
captain, had all the eloquence of a recruiting sergeant. Palaces rose
like mushrooms in his descriptions; groves of lofty trees, and aromatic
shrubs unknown to the chilly soils of Europe, were tenanted by every
object of the chase, from the royal tiger down to the jackal.
The luxuries of a natch, and the peculiar Oriental beauty of the
enchantresses who perfumed their voluptuous Eastern domes, for the
pleasure of the haughty English conquerors, were no less attractive than
the battles and sieges on which the Captain at other times expatiated.
Not a stream did he mention but flowed over sands of gold, and not a
palace that was inferior to those of the celebrated Fata Morgana. His
descriptions seemed steeped in odours, and his every phrase perfumed in
ottar of roses. The interviews at which these descriptions took place,
often ended in a bottle of choicer wine than the Swan Inn afforded,
with some other appendages of the table, which the Captain, who was
a _bon-vivant_, had procured from Edinburgh. From this good cheer
Middlemas was doomed to retire to the homely evening meal of his master,
where not all the simple beauties of Menie were able to overcome his
disgust at the coarseness of the provisions, or his unwillingness to
answer questions concerning the diseases of the wretched peasants who
were subjected to his inspection.

Richard's hopes of being acknowledged by his father had long since
vanished, and the rough repulse and subsequent neglect on the part of
Moncada, had satisfied him that his grandfather was inexorable, and that
neither then, nor at any future time, did he mean to realize the
visions which Nurse Jamieson's splendid figments had encouraged him to
entertain. Ambition, however, was not lulled to sleep, though it was no
longer nourished by the same hopes which had at first awakened it. The
Indian Captain's lavish oratory supplied the themes which had been
at first derived from the legends of the nursery; the exploits of
a Lawrence and a Clive, as well as the magnificent opportunities of
acquiring wealth to which these exploits opened the road, disturbed the
slumbers of the young adventurer. There was nothing to counteract these
except his love for Menie Gray, and the engagements into which it
had led him. But his addresses had been paid to Menie as much for
the gratification of his vanity, as from any decided passion for that
innocent and guileless being. He was desirous of carrying off the prize,
for which Hartley, whom he never loved, had the courage to contend
with him. Then Menie Gray had been beheld with admiration by men his
