column of smoke.

By the spot where the road cross'd I noted that many men and horses had
lately pass'd hereby to westward, and, by their footmarks, at a great
speed. A little further, and I came on a broken musket flung against the
hedge, with a nauseous mess of blood and sandy hairs about the stock
of it; and just beyond was a dead horse, his legs sticking up like bent
poles across the road. 'Twas here that my blood went cold on a sudden,
to hear a dismal groaning not far ahead. I stood still, holding my
breath, and then ran forward again.

The road took a twist that led me face to face with a small whitewashed
cottage, smear'd with black stains of burning. For seemingly it had been
fir'd in one or two places, only the flames had died out: and from the
back, where some out-building yet smoulder'd, rose the smoke that I
spied. But what brought me to a stand was to see the doorway all
crack'd and charr'd, and across it a soldier stretch'd--a green-coated
rebel--and quite dead. His face lay among the burn'd ruins of the door,
that had wofully singed his beard and hair. A stain of blood ran across
the door stone and into the road.

I was gazing upon him and shuddering, when again I heard the groans.
They issued from the upper chamber of the cottage. I stepped over the
dead soldier and mounted the ladder that led upstairs.

The upper room was but a loft. In it were two beds, whereof one was
empty. On the edge of the other sat up a boy of sixteen or thereabouts,
stark naked and moaning miserably. With one hand he seem'd trying to
cover a big wound that gaped in his chest: the other, as my head rose
over the ladder, he stretch'd out with all the fingers spread. And this
was his last effort. As I stumbled up, his fingers clos'd in a spasm of
pain; his hands dropp'd, and the body tumbled back on the bed, where it
lay with the legs dangling.

The poor lad must have been stabb'd as he lay asleep. For by the bedside
I found his clothes neatly folded and without a speck of blood. They
were clean, though coarse; so thinking they would serve for Delia, I
took them, albeit with some scruples at robbing the dead, and covering
the body with a sheet, made my way downstairs.

[Illustration: "Oh, Jack--they do not fit at all!"--Page 121.]

Here, on a high shelf at the foot of the ladder, I discover'd a couple
of loaves and some milk, and also, lying hard by, a pair of shepherd's
shears, which I took also, having a purpose for them. By this time,
being sick enough of the place, I was glad to make all speed back to
Delia.

She was still waiting among the leafless alders, and clapp'd her hands
to see the two loaves under my arm.

Said I, flinging down the clothes, and munching at my share of the
bread---

"Here is the boy's suit that you wish'd for."

"Oh, dear! 'tis not a very choice one." Her face fell.

"All the better for escaping notice."

"But--but I _like_ to be notic'd!"

Nevertheless, when breakfast was done, she consented to try on the
clothes. I left her eyeing them doubtfully, and stroll'd away by the
river's bank. In a while her voice call'd to me---

"Oh, Jack--they do not fit at all!"

"Why, 'tis admirable!" said I, returning, and scanning her. Now this was
a lie: but she took me more than ever, so pretty and comical she look'd
in the dress.

"And I cannot walk a bit in them!" she pouted, strutting up and down.

"Swing your arms more, and let them hang looser."

"And my hair. Oh, Jack, I have such beautiful hair!"

"It must come off," said I, pulling the shears out of my pocket.

"And look at these huge boots!"

Indeed, this was the main trouble, for I knew they would hurt her in
walking: yet she made more fuss about her hair, and only gave in when
I scolded her roundly. So I took the shears and clipp'd the chestnut
curls, one by one, while she cried for vexation; and took occasion of
her tears to smuggle the longest lock inside my doublet.

       *       *       *       *       *

But, an hour after, she was laughing again, and had learned to cock the
poor country lad's cap rakishly over one eye: and by evening was walking
with a swagger and longing (I know) to meet with folks. For, to spare
her the sight of the ruin'd cottage, I had taken her round through the
fields, and by every bypath that seem'd to lead westward. 'Twas safer to
journey thus; and all the way she practic'd a man's carriage and airs,
and how to wink and whistle and swing a stick. And once, when she left
one of her shoes in a wet ditch, she said "d--n!" as natural as life:
and then--

We jump'd over a hedge, plump into an outpost of rebels, as they sat
munching their supper.

They were six in all, and must have been sitting like mice: for all I
know of it is this. I had climb'd the hedge first, and was helping
Delia over, when out of the ground, as it seem'd, a voice shriek'd,
"Run--run!--the King's men are on us!" and then, my foot slipping, down
I went on to the shoulders of a thick-set man, and well-nigh broke his
neck as he turn'd to look up at me.

At first, the whole six were for running, I believe. But seeing only
a lad stretch'd on his face, and a second on the hedge, they thought
better of it. Before I could scramble up, one pair of hands was screw'd
about my neck, another at my heels, and in a trice there we were
pinion'd.

"Fetch the lantern, Zacchaeus."

'Twas quickly lit, and thrust into my face; and very foolish I must have
look'd. The fellows were all clad in green coats, much soil'd with mud
and powder. And they grinn'd in my face till I long'd to kick them.

"Search the malignant!" cried one. "Question him," call'd out another;
and forthwith began a long interrogatory concerning the movements of his
Majesty's troops, from which, indeed, I learn'd much concerning the late
encounter: but of course could answer nought. 'Twas only natural they
should interpret this silence for obstinacy.

"March 'em off to Captain Stubbs!"

"Halloa!" shouted a pockmarked trooper, that had his hand thrust in on
my breast: "bring the lantern close here. What's this?"

'Twas, alas! the King's letter: and I bit my lip while they cluster'd
round, turning the lantern's yellow glare upon the superscription.

"Lads, there's promotion in this!" shouted the thick-set man I had
tumbled on (who, it seem'd, was the sergeant in the troop): "hand me the
letter, there! Zacchaeus Martin and Tom Pine--you two bide here on duty:
t'other three fall in about the prisoners--quick march!' The wicked have
digged a pit--'"

The rogue ended up with a tag from the Psalmist.

We were march'd down the road for a mile or more, till we heard a loud
bawling, as of a man in much bodily pain, and soon came to a small
village, where, under a tavern lamp, by the door, was a man perch'd up
on a tub, and shouting forth portions of the Scripture to some twenty or
more green-coats assembled round. Our conductor pushed past these, and
enter'd the tavern. At a door to the left in the passage he halted, and
knocking once, thrust us inside.

The room was bare and lit very dimly by two tallow candles, set in
bottles. Between these, on a deal table, lay a map outspread, and over
it a man was bending, who look'd up sharply at our entrance.

He was thin, with a blue nose, and wore a green uniform like the rest:
only his carriage proved him a man of authority.

This Captain Stubbs listened, you may be sure, with a bright'ning eye to
the sergeant's story; and at the close fix'd an inquisitive gaze on the
pair of us, turning the King's letter over and over in his hands.

"How came this in your possession?" he ask'd at length.

"That," said I, "I must decline to tell."

He hesitated a moment; then, re-seating himself, broke the seal, spread
the letter upon the map, and read it slowly through. For the first time
I began heartily to hope that the paper contain'd nothing of moment. But
the man's face was no index of this. He read it through twice, folded it
away in his breast, and turn'd to the sergeant--


"To-morrow at six in the morning we continue our march. Meanwhile keep
these fellows secure. I look to you for this."

The sergeant saluted and we were led out. That night we pass'd in
handcuffs, huddled with fifty soldiers in a hayloft of the inn and
hearkening to their curious talk, that was half composed of Holy Writ
and half of gibes at our expense. They were beaten men and, like all
such, found comfort in deriding the greater misfortunes of others.

Before daylight the bugles began to sound, and we were led down to the
green before the tavern door, where already were close upon five hundred
gather'd, that had been billeted about the village and were now forming
in order of march--a soil'd, batter'd crew, with torn ensigns and little
heart in their movements. The sky began a cold drizzle as we set out,
and through this saddening whether we trudged all day, Delia and I being
kept well apart, she with the vanguard and I in the rear, seeing only
the winding column, the dejected heads bobbing in front as they bent to
the slanting rain, the cottagers that came out to stare as we pass'd;
and hearing but the hoarse words of command, the low mutterings of the
men, and always the monotonous _tramp-tramp_ through the slush and mire
of the roads.

'Tis like a bad dream to me, and I will not dwell on it. That night
we pass'd at Chippenham--a small market town--and on the morrow went
tramping again through worse weather, but always amid the same sights
and sounds. There were moments when I thought to go mad, wrenching at my
cords till my wrists bled, yet with no hope to escape. But in time, by
good luck, my wits grew deaden'd to it all, and I march'd on with the
rest to a kind of lugubrious singsong that my brain supplied. For hours
I went thus, counting my steps, missing my reckoning, and beginning
again.

Daylight was failing when the towers of Bristol grew clear out of the
leaden mist in front; and by five o'clock we halted outside the walls
and beside the ditch of the castle, waiting for the drawbridge to be let
down. Already a great crowd had gather'd about us, of those who had come
out to learn news of the defeat, which, the day before some fugitives
had carried to Bristol. To their questions, as to all else, I listen'd
like a man in a trance: and recall this only--that first I was shivering
out in the rain and soon after was standing beside Delia, under guard
of a dozen soldiers, and shaking with cold, beneath a gateway that led
between the two wards of the castle. And there, for an hour at least, we
kick'd our heels, until from the inner ward Captain Stubbs came striding
and commanded us to follow.

Across the court we went in the rain, through a vaulted passage, and
passing a screen of carved oak found ourselves suddenly in a great hall,
near forty yards long (as I reckon it), and rafter'd with oak. At the
far end, around a great marble table, were some ten or more gentlemen
seated, who all with one accord turn'd their eyes upon us, as the
captain brought us forward.

The table before them was litter'd with maps, warrants, and papers; and
some of the gentlemen had pens in their hands. But the one on whom my
eyes fastened was a tall, fair soldier that sat in the centre, and held
his Majesty's letter, open, in his hand: who rose and bow'd to me as I
came near.

"Sir," he said, "the fortune of war having given you into our hands, you
will not refuse, I hope, to answer our questions."

"Sir, I have nought to tell," answer'd I, bowing in return.

With a delicate white hand he wav'd my words aside. He had a handsome,
irresolute mouth, and was, I could tell, of very different degree from
the merchants and lawyers beside him.

"You act under orders from the--the--"

"Anti-Christ," put in a snappish little fellow on his right.

"I do nothing of the sort," said I.

"Well, then, sir, from King Charles."

"I do not."

"Tush!" exclaim'd the snappish man, and then straightening himself
up--"That boy with you--that fellow disguis'd as a countryman--look at
his boots!--he's a Papist spy!"

"There, sir, you are wrong!"

"I saw him--I'll be sworn to his face--I saw him, a year back, at Douai,
helping at the mass! I never forget faces."

"Why, what nonsense!" cried I, and burst out laughing.

"Don't mock at me, sir!" he thunder'd, bringing down his fist on the
table. "I tell you the boy is a Papist!" He pointed furiously at Delia,
who, now laughing also, answer'd him very demurely---

"Indeed, sir--"

"I saw you, I say."

"You are bold to make so certain of a Papist--"

"I saw you!"

"That cannot even tell maid from man!"

"What is meant by that?" asks the tall soldier, opening his eyes.

"Why, simply this, sir: I am no boy at all, but a girl!"

There was a minute, during which the little man went purple in the face,
and the rest star'd at Delia in blank astonishment.

"Oh, Jack," she whisper'd in my ear, "I am so very, very sorrow: but I
_cannot_ wear these hateful clothes much longer."

She fac'd the company with a rosy blush.

"What say you to this?" ask'd Colonel Essex--for 'twas he--turning round
on the little man.

"Say? What do I say? That the fellow is a Papist, too. I knew it from
the first, and this proves it!"




CHAPTER IX.

I BREAK OUT OF PRISON.


You are now to be ask'd to pass over the next four weeks in as many
minutes: as would I had done at the time! For I spent them in a bitter
cold cell in the main tower of Bristol keep, with a chair and a pallet
of straw for all my furniture, and nothing to stay my fast but the bread
and water that the jailer--a sour man, if ever there were one--brought
me twice a day.

This keep lies in the northwest corner of the outer ward of the
castle--a mighty tall pile and strongly built, the walls (as the jailer
told me) being a full twenty-five feet thick near the foundations, tho'
by time you ascended to the towers this thickness had dwindled to six
feet and no more. In shape 'twas a quadrilateral, a little shorter from
north to south than from east to west (in which latter direction it
measured sixty feet, about), and had four towers standing at the four
corners, whereof mine was five fathoms higher than the rest.

Guess, then, how little I thought of escape, having but one window, a
hundred feet (I do believe) above the ground, and that so narrow that,
even without the iron bar across it, 'twould barely let my shoulders
pass. What concern'd me more was the cold that gnaw'd me continually
these winter nights, as I lay thinking of Delia (whom I had not seen
since our examination), or gazing out on the patch of frosty heaven
that was all my view. 'Twas thus I had heard Bristol bells ringing for
Christmas in the town below.

Colonel Essex had been thrice to visit me, and always offer'd many
excuses for my treatment; but when he came to question me, why of course
I had nothing to tell, so that each visit but served to vex him more.
Clearly I was suspected to know a great deal beyond what appear'd in
the letter: and no doubt poor Anthony Killigrew had receiv'd some verbal
message from His Majesty which he lived not long enough to transmit to
me. As 'twas, I kept silence; and the Colonel in return would tell me
nothing of what had befallen Delia.

One fine, frosty morning, then, when I had lain in this distress just
four weeks, the door of my cell open'd, and there appear'd a young
woman, not uncomely, bringing in my bread and water. She was the
jailer's daughter, and wore a heavy bunch of keys at her girdle.

"Oh, good morning!" said I: for till now her father only had visited me,
and this was a welcome change.

Instead of answering cheerfully (as I look'd for), she gave a little nod
of the head, rather sorrowful, and answered:--

"Father's abed with the ague."

"Now you cannot expect me to be sorry."

"Nay," she said; and I caught her looking at me with something like
compassion in her blue eyes, which mov'd me to cry out suddenly---

"I think you are woman enough to like a pair of lovers."

"Oh, aye: but where's t'other half of the pair?"

"You're right. The young gentlewoman that was brought hither with me--I
know not if she loves me: but this I do know--I would give my hand to
learn her whereabouts, and how she fares."

"Better eat thy loaf," put in the girl very suddenly, setting down the
plate and pitcher.

'Twas odd, but I seem'd to hear a sob in her voice. However, her back
was toward me as I glanc'd up. And next moment she was gone, locking the
iron door behind her.

I turn'd from my breakfast with a sigh, having for the moment tasted
the hope to hear something of Delia. But in a while, feeling hungry, I
pick'd up the loaf beside me, and broke it in two.

To my amaze, out dropp'd something that jingled on the stone floor.

'Twas a small file: and examining the loaf again, I found a clasp-knife
also, and a strip of paper, neatly folded, hidden in the bread.

"Deare Jack,

"Colonel Essex, finding no good come of his interrogatories, hath set me
at large; tho' I continue under his eye, to wit, with a dowager of his
acquaintance, a Mistress Finch. Wee dwell in a private house midway down
St. Thomas his street, in Redcliffe: and she hath put a dismal dress
upon me (Jack, 'tis _hideous_), but otherwise uses me not ill. But take
care of thyself, my deare friend: for tho' the Colonel be a gentilman,
he is press'd by them about him, and at our last interview I noted a
mischief in his eye. Canst use this file?--(but take care: all the
gates I saw guarded with troopers to-day.) This by one who hath been
my friend: for whose sake tear the paper up. And beleeve your cordial,
loving comrade

"D. K."

After reading this a dozen times, till I had it by heart, I tore the
letter into small pieces and hid them in my pocket. This done, I felt
lighter-hearted than for many a day, and (rather for employment than
with any farther view) began lazily to rub away at my window bar. The
file work'd well. By noon the bar was half sever'd, and I broke off to
whistle a tune. 'Twas---

    "Vivre en tout cas,
     C'est le grand soulas--"

and I broke off to hear the key turning in my lock.

The jailer's daughter enter'd with my second meal. Her eyes were red
with weeping.

Said I, "Does your father beat you?"

"He has, before now," she replied: "but not to-day."

"Then why do you weep?"

"Not for that."

"For what then?"

"For you--oh, dear, dear! How shall I tell it? They are going to--to---"
She sat down on the chair, and sobb'd in her apron.

"What is't they are going to do?"

"To--to--h-hang you."

"The devil! When?"

"Tut-tut-to-morrow mo-horning!"

I went suddenly very cold all over. There was silence for a moment, and
then I heard the noise of some one dropping a plank in the courtyard
below.

"What's that?"

"The gug-gug---"

"Gallows?"

She nodded.

