the pile of barrels and a figure standing with a lighted torch
close to one of them. A panic seized them, and believing they had
made their way into a powder magazine, and that in another instant
there would be a terrible explosion, they turned with shouts of "A
magazine! a magazine! Fly, or we are all dead men!"

"Run, Lionel, and get help," Geoffrey said, and in two or three
minutes a number of soldiers ran down into the cellar. The Walloons
were not long before they recovered from their panic. Their officers
knew that the wine cellars of the city were in front of them, and
reassured them as to the character of the barrels they had seen.
They were, however, too late, and a furious conflict took place at
the entrance into the cellar, but the enemy, able only to advance
two or three abreast, failed to force their way in.

Captain Uvedale and Francis Vere were soon on the spot, and when at
last the enemy, unable to force an entrance, fell back, the former
said, "This is just as I feared. You see, the Spaniards drove this
gallery, and ceased to work immediately they heard us approaching
them. We had no idea that they were in front of us, and so they
only had to put a barrel of powder there and fire it as soon as
there was but a foot or two of earth between us and them."

"But how was it," Francis Vere asked, "that when they fired it they
did not at once rush forward? They could have captured the whole
building before we knew what had happened."

"That I cannot tell," Captain Uvedale replied. "The four men at
work must have been either killed or knocked senseless. We shall
know better another time, and will have a strong guard in each
cellar from which our mines are being driven."

"If it please you, Captain Uvedale," Lionel said, "it was my brother
Geoffrey who prevented them from advancing; for indeed several of
them had already entered the cellar, and the gallery behind was
full of them."

"But how did he do that?" Captain Uvedale asked in surprise.

Lionel related the ruse by which Geoffrey had created a panic in
the minds of the Spaniards.

"That was well thought of indeed, and promptly carried out!"
Captain Uvedale exclaimed. "Francis, these pages of yours are truly
promising young fellows. They detected that rascally Dutchman who
was betraying us. I noticed them several times in the thick of
the fray at the breach; and now they have saved the city by their
quickness and presence of mind; for had these Spaniards once got
possession of this warehouse they would have speedily broken a way
along through the whole tier, and could then have poured in upon
us with all their strength."

"That is so, indeed," Francis Vere agreed. "They have assuredly
saved the town, and there is the greatest credit due to them. I
shall be glad, Uvedale, if you will report the matter to our leader.
You are in command of the mining works, and it will come better
from you than from me who is their captain."

Captain Uvedale made his report, and both Sir Roger Williams and
the governor thanked the boys, and especially Geoffrey, for the
great service they had rendered.

Very shortly the galleries were broken into in several other places,
and the battle became now as fierce and continuous down in the
cellars as it had before been on the breach. By the light of torches,
in an atmosphere heavy with the fumes of gunpowder, surrounded by
piled up barrels of wine, the defenders and assailants maintained
a terrible conflict, men staggering up exhausted by their exertion
and by the stifling atmosphere while others took their places below,
and so, night and day, the desperate struggle continued.

All these weeks no serious effort had been made for the relief of
the beleaguered town. Captains Hall and Allen had several times
swum down at night through the bridge of boats with letters from
the governor entreating a speedy succour. The States had sent a
fleet which sailed some distance up the Zwin, but returned without
making the slightest effort to break through the bridge of boats.
The Earl of Leicester had advanced with a considerable force from
Ostend against the fortress of Blankenburg, but had retreated
hastily as soon as Parma despatched a portion of his army against
him; and so the town was left to its fate.

The last letter that the governor despatched said that longer
resistance was impossible. The garrison were reduced to a mere
remnant, and these utterly worn out by constant fighting and the
want of rest. He should ask for fair and honourable terms, but if
these were refused the garrison and the whole male inhabitants in
the city, putting the women and children in the centre, would sally
out and cut their way through, or die fighting in the midst of the
Spaniards. The swimmer who took the letter was drowned, but his
body was washed ashore and the letter taken to the Duke of Parma.

Three days afterwards a fresh force of the enemy embarked in forty
large boats, and were about to land on an unprotected wharf by
the riverside when Arnold de Groenvelt hung out the white flag.
His powder was exhausted and his guns disabled, and the garrison
so reduced that the greater portion of the walls were left wholly
undefended. The Duke of Parma, who was full of admiration at the
extraordinary gallantry of the defenders, and was doubtless also
influenced by the resolution expressed in his letter by the governor,
granted them most honourable terms. The garrison were to march out
with all their baggage and arms, with matches lighted and colours
displayed. They were to proceed to Breskans, and there to embark
for Flushing. The life and property of the inhabitants were to be
respected, and all who did not choose to embrace the Catholic faith
were to be allowed to leave the town peaceably, taking with them
their belongings, and to go wheresoever they pleased.

When the gates were opened the garrison sallied out. The Duke of
Parma had an interview with several of the leaders, and expressed
his high admiration of the valour with which they had fought, and
said that the siege of Sluys had cost him more men than he had lost
in the four principal sieges he had undertaken in the Low Country
put together. On the 4th of August the duke entered Sluys in triumph,
and at once began to make preparations to take part in the great
invasion of England for which Spain was preparing.

After their arrival at Flushing Captains Vere, Uvedale, and others,
who had brought their companies from Bergen op Zoom to aid in the
defence of Sluys, returned to that town.

The Earl of Leicester shortly afterwards resigned his appointment
as general of the army. He had got on but badly with the States
General, and there was from the first no cordial cooperation between
the two armies. The force at his disposal was never strong enough
to do anything against the vastly superior armies of the Duke
of Parma, who was one of the most brilliant generals of his age,
while he was hampered and thwarted by the intrigues and duplicity
of Elizabeth, who was constantly engaged in half hearted negotiations
now with France and now with Spain, and whose capricious temper
was continually overthrowing the best laid plans of her councillors
and paralysing the actions of her commanders. It was not until
she saw her kingdom threatened by invasion that she placed herself
fairly at the head of the national movement, and inspired her
subjects with her energy and determination.

Geoffrey Vickars had been somewhat severely wounded upon the last
day of the struggle in the cellar, a Spanish officer having beaten
down his guard and cleft through his morion. Lionel was unwounded,
but the fatigue and excitement had told upon him greatly, and soon
after they arrived at Bergen Captain Vere advised both of them to
return home for a few months.

"There is nothing likely to be doing here until the spring. Parma
has a more serious matter in hand. They talk, you know, of invading
England, and after his experience at Sluys I do not think he will
be wasting his force by knocking their head against stone walls.
I should be glad if I could return too, but I have my company to
look after and must remain where I am ordered; but as you are but
volunteers and giving your service at your pleasure, and are not
regularly upon the list of the pages of the company, I can undertake
to grant you leave, and indeed I can see that you both greatly need
rest. You have begun well and have both done good service, and have
been twice thanked by the governor of Sluys and Sir Roger Williams.

"You will do yourselves no good by being shut up through the winter
in this dull town, and as there is a vessel lying by the quay which
is to set sail tomorrow, I think you cannot do better than go in
her. I will give you letters to my cousin and your father saying
how well you have borne yourselves, and how mightily Sir Roger
Williams was pleased with you. In the spring you can rejoin, unless
indeed the Spaniards should land in England, which Heaven forfend,
in which case you will probably prefer to ride under my cousin's
banner at home."

The boys gladly accepted Francis Vere's proposal. It was but three
months since they had set foot in Holland, but they had gone through
a tremendous experience, and the thought of being shut up for eight
or nine months at Bergen op Zoom was by no means a pleasant one.
Both felt worn out and exhausted, and longed for the fresh keen air
of the eastern coast. Therefore the next morning they embarked on
board ship. Captain Vere presented them each with a handsome brace
of pistols in token of his regard, and Captains Uvedale, Baskerville,
and other officers who were intimate friends of Vere's, and had met
them at his quarters, gave them handsome presents in recognition
of the services they had rendered at Sluys.

The ship was bound for Harwich, which was the nearest English port.
Landing there, they took passage by boat to Manningtree and thence
by horse home, where they astounded their father and mother by
their sudden appearance.

"And this is what comes of your soldiering," Mrs. Vickars said
when the first greeting was over. "Here is Geoffrey with plasters
all over the side of his head, and you, Lionel, looking as pale and
thin as if you had gone through a long illness. I told your father
when we heard of your going that you ought to be brought back
and whipped; but the earl talked him over into writing to Captain
Francis to tell him that he approved of this mad brained business,
and a nice affair it has turned out."

"You will not have to complain of our looks, mother, at the end
of a week or two," Geoffrey said. "My wound is healing fast, and
Lionel only needs an extra amount of sleep for a time. You see, for
nearly a month we were never in bed, but just lay down to sleep by
the side of Captain Vere on the top of the ramparts, where we had
been fighting all day.

"It was a gallant defence," Mr. Vickars said, "and all England
is talking of it.  It was wonderful that 800 English and as many
Dutchmen should hold a weak place for two months against full twelve
times their number of Spaniards, led by the Duke of Parma himself,
and there is great honour for all who took part in the defence.
The governor and Sir Roger Williams especially mentioned Francis
Vere as among the bravest and best of their captains, and although
you as pages can have had nought to do with the fighting, you will
have credit as serving under his banner."

"I think, father," Geoffrey said, touching the plasters on his
head, "this looks somewhat as if we had had something to do with
the fighting, and here is a letter for you from Captain Vere which
will give you some information about it."

Mr. Vickars adjusted his horn spectacles on his face and opened
the letter.  It began:  "My dear Master and Friend,--I have had
no means of writing to you since your letter came to me, having
had other matters in mind, and being cut off from all communication
with England.  I was glad to find that you did not take amiss my
carrying off of your sons.  Indeed that action has turned out more
happily than might have been expected, for I own that they were
but young for such rough service.

"However, they have proved themselves valiant young gentlemen.
They fought stoutly by my side during our long tussle with the
Spaniards, and more than once saved my life by ridding me of foes
who would have taken me at a disadvantage.  Once, indeed, when I
was down from a blow on the pate from a Spanish axe, they rushed
forward and kept my assailants at bay until rescue came.  They
discovered a plot between a traitor in the town and the Spaniards,
and succeeded in defeating his plans and bringing him to justice.

"They were also the means of preventing the Spaniards from breaking
into the great wine cellars and capturing the warehouses, and for
each of these services they received the thanks of the Dutch governor
and of Sir Roger Williams, our leader.  Thus, you see, although
so young they have distinguished themselves mightily, and should
aught befall me, there are many among my friends who will gladly
take them under their protection and push them forward.  I have
sent them home for a time to have quiet and rest, which they need
after their exertions, and have done this the more willingly since
there is no chance of fighting for many months to come. I hope that
before the Spaniards again advance against us I may have them by
my side."

"Well, well, this is wonderful," Mrs. Vickars said when her husband
had finished reading the letter. "If they had told me themselves I
should not have believed them, although they have never been given
to the sin of lying; but since it is writ in Master Vere's own hand
it cannot be doubted. And now tell us all about it, boys."

"We will tell you when we have had dinner, mother. This brisk Essex
air has given us both an appetite, and until that is satisfied you
must excuse us telling a long story. Is the earl at the castle,
father? because we have two letters to him from Captain Francis--one,
I believe, touching our affairs, and the other on private
matters. We have also letters from him to his mother and his brother
John, and these we had better send off at once by a messenger, as
also the private letters to the earl."

"That I will take myself," Mr. Vickars said. "I was just going up
to him to speak about my parish affairs when you arrived."

"You had better have your dinner first," Mrs. Vickars said decidedly.
"When you once get with the earl and begin talking you lose all
account of the time, and only last week kept dinner waiting for two
hours. It is half past eleven now, and I will hurry it on so that
it will be ready a few minutes before noon."

"Very well, my dear; but I will go out into the village at once and
find a messenger to despatch to Crepping Hall with the letters to
Dame Elizabeth and John Vere."

The boys' story was not told until after supper, for as soon as
dinner was over Mr. Vickars went up to the castle with the letters
for the earl. The latter, after reading them, told him that his
cousin spoke most highly of his two sons, and said they had been
of great service, even as far as the saving of his life. The earl
told Mr. Vickars to bring the boys up next day to see him in order
that he might learn a full account of the fighting at Sluys, and
that he hoped they would very often come in, and would, while they
were at home, practise daily with his master of arms at the castle.

"I know, Mr. Vickars, that you had hoped that one of them would
enter the church; but you see that their tastes lie not in that
direction, and it is evident that, as in the case of my cousin
Francis, they are cut out for soldiers."

"I am afraid so," Mr. Vickars said; "and must let them have their
own way, for I hold, that none should be forced to follow the
ministry save those whose natural bent lies that way."

"I don't think they have chosen badly," the earl said. "My cousin
Francis bids fair to make a great soldier, and as they start in
life as his pages they will have every chance of getting on, and
I warrant me that Francis will push their fortunes. Perhaps I may
be able to aid them somewhat myself. If aught comes of this vapouring
of the Spaniards, before the boys return to Holland, they shall
ride with me. I am already arming all the tenantry and having them
practised in warlike exercises, and in the spring I shall fit out
two ships at Harwich to join the fleet that will put to sea should
the Spaniards carry out their threats of invading us."



CHAPTER VI

THE LOSS OF THE SUSAN


There were few people in Hedingham more pleased to see the two lads
on their return than John Lirriper, to whom they paid a visit on
the first day they went out.

"I am glad to see you back, young masters; though, to say the truth,
you are not looking nigh so strong and well as you did when I last
parted from you."

"We shall soon be all right again, John. We have had rather a rough
time of it over there in Sluys."

"Ah, so I have heard tell, Master Geoffrey. Your father read out
from the pulpit a letter the earl had received from Captain Francis
telling about the fighting, and it mentioned that you were both
alive and well and had done good service; but it was only a short
letter sent off in haste the day after he and the others had got
out of the town. I was right glad when I heard it, I can tell you,
for there had been nought talked of here but the siege; and though
your lady mother has not said much to me, I always held myself ready
to slip round the corner or into a house when I saw her come down
the street, for I knew well enough what was in her mind. She was
just saying to herself, 'John Lirriper, if it hadn't been for you
my two boys would not be in peril now. If aught comes to them, it
will be your doing.' And though it was not my fault, as far as I
could see, for Captain Francis took you off my hands, as it were,
and I had no more to say in the matter than a child, still, there
it was, and right glad was I when I heard that the siege was over
and you were both alive.

"I had a bad time of it, I can tell you, when I first got back,
young sirs, for your mother rated me finely; and though your father
said it was not my fault in any way, she would not listen to him,
but said she had given you into my charge, and that I had no right
to hand you over to any others save with your father's
permission--not if it were to the earl himself,--and for a long time
after she would make as if she didn't see me if she met me in the
street. When my wife was ill about that time she sent down broths
and simples to her, but she sent them by one of the maids, and
never came herself save when she knew I was away in my boat.

"However, the day after the reading of that letter she came in
and said she was sorry she had treated me hardly, and that she had
known at heart all along that it was not altogether my fault, and
asked my pardon as nice as if I had been the earl. Of course I said
there was nothing to ask pardon for, and indeed that I thought it
was only natural she should have blamed me, for that I had often
blamed myself, though not seeing how I could have done otherwise.
However, I was right glad when the matter was made up, for it is
not pleasant for a man when the parson's wife sets herself against
him."

"It was certainly hard upon you, John," Geoffrey said; "but I am sure
our mother does not in any way blame you now. You see, we brought
home letters from Captain Vere, or rather Sir Francis, for he has
been knighted now, and he was good enough to speak very kindly of
what we were able to do in the siege. Mother did not say much, but
I am sure that at heart she is very grateful, for the earl himself
came down to the Rectory and spoke warmly about us, and said that
he should always be our fast friend, because we had given his cousin
some help when he was roughly pressed by the Spaniards. I hope we
shall have another sail with you in a short time, for we are not
going back to the Netherlands at present, as things are likely to
be quiet there now. Although he did not say so, I think Sir Francis
thought that we were over young for such rough work, and would be
more useful in a year's time; for, you see, in these sieges even
pages have to take their share in the fighting, and when it comes
to push of pike with the Spaniards more strength and vigour are needed
than we possess at present. So we are to continue our practice at
arms at the castle, and to take part in the drilling of the companies
the earl is raising in case the Spaniards carry out their threat
of invading England."

Mrs. Vickars offered no objection whatever the first time Geoffrey
asked permission to go down to Bricklesey with John Lirriper.

"I have no objection, Geoffrey; and, indeed, now that you have
chosen your own lives and are pages to Sir Francis Vere, it seems
to me that in matters of this kind you can judge for yourself.
Now that you have taken to soldiering and have borne your part in
a great siege, and have even yourselves fought with the Spaniards,
I deem it that you have got beyond my wing, and must now act in all
small matters as it pleases you; and that since you have already
run great danger of your lives, and may do so again ere long, it
would be folly of me to try to keep you at my apron strings and to
treat you as if you were still children."

So the two lads often accompanied John Lirriper to Bricklesey,
and twice sailed up the river to London and back in Joe Chambers'
smack, these jaunts furnishing a pleasant change to their work of
practising with pike and sword with the men-at-arms at the castle,
or learning the words of command and the work of officers in drilling
the newly raised corps. One day John Lirriper told them that his
nephew was this time going to sail up the Medway to Rochester,
and would be glad to take them with him if they liked it; for they
were by this time prime favourites with the master of the Susan.
Although their mother had told them that they were at liberty to
go as they pleased, they nevertheless always made a point of asking
permission before they went away.

"If the wind is fair we shall not be long away on this trip, mother.
Two days will take us up to Rochester; we shall be a day loading
there, and shall therefore be back on Saturday if the wind serves,
and may even be sooner if the weather is fine and we sail with
the night tides, as likely enough we shall, for the moon is nearly
full, and there will be plenty of light to keep our course free of
the sands."

The permission was readily given. Mrs. Vickars had come to see that
it was useless to worry over small matters, and therefore nodded
cheerfully, and said she would give orders at once for a couple of
chickens to be killed and other provision prepared for their voyage.

"I do not doubt you are going to have a rougher voyage than usual
this time, young masters," John Lirriper said when the boat was
approaching Bricklesey. "The sky looks wild, and I think there is
going to be a break in the weather. However, the Susan is a stout
boat, and my nephew a careful navigator."

"I should like a rough voyage for a change, John," Geoffrey said.
"We have always had still water and light winds on our trips, and
I should like a good blow."

"Well, I think you will have one; though may be it will only come
on thick and wet. Still I think there is wind in those clouds, and
