King Richard's sister had married the King of this place, but he was
dead: and his uncle TANCRED had usurped the crown, cast the Royal Widow
into prison, and possessed himself of her estates.  Richard fiercely
demanded his sister's release, the restoration of her lands, and
(according to the Royal custom of the Island) that she should have a
golden chair, a golden table, four-and-twenty silver cups, and four-and-
twenty silver dishes.  As he was too powerful to be successfully
resisted, Tancred yielded to his demands; and then the French King grew
jealous, and complained that the English King wanted to be absolute in
the Island of Messina and everywhere else.  Richard, however, cared
little or nothing for this complaint; and in consideration of a present
of twenty thousand pieces of gold, promised his pretty little nephew
ARTHUR, then a child of two years old, in marriage to Tancred's daughter.
We shall hear again of pretty little Arthur by-and-by.

This Sicilian affair arranged without anybody's brains being knocked out
(which must have rather disappointed him), King Richard took his sister
away, and also a fair lady named BERENGARIA, with whom he had fallen in
love in France, and whom his mother, Queen Eleanor (so long in prison,
you remember, but released by Richard on his coming to the Throne), had
brought out there to be his wife; and sailed with them for Cyprus.

He soon had the pleasure of fighting the King of the Island of Cyprus,
for allowing his subjects to pillage some of the English troops who were
shipwrecked on the shore; and easily conquering this poor monarch, he
seized his only daughter, to be a companion to the lady Berengaria, and
put the King himself into silver fetters.  He then sailed away again with
his mother, sister, wife, and the captive princess; and soon arrived
before the town of Acre, which the French King with his fleet was
besieging from the sea.  But the French King was in no triumphant
condition, for his army had been thinned by the swords of the Saracens,
and wasted by the plague; and SALADIN, the brave Sultan of the Turks, at
the head of a numerous army, was at that time gallantly defending the
place from the hills that rise above it.

Wherever the united army of Crusaders went, they agreed in few points
except in gaming, drinking, and quarrelling, in a most unholy manner; in
debauching the people among whom they tarried, whether they were friends
or foes; and in carrying disturbance and ruin into quiet places.  The
French King was jealous of the English King, and the English King was
jealous of the French King, and the disorderly and violent soldiers of
the two nations were jealous of one another; consequently, the two Kings
could not at first agree, even upon a joint assault on Acre; but when
they did make up their quarrel for that purpose, the Saracens promised to
yield the town, to give up to the Christians the wood of the Holy Cross,
to set at liberty all their Christian captives, and to pay two hundred
thousand pieces of gold.  All this was to be done within forty days; but,
not being done, King Richard ordered some three thousand Saracen
prisoners to be brought out in the front of his camp, and there, in full
view of their own countrymen, to be butchered.

The French King had no part in this crime; for he was by that time
travelling homeward with the greater part of his men; being offended by
the overbearing conduct of the English King; being anxious to look after
his own dominions; and being ill, besides, from the unwholesome air of
that hot and sandy country.  King Richard carried on the war without him;
and remained in the East, meeting with a variety of adventures, nearly a
year and a half.  Every night when his army was on the march, and came to
a halt, the heralds cried out three times, to remind all the soldiers of
the cause in which they were engaged, 'Save the Holy Sepulchre!' and then
all the soldiers knelt and said 'Amen!'  Marching or encamping, the army
had continually to strive with the hot air of the glaring desert, or with
the Saracen soldiers animated and directed by the brave Saladin, or with
both together.  Sickness and death, battle and wounds, were always among
them; but through every difficulty King Richard fought like a giant, and
worked like a common labourer.  Long and long after he was quiet in his
grave, his terrible battle-axe, with twenty English pounds of English
steel in its mighty head, was a legend among the Saracens; and when all
the Saracen and Christian hosts had been dust for many a year, if a
Saracen horse started at any object by the wayside, his rider would
exclaim, 'What dost thou fear, Fool?  Dost thou think King Richard is
behind it?'

No one admired this King's renown for bravery more than Saladin himself,
who was a generous and gallant enemy.  When Richard lay ill of a fever,
Saladin sent him fresh fruits from Damascus, and snow from the mountain-
tops.  Courtly messages and compliments were frequently exchanged between
them--and then King Richard would mount his horse and kill as many
Saracens as he could; and Saladin would mount his, and kill as many
Christians as he could.  In this way King Richard fought to his heart's
content at Arsoof and at Jaffa; and finding himself with nothing exciting
to do at Ascalon, except to rebuild, for his own defence, some
fortifications there which the Saracens had destroyed, he kicked his ally
the Duke of Austria, for being too proud to work at them.

The army at last came within sight of the Holy City of Jerusalem; but,
being then a mere nest of jealousy, and quarrelling and fighting, soon
retired, and agreed with the Saracens upon a truce for three years, three
months, three days, and three hours.  Then, the English Christians,
protected by the noble Saladin from Saracen revenge, visited Our
Saviour's tomb; and then King Richard embarked with a small force at Acre
to return home.

But he was shipwrecked in the Adriatic Sea, and was fain to pass through
Germany, under an assumed name.  Now, there were many people in Germany
who had served in the Holy Land under that proud Duke of Austria who had
been kicked; and some of them, easily recognising a man so remarkable as
King Richard, carried their intelligence to the kicked Duke, who
straightway took him prisoner at a little inn near Vienna.

The Duke's master the Emperor of Germany, and the King of France, were
equally delighted to have so troublesome a monarch in safe keeping.
Friendships which are founded on a partnership in doing wrong, are never
true; and the King of France was now quite as heartily King Richard's
foe, as he had ever been his friend in his unnatural conduct to his
father.  He monstrously pretended that King Richard had designed to
poison him in the East; he charged him with having murdered, there, a man
whom he had in truth befriended; he bribed the Emperor of Germany to keep
him close prisoner; and, finally, through the plotting of these two
princes, Richard was brought before the German legislature, charged with
the foregoing crimes, and many others.  But he defended himself so well,
that many of the assembly were moved to tears by his eloquence and
earnestness.  It was decided that he should be treated, during the rest
of his captivity, in a manner more becoming his dignity than he had been,
and that he should be set free on the payment of a heavy ransom.  This
ransom the English people willingly raised.  When Queen Eleanor took it
over to Germany, it was at first evaded and refused.  But she appealed to
the honour of all the princes of the German Empire in behalf of her son,
and appealed so well that it was accepted, and the King released.
Thereupon, the King of France wrote to Prince John--'Take care of
thyself.  The devil is unchained!'

Prince John had reason to fear his brother, for he had been a traitor to
him in his captivity.  He had secretly joined the French King; had vowed
to the English nobles and people that his brother was dead; and had
vainly tried to seize the crown.  He was now in France, at a place called
Evreux.  Being the meanest and basest of men, he contrived a mean and
base expedient for making himself acceptable to his brother.  He invited
the French officers of the garrison in that town to dinner, murdered them
all, and then took the fortress.  With this recommendation to the good
will of a lion-hearted monarch, he hastened to King Richard, fell on his
knees before him, and obtained the intercession of Queen Eleanor.  'I
forgive him,' said the King, 'and I hope I may forget the injury he has
done me, as easily as I know he will forget my pardon.'

While King Richard was in Sicily, there had been trouble in his dominions
at home: one of the bishops whom he had left in charge thereof, arresting
the other; and making, in his pride and ambition, as great a show as if
he were King himself.  But the King hearing of it at Messina, and
appointing a new Regency, this LONGCHAMP (for that was his name) had fled
to France in a woman's dress, and had there been encouraged and supported
by the French King.  With all these causes of offence against Philip in
his mind, King Richard had no sooner been welcomed home by his
enthusiastic subjects with great display and splendour, and had no sooner
been crowned afresh at Winchester, than he resolved to show the French
King that the Devil was unchained indeed, and made war against him with
great fury.

There was fresh trouble at home about this time, arising out of the
discontents of the poor people, who complained that they were far more
heavily taxed than the rich, and who found a spirited champion in WILLIAM
FITZ-OSBERT, called LONGBEARD.  He became the leader of a secret society,
comprising fifty thousand men; he was seized by surprise; he stabbed the
citizen who first laid hands upon him; and retreated, bravely fighting,
to a church, which he maintained four days, until he was dislodged by
fire, and run through the body as he came out.  He was not killed,
though; for he was dragged, half dead, at the tail of a horse to
Smithfield, and there hanged.  Death was long a favourite remedy for
silencing the people's advocates; but as we go on with this history, I
fancy we shall find them difficult to make an end of, for all that.

The French war, delayed occasionally by a truce, was still in progress
when a certain Lord named VIDOMAR, Viscount of Limoges, chanced to find
in his ground a treasure of ancient coins.  As the King's vassal, he sent
the King half of it; but the King claimed the whole.  The lord refused to
yield the whole.  The King besieged the lord in his castle, swore that he
would take the castle by storm, and hang every man of its defenders on
the battlements.

There was a strange old song in that part of the country, to the effect
that in Limoges an arrow would be made by which King Richard would die.
It may be that BERTRAND DE GOURDON, a young man who was one of the
defenders of the castle, had often sung it or heard it sung of a winter
night, and remembered it when he saw, from his post upon the ramparts,
the King attended only by his chief officer riding below the walls
surveying the place.  He drew an arrow to the head, took steady aim, said
between his teeth, 'Now I pray God speed thee well, arrow!' discharged
it, and struck the King in the left shoulder.

Although the wound was not at first considered dangerous, it was severe
enough to cause the King to retire to his tent, and direct the assault to
be made without him.  The castle was taken; and every man of its
defenders was hanged, as the King had sworn all should be, except
Bertrand de Gourdon, who was reserved until the royal pleasure respecting
him should be known.

By that time unskilful treatment had made the wound mortal and the King
knew that he was dying.  He directed Bertrand to be brought into his
tent.  The young man was brought there, heavily chained, King Richard
looked at him steadily.  He looked, as steadily, at the King.

'Knave!' said King Richard.  'What have I done to thee that thou
shouldest take my life?'

'What hast thou done to me?' replied the young man.  'With thine own
hands thou hast killed my father and my two brothers.  Myself thou
wouldest have hanged.  Let me die now, by any torture that thou wilt.  My
comfort is, that no torture can save Thee.  Thou too must die; and,
through me, the world is quit of thee!'

Again the King looked at the young man steadily.  Again the young man
looked steadily at him.  Perhaps some remembrance of his generous enemy
Saladin, who was not a Christian, came into the mind of the dying King.

'Youth!' he said, 'I forgive thee.  Go unhurt!'  Then, turning to the
chief officer who had been riding in his company when he received the
wound, King Richard said:

'Take off his chains, give him a hundred shillings, and let him depart.'

He sunk down on his couch, and a dark mist seemed in his weakened eyes to
fill the tent wherein he had so often rested, and he died.  His age was
forty-two; he had reigned ten years.  His last command was not obeyed;
for the chief officer flayed Bertrand de Gourdon alive, and hanged him.

There is an old tune yet known--a sorrowful air will sometimes outlive
many generations of strong men, and even last longer than battle-axes
with twenty pounds of steel in the head--by which this King is said to
have been discovered in his captivity.  BLONDEL, a favourite Minstrel of
King Richard, as the story relates, faithfully seeking his Royal master,
went singing it outside the gloomy walls of many foreign fortresses and
prisons; until at last he heard it echoed from within a dungeon, and knew
the voice, and cried out in ecstasy, 'O Richard, O my King!'  You may
believe it, if you like; it would be easy to believe worse things.
Richard was himself a Minstrel and a Poet.  If he had not been a Prince
too, he might have been a better man perhaps, and might have gone out of
the world with less bloodshed and waste of life to answer for.




CHAPTER XIV--ENGLAND UNDER KING JOHN, CALLED LACKLAND


At two-and-thirty years of age, JOHN became King of England.  His pretty
little nephew ARTHUR had the best claim to the throne; but John seized
the treasure, and made fine promises to the nobility, and got himself
crowned at Westminster within a few weeks after his brother Richard's
death.  I doubt whether the crown could possibly have been put upon the
head of a meaner coward, or a more detestable villain, if England had
been searched from end to end to find him out.

The French King, Philip, refused to acknowledge the right of John to his
new dignity, and declared in favour of Arthur.  You must not suppose that
he had any generosity of feeling for the fatherless boy; it merely suited
his ambitious schemes to oppose the King of England.  So John and the
French King went to war about Arthur.

He was a handsome boy, at that time only twelve years old.  He was not
born when his father, Geoffrey, had his brains trampled out at the
tournament; and, besides the misfortune of never having known a father's
guidance and protection, he had the additional misfortune to have a
foolish mother (CONSTANCE by name), lately married to her third husband.
She took Arthur, upon John's accession, to the French King, who pretended
to be very much his friend, and who made him a Knight, and promised him
his daughter in marriage; but, who cared so little about him in reality,
that finding it his interest to make peace with King John for a time, he
did so without the least consideration for the poor little Prince, and
heartlessly sacrificed all his interests.

Young Arthur, for two years afterwards, lived quietly; and in the course
of that time his mother died.  But, the French King then finding it his
interest to quarrel with King John again, again made Arthur his pretence,
and invited the orphan boy to court.  'You know your rights, Prince,'
said the French King, 'and you would like to be a King.  Is it not so?'
'Truly,' said Prince Arthur, 'I should greatly like to be a King!'
'Then,' said Philip, 'you shall have two hundred gentlemen who are
Knights of mine, and with them you shall go to win back the provinces
belonging to you, of which your uncle, the usurping King of England, has
taken possession.  I myself, meanwhile, will head a force against him in
Normandy.'  Poor Arthur was so flattered and so grateful that he signed a
treaty with the crafty French King, agreeing to consider him his superior
Lord, and that the French King should keep for himself whatever he could
take from King John.

Now, King John was so bad in all ways, and King Philip was so perfidious,
that Arthur, between the two, might as well have been a lamb between a
fox and a wolf.  But, being so young, he was ardent and flushed with
hope; and, when the people of Brittany (which was his inheritance) sent
him five hundred more knights and five thousand foot soldiers, he
believed his fortune was made.  The people of Brittany had been fond of
him from his birth, and had requested that he might be called Arthur, in
remembrance of that dimly-famous English Arthur, of whom I told you early
in this book, whom they believed to have been the brave friend and
companion of an old King of their own.  They had tales among them about a
prophet called MERLIN (of the same old time), who had foretold that their
own King should be restored to them after hundreds of years; and they
believed that the prophecy would be fulfilled in Arthur; that the time
would come when he would rule them with a crown of Brittany upon his
head; and when neither King of France nor King of England would have any
power over them.  When Arthur found himself riding in a glittering suit
of armour on a richly caparisoned horse, at the head of his train of
knights and soldiers, he began to believe this too, and to consider old
Merlin a very superior prophet.

He did not know--how could he, being so innocent and inexperienced?--that
his little army was a mere nothing against the power of the King of
England.  The French King knew it; but the poor boy's fate was little to
him, so that the King of England was worried and distressed.  Therefore,
King Philip went his way into Normandy and Prince Arthur went his way
towards Mirebeau, a French town near Poictiers, both very well pleased.

Prince Arthur went to attack the town of Mirebeau, because his
grandmother Eleanor, who has so often made her appearance in this history
(and who had always been his mother's enemy), was living there, and
because his Knights said, 'Prince, if you can take her prisoner, you will
be able to bring the King your uncle to terms!'  But she was not to be
easily taken.  She was old enough by this time--eighty--but she was as
full of stratagem as she was full of years and wickedness.  Receiving
intelligence of young Arthur's approach, she shut herself up in a high
tower, and encouraged her soldiers to defend it like men.  Prince Arthur
with his little army besieged the high tower.  King John, hearing how
matters stood, came up to the rescue, with _his_ army.  So here was a
strange family-party!  The boy-Prince besieging his grandmother, and his
uncle besieging him!

This position of affairs did not last long.  One summer night King John,
by treachery, got his men into the town, surprised Prince Arthur's force,
took two hundred of his knights, and seized the Prince himself in his
bed.  The Knights were put in heavy irons, and driven away in open carts
drawn by bullocks, to various dungeons where they were most inhumanly
treated, and where some of them were starved to death.  Prince Arthur was
sent to the castle of Falaise.

One day, while he was in prison at that castle, mournfully thinking it
strange that one so young should be in so much trouble, and looking out
of the small window in the deep dark wall, at the summer sky and the
birds, the door was softly opened, and he saw his uncle the King standing
in the shadow of the archway, looking very grim.

'Arthur,' said the King, with his wicked eyes more on the stone floor
than on his nephew, 'will you not trust to the gentleness, the
friendship, and the truthfulness of your loving uncle?'

'I will tell my loving uncle that,' replied the boy, 'when he does me
right.  Let him restore to me my kingdom of England, and then come to me
and ask the question.'

The King looked at him and went out.  'Keep that boy close prisoner,'
said he to the warden of the castle.

Then, the King took secret counsel with the worst of his nobles how the
Prince was to be got rid of.  Some said, 'Put out his eyes and keep him
in prison, as Robort of Normandy was kept.'  Others said, 'Have him
stabbed.'  Others, 'Have him hanged.'  Others, 'Have him poisoned.'

King John, feeling that in any case, whatever was done afterwards, it
would be a satisfaction to his mind to have those handsome eyes burnt out
that had looked at him so proudly while his own royal eyes were blinking
at the stone floor, sent certain ruffians to Falaise to blind the boy
with red-hot irons.  But Arthur so pathetically entreated them, and shed
such piteous tears, and so appealed to HUBERT DE BOURG (or BURGH), the
warden of the castle, who had a love for him, and was an honourable,
tender man, that Hubert could not bear it.  To his eternal honour he
prevented the torture from being performed, and, at his own risk, sent
the savages away.

The chafed and disappointed King bethought himself of the stabbing
suggestion next, and, with his shuffling manner and his cruel face,
proposed it to one William de Bray.  'I am a gentleman and not an
executioner,' said William de Bray, and left the presence with disdain.

But it was not difficult for a King to hire a murderer in those days.
King John found one for his money, and sent him down to the castle of
Falaise.  'On what errand dost thou come?' said Hubert to this fellow.
'To despatch young Arthur,' he returned.  'Go back to him who sent thee,'
answered Hubert, 'and say that I will do it!'

King John very well knowing that Hubert would never do it, but that he
courageously sent this reply to save the Prince or gain time, despatched
messengers to convey the young prisoner to the castle of Rouen.

Arthur was soon forced from the good Hubert--of whom he had never stood
in greater need than then--carried away by night, and lodged in his new
prison: where, through his grated window, he could hear the deep waters
of the river Seine, rippling against the stone wall below.

One dark night, as he lay sleeping, dreaming perhaps of rescue by those
unfortunate gentlemen who were obscurely suffering and dying in his
cause, he was roused, and bidden by his jailer to come down the staircase
to the foot of the tower.  He hurriedly dressed himself and obeyed.  When
they came to the bottom of the winding stairs, and the night air from the
river blew upon their faces, the jailer trod upon his torch and put it
out.  Then, Arthur, in the darkness, was hurriedly drawn into a solitary
boat.  And in that boat, he found his uncle and one other man.

He knelt to them, and prayed them not to murder him.  Deaf to his
entreaties, they stabbed him and sunk his body in the river with heavy
stones.  When the spring-morning broke, the tower-door was closed, the
boat was gone, the river sparkled on its way, and never more was any
trace of the poor boy beheld by mortal eyes.

The news of this atrocious murder being spread in England, awakened a
hatred of the King (already odious for his many vices, and for his having
stolen away and married a noble lady while his own wife was living) that
never slept again through his whole reign.  In Brittany, the indignation
was intense.  Arthur's own sister ELEANOR was in the power of John and
shut up in a convent at Bristol, but his half-sister ALICE was in
Brittany.  The people chose her, and the murdered prince's father-in-law,
the last husband of Constance, to represent them; and carried their fiery
complaints to King Philip.  King Philip summoned King John (as the holder
of territory in France) to come before him and defend himself.  King John
refusing to appear, King Philip declared him false, perjured, and guilty;
and again made war.  In a little time, by conquering the greater part of
his French territory, King Philip deprived him of one-third of his
dominions.  And, through all the fighting that took place, King John was
always found, either to be eating and drinking, like a gluttonous fool,
when the danger was at a distance, or to be running away, like a beaten
cur, when it was near.

You might suppose that when he was losing his dominions at this rate, and
when his own nobles cared so little for him or his cause that they
plainly refused to follow his banner out of England, he had enemies
enough.  But he made another enemy of the Pope, which he did in this way.

The Archbishop of Canterbury dying, and the junior monks of that place
wishing to get the start of the senior monks in the appointment of his
successor, met together at midnight, secretly elected a certain REGINALD,
and sent him off to Rome to get the Pope's approval.  The senior monks
and the King soon finding this out, and being very angry about it, the
junior monks gave way, and all the monks together elected the Bishop of
Norwich, who was the King's favourite.  The Pope, hearing the whole
story, declared that neither election would do for him, and that _he_
elected STEPHEN LANGTON.  The monks submitting to the Pope, the King
turned them all out bodily, and banished them as traitors.  The Pope sent
three bishops to the King, to threaten him with an Interdict.  The King
told the bishops that if any Interdict were laid upon his kingdom, he
would tear out the eyes and cut off the noses of all the monks he could
lay hold of, and send them over to Rome in that undecorated state as a
present for their master.  The bishops, nevertheless, soon published the
Interdict, and fled.

After it had lasted a year, the Pope proceeded to his next step; which
was Excommunication.  King John was declared excommunicated, with all the
usual ceremonies.  The King was so incensed at this, and was made so
desperate by the disaffection of his Barons and the hatred of his people,
that it is said he even privately sent ambassadors to the Turks in Spain,
offering to renounce his religion and hold his kingdom of them if they
would help him.  It is related that the ambassadors were admitted to the
presence of the Turkish Emir through long lines of Moorish guards, and
that they found the Emir with his eyes seriously fixed on the pages of a
large book, from which he never once looked up.  That they gave him a
letter from the King containing his proposals, and were gravely
dismissed.  That presently the Emir sent for one of them, and conjured
him, by his faith in his religion, to say what kind of man the King of
England truly was?  That the ambassador, thus pressed, replied that the
King of England was a false tyrant, against whom his own subjects would
soon rise.  And that this was quite enough for the Emir.

Money being, in his position, the next best thing to men, King John
spared no means of getting it.  He set on foot another oppressing and
torturing of the unhappy Jews (which was quite in his way), and invented
a new punishment for one wealthy Jew of Bristol.  Until such time as that
Jew should produce a certain large sum of money, the King sentenced him
to be imprisoned, and, every day, to have one tooth violently wrenched
out of his head--beginning with the double teeth.  For seven days, the
oppressed man bore the daily pain and lost the daily tooth; but, on the
eighth, he paid the money.  With the treasure raised in such ways, the
King made an expedition into Ireland, where some English nobles had
revolted.  It was one of the very few places from which he did not run
away; because no resistance was shown.  He made another expedition into
Wales--whence he _did_ run away in the end: but not before he had got
from the Welsh people, as hostages, twenty-seven young men of the best
families; every one of whom he caused to be slain in the following year.

To Interdict and Excommunication, the Pope now added his last sentence;
Deposition.  He proclaimed John no longer King, absolved all his subjects
from their allegiance, and sent Stephen Langton and others to the King of
France to tell him that, if he would invade England, he should be
forgiven all his sins--at least, should be forgiven them by the Pope, if
that would do.

As there was nothing that King Philip desired more than to invade
England, he collected a great army at Rouen, and a fleet of seventeen
hundred ships to bring them over.  But the English people, however
bitterly they hated the King, were not a people to suffer invasion
quietly.  They flocked to Dover, where the English standard was, in such
great numbers to enrol themselves as defenders of their native land, that
there were not provisions for them, and the King could only select and
retain sixty thousand.  But, at this crisis, the Pope, who had his own
reasons for objecting to either King John or King Philip being too
powerful, interfered.  He entrusted a legate, whose name was PANDOLF,
with the easy task of frightening King John.  He sent him to the English
Camp, from France, to terrify him with exaggerations of King Philip's
power, and his own weakness in the discontent of the English Barons and
people.  Pandolf discharged his commission so well, that King John, in a
wretched panic, consented to acknowledge Stephen Langton; to resign his
kingdom 'to God, Saint Peter, and Saint Paul'--which meant the Pope; and
to hold it, ever afterwards, by the Pope's leave, on payment of an annual
sum of money.  To this shameful contract he publicly bound himself in the
church of the Knights Templars at Dover: where he laid at the legate's
feet a part of the tribute, which the legate haughtily trampled upon.  But
they _do_ say, that this was merely a genteel flourish, and that he was
afterwards seen to pick it up and pocket it.

There was an unfortunate prophet, the name of Peter, who had greatly
increased King John's terrors by predicting that he would be unknighted
