thing one thinks about. Are you fond of hunting? The forest of Seillon
is not a hundred yards off. Hunting to hounds you will have perforce to
renounce, but we have good shooting. In the days of my old bogies, the
Chartreuse monks, the woods swarmed with wild boars, hares and foxes.
No one hunts there now, because it belongs to the government; and the
government at present is nobody. In my capacity as General Bonaparte's
aide-de-camp I'll fill the vacancy, and we'll see who dares meddle with
me, if, after chasing the Austrians on the Adige and the Mamelukes
on the Nile, I hunt the boars and deer and the hares and foxes on
the Reissouse. One day of archeology, one day of fishing, and one of
hunting, that's three already. You see, my dear fellow, we have only
fifteen or sixteen left to worry about."

"My dear Roland," said Sir John sadly, and without replying to the young
officer's wordy sally, "won't you ever tell me about this fever which
sears you, this sorrow which undermines you?"

"Ah!" said Roland, with his harsh, doleful laugh. "I have never been
gayer than I am this morning; it's your liver, my lord, that is out of
order and makes you see everything black."

"Some day I hope to be really your friend," replied Sir John seriously;
"then you will confide in me, and I shall help you to bear your burden."

"And half my aneurism!--Are you hungry, my lord?"

"Why do you ask?"

"Because I hear Edouard on the stairs, coming up to tell us that
breakfast is ready."

As Roland spoke, the door opened and the boy burst out: "Big brother
Roland, mother and sister Amelie are waiting breakfast for Sir John and
you."

Then catching the Englishman's right hand, he carefully examined the
first joint of the thumb and forefinger.

"What are you looking at, my little friend?" asked Sir John.

"I was looking to see if you had any ink on your fingers."

"And if I had ink on my fingers, what would it mean?"

"That you had written to England, and sent for my pistols and sword."

"No, I have not yet written," said Sir John; "but I will to-day."

"You hear, big brother Roland? I'm to have my sword and my pistols in a
fortnight!"

And the boy, full of delight, offered his firm rosy cheek to Sir John,
who kissed it as tenderly as a father would have done. Then they went to
the dining-room where Madame de Montrevel and Amelie were awaiting them.




CHAPTER XII. PROVINCIAL PLEASURES

That same day Roland put into execution part of his plans for his
guest's amusement. He took Sir John to see the church of Brou.

Those who have seen the charming little chapel of Brou know that it is
known as one of the hundred marvels of the Renaissance; those who have
not seen it must have often heard it said. Roland, who had counted on
doing the honors of this historic gem to Sir John, and who had not seen
it for the last seven or eight years, was much disappointed when, on
arriving in front of the building, he found the niches of the saints
empty and the carved figures of the portal decapitated.

He asked for the sexton; people laughed in his face. There was no longer
a sexton. He inquired to whom he should go for the keys. They replied
that the captain of the gendarmerie had them. The captain was not far
off, for the cloister adjoining the church had been converted into a
barrack.

Roland went up to the captain's room and made himself known as
Bonaparte's aide-de-camp. The captain, with the placid obedience of a
subaltern to his superior officer, gave him the keys and followed behind
him. Sir John was waiting before the porch, admiring, in spite of the
mutilation to which they had been subjected, the admirable details of
the frontal.

Roland opened the door and started back in astonishment. The church was
literally stuffed with hay like a cannon charged to the muzzle.

"What does this mean?" he asked the captain of the gendarmerie.

"A precaution taken by the municipality."

"A precaution taken by the municipality?"

"Yes."

"For what?"

"To save the church. They were going to demolish it; but the mayor
issued a decree declaring that, in expiation of the false worship for
which it had served, it should be used to store fodder."

Roland burst out laughing, and, turning to Sir John, he said: "My
dear Sir John, the church was well worth seeing, but I think what this
gentleman has just told us is no less curious. You can always find--at
Strasburg, Cologne, or Milan--churches or cathedrals to equal the chapel
of Brou; but where will you find an administration idiotic enough to
destroy such a masterpiece, and a mayor clever enough to turn it into a
barn? A thousand thanks, captain. Here are your keys."

"As I was saying at Avignon, the first time I had the pleasure of seeing
you, my dear Roland," replied Sir John, "the French are a most amusing
people."

"This time, my lord, you are too polite," replied Roland. "Idiotic is
the word. Listen. I can understand the political cataclysms which have
convulsed society for the last thousand years; I can understand the
communes, the pastorals, the Jacquerie, the maillotins, the Saint
Bartholomew, the League, the Fronde, the dragonnades, the Revolution; I
can understand the 14th of July, the 5th and 6th of October, the 20th
of June, the 10th of August, the 2d and 3d of September, the 21st of
January, the 31st of May, the 30th of October, and the 9th Thermidor; I
can understand the egregious torch of civil wars, which inflames instead
of soothing the blood; I can understand the tidal wave of revolution,
sweeping on with its flux, that nothing can arrest, and its reflux,
which carries with it the ruins of the institution which it has itself
shattered. I can understand all that, but lance against lance, sword
against sword, men against men, a people against a people! I can
understand the deadly rage of the victors, the sanguinary reaction of
the vanquished, the political volcanoes which rumble in the bowels of
the globe, shake the earth, topple over thrones, upset monarchies, and
roll heads and crowns on the scaffold. But what I cannot understand is
this mutilation of the granite, this placing of monuments beyond the
pale of the law, the destruction of inanimate things, which belong
neither to those who destroy them nor to the epoch in which they are
destroyed; this pillage of the gigantic library where the antiquarian
can read the archeological history of a country. Oh! the vandals, the
barbarians! Worse than that, the idiots! who revenge the Borgia crimes
and the debauches of Louis XV. on stone. How well those Pharaohs, Menaes,
and Cheops knew man as the most perversive, destructive and evil of
animals! They who built their pyramids, not with carved traceries, nor
lacy spires, but with solid blocks of granite fifty feet square! How
they must have laughed in the depths of those sepulchres as they watched
Time dull its scythe and pashas wear out their nails in vain against
them. Let us build pyramids, my dear Sir John. They are not difficult as
architecture, nor beautiful as art, but they are solid; and that enables
a general to say four thousand years later: 'Soldiers, from the apex of
these monuments forty centuries are watching you!' On my honor, my lord,
I long to meet a windmill this moment that I might tilt against it."

And Roland, bursting into his accustomed laugh, dragged Sir John in the
direction of the chateau. But Sir John stopped him and asked: "Is there
nothing else to see in the city except the church?"

"Formerly, my lord," replied Roland, "before they made a hay-loft of
it, I should have asked you to come down with me into the vaults of
the Dukes of Savoy. We could have hunted for that subterranean passage,
nearly three miles long, which is said to exist there, and which,
according to these rumors, communicates with the grotto of Ceyzeriat.
Please observe, I should never offer such a pleasure trip except to an
Englishman; it would have been like a scene from your celebrated Anne
Radcliffe in the 'Mysteries of Udolpho.' But, as you see, that is
impossible, so we will have to be satisfied with our regrets. Come."

"Where are we going?"

"Faith, I don't know. Ten years ago I should have taken you to the farms
where they fatten pullets. The pullets of Bresse, you must know, have a
European reputation. Bourg was an annex to the great coop of Strasburg.
But during the Terror, as you can readily imagine, these fatteners of
poultry shut up shop. You earned the reputation of being an aristocrat
if you ate a pullet, and you know the fraternal refrain: 'Ah, ca ira, ca
ira--the aristocrats to the lantern!' After Robespierre's downfall
they opened up again; but since the 18th of Fructidor, France has been
commanded to fast, from fowls and all. Never mind; come on, anyway.
In default of pullets, I can show you one thing, the square where
they executed those who ate them. But since I was last in the town the
streets have changed their names. I know the way, but I don't know the
names."

"Look here!" demanded Sir John; "aren't you a Republican?"

"I not a Republican? Come, come! Quite to the contrary. I consider
myself an excellent Republican. I am quite capable of burning off my
hand, like Mucius Scaevola, or jumping into the gulf like Curtius to save
the Republic; but I have, unluckily, a keen sense of the ridiculous.
In spite of myself, the absurdity of things catches me in the side and
tickles me till I nearly die of laughing. I am willing to accept the
Constitution of 1791; but when poor Herault de Sechelles wrote to the
superintendent of the National Library to send him a copy of the laws
of Minos, so that he could model his constitution on that of the Isle
of Crete, I thought it was going rather far, and that we might very well
have been content with those of Lycurgus. I find January, February, and
March, mythological as they were, quite as good as Nivose, Pluviose,
and Ventose. I can't understand why, when one was called Antoine or
Chrystomome in 1789, he should be called Brutus or Cassius in 1793.
Here, for example, my lord, is an honest street, which was called
the Rue des Halles (Market Street). There was nothing indecent or
aristocratic about that, was there? Well, now it is called--Just wait
(Roland read the inscription). Well, now it is called the Rue de la
Revolution. Here's another, which used to be called Notre Dame; it is
now the Rue du Temple. Why Rue du Temple? Probably to perpetuate the
memory of that place where the infamous Simon tried to teach cobbling to
the heir of sixty-three kings. Don't quarrel with me if I am mistaken by
one or two! Now here's a third; it was named Crevecoeur, a name famous
throughout Bresse, Burgundy and Flanders. It is now the Rue de la
Federation. Federation is a fine thing, but Crevecoeur was a fine name.
And then you see to-day it leads straight to the Place de la Guillotine,
which is, in my opinion, all wrong. I don't want any streets that lead
to such places. This one has its advantages; it is only about a hundred
feet from the prison, which economized and still economizes the tumbrel
and the horse of M. de Bourg. By the way, have you noticed that the
executioner remains noble and keeps his title? For the rest, the square
is excellently arranged for spectators, and my ancestor, Montrevel,
whose name it bears, doubtless, foreseeing its ultimate destiny, solved
the great problem, still unsolved by the theatres, of being able to see
well from every nook and corner. If ever they cut off my head, which,
considering the times in which we are living, would in no wise be
surprising, I shall have but one regret: that of being less well-placed
and seeing less than the others. Now let us go up these steps. Here we
are in the Place des Lices. Our Revolutionists left it its name, because
in all probability they don't know what it means. I don't know
much better than they, but I think I remember that a certain Sieur
d'Estavayer challenged some Flemish count--I don't know who--and that
the combat took place in this square. Now, my dear fellow, here is the
prison, which ought to give you some idea of human vicissitudes. Gil
Blas didn't change his condition more often than this monument its
purposes. Before Caesar it was a Gaelic temple; Caesar converted it into a
Roman fortress; an unknown architect transformed it into a military work
during the Middle Ages; the Knights of Baye, following Caesar's
example, re-made it into a fortress; the princes of Savoy used it for a
residence; the aunt of Charles V. lived here when she came to visit her
church at Brou, which she never had the satisfaction of seeing finished.
Finally, after the treaty of Lyons, when Bresse was returned to France,
it was utilized both as a prison and a court-house. Wait for me a
moment, my lord, if you dislike the squeaking of hinges and the grating
of bolts. I have a visit to pay to a certain cell."

"The grating of bolts and the squeaking of hinges is not a very
enlivening sound, but no matter. Since you were kind enough to undertake
my education, show me your dungeon."

"Very well, then. Come in quickly. I see a crowd of persons who look as
if they want to speak to me."

In fact, little by little, a sort of rumor seemed to spread throughout
the town. People emerged from the houses, forming groups in the streets,
and they all watched Roland with curiosity. He rang the bell of the
gate, situated then where it is now, but opening into the prison yard. A
jailer opened it for them.

"Ah, ah! so you are still here, Father Courtois?" asked the young man.
Then, turning to Sir John, he added: "A fine name for a jailer, isn't
it, my lord?"

The jailer looked at the young man in amazement.

"How is it," he asked through the grating, "that you know my name, when
I don't know yours?"

"Good! I not only know your name, but also your opinions. You are an old
royalist, Pere Courtois."

"Monsieur," said the jailer, terrified, "don't make bad jokes if you
please, and say what you want."

"Well, my good Father Courtois, I would like to visit the cell where
they put my mother and sister, Madame and Mademoiselle Montrevel."

"Ah!" exclaimed the gatekeeper, "so it's you, M. Louis? You may well say
that I know you. What a fine, handsome young man you've grown to be!"

"Do you think so, Father Courtois? Well, I can return the compliment.
Your daughter Charlotte is, on my word, a beautiful girl. Charlotte is
my sister's maid, Sir John."

"And she is very happy over it. She is better off there than here, M.
Roland. Is it true that you are General Bonaparte's aide-de-camp?"

"Alas! I have that honor, Courtois. You would prefer me to be Comte
d'Artois's aide-de-camp, or that of M. le Duc of Angouleme?"

"Oh, do be quiet, M. Louis!" Then putting his lips to the young man's
ear, "Tell me, is it true?"

"What, Father Courtois?"

"That General Bonaparte passed through Lyons yesterday?"

"There must be some truth in the rumor, for this is the second time
that I have heard it. Ah! I understand now. These good people who were
watching me so curiously apparently wanted to question me. They were
like you, Father Courtois: they want to know what to make of General
Bonaparte's arrival."

"Do you know what they say, M. Louis?"

"Still another rumor, Father Courtois?"

"I should think so, but they only whisper it."

"What is it?"

"They say that he has come to demand the throne of his Majesty Louis
XVIII. from the Directory and the king's return to it; and that if
Citizen Gohier as president doesn't give it up of his own accord he will
take it by force."

"Pooh!" exclaimed the young officer with an incredulous air bordering on
irony. But Father Courtois insisted on his news with an affirmative nod.

"Possibly," said the young man; "but as for that, it's news for me. And
now that you know me, will you open the gate?"

"Of course I will. I should think so. What the devil am I about?"
and the jailer opened the gate with an eagerness equalling his former
reluctance. The young man entered, and Sir John followed him. The jailer
locked the gate carefully, then he turned, followed by Roland and the
Englishman in turn. The latter was beginning to get accustomed to
his young friend's erratic character. The spleen he saw in Roland was
misanthropy, without the sulkiness of Timon or the wit of Alceste.

The jailer crossed the yard, which was separated from the law courts
by a wall fifteen feet high, with an opening let into the middle of
the receding wall, closed by a massive oaken door, to admit prisoners
without taking them round by the street. The jailer, we say, crossed the
yard to a winding stairway in the left angle of the courtyard which led
to the interior of the prison.

If we insist upon these details, it is because we shall be obliged to
return to this spot later, and we do not wish it to be wholly unfamiliar
to our readers when that time comes.

These steps led first to the ante-chamber of the prison, that is to say
to the porter's hall of the lower court-room. From that hall ten steps
led down into an inner court, separated from a third, which was that of
the prisoners, by a wall similar to the one we have described, only this
one had three doors. At the further end of the courtyard a passage led
to the jailer's own room, which gave into a second passage, on which
were the cells which were picturesquely styled cages. The jailer paused
before the first of these cages and said, striking the door:

"This is where I put madame, your mother, and your sister, so that if
the dear ladies wanted either Charlotte or myself, they need but knock."

"Is there any one in the cell?"

"No one"

"Then please open the door. My friend, Lord Tanlay, is a philanthropic
Englishman who is travelling about to see if the French prisons are more
comfortable than the English ones. Enter, Sir John."

Pere Courtois having opened the door, Roland pushed Sir John into a
perfectly square cell measuring ten or twelve feet each way.

"Oh, oh!" exclaimed Sir John, "this is lugubrious."

"Do you think so? Well, my dear friend, this is where my mother, the
noblest woman in the world, and my sister, whom you know, spent six
weeks with a prospect of leaving it only to make the trip to the Place
de Bastion. Just think, that was five years ago, so my sister was
scarcely twelve."

"But what crime had they committed?"

"Oh! a monstrous crime. At the anniversary festival with which the town
of Bourg considered proper to commemorate the death of the 'Friend of
the People,' my mother refused to permit my sister to represent one of
the virgins who bore the tears of France in vases. What will you! Poor
woman, she thought she had done enough for her country in giving it
the blood of her son and her husband, which was flowing in Italy and
Germany. She was mistaken. Her country, as it seems, claimed further the
tears of her daughter. She thought that too much, especially as those
tears were to flow for the citizen Marat. The result was that on the
very evening of the celebration, during the enthusiastic exaltation,
my mother was declared accused. Fortunately Bourg had not attained the
celerity of Paris. A friend of ours, an official in the record-office,
kept the affair dragging, until one fine day the fall and death of
Robespierre were made known. That interrupted a good many things, among
others the guillotinades. Our friend convinced the authorities that the
wind blowing from Paris had veered toward clemency; they waited fifteen
days, and on the sixteenth they told my mother and sister that they were
free. So you understand, my friend--and this involves the most profound
philosophical reflection--so that if Mademoiselle Teresa Cabarrus had
not come from Spain, if she had not married M. Fontenay, parliamentary
counsellor; had she not been arrested and brought before the pro-consul
Tallien, son of the Marquis de Bercy's butler, ex-notary's clerk,
ex-foreman of a printing-shop, ex-porter, ex-secretary to the Commune
of Paris temporarily at Bordeaux; and had the ex-pro-consul not become
enamored of her, and had she not been imprisoned, and if on the ninth
of Thermidor she had not found means to send a dagger with these words:
'Unless the tyrant dies to-day, I die to-morrow'; had not Saint-Just
been arrested in the midst of his discourse; had not Robespierre, on
that day, had a frog in his throat; had not Garnier de l'Aube exclaimed:
'It is the blood of Danton choking you!' had not Louchet shouted for his
arrest; had he not been arrested, released by the Commune, recaptured
in spite of this, had his jaw broken by a pistol shot, and been executed
next day--my mother would, in all probability, have had her head cut off
for refusing to allow her daughter to weep for citizen Marat in one of
the twelve lachrymal urns which Bourg was desirous of filling with its
tears. Good-by, Courtois. You are a worthy man. You gave my mother and
sister a little water to put with their wine, a little meat to eat with
their bread, a little hope to fill their hearts; you lent them your
daughter that they might not have to sweep their cell themselves. That
deserves a fortune. Unfortunately I am not rich; but here are fifty
louis I happen to have with me. Come, my lord."

And the young man carried off Sir John before the jailer, recovered from
his surprise and found time either to thank Roland or refuse the fifty
louis; which, it must be said, would have been a remarkable proof of
disinterestedness in a jailer, especially when that jailer's opinions
were opposed to those of the government he served.

Leaving the prison, Roland and Sir John found the Place des Lices
crowded with people who had heard of General Bonaparte's return
to France, and were shouting "Vive Bonaparte!" at the top of their
lungs--some because they really admired the victor of Arcola, Rivoli,
and the Pyramids, others because they had been told, like Pere Courtois,
that this same victor had vanquished only that Louis XVIII. might profit
by his victories.

Roland and Sir John, having now visited all that the town of Bourg
offered of interest, returned to the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines, which
they reached before long. Madame de Montrevel and Amelie had gone out.
Roland installed Sir John in an easy chair, asking him to wait a few
minutes for him. At the end of five minutes he returned with a sort of
pamphlet of gray paper, very badly printed, in his hand.

"My dear fellow," said he, "you seemed to have some doubts about the
authenticity of that festival which I just mentioned, and which nearly
cost my mother and sister their lives, so I bring you the programme.
Read it, and while you are doing so I will go and see what they have
been doing with my dogs; for I presume that you would rather hold me
quit of our fishing expedition in favor of a hunt."

He went out, leaving in Sir John's hands a copy of the decree of the
municipality of the town of Bourg, instituting the funeral rites in
honor of Marat, on the anniversary of his death.




CHAPTER XIII. THE WILD-BOAR

Sir John was just finishing that interesting bit of history when Madame
de Montrevel and her daughter returned. Amelie, who did not know how
much had been said about her between Roland and Sir John, was astounded
by the expression with which that gentleman scrutinized her.

To him she seemed more lovely than before. He could readily understand
that mother, who at the risk of life had been unwilling that this
charming creature should profane her youth and beauty by serving as a
mourner in a celebration of which Marat was the deity. He recalled that
cold damp cell which he had lately visited, and shuddered at the thought
that this delicate white ermine before his eyes had been imprisoned
there, without sun or air, for six weeks. He looked at the throat,
too long perhaps, but swan-like in its suppleness and graceful in its
exaggeration, and he remembered that melancholy remark of the poor
Princesse de Lamballe, as she felt her slender neck: "It will not give
the executioner much trouble!"

The thoughts which succeeded each other in Sir John's mind gave to his
face an expression so different from its customary aspect, that Madame
de Montrevel could not refrain from asking what troubled him. He then
told her of his visit to the prison, and Roland's pious pilgrimage to
the dungeon where his mother and sister had been incarcerated. Just
as Sir John had concluded his tale, a view-halloo sounded without, and
Roland entered, his hunting-horn in his hands.

"My dear friend," he cried, "thanks to my mother, we shall have a
splendid hunt to-morrow."

"Thanks to me?" queried Madame de Montrevel.

"How so?" added Sir John.

"I left you to see about my dogs, didn't I?"

"You said so, at any rate."

"I had two excellent beasts, Barbichon and Ravaude, male and female."

"Oh!" exclaimed Sir John, "are they dead?"

"Well, yes; but just guess what this excellent mother of mine has done?"
and, tilting Madame de Montrevel's head, he kissed her on both cheeks.
"She wouldn't let them drown a single puppy because they were the dogs
of my dogs; so the result is, that to-day the pups, grand-pups, and
great-grand-pups of Barbichon and Ravaude are as numerous as the
descendant of Ishmael. Instead of a pair of dogs, I have a whole pack,
twenty-five beasts, all as black as moles with white paws, fire in their
eyes and hearts, and a regiment of cornet-tails that would do you good
to see."

And Roland sounded another halloo that brought his young brother to the
scene.

"Oh!" shouted the boy as he entered, "you are going hunting to-morrow,
brother Roland. I'm going, too, I'm going, too!"

"Good!" said Roland, "but do you know what we are going to hunt?"

"No. All I know is that I'm going, too."

"We're going to hunt a boar."

"Oh, joy!" cried the boy, clapping his little hands.

"Are you crazy?" asked Madame de Montrevel, turning pale.

"Why so, madame mother, if you please?"

"Because boar hunts are very dangerous."

"Not so dangerous as hunting men. My brother got back safe from that,
and so will I from the other."

"Roland," cried Madame de Montrevel, while Amelie, lost in thought, took
no part in the discussion, "Roland, make Edouard listen to reason. Tell
him that he hasn't got common-sense."

But Roland, who recognized himself again in his young brother, instead
of blaming him, smiled at his boyish ardor. "I'd take you willingly,"
said he, "only to go hunting one must at least know how to handle a
gun."

"Oh, Master Roland," cried Edouard, "just come into the garden a bit.
Put up your hat at a hundred yards, and I'll show you how to handle a
gun."

"Naughty child," exclaimed Madame de Montrevel, trembling, "where did
you learn?"

"Why, from the gunsmith at Montagnac, who keeps papa's and Roland's
guns. You ask me sometimes what I do with my money, don't you? Well, I
buy powder and balls with it, and I am learning to kill Austrians and
Arabs like my brother Roland."

Madame de Montrevel raised her hands to heaven.

"What can you expect, mother?" asked Roland. "Blood will tell. No
Montrevel could be afraid of powder. You shall come with us to-morrow,
Edouard."

The boy sprang upon his brother's neck.

"And I," said Sir John, "will equip you to-day like a regular huntsman,
just as they used to arm the knights of old. I have a charming little
rifle that I will give you. It will keep you contented until your sabre
and pistols come."

"Well," asked Roland, "are you satisfied now, Edouard?"

"Yes; but when will he give it to me? If you have to write to England
for it, I warn you I shan't believe in it."

"No, my little friend, we have only to go up to my room and open my
gun-case. That's soon done."

"Then, let's go at once."

"Come on," said Sir John; and he went out, followed by Edouard.

A moment later, Amelie, still absorbed in thought, rose and left the
room. Neither Madame de Montrevel nor Roland noticed her departure, so
interested were they in a serious discussion. Madame de Montrevel
tried to persuade Roland not to take his young brother with him on the
morrow's hunt. Roland explained that, since Edouard was to become a
soldier like his father and brother, the sooner he learned to handle a
gun and become familiar with powder and ball the better. The discussion
was not yet ended when Edouard returned with his gun slung over his
shoulder.

"Look, brother," said he, turning to Roland; "just see what a fine
present Sir John has given me." And he looked gratefully at Sir John,
who stood in the doorway vainly seeking Amelie with his eyes.

It was in truth a beautiful present. The rifle, designed with that
plainness of ornament and simplicity of form peculiar to English
weapons, was of the finest finish. Like the pistols, of which Roland
had had opportunity to test the accuracy, the rifle was made by the
celebrated Manton, and carried a twenty-four calibre bullet. That it had
been originally intended for a woman was easily seen by the shortness
of the stock and the velvet pad on the trigger. This original purpose of
the weapon made it peculiarly suitable for a boy of twelve.

Roland took the rifle from his brother's shoulder, looked at it
knowingly, tried its action, sighted it, tossed it from one hand to the
other, and then, giving it back to Edouard, said: "Thank Sir John again.
You have a rifle fit for a king's son. Let's go and try it."

All three went out to try Sir John's rifle, leaving Madame de Montrevel
as sad as Thetis when she saw Achilles in his woman's garb draw the
sword of Ulysses from its scabbard.

A quarter of an hour later, Edouard returned triumphantly. He brought
his mother a bit of pasteboard of the circumference of a hat, in which
he had put ten bullets out of twelve. The two men had remained behind in
the park conversing.

Madame de Montrevel listened to Edouard's slightly boastful account of
his prowess. Then she looked at him with that deep and holy sorrow of
mothers to whom fame is no compensation for the blood it sheds. Oh!
ungrateful indeed is the child who has seen that look bent upon him
and does not eternally remember it. Then, after a few seconds of this
painful contemplation, she pressed her second son to her breast, and
murmured sobbing: "You, too! you, too, will desert your mother some
day."

"Yes, mother," replied the boy, "to become a general like my father, or
an aide-de-camp like Roland."

"And to be killed as your father was, as your brother perhaps will be."

For the strange transformation in Roland's character had not escaped
Madame de Montrevel. It was but an added dread to her other anxieties,
among which Amelie's pallor and abstraction must be numbered.

Amelie was just seventeen; her childhood had been that of a happy
laughing girl, joyous and healthy. The death of her father had cast a
black veil over her youth and gayety. But these tempests of spring pass
rapidly. Her smile, the sunshine of life's dawn, returned like that of
Nature, sparkling through that dew of the heart we call tears.

Then, one day about six months before this story opens, Amelie's face
had saddened, her cheeks had grown pale, and, like the birds who migrate
at the approach of wintry weather, the childlike laughter that escaped
her parted lips and white teeth had fled never to return.

Madame de Montrevel had questioned her, but Amelie asserted that she was
still the same. She endeavored to smile, but as a stone thrown into
a lake rings upon the surface, so the smiles roused by this maternal
solicitude faded, little by little, from Amelie's face. With keen
maternal instinct Madame de Montrevel had thought of love. But
whom could Amelie love? There were no visitors at the Chateau des
Noires-Fontaines, the political troubles had put an end to all society,
and Amelie went nowhere alone. Madame de Montrevel could get no further
than conjecture. Roland's return had given her a moment's hope; but
this hope fled as soon as she perceived the effect which this event had
produced upon Amelie.

It was not a sister, but a spectre, it will be recalled, who had come
to meet him. Since her son's arrival, Madame de Montrevel had not
lost sight of Amelie, and she perceived, with dolorous amazement, that
Roland's presence awakened a feeling akin to terror in his sister's
breast. She, whose eyes had formerly rested so lovingly upon him, now
seemed to view him with alarm. Only a few moments since, Amelie had
profited by the first opportunity to return to her room, the one spot in
the chateau where she seemed at ease, and where for the last six months
she had spent most of her time. The dinner-bell alone possessed the
power to bring her from it, and even then she waited for the second call
before entering the dining-room.

Roland and Sir John, as we have said, had divided their time between
their visit to Bourg and their preparations for the morrow's hunt. From
morn until noon they were to beat the woods; from noon till evening they
were to hunt the boar. Michel, that devoted poacher, confined to his
chair for the present with a sprain, felt better as soon as the question
of the hunt was mooted, and had himself hoisted on a little horse that
was used for the errands of the house. Then he sallied forth to collect
the beaters from Saint-Just and Montagnac. He, being unable to beat
or run, was to remain with the pack, and watch Sir John's and Roland's
horse, and Edouard's pony, in the middle of the forest, where it was
intersected by one good road and two practicable paths. The beaters,
who could not follow the hunt, were to return to the chateau with the
game-bags.

The beaters were at the door at six the following morning. Michel was
not to leave with the horses and dogs until eleven. The Chateau des
Noires-Fontaines was just at the edge of the forest of Seillon, so the
hunt could begin at its very gates.

As the battue promised chiefly deer and hares, the guns were loaded with
balls. Roland gave Edouard a simple little gun which he himself had used
as a child. He had not enough confidence as yet in the boy's prudence
to trust him with a double-barrelled gun. As for the rifle that Sir John
had given him the day before, it could only carry cartridges. It was
given into Michel's safe keeping, to be returned to him in case they
started a boar for the second part of the hunt. For this Roland and
Sir John were also to change their guns for rifles and hunting knives,
pointed as daggers and sharp as razors, which formed part of Sir John's
arsenal, and could be suspended from the belt or screwed on the point of
the gun like bayonets.

From the beginning of the battue it was easy to see that the hunt would
be a good one. A roebuck and two hares were killed at once. At noon two
does, seven roebucks and two foxes had been bagged. They had also seen
two boars, but these latter had only shaken their bristles in answer to
the heavy balls and made off.

Edouard was in the seventh heaven; he had killed a roebuck. The beaters,
well rewarded for their labor, were sent to the chateau with the game,
as had been arranged. A sort of bugle was sounded to ascertain Michel's
whereabout, to which he answered. In less than ten minutes the three
hunters had rejoined the gardener with his hounds and horses.

Michel had seen a boar which he had sent his son to head off, and it was
now in the woods not a hundred paces distant. Jacques, Michel's eldest
son, beat up the woods with Barbichon and Ravaude, the heads of the
pack, and in about five minutes the boar was found in his lair. They
could have killed him at once, or at least shot at him, but that would
have ended the hunt too quickly. The huntsmen launched the whole pack
at the animal, which, seeing this troop of pygmies swoop down upon
him, started off at a slow trot. He crossed the road, Roland giving the
view-halloo, and headed in the direction of the Chartreuse of Seillon,
the three riders following the path which led through the woods. The
boar led them a chase which lasted until five in the afternoon, turning
upon his tracks, evidently unwilling to leave the forest with its thick
undergrowth.

At last the violent barking of the dogs warned them that the animal had
been brought to bay. The spot was not a hundred paces distant from
the pavilion belonging to the Chartreuse, in one of the most tangled
thickets of the forest. It was impossible to force the horses through
it, and the riders dismounted. The barking of the dogs guided them
straight along the path, from which they deviated only where the
obstacles they encountered rendered it necessary.

From time to time yelps of pain indicated that members of the attacking
party had ventured too close to the animal, and had paid the price of
their temerity. About twenty feet from the scene of action the hunters
began to see the actors. The boar was backed against a rock to avoid
attack in the rear; then, bracing himself on his forepaws, he faced the
dogs with his ensanguined eyes and enormous tusks. They quivered around
him like a moving carpet; five or six, more or less badly wounded, were
staining the battlefield with their blood, though still attacking the
boar with a fury and courage that might have served as an example to the
bravest men.

Each hunter faced the scene with the characteristic signs of his age,
nature and nation. Edouard, at one and the same time, the most imprudent
and the smallest, finding the path less difficult, owing to his small,
stature, arrived first. Roland, heedless of danger of any kind, seeking
rather than avoiding it, followed. Finally Sir John, slower, graver,
more reflective, brought up the rear. Once the boar perceived his
hunters he paid no further attention to the dogs. He fixed his gleaming,
sanguinary eyes upon them; but his only movement was a snapping of the
jaws, which he brought together with a threatening sound. Roland watched
the scene for an instant, evidently desirous of flinging himself into
the midst of the group, knife in hand, to slit the boar's throat as a
butcher would that of a calf or a pig. This impulse was so apparent that
Sir John caught his arm, and little Edouard exclaimed: "Oh! brother, let
me shoot the boar!"

Roland restrained himself, and stacking his gun against a tree, waited,
armed only with his hunting-knife, which he had drawn from its sheath.

"Very well," said he, "shoot him; but be careful about it."

"Oh! don't worry," retorted the child, between his set teeth. His
face was pale but resolute as he aimed the barrel of his rifle at the
animal's head.

"If he misses him, or only wounds him," observed Sir John, "you know
that the brute will be upon us before we can see him through the smoke."

"I know it, my lord; but I am accustomed to these hunts," replied
Roland, his nostrils quivering, his eyes sparkling, his lips parted:
"Fire, Edouard!"

The shot followed the order upon the instant; but after the shot, with,
or even before it, the beast, swift as lightning, rushed upon the child.
A second shot followed the first, but the animal's scarlet eyes still
gleamed through the smoke. But, as it rushed, it met Roland with his
knee on the ground, the knife in his hand. A moment later a tangled,
formless group, man and boar, boar and man, was rolling on the ground.
Then a third shot rang out, followed by a laugh from Roland.

"Ah! my lord," cried the young man, "you've wasted powder and shot.
Can't you see that I have ripped him up? Only get his body off of me.
The beast weighs at least four hundred pounds, and he is smothering me."

But before Sir John could stoop, Roland, with a vigorous push of the
shoulder, rolled the animal's body aside, and rose to his feet covered
with blood, but without a single scratch. Little Edouard, either from
lack of time or from native courage, had not recoiled an inch. True, he
was completely protected by his brother's body, which was between him
and the boar. Sir John had sprung aside to take the animal in the flank.
He watched Roland, as he emerged from this second duel, with the same
amazement that he had experienced after the first.

The dogs--those that were left, some twenty in all--had followed the
boar, and were now leaping upon his body in the vain effort to tear the
bristles, which were almost as impenetrable as iron.

"You will see," said Roland, wiping the blood from his face and hands
with a fine cambric handkerchief, "how they will eat him, and your knife
too, my lord."

"True," said Sir John; "where is the knife?"

"In its sheath," replied Roland.

"Ah!" exclaimed the boy, "only the handle shows."

He sprang toward the animal and pulled out the poniard, which, as he
said, was buried up to the hilt. The sharp point, guided by a calm eye
and a firm hand, had pierced the animal's heart.

There were other wounds on the boar's body. The first, caused by the
boy's shot, showed a bloody furrow just over the eye; the blow had been
too weak to crush the frontal bone. The second came from Sir John's
first shot; it had caught the animal diagonally and grazed his breast.
The third, fired at close quarters, went through the body; but, as
Roland had said, not until after the animal was dead.




CHAPTER XIV. AN UNPLEASANT COMMISSION

The hunt was over, darkness was falling, and it was now a question of
returning to the chateau. The horses were nearby; they could hear them
neighing impatiently. They seemed to be asking if their courage was so
doubted that they were not allowed to share in the exciting drama.

Edouard was bent upon dragging the boar after them, fastening it to the
saddle-bow, and so carrying it back to the chateau; but Roland pointed
out that it was simpler to send a couple of men for it with a barrow.
Sir John being of the same opinion, Edouard--who never ceased pointing
to the wound in the head, and saying, "That's my shot; that's where I
aimed"--Edouard, we say, was forced to yield to the majority. The three
hunters soon reached the spot where their horses were tethered, mounted,
and in less than ten minutes were at the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines.

Madame de Montrevel was watching for them on the portico. The poor
mother had waited there nearly an hour, trembling lest an accident had
befallen one or the other of her sons. The moment Edouard espied her he
put his pony to a gallop, shouting from the gate: "Mother, mother! We
killed a boar as big as a donkey. I shot him in the head; you'll see the
hole my ball, made; Roland stuck his hunting knife into the boar's belly
up to the hilt, and Sir John fired at him twice. Quick, quick! Send the
men for the carcass. Don't be frightened when you see Roland. He's all
covered with blood--but it's from the boar, and he hasn't a scratch."

This was delivered with Edouard's accustomed volubility while Madame de
Montrevel was crossing the clearing between the portico and the road to
open the gate. She intended to take Edouard in her arms, but he jumped
from his saddle and flung himself upon her neck. Roland and Sir John
came up just then, and Amelie appeared on the portico at the same
instant.

Edouard left his mother to worry over Roland, who, covered as he was
with blood, looked very terrifying, and rushed to his sister with the
tale he had rattled off to his mother. Amelie listened in an abstracted
manner that probably hurt Edouard's vanity, for he dashed off to the
kitchen to describe the affair to Michel, who was certain to listen to
him.

