a young prince he was--did not expect that he too would come riding by
her gate, and perhaps tumble down from his horse there, and be taken
into the house, and be cured, and cause his royal grandpapa to give
Martin Lambert a regiment, and fall in love with Theo.

The Colonel for his part, and his second daughter, Miss Hetty, were on
the laughing, scornful, unbelieving side. Mamma was always match-making.
Indeed, Mrs. Lambert was much addicted to novels, and cried her eyes out
over them with great assiduity. No coach ever passed the gate, but she
expected a husband for her girls would alight from it and ring the bell.
As for Miss Hetty, she allowed her tongue to wag in a more than
usually saucy way: she made a hundred sly allusions to their guest. She
introduced Prussia and Persia into their conversation with abominable
pertness and frequency. She asked whether the present King of Prussia
was called the Shaw or the Sophy, and how far it was from Ispahan to
Saxony, which his Majesty was at present invading, and about which war
papa was so busy with his maps and his newspapers? She brought down the
Persian Tales from her mamma's closet, and laid them slily on the table
in the parlour where the family sate. She would not marry a Persian
prince for her part; she would prefer a gentleman who might not have
more than one wife at a time. She called our young Virginian Theo's
gentleman, Theo's prince. She asked her mamma if she wished her, Hetty,
to take the other visitor, the black prince, for herself? Indeed, she
rallied her sister and her mother unceasingly on their sentimentalities,
and would never stop until she had made them angry, when she would begin
to cry herself, and kiss them violently one after the other, and coax
them back into good-humour. Simple Harry Warrington, meanwhile, knew
nothing of all the jokes, the tears, quarrels, reconciliations, hymeneal
plans, and so forth, of which he was the innocent occasion. A hundred
allusions to the Prussians and Persians were shot at him, and those
Parthian arrows did not penetrate his hide at all. A Shaw? A Sophy?
Very likely he thought a Sophy was a lady, and would have deemed it the
height of absurdity that a man with a great black beard should have
any such name. We fall into the midst of a quiet family: we drop like a
stone, say, into a pool,--we are perfectly compact and cool, and little
know the flutter and excitement we make there, disturbing the fish,
frightening the ducks, and agitating the whole surface of the water.
How should Harry know the effect which his sudden appearance produced in
this little, quiet, sentimental family? He thought quite well enough of
himself on many points, but was diffident as yet regarding women, being
of that age when young gentlemen require encouragement and to be brought
forward, and having been brought up at home in very modest and primitive
relations towards the other sex. So Miss Hetty's jokes played round the
lad, and he minded them no more than so many summer gnats. It was not
that he was stupid, as she certainly thought him: he was simple, too
much occupied with himself and his own honest affairs to think of
others. Why, what tragedies, comedies, interludes, intrigues, farces,
are going on under our noses in friends' drawing-rooms where we visit
every day, and we remain utterly ignorant, self-satisfied, and blind!
As these sisters sate and combed their flowing ringlets of nights, or
talked with each other in the great bed where, according to the fashion
of the day, they lay together, how should Harry know that he had so
great a share in their thoughts, jokes, conversation? Three days after
his arrival, his new and hospitable friends were walking with him in my
Lord Wrotham's fine park, where they were free to wander; and here, on a
piece of water, they came to some swans, which the young ladies were
in the habit of feeding with bread. As the birds approached the young
women, Hetty said, with a queer look at her mother and sister, and
then a glance at her father, who stood by, honest, happy, in a red
waistcoat,--Hetty said: "Mamma's swans are something like these, papa."

"What swans, my dear?" says mamma.

"Something like, but not quite. They have shorter necks than these, and
are, scores of them, on our common," continues Miss Hetty. "I saw Betty
plucking one in the kitchen this morning. We shall have it for dinner,
with apple-sauce and----"

"Don't be a little goose!" says Miss Theo.

"And sage and onions. Do you love swan, Mr. Warrington?"

"I shot three last winter on our river," said the Virginian gentleman.
"Ours are not such white birds as these--they eat very well, though."
The simple youth had not the slightest idea that he himself was an
allegory at that very time, and that Miss Hetty was narrating a fable
regarding him. In some exceedingly recondite Latin work I have read
that, long before Virginia was discovered, other folks were equally dull
of comprehension.

So it was a premature sentiment on the part of Miss Theo--that little
tender flutter of the bosom which we have acknowledged she felt on first
beholding the Virginian, so handsome, pale, and bleeding. This was not
the great passion which she knew her heart could feel. Like the birds,
it had wakened and begun to sing at a false dawn. Hop back to thy perch,
and cover thy head with thy wing, thou tremulous little fluttering
creature! It is not yet light, and roosting is as yet better than
singing. Anon will come morning, and the whole sky will redden, and you
shall soar up into it and salute the sun with your music.

One little phrase, some three-and-thirty lines back, perhaps the fair
and suspicious reader has remarked: "Three days after his arrival, Harry
was walking with," etc. etc. If he could walk--which it appeared he
could do perfectly well--what business had he to be walking with anybody
but Lady Maria Esmond on the Pantiles, Tunbridge Wells? His shoulder
was set: his health was entirely restored: he had not even a change of
coats, as we have seen, and was obliged to the Colonel for his raiment.
Surely a young man in such a condition had no right to be lingering
on at Oakhurst, and was bound by every tie of duty and convenience,
by love, by relationship, by a gentle heart waiting for him, by the
washerwoman finally, to go to Tunbridge. Why did he stay behind, unless
he was in love with either of the young ladies (and we say he wasn't)?
Could it be that he did not want to go? Hath the gracious reader
understood the meaning of the mystic S with which the last chapter
commences, and in which the designer has feebly endeavoured to depict
the notorious Sinbad the Sailor, surmounted by that odious old man of
the sea? What if Harry Warrington should be that sailor, and his fate
that choking, deadening, inevitable old man? What if for two days past
he has felt those knees throttling him round the neck? if his fell
aunt's purpose is answered, and if his late love is killed as dead
by her poisonous communications as fair Rosamond was by her royal and
legitimate rival? Is Hero then lighting the lamp up, and getting ready
the supper, whilst Leander is sitting comfortably with some other party,
and never in the least thinking of taking to the water? Ever since
that coward's blow was struck in Lady Maria's back by her own relative,
surely kind hearts must pity her ladyship. I know she has faults--ay,
and wears false hair and false never mind what. But a woman in distress,
shall we not pity her--a lady of a certain age, are we going to laugh at
her because of her years? Between her old aunt and her unhappy delusion,
be sure my Lady Maria Esmond is having no very pleasant time of it at
Tunbridge Wells. There is no one to protect her. Madam Beatrix has her
all to herself. Lady Maria is poor, and hopes for money from her aunt.
Lady Maria has a secret or two which the old woman knows, and brandishes
over her. I for one am quite melted and grow soft-hearted as I think
of her. Imagine her alone, and a victim to that old woman! Paint to
yourself that antique Andromeda (if you please we will allow that rich
flowing head of hair to fall over her shoulders) chained to a rock
on Mount Ephraim, and given up to that dragon of a Baroness! Succour,
Perseus! Come quickly with thy winged feet and flashing falchion!
Perseus is not in the least hurry. The dragon has her will of Andromeda
for day after day.

Harry Warrington, who would not have allowed his dislocated and mended
shoulder to keep him from going out hunting, remained day after day
contentedly at Oakhurst, with each day finding the kindly folks who
welcomed him more to his liking. Perhaps he had never, since his
grandfather's death, been in such good company. His lot had lain amongst
fox-hunting Virginian squires, with whose society he had put up very
contentedly, riding their horses, living their lives, and sharing their
punch-bowls. The ladies of his own and mother's acquaintance were
very well bred, and decorous, and pious, no doubt, but somewhat
narrow-minded. It was but a little place, his home, with its pompous
ways, small etiquettes and punctilios, small flatteries, small
conversations and scandals. Until he had left the place, some time
after, he did not know how narrow and confined his life had been there.
He was free enough personally. He had dogs and horses, and might shoot
and hunt for scores of miles round about: but the little lady-mother
domineered at home, and when there he had to submit to her influence and
breathe her air.

Here the lad found himself in the midst of a circle where everything
about him was incomparably gayer, brighter, and more free. He was living
with a man and woman who had seen the world, though they lived retired
from it, who had both of them happened to enjoy from their earliest
times the use not only of good books, but of good company--those live
books, which are such pleasant and sometimes such profitable reading.
Society has this good at least: that it lessens our conceit, by teaching
us our insignificance, and making us acquainted with our betters. If you
are a young person who read this, depend upon it, sir or madam, there is
nothing more wholesome for you than to acknowledge and to associate with
your superiors. If I could, I would not have my son Thomas first Greek
and Latin prize boy, first oar, and cock of the school. Better for his
soul's and body's welfare that he should have a good place, not the
first--a fair set of competitors round about him, and a good thrashing
now and then, with a hearty shake afterwards of the hand which
administered the beating. What honest man that can choose his lot would
be a prince, let us say, and have all society walking backwards before
him, only obsequious household-gentlemen to talk to, and all mankind mum
except when your High Mightiness asks a question and gives permission
to speak? One of the great benefits which Harry Warrington received from
this family, before whose gate Fate had shot him, was to begin to learn
that he was a profoundly ignorant young fellow, and that there were many
people in the world far better than he knew himself to be. Arrogant
a little with some folks, in the company of his superiors he was
magnanimously docile. We have seen how faithfully he admired his brother
at home, and his friend, the gallant young Colonel of Mount Vernon: of
the gentlemen, his kinsmen at Castlewood, he had felt himself at least
the equal. In his new acquaintance at Oakhurst he found a man who had
read far more books than Harry could pretend to judge of, who had seen
the world and come unwounded out of it, as he had out of the dangers
and battles which he had confronted, and who had goodness and honesty
written on his face and breathing from his lips, for which qualities our
brave lad had always an instinctive sympathy and predilection.

As for the women, they were the kindest, merriest, most agreeable he had
as yet known. They were pleasanter than Parson Broadbent's black-eyed
daughter at home, whose laugh carried as far as a gun. They were quite
as well-bred as the Castlewood ladies, with the exception of Madam
Beatrix (who, indeed, was as grand as an empress on some occasions).
But somehow, after a talk with Madam Beatrix, and vast amusement and
interest in her stories, the lad would come away as with a bitter taste
in his mouth, and fancy all the world wicked round about him. They were
not in the least squeamish; and laughed over pages of Mr. Fielding, and
cried over volumes of Mr. Richardson, containing jokes and incidents
which would make Mrs. Grundy's hair stand on end, yet their merry
prattle left no bitterness behind it: their tales about this neighbour
and that were droll, not malicious; the curtseys and salutations with
which the folks of the little neighbouring town received them, how
kindly and cheerful! their bounties how cordial! Of a truth it is good
to be with good people. How good Harry Warrington did not know at the
time, perhaps, or until subsequent experience showed him contrasts, or
caused him to feel remorse. Here was a tranquil, sunshiny day of a life
that was to be agitated and stormy--a happy hour or two to remember.
Not much happened during the happy hour or two. It was only sweet sleep,
pleasant waking, friendly welcome, serene pastime. The gates of the old
house seemed to shut the wicked world out somehow, and the inhabitants
within to be better, and purer, and kinder than other people. He was
not in love; oh no! not the least, either with saucy Hetty or generous
Theodosia but when the time came for going away, he fastened on both
their hands, and felt an immense regard for them. He thought he should
like to know their brothers, and that they must be fine fellows; and as
for Mrs. Lambert, I believe she was as sentimental at his departure as
if he had been the last volume of Clarissa Harlowe.

"He is very kind and honest," said Theo, gravely, as, looking from the
terrace, they saw him and their father and servants riding away on the
road to Westerham.

"I don't think him stupid at all now," said little Hetty; "and, mamma, I
think, he is very like a swan indeed."

"It felt just like one of the boys going to school," said mamma.

"Just like it," said Theo, sadly.

"I am glad he has got papa to ride with him to Westerham," resumed Miss
Hetty, "and that he bought Farmer Briggs's horse. I don't like his going
to those Castlewood people. I am sure that Madame Bernstein is a wicked
old woman. I expected to see her ride away on her crooked stick."

"Hush, Hetty!"

"Do you think she would float if they tried her in the pond, as poor old
mother Hely did at Elmhurst? The other old woman seemed fond of him--I
mean the one with the fair tour. She looked very melancholy when she
went away; but Madame Bernstein whisked her off with her crutch, and she
was obliged to go. I don't care, Theo. I know she is a wicked woman.
You think everybody good, you do, because you never do anything wrong
yourself."

"My Theo is a good girl," says the mother, looking fondly at both her
daughters.

"Then why do we call her a miserable sinner?"

"We are all so, my love," said mamma.

"What, papa too? You know you don't think so," cries Miss Hester. And to
allow this was almost more than Mrs. Lambert could afford.

"What was that you told John to give to Mr. Warrington's black man?"

Mamma owned, with some shamefacedness, it was a bottle of her cordial
water and a cake which she had bid Betty make. "I feel quite like a
mother to him, my dears, I can't help owning it,--and you know both
our boys still like one of our cakes to take to school or college with
them."




CHAPTER XXIV. From Oakhurst to Tunbridge


Having her lily handkerchief in token of adieu to the departing
travellers, Mrs. Lambert and her girls watched them pacing leisurely on
the first few hundred yards of their journey, and until such time as a
tree-clumped corner of the road hid them from the ladies' view. Behind
that clump of limes the good matron had many a time watched those she
loved best disappear. Husband departing to battle and danger, sons to
school, each after the other had gone on his way behind yonder green
trees, returning as it pleased Heaven's will at his good time, and
bringing pleasure and love back to the happy little family. Besides
their own instinctive nature (which to be sure aids wonderfully in the
matter), the leisure and contemplation attendant upon their home life
serve to foster the tenderness and fidelity of our women. The men gone,
there is all day to think about them, and to-morrow and to-morrow--when
there certainly will be a letter--and so on. There is the vacant room
to go look at, where the boy slept last night, and the impression of his
carpet bag is still on the bed. There is his whip hung up in the hall,
and his fishing-rod and basket--mute memorials of the brief bygone
pleasures. At dinner there comes up that cherry-tart, half of which
our darling ate at two o'clock in spite of his melancholy, and with a
choking little sister on each side of him. The evening prayer is said
without that young scholar's voice to utter the due responses. Midnight
and silence come, and the good mother lies wakeful, thinking how one of
the dear accustomed brood is away from the nest. Morn breaks, home and
holidays have passed away, and toil and labour have begun for him. So
those rustling limes formed, as it were, a screen between the world and
our ladies of the house at Oakhurst. Kind-hearted Mrs. Lambert always
became silent and thoughtful, if by chance she and her girls walked up
to the trees in the absence of the men of the family. She said she would
like to carve their names up on the grey silvered trunks, in the midst
of true-lovers' knots, as was then the kindly fashion; and Miss Theo,
who had an exceeding elegant turn that way, made some verses regarding
the trees, which her delighted parent transmitted to a periodical of
those days.

"Now we are out of sight of the ladies," says Colonel Lambert, giving a
parting salute with his hat, as the pair of gentlemen trotted past the
limes in question. "I know my wife always watches at her window until we
are round this corner. I hope we shall have you seeing the trees and the
house again, Mr. Warrington; and the boys being at home, mayhap there
will be better sport for you."

"I never want to be happier, sir, than I have been," replied Mr.
Warrington; "and I hope you will let me say, that I feel as if I am
leaving quite old friends behind me."

"The friend at whose house we shall sup to-night hath a son, who is
an old friend of our family, too; and my wife, who is an inveterate
marriage-monger, would have made a match between him and one of my
girls, but that the Colonel hath chosen to fall in love with somebody
else."

"Ah!" sighed Mr. Warrington.

"Other folks have done the same thing. There were brave fellows before
Agamemnon."

"I beg your pardon, sir. Is the gentleman's name--Aga----? I did not
quite gather it," meekly inquired the young traveller.

"No, his name is James Wolfe," cried the Colonel, smiling. "He is a
young fellow still, or what we call so, being scarce thirty years old.
He is the youngest lieutenant-colonel in the army, unless, to be sure,
we except a few scores of our nobility, who take rank before us common
folk."

"Of course of course!" says the Colonel's young companion with true
colonial notions of aristocratic precedence.

"And I have seen him commanding captains, and very brave captains, who
were thirty years his seniors, and who had neither his merit nor his
good fortune. But, lucky as he hath been, no one envies his superiority,
for, indeed, most of us acknowledge that he is our superior. He is
beloved by every man of our old regiment and knows every one of them. He
is a good scholar as well as a consummate soldier, and a master of many
languages."

"Ah, sir!" said Harry Warrington, with a sigh of great humility; "I feel
that I have neglected my own youth sadly; and am come to England but an
ignoramus. Had my dear brother been alive, he would have represented our
name and our colony, too, better than I can do. George was a scholar;
George was a musician; George could talk with the most learned people
in our country, and I make no doubt would have held his own here. Do you
know, sir, I am glad to have come home, and to you especially, if but to
learn how ignorant I am."

"If you know that well, 'tis a great gain already," said the Colonel,
with a smile.

"At home, especially of late, and since we lost my brother, I used to
think myself a mighty fine fellow, and have no doubt that the folks
round about flattered me. I am wiser now,--that is, I hope I am,--though
perhaps I am wrong, and only bragging again. But you see, sir, the
gentry in our colony don't know very much, except about dogs and horses,
and betting and games. I wish I knew more about books, and less about
them."

"Nay. Dogs and horses are very good books, too, in their way, and we may
read a deal of truth out of 'em. Some men are not made to be scholars,
and may be very worthy citizens and gentlemen in spite of their
ignorance. What call have all of us to be especially learned or wise, or
to take a first place in the world? His Royal Highness is commander, and
Martin Lambert is colonel, and Jack Hunt, who rides behind yonder, was a
private soldier, and is now a very honest, worthy groom. So as we all
do our best in our station, it matters not much whether that be high
or low. Nay, how do we know what is high and what is low? and whether
Jack's currycomb, or my epaulets, or his Royal Highness's baton, may
not turn out to be pretty equal? When I began life, et militavi non
sine--never mind what--I dreamed of success and honour; now I think of
duty, and yonder folks, from whom we parted a few hours ago. Let us trot
on, else we shall not reach Westerham before nightfall."

At Westerham the two friends were welcomed by their hosts, a stately
matron, an old soldier, whose recollections and services were of
five-and-forty years back, and the son of this gentleman and lady, the
Lieutenant-Colonel of Kingsley's regiment, that was then stationed at
Maidstone, whence the Colonel had come over on a brief visit to his
parents. Harry looked with some curiosity at this officer, who, young
as he was, had seen so much service, and obtained a character so high.
There was little of the beautiful in his face. He was very lean and very
pale; his hair was red, his nose and cheek-bones were high; but he had
a fine courtesy towards his elders, a cordial greeting towards his
friends, and an animation in conversation which caused those who heard
him to forget, even to admire, his homely looks.

Mr. Warrington was going to Tunbridge? Their James would bear him
company, the lady of the house said, and whispered something to Colonel
Lambert at supper, which occasioned smiles and a knowing wink or two
from that officer. He called for wine, and toasted "Miss Lowther." "With
all my heart," cried the enthusiastic Colonel James, and drained his
glass to the very last drop. Mamma whispered her friend how James and
the lady were going to make a match, and how she came of the famous
Lowther family of the North.

"If she was the daughter of King Charlemagne," cries Lambert, "she is
not too good for James Wolfe, or for his mother's son."

"Mr. Lambert would not say so if he knew her," the young Colonel
declared.

"Oh, of course, she is the priceless pearl, and you are nothing," cries
mamma. "No. I am of Colonel Lambert's opinion; and, if she brought all
Cumberland to you for a jointure, I should say it was my James's due.
That is the way with 'em, Mr. Warrington. We tend our children through
fevers, and measles, and whooping-cough, and small-pox; we send them to
the army and can't sleep at night for thinking; we break our hearts at
parting with 'em, and have them at home only for a week or two in the
year, or maybe ten years, and, after all our care, there comes a lass
with a pair of bright eyes, and away goes our boy, and never cares a fig
for us afterwards."

"And pray, my dear, how did you come to marry James's papa?" said
the elder Colonel Wolfe. "And why didn't you stay at home with your
parents?"

"Because James's papa was gouty, and wanted somebody to take care of
him, I suppose; not because I liked him a bit," answers the lady: and so
with much easy talk and kindness the evening passed away.

On the morrow, and with many expressions of kindness and friendship for
his late guest, Colonel Lambert gave over the young Virginian to Mr.
Wolfe's charge, and turned his horse's head homewards, while the two
gentlemen sped towards Tunbridge Wells. Wolfe was in a hurry to reach
the place, Harry Warrington was, perhaps, not quite so eager: nay, when
Lambert rode towards his own home, Harry's thoughts followed him with
a great deal of longing desire to the parlour at Oakhurst, where he
had spent three days in happy calm. Mr. Wolfe agreed in all Harry's
enthusiastic praises of Mr. Lambert, and of his wife, and of his
daughters, and of all that excellent family. "To have such a good name,
and to live such a life as Colonel Lambert's," said Wolfe, "seem to me
now the height of human ambition."

"And glory and honour?" asked Warrington, "are those nothing? and would
you give up the winning of them?"

"They were my dreams once," answered the Colonel, who had now different
ideas of happiness, "and now my desires are much more tranquil. I have
followed arms ever since I was fourteen years of age. I have seen almost
every kind of duty connected with my calling. I know all the garrison
towns in this country, and have had the honour to serve wherever there
has been work to be done during the last ten years. I have done pretty
near the whole of a soldier's duty, except, indeed, the command of
an army, which can hardly be hoped for by one of my years; and now,
methinks, I would like quiet, books to read, a wife to love me, and some
children to dandle on my knee. I have imagined some such Elysium for
myself, Mr. Warrington. True love is better than glory; and a tranquil
fireside, with the woman of your heart seated by it, the greatest good
the gods can send to us."

Harry imagined to himself the picture which his comrade called up. He
said "Yes," in answer to the other's remark; but, no doubt, did not give
a very cheerful assent, for his companion observed upon the expression
of his face.

"You say 'Yes' as if a fireside and a sweetheart were not particularly
to your taste."

"Why, look you, Colonel, there are other things which a young fellow
might like to enjoy. You have had sixteen years of the world: and I am
but a few months away from my mother's apron-strings. When I have seen
a campaign or two, or six, as you have: when I have distinguished myself
like Mr. Wolfe, and made the world talk of me, I then may think of
retiring from it."

To these remarks, Mr. Wolfe, whose heart was full of a very different
matter, replied by breaking out in a further encomium of the joys of
marriage; and a special rhapsody upon the beauties and merits of his
mistress--a theme intensely interesting to himself, though not so,
possibly, to his hearer, whose views regarding a married life, if
he permitted himself to entertain any, were somewhat melancholy and
despondent. A pleasant afternoon brought them to the end of their ride;
nor did any accident or incident accompany it, save, perhaps, a mistake
which Harry Warrington made at some few miles' distance from Tunbridge
Wells, where two horsemen stopped them, whom Harry was for charging,
pistol in hand, supposing them to be highwaymen. Colonel Wolfe,
laughing, bade Mr. Warrington reserve his fire, for these folks were
only innkeepers' agents, and not robbers (except in their calling).
Gumbo, whose horse ran away with him at this particular juncture, was
brought back after a great deal of bawling on his master's part, and the
two gentlemen rode into the little town, alighted at their inn, and then
separated, each in quest of the ladies whom he had come to visit.

Mr. Warrington found his aunt installed in handsome lodgings, with a
guard of London lacqueys in her anteroom, and to follow her chair when
she went abroad. She received him with the utmost kindness. His cousin,
my Lady Maria, was absent when he arrived: I don't know whether the
young gentleman was unhappy at not seeing her: or whether he disguised
his feelings, or whether Madame de Bernstein took any note regarding
them.

A beau in a rich figured suit, the first specimen of the kind Harry had
seen, and two dowagers with voluminous hoops and plenty of rouge, were
on a visit to the Baroness when her nephew made his bow to her. She
introduced the young man to these personages as her nephew, the young
Croesus out of Virginia, of whom they had heard. She talked about the
immensity of his estate, which was as large as Kent; and, as she had
read, infinitely more fruitful. She mentioned how her half-sister, Madam
Esmond, was called Princess Pocahontas in her own country. She never
tired in her praises of mother and son, of their riches and their good
qualities. The beau shook the young man by the hand, and was delighted
to have the honour to make his acquaintance. The ladies praised him
to his aunt so loudly that the modest youth was fain to blush at their
compliments. They went away to inform the Tunbridge society of the news
of his arrival. The little place was soon buzzing with accounts of the
wealth, the good breeding, and the good looks of the Virginian.

"You could not have come at a better moment, my dear," the Baroness said
to her nephew, as her visitors departed with many curtseys and congees.
"Those three individuals have the most active tongues in the Wells. They
will trumpet your good qualities in every company where they go. I have
introduced you to a hundred people already, and, Heaven help me! have
told all sorts of fibs about the geography of Virginia in order to
describe your estate. It is a prodigious large one, but I am afraid I
have magnified it. I have filled it with all sorts of wonderful animals,
gold mines, spices; I am not sure I have not said diamonds. As for
your negroes, I have given your mother armies of them, and, in fact,
represented her as a sovereign princess reigning over a magnificent
dominion. So she has a magnificent dominion: I cannot tell to a few
hundred thousand pounds how much her yearly income is, but I have no
doubt it is a very great one. And you must prepare, sir, to be treated
here as the heir-apparent of this royal lady. Do not let your head be
turned. From this day forth you are going to be flattered as you have
never been flattered in your life."

"And to what end, ma'am?" asked the young gentleman. "I see no reason
why I should be reputed so rich, or get so much flattery."

"In the first place, sir, you must not contradict your old aunt, who
has no desire to be made a fool of before her company. And as for your
reputation, you must know we found it here almost ready-made on our
arrival. A London newspaper has somehow heard of you, and come out with
a story of the immense wealth of a young gentleman from Virginia lately
landed, and a nephew of my Lord Castlewood. Immensely wealthy you are,
and can't help yourself. All the world is eager to see you. You shall
go to church to-morrow morning, and see how the whole congregation will
turn away from its books and prayers, to worship the golden calf in your
person. You would not have had me undeceive them, would you, and speak
ill of my own flesh and blood?"

"But how am I bettered by this reputation for money?" asked Harry.

"You are making your entry into the world, and the gold key will open
most of its doors to you. To be thought rich is as good as to be rich.
You need not spend much money. People will say that you hoard it, and
your reputation for avarice will do you good rather than harm. You'll
see how the mothers will smile upon you, and the daughters will curtsey!
Don't look surprised! When I was a young woman myself I did as all
the rest of the world did, and tried to better myself by more than one
desperate attempt at a good marriage. Your poor grandmother, who was a
saint upon earth to be sure, bating a little jealousy, used to scold me,
and called me worldly. Worldly, my dear! So is the world worldly; and
we must serve it as it serves us; and give it nothing for nothing. Mr.
Henry Esmond Warrington--I can't help loving the two first names, sir,
old woman as I am, and that I tell you--on coming here or to London,
would have been nobody. Our protection would have helped him but little.
Our family has little credit, and, entre nous, not much reputation. I
suppose you know that Castlewood was more than suspected in '45, and
hath since ruined himself by play?"

Harry had never heard about Lord Castlewood or his reputation.

"He never had much to lose, but he has lost that and more: his wretched
estate is eaten up with mortgages. He has been at all sorts of schemes
to raise money:--my dear, he has been so desperate at times, that I did
not think my diamonds were safe with him; and have travelled to and from
Castlewood without them. Terrible, isn't it, to speak so of one's own
nephew? But you are my nephew, too, and not spoiled by the world yet,
and I wish to warn you of its wickedness. I heard of your play-doings
with Will and the chaplain, but they could do you no harm,--nay, I am
told you had the better of them. Had you played with Castlewood, you
would have had no such luck: and you would have played, had not an old
aunt of yours warned my Lord Castlewood to keep his hands off you."

"What, ma'am, did you interfere to preserve me?"

"I kept his clutches off from you: be thankful that you are come out of
that ogre's den with any flesh on your bones! My dear, it has been the
rage and passion of all our family. My poor silly brother played; both
his wives played, especially the last one, who has little else to live
upon now but her nightly assemblies in London, and the money for the
cards. I would not trust her at Castlewood alone with you: the passion
is too strong for them, and they would fall upon you, and fleece you;
and then fall upon each other, and fight for the plunder. But for his
place about the Court my poor nephew hath nothing, and that is Will's
fortune, too, sir, and Maria's and her sister's."

"And are they, too, fond of the cards?"

"No; to do poor Molly justice, gaming is not her passion: but when she
is amongst them in London, little Fanny will bet her eyes out of her
head. I know what the passion is, sir: do not look so astonished; I have
had it, as I had the measles when I was a child. I am not cured quite.
For a poor old woman there is nothing left but that. You will see some
high play at my card-tables to-night. Hush! my dear. It was that I
wanted, and without which I moped so at Castlewood! I could not win of
my nieces or their mother. They would not pay if they lost. 'Tis best to
warn you, my dear, in time, lest you should be shocked by the discovery.
I can't live without the cards, there's the truth!"

A few days before, and while staying with his Castlewood relatives,
Harry, who loved cards, and cock-fighting, and betting, and every
conceivable sport himself, would have laughed very likely at this
confession. Amongst that family into whose society he had fallen, many
things were laughed at, over which some folks looked grave. Faith and
honour were laughed at; pure lives were disbelieved; selfishness was
proclaimed as common practice; sacred duties were sneeringly spoken of,
and vice flippantly condoned. These were no Pharisees: they professed no
hypocrisy of virtue, they flung no stones at discovered sinners:--they
smiled, shrugged their shoulders, and passed on. The members of this
family did not pretend to be a whit better than their neighbours, whom
they despised heartily; they lived quite familiarly with the folks about
whom and whose wives they told such wicked, funny stories; they took
their share of what pleasure or plunder came to hand, and lived from day
to day till their last day came for them. Of course there are no such
people now; and human nature is very much changed in the last hundred
years. At any rate, card-playing is greatly out of mode: about that
there can be no doubt: and very likely there are not six ladies of
fashion in London who know the difference between Spadille and Manille.

"How dreadfully dull you must have found those humdrum people at that
village where we left you--but the savages were very kind to you,
child!" said Madame de Bernstein, patting the young man's cheek with her
pretty old hand.

"They were very kind; and it was not at all dull, ma'am, and I think
they are some of the best people in the world," said Harry, with his
face flushing up. His aunt's tone jarred upon him. He could not bear
that any one should speak or think lightly of the new friends whom he
had found. He did not want them in such company.

The old lady, imperious and prompt to anger, was about to resent the
check she had received, but a second thought made her pause. "Those two
girls," she thought, "a sick-bed--an interesting stranger--of course
he has been falling in love with one of them." Madame Bernstein looked
round with a mischievous glance at Lady Maria, who entered the room at
this juncture.




CHAPTER XXV. New Acquaintances


Cousin Maria made her appearance, attended by a couple of gardener's
boys bearing baskets of flowers, with which it was proposed to decorate
Madame de Bernstein's drawing-room against the arrival of her ladyship's
company. Three footmen in livery, gorgeously laced with worsted, set out
twice as many card-tables. A major-domo in black and a bag, with fine
laced ruffles; and looking as if he ought to have a sword by his side,
followed the lacqueys bearing fasces of wax candles, which he placed
a pair on each card-table, and in the silver sconces on the wainscoted
wall that was now gilt with the slanting rays of the sun, as was the
prospect of the green common beyond, with its rocks and clumps of trees
and houses twinkling in the sunshine. Groups of many-coloured figures in
hoops and powder and brocade sauntered over the green, and dappled the
plain with their shadows. On the other side from the Baroness's windows
you saw the Pantiles, where a perpetual fair was held, and heard the
clatter and buzzing of the company. A band of music was here performing
for the benefit of the visitors to the Wells. Madame Bernstein's chief
sitting-room might not suit a recluse or a student, but for those who
liked bustle, gaiety, a bright cross light, and a view of all that was
going on in the cheery busy place, no lodging could be pleasanter. And
when the windows were lighted up, the passengers walking below were
aware that her ladyship was at home and holding a card-assembly, to
which an introduction was easy enough. By the way, in speaking of the
past, I think the night-life of society a hundred years since was rather
a dark life. There was not one wax-candle for ten which we now see in a
lady's drawing-room: let alone gas and the wondrous new illuminations
of clubs. Horrible guttering tallow smoked and stunk in passages. The
candle-snuffer was a notorious officer in the theatre. See Hogarth's
pictures: how dark they are, and how his feasts are, as it were,
begrimed with tallow! In "Marriage a la Mode," in Lord Viscount
Squanderfield's grand saloons, where he and his wife are sitting yawning
before the horror-stricken steward when their party is over--there are
but eight candles--one on each card-table, and half a dozen in a brass
chandelier. If Jack Briefless convoked his friends to oysters and beer
in his chambers, Pump Court, he would have twice as many. Let us comfort
ourselves by thinking that Louis Quatorze in all his glory held his
revels in the dark, and bless Mr. Price and other Luciferous benefactors
of mankind, for banishing the abominable mutton of our youth.

So Maria with her flowers (herself the fairest flower), popped her
roses, sweet-williams, and so forth, in vases here and there, and
adorned the apartment to the best of her art. She lingered fondly over
this bowl and that dragon jar, casting but sly timid glances the while
at young cousin Harry, whose own blush would have become any young
woman, and you might have thought that she possibly intended to outstay
her aunt; but that Baroness, seated in her arm-chair, her crooked
tortoiseshell stick in her hand, pointed the servants imperiously to
their duty; rated one and the other soundly: Tom for having a darn in
his stocking; John for having greased his locks too profusely out of the
candle-box; and so forth--keeping a stern domination over them. Another
remark concerning poor Jeames of a hundred years ago: Jeames slept two
in a bed, four in a room, and that room a cellar very likely, and he
washed in a trough such as you would hardly see anywhere in London now
out of the barracks of her Majesty's Foot Guards.

If Maria hoped a present interview, her fond heart was disappointed.
"Where are you going to dine, Harry?" asks Madame de Bernstein. "My
niece Maria and I shall have a chicken in the little parlour--I think
you should go to the best ordinary. There is one at the White Horse
at three, we shall hear his bell in a minute or two. And you will
understand, sir, that you ought not to spare expense, but behave like
Princess Pocahontas's son. Your trunks have been taken over to the
lodging I have engaged for you. It is not good for a lad to be always
hanging about the aprons of two old women. Is it, Maria?"

"No," says her ladyship, dropping her meek eyes; whilst the other lady's
glared in triumph. I think Andromeda had been a good deal exposed to the
Dragon in the course of the last five or six days: and if Perseus
had cut the latter's cruel head off he would have committed not
unjustifiable monstricide. But he did not bare sword or shield; he only
looked mechanically at the lacqueys in tawny and blue as they creaked
about the room.

"And there are good mercers and tailors from London always here to wait
on the company at the Wells. You had better see them, my dear, for your
suit is not of the very last fashion--a little lace----"

"I can't go out of mourning, ma'am," said the young man, looking down at
his sables.

"Ho, sir," cried the lady, rustling up from her chair and rising on her
cane, "wear black for your brother till you are as old as Methuselah,
if you like. I am sure I don't want to prevent you. I only want you to
dress, and to do like other people, and make a figure worthy of your
name."

"Madam," said Mr. Warrington with great state, "I have not done anything
to disgrace it that I know."

Why did the old Woman stop and give a little start as if she had been
struck? Let bygones be bygones. She and the boy had a score of little
passages of this kind in which swords were crossed and thrusts rapidly
dealt or parried. She liked Harry none the worse for his courage in
facing her. "Sure a little finer linen than that shirt you wear will not
be a disgrace to you, sir," she said, with rather a forced laugh.

Harry bowed and blushed. It was one of the homely gifts of his Oakhurst
friends. He felt pleased somehow to think he wore it; thought of the
new friends, so good, so pure, so simple, so kindly, with immense
tenderness, and felt, while invested in this garment, as if evil could
not touch him. He said he would go to his lodging, and make a point of
returning arrayed in the best linen he had.

"Come back here, sir," said Madame Bernstein, "and if our company has
not arrived, Maria and I will find some ruffles for you!" And herewith,
under a footman's guidance, the young fellow walked off to his new
lodgings.

Harry found not only handsome and spacious apartments provided for him,
but a groom in attendance waiting to be engaged by his honour, and a
second valet, if he was inclined to hire one to wait upon Mr. Gumbo. Ere
he had been many minutes in his rooms, emissaries from a London tailor
and bootmaker waited him with the cards and compliments of their
employers, Messrs. Regnier and Tull; the best articles in his modest
wardrobe were laid out by Gumbo, and the finest linen with which
his thrifty Virginian mother had provided him. Visions of the
snow-surrounded home in his own country, of the crackling logs and the
trim quiet ladies working by the fire, rose up before him. For the
first time a little thought that the homely clothes were not quite smart
enough, the home-worked linen not so fine as it might be, crossed the
young man's mind. That he should be ashamed of anything belonging to him
or to Castlewood! That was strange. The simple folks there were only too
well satisfied with all things that were done, or said, or produced
at Castlewood; and Madam Esmond, when she sent her son forth on his
travels, thought no young nobleman need be better provided. The clothes
might have fitted better and been of a later fashion, to be sure--but
still the young fellow presented a comely figure enough when he issued
from his apartments, his toilet over; and Gumbo calling a chair, marched
beside it, until they reached the ordinary where the young gentleman was
to dine.

Here he expected to find the beau whose acquaintance he had made a few
hours before at his aunt's lodging, and who had indicated to Harry that
the White Horse was the most modish place for dining at the Wells, and
he mentioned his friend's name to the host: but the landlord and waiters
leading him into the room with many smiles and bows assured his honour
that his honour did not need any other introduction than his own, helped
him to hang up his coat and sword on a peg, asked him whether he would
drink Burgundy, Pontac, or champagne to his dinner, and led him to a
table.

Though the most fashionable ordinary in the village, the White Horse did
not happen to be crowded on this day. Monsieur Barbeau, the landlord,
informed Harry that there was a great entertainment at Summer Hill,
which had taken away most of the company; indeed, when Harry entered
the room, there were but four other gentlemen in it. Two of these guests
were drinking wine, and had finished their dinner: the other two were
young men in the midst of their meal, to whom the landlord, as he
passed, must have whispered the name of the new-comer, for they looked
at him with some appearance of interest, and made him a slight bow
across the table as the smiling host bustled away for Harry's dinner.

Mr. Warrington returned the salute of the two gentlemen, who bade him
welcome to Tunbridge, and hoped he would like the place upon better
acquaintance. Then they smiled and exchanged waggish looks with each
other, of which Harry did not understand the meaning, nor why they cast
knowing glances at the two other guests over their wine.

One of these persons was in a somewhat tarnished velvet coat with a huge
queue and bag, and voluminous ruffles and embroidery. The other was a
little beetle-browed, hook-nosed, high-shouldered gentleman, whom his
opposite companion addressed as milor, or my lord, in a very high voice.
My lord, who was sipping the wine before him, barely glanced at the
new-comer, and then addressed himself to his own companion.

"And so you know the nephew of the old woman--the Croesus who comes to
arrive?"

"You're thrown out there, Jack!" says one young gentleman to the other.

"Never could manage the lingo," said Jack. The two elders had begun to
speak in the French language.

"But assuredly, my dear lord!" says the gentleman with the long queue.

"You have shown energy, my dear Baron! He has been here but two hours.
My people told me of him only as I came to dinner."

"I knew him before!--I have met him often in London with the Baroness
and my lord, his cousin," said the Baron.

A smoking soup for Harry here came in, borne by the smiling host.
"Behold, sir! Behold a potage of my fashion!" says my landlord, laying
down the dish and whispering to Harry the celebrated name of the
nobleman opposite. Harry thanked Monsieur Barbeau in his own language,
upon which the foreign gentleman, turning round, grinned most graciously
at Harry, and said, "Fous bossedez notre langue barfaidement, monsieur."
Mr. Warrington had never heard the French language pronounced in that
manner in Canada. He bowed in return to the foreign gentleman.

"Tell me more about the Croesus, my good Baron," continued his lordship,
speaking rather superciliously to his companion, and taking no notice of
Harry, which perhaps somewhat nettled the young man.

"What will you, that I tell you, my dear lord? Croesus is a youth like
other youths; he is tall, like other youths; he is awkward, like other
youths; he has black hair, as they all have who come from the Indies.
Lodgings have been taken for him at Mrs. Rose's toy-shop."

"I have lodgings there too," thought Mr. Warrington. "Who is Croesus
they are talking of? How good the soup is!"

"He travels with a large retinue," the Baron continued, "four servants,
two postchaises, and a pair of outriders. His chief attendant is a black
man who saved his life from the savages in America, and who will
not hear, on any account, of being made free. He persists in wearing
mourning for his elder brother from whom he inherits his principality."

"Could anything console you for the death of yours, Chevalier?" cried
out the elder gentleman.

"Milor! his property might," said the Chevalier, "which you know is not
small."

"Your brother lives on his patrimony--which you have told me is
immense--you by your industry, my dear Chevalier."

"Milor!" cries the individual addressed as Chevalier.

"By your industry or your esprit,--how much more noble! Shall you be
at the Baroness's to-night? She ought to be a little of your parents,
Chevalier?"

"Again I fail to comprehend your lordship," said the other gentleman,
rather sulkily.

"Why, she is a woman of great wit--she is of noble birth--she has
undergone strange adventures--she has but little principle (there you
happily have the advantage of her). But what care we men of the world?
You intend to go and play with the young Creole, no doubt, and get as
much money from him as you can. By the way, Baron, suppose he should
be a guet-apens, that young Creole? Suppose our excellent friend has
invented him up in London, and brings him down with his character for
wealth to prey upon the innocent folks here?"

"J'y ai souvent pense, milor," says the little Baron, placing his finger
to his nose very knowingly, "that Baroness is capable of anything."

"A Baron--a Baroness, que voulez-vous, my friend? I mean the late
lamented husband. Do you know who he was?"

"Intimately. A more notorious villain never dealt a card. At Venice, at
Brussels, at Spa, at Vienna--the gaols of every one of which places he
knew. I knew the man, my lord."

"I thought you would. I saw him at the Hague, where I first had the
honour of meeting you, and a more disreputable rogue never entered my
doors. A minister must open them to all sorts of people, Baron,--spies,
sharpers, ruffians of every sort."

"Parbleu, milor, how you treat them!" says my lord's companion.

"A man of my rank, my friend--of the rank I held then--of course, must
see all sorts of people--entre autres your acquaintance. What his wife
could want with such a name as his I can't conceive."

"Apparently, it was better than the lady's own."

"Effectively! So I have heard of my friend Paddy changing clothes with
the scarecrow. I don't know which name is the most distinguished, that
of the English bishop or the German baron."

"My lord," cried the other gentleman, rising and laying his hand on
a large star on his coat, "you forget that I, too, am a Baron and a
Chevalier of the Holy Roman----"

"--Order of the Spur!--not in the least, my dear knight and baron!
You will have no more wine? We shall meet at Madame de Bernstein's
to-night." The knight and baron quitted the table, felt in his
embroidered pockets, as if for money to give the waiter, who brought him
his great laced hat, and waving that menial off with a hand surrounded
by large ruffles and blazing rings, he stalked away from the room.

It was only when the person addressed as my lord had begun to speak of
the bishop's widow and the German baron's wife that Harry Warrington
was aware how his aunt and himself had been the subject of the two
gentlemen's conversation. Ere the conviction had settled itself on his
mind, one of the speakers had quitted the room, and the other, turning
to a table at which two gentlemen sate, said, "What a little sharper it
is! Everything I said about Bernstein relates mutato nomine to him. I
knew the fellow to be a spy and a rogue. He has changed his religion I
don't know how many times. I had him turned out of the Hague myself when
I was ambassador, and I know he was caned in Vienna."

"I wonder my Lord Chesterfield associates with such a villain!" called
out Harry from his table. The other couple of diners looked at him. To
his surprise the nobleman so addressed went on talking.

"There cannot be a more fieffe coquin than this Poellnitz. Why, Heaven
be thanked, he has actually left me my snuff-box! You laugh?--the fellow
is capable of taking it." And my lord thought it was his own satire at
which the young men were laughing.

"You are quite right, sir," said one of the two diners, turning to Mr.
Warrington, "though, saving your presence, I don't know what business it
is of yours. My lord will play with anybody who will set him. Don't be
alarmed, he is as deaf as a post, and did not hear a word that you said;
and that's why my lord will play with anybody who will put a pack of
cards before him, and that is the reason why he consorts with this
rogue."

"Faith, I know other noblemen who are not particular as to their
company," says Mr. Jack.

"Do you mean because I associate with you? I know my company, my good
friend, and I defy most men to have the better of me."

Not having paid the least attention to Mr. Warrington's angry
interruption, my lord opposite was talking in his favourite French with
Monsieur Barbeau, the landlord, and graciously complimenting him on
his dinner. The host bowed again and again; was enchanted that his
Excellency was satisfied: had not forgotten the art which he had learned
when he was a young man in his Excellency's kingdom of Ireland. The
salmi was to my lord's liking? He had just served a dish to the young
American seigneur who sate opposite, the gentleman from Virginia.

"To whom?" My lord's pale face became red for a moment, as he asked this
question, and looked towards Harry Warrington, opposite to him.

"To the young gentleman from Virginia who has just arrived, and who
perfectly possesses our beautiful language!" says Mr. Barbeau, thinking
to kill two birds, as it were, with this one stone of a compliment.

"And to whom your lordship will be answerable for language reflecting
upon my family, and uttered in the presence of these gentlemen,"
cried out Mr. Warrington, at the top of his voice, determined that his
opponent should hear.

"You must go and call into his ear, and then he may perchance hear you,"
said one of the younger guests.

"I will take care that his lordship shall understand my meaning, one way
or other," Mr. Warrington said, with much dignity; "and will not suffer
calumnies regarding my relatives to be uttered by him or any other man!"

Whilst Harry was speaking, the little nobleman opposite to him did
not hear him, but had time sufficient to arrange his own reply. He had
risen, passing his handkerchief once or twice across his mouth, and
laying his slim fingers on the table. "Sir," said he, "you will believe,
on the word of a gentleman, that I had no idea before whom I was
speaking, and it seems that my acquaintance, Monsieur de Poellnitz, knew
you no better than myself. Had I known you, believe me that I should
have been the last man in the world to utter a syllable that should give
you annoyance; and I tender you my regrets and apologies, before my Lord
March and Mr. Morris here present."

To these words, Mr. Warrington could only make a bow, and mumble out a
few words of acknowledgment: which speech having made believe to hear,
my lord made Harry another very profound bow, and saying he should have
the honour of waiting upon Mr. Warrington at his lodgings, saluted the
company, and went away.




CHAPTER XXVI. In which we are at a very Great Distance from Oakhurst


Within the precinct of the White Horse Tavern, and coming up to the
windows of the eating-room, was a bowling-green, with a table or two,
where guests might sit and partake of punch or tea. The three gentlemen
having come to an end of their dinner about the same time, Mr. Morris
proposed that they should adjourn to the Green, and there drink a cool
bottle. "Jack Morris would adjourn to the Dust Hole, as a pretext for
a fresh drink," said my lord. On which Jack said he supposed each
gentleman had his own favourite way of going to the deuce. His weakness,
he owned, was a bottle.

"My Lord Chesterfield's deuce is deuce-ace," says my Lord March. "His
lordship can't keep away from the cards or dice."

"My Lord March has not one devil, but several devils. He loves gambling,
he loves horse-racing, he loves betting, he loves drinking, he loves
eating, he loves money, he loves women; and you have fallen into bad
company, Mr. Warrington, when you lighted upon his lordship. He will
play you for every acre you have in Virginia."

"With the greatest pleasure in life, Mr. Warrington!" interposes my
lord.

"And for all your tobacco, and for all your spices, and for all your
slaves, and for all your oxen and asses, and for everything that is
yours."

"Shall we begin now? Jack, you are never without a dice-box or a
bottle-screw. I will set Mr. Warrington for what he likes."

"Unfortunately, my lord, the tobacco, and the slaves, and the asses, and
the oxen, are not mine, as yet. I am just of age, and my mother, scarce
twenty years older, has quite as good chance of long life as I have."

"I will bet you that you survive her. I will pay you a sum now against
four times the sum to be paid at her death. I will set you a fair sum
over this table against the reversion of your estate in Virginia at the
old lady's departure. What do you call your place?"

"Castlewood."

"A principality, I hear it is. I will bet that its value has been
exaggerated ten times at least amongst the quidnuncs here. How came
you by the name of Castlewood?--you are related to my lord? Oh, stay: I
know,--my lady, your mother, descends from the real head of the house.
He took the losing side in '15. I have had the story a dozen times from
my old Duchess. She knew your grandfather. He was friend of Addison and
Steele, and Pope and Milton, I dare say, and the bigwigs. It is a pity
he did not stay at home, and transport the other branch of the family to
the plantations."

"I have just been staying at Castlewood with my cousin there," remarked
Mr. Warrington.

"Hm! Did you play with him? He's fond of pasteboard and bones."

"Never, but for sixpences and a pool of commerce with the ladies."

"So much the better for both of you. But you played with Will Esmond if
he was at home? I will lay ten to one you played with Will Esmond."

Harry blushed, and owned that of an evening his cousin and he had had a
few games at cards.

"And Tom Sampson, the chaplain," cried Jack Morris, "was he of the
party? I wager that Tom made a third, and the Lord deliver you from Tom
and Will Esmond together!"

"Nay; the truth is, I won of both of them," said Mr. Warrington.

"And they paid you? Well, miracles will never cease!"

"I did not say anything about miracles," remarked Mr. Harry, smiling
over his wine.

"And you don't tell tales out of school--the volto sciolto--hey, Mr.
Warrington?" says my lord.

"I beg your pardon," said downright Harry, "French is the only language
besides my own of which I know a little."

"My Lord March has learned Italian at the Opera, and a pretty penny
his lessons have cost him," remarked Jack Morris. "We must show him the
Opera--mustn't we, March?"

"Must we, Morris?" said my lord, as if he only half liked the other's
familiarity.

Both of the two gentlemen were dressed alike, in small scratch-wigs
without powder, in blue frocks with plate buttons, in buckskins and
riding-boots, in little hats with a narrow cord of lace, and no outward
mark of fashion.

"I don't care about the Opera much, my lord," says Harry, warming with
his wine; "but I should like to go to Newmarket, and long to see a good
English hunting-field."

"We will show you Newmarket and the hunting-field, sir. Can you ride
pretty well?"

"I think I can," Harry said; "and I can shoot pretty well, and jump
some."

"What's your weight? I bet you we weigh even, or I weigh most. I bet you
Jack Morris beats you at birds or a mark, at five-and-twenty paces. I
bet you I jump farther than you on flat ground, here on this green."

"I don't know Mr. Morris's shooting--I never saw either gentleman
before--but I take your bets, my lord, at what you please," cries Harry,
who by this time was more than warm with Burgundy.

"Ponies on each!" cried my lord.

"Done and done!" cried my lord and Harry together. The young man thought
it was for the honour of his country not to be ashamed of any bet made
to him.

"We can try the last bet now, if your feet are pretty steady," said my
lord, springing up, stretching his arms and limbs, and looking at the
crisp, dry grass. He drew his boots off, then his coat and waistcoat,
buckling his belt round his waist, and flinging his clothes down to the
ground.

Harry had more respect for his garments. It was his best suit. He took
off the velvet coat and waistcoat, folded them up daintily, and, as the
two or three tables round were slopped with drink, went to place the
clothes on a table in the eating-room, of which the windows were open.

Here a new guest had entered; and this was no other than Mr. Wolfe,
who was soberly eating a chicken and salad, with a modest pint of wine.
Harry was in high spirits. He told the Colonel he had a bet with my Lord
March--would Colonel Wolfe stand him halves? The Colonel said he was too
poor to bet. Would he come out and see fair play? That he would with
all his heart. Colonel Wolfe set down his glass, and stalked through the
open window after his young friend.

"Who is that tallow-faced Put with the carroty hair?" says Jack Morris,
on whom the Burgundy had had its due effect.

Mr. Warrington explained that this was Lieutenant-Colonel Wolfe, of the
20th Regiment.

"Your humble servant, gentlemen!" says the Colonel, making the company a
rigid military bow.

"Never saw such a figure in my life!" cries Jack Morris. "Did
you--March?"

"I beg your pardon, I think you said March?" said the Colonel, looking
very much surprised.

"I am the Earl of March, sir, at Colonel Wolfe's service," said the
nobleman, bowing. "My friend, Mr. Morris, is so intimate with me, that,
after dinner, we are quite like brothers."

Why is not all Tunbridge Wells by to hear this? thought Morris. And he
was so delighted that he shouted out, "Two to one on my lord!"

"Done!" calls out Mr. Warrington; and the enthusiastic Jack was obliged
to cry "Done!" too.

"Take him, Colonel," Harry whispers to his friend.

But the Colonel said he could not afford to lose, and therefore could
not hope to win.

"I see you have won one of our bets already, Mr. Warrington," my Lord
March remarked. "I am taller than you by an inch or two, but you are
broader round the shoulders."

"Pooh, my dear Will! I bet you you weigh twice as much as he does!"
cries Jack Morris.

"Done, Jack!" says my lord, laughing. "The bets are all ponies. Will you
take him, Mr. Warrington?"

"No, my dear fellow--one's enough," says Jack.

"Very good, my dear fellow," says my lord; "and now we will settle the
other wager."

Having already arrayed himself in his best silk stockings, black
satin-net breeches, and neatest pumps, Harry did not care to take off
his shoes as his antagonist had done, whose heavy riding-boots and spurs
