dividing its stream into two, it sends its waters partly into the Ionian
sea, [1402] and partly to the south into a deep gulf that bends upwards
from the Trinaerian sea, that sea which lies along your land, if indeed
Achelous flows forth from your land."

(ll. 204-302) Thus he spake, and to them the goddess granted a happy
portent, and all at the sight shouted approval, that this was their
appointed path. For before them appeared a trail of heavenly light, a
sign where they might pass. And gladly they left behind there the son of
Lyeus and with canvas outspread sailed over the sea, with their eyes
on the Paphlagonian mountains. But they did not round Carambis, for
the winds and the gleam of the heavenly fire stayed with them till they
reached Ister's mighty stream.

(ll. 303-337) Now some of the Colchians, in a vain search, passed out
from Pontus through the Cyanean rocks; but the rest went to the river,
and them Apsyrtus led, and, turning aside, he entered the mouth called
Fair. Wherefore he outstripped the heroes by crossing a neck of land
into the furthest gulf of the Ionian sea. For a certain island is
enclosed by Ister, by name Peuee, three-cornered, its base stretching
along the coast, and with a sharp angle towards the river; and round it
the outfall is cleft in two. One mouth they call the mouth of Narex, and
the other, at the lower end, the Fair mouth. And through this Apsyrtus
and his Colchians rushed with all speed; but the heroes went upwards
far away towards the highest part of the island. And in the meadows the
country shepherds left their countless flocks for dread of the
ships, for they deemed that they were beasts coming forth from the
monster-teeming sea. For never yet before had they seen seafaring ships,
neither the Scythians mingled with the Thracians, nor the Sigynni, nor
yet the Graucenii, nor the Sindi that now inhabit the vast desert plain
of Laurium. But when they had passed near the mount Angurum, and the
cliff of Cauliacus, far from the mount Angurum, round which Ister,
dividing his stream, falls into the sea on this side and on that, and
the Laurian plain, then indeed the Colchians went forth into the Cronian
sea and cut off all the ways, to prevent their foes' escape. And the
heroes came down the river behind and reached the two Brygean isles of
Artemis near at hand. Now in one of them was a sacred temple; and on the
other they landed, avoiding the host of Apsyrtus; for the Colchians
had left these islands out of many within the river, just as they were,
through reverence for the daughter of Zeus; but the rest, thronged by
the Colchians, barred the ways to the sea. And so on other islands too,
close by, Apsyrtus left his host as far as the river Salangon and the
Nestian land.

(ll. 338-349) There the Minyae would at that time have yielded in grim
fight, a few to many; but ere then they made a covenant, shunning a
dire quarrel; as to the golden fleece, that since Aeetes himself had so
promised them if they should fulfill the contests, they should keep it
as justly won, whether they carried it off by craft or even openly
in the king's despite; but as to Medea--for that was the cause of
strife--that they should give her in ward to Leto's daughter apart from
the throng, until some one of the kings that dispense justice should
utter his doom, whether she must return to her father's home or follow
the chieftains to the land of Hellas.

(ll. 350-354) Now when the maiden had mused upon all this, sharp anguish
shook her heart unceasingly; and quickly she called forth Jason alone
apart from his comrades, and led him aside until they were far away, and
before his face uttered her speech all broken with sobs:

(ll. 355-390) "What is this purpose that ye are now devising about me, O
son of Aeson? Has thy triumph utterly cast forgetfulness upon thee,
and reekest thou nothing of all that thou spakest when held fast by
necessity? Whither are fled the oaths by Zeus the suppliants' god,
whither are fled thy honied promises? For which in no seemly wise, with
shameless will, I have left my country, the glories of my home and even
my parents--things that were dearest to me; and far away all alone I
am borne over the sea with the plaintive kingfishers because of thy
trouble, in order that I might save thy life in fulfilling the contests
with the oxen and the earthborn men. Last of all the fleece--when the
matter became known, it was by my folly thou didst win it; and a foul
reproach have I poured on womankind. Wherefore I say that as thy child,
thy bride and thy sister, I follow thee to the land of Hellas. Be ready
to stand by me to the end, abandon me not left forlorn of thee when thou
dost visit the kings. But only save me; let justice and right, to which
we have both agreed, stand firm; or else do thou at once shear through
this neck with the sword, that I may gain the guerdon due to my mad
passion. Poor wretch! if the king, to whom you both commit your cruel
covenant, doom me to belong to my brother. How shall I come to my
father's sight? Will it be with a good name? What revenge, what heavy
calamity shall I not endure in agony for the terrible deeds I have done?
And wilt thou win the return that thy heart desires? Never may Zeus'
bride, the queen of all, in whom thou dost glory, bring that to pass.
Mayst thou some time remember me when thou art racked with anguish; may
the fleece like a dream vanish into the nether darkness on the wings
of the wind! And may my avenging Furies forthwith drive thee from thy
country, for all that I have suffered through thy cruelty! These curses
will not be allowed to fall unaccomplished to the ground. A mighty oath
hast thou transgressed, ruthless one; but not long shalt thou and thy
comrades sit at ease casting eyes of mockery upon me, for all your
covenants."

(ll. 391-394) Thus she spake, seething with fierce wrath; and she longed
to set fire to the ship and to hew it utterly in pieces, and herself to
fall into the raging flame. But Jason, half afraid, thus addressed her
with gentle words:

(ll. 395-409) "Forbear, lady; me too this pleases not. But we seek some
respite from battle, for such a cloud of hostile men, like to a fire,
surrounds us, on thy account. For all that inhabit this land are eager
to aid Apsyrtus, that they may lead thee back home to thy father, like
some captured maid. And all of us would perish in hateful destruction,
if we closed with them in fight; and bitterer still will be the pain,
if we are slain and leave thee to be their prey. But this covenant will
weave a web of guile to lead him to ruin. Nor will the people of the
land for thy sake oppose us, to favour the Colchians, when their prince
is no longer with them, who is thy champion and thy brother; nor will I
shrink from matching myself in fight with the Colchians, if they bar my
way homeward."

(ll. 410-420) Thus he spake soothing her; and she uttered a deadly
speech: "Take heed now. For when sorry deeds are done we must needs
devise sorry counsel, since at first I was distraught by my error, and
by heaven's will it was I wrought the accomplishment of evil desires.
Do thou in the turmoil shield me from the Colchians' spears; and I will
beguile Apsyrtus to come into thy hands--do thou greet him with splendid
gifts--if only I could persuade the heralds on their departure to bring
him alone to hearken to my words. Thereupon if this deed pleases thee,
slay him and raise a conflict with the Colchians, I care not."

(ll. 421-422) So they two agreed and prepared a great web of guile for
Apsyrtus, and provided many gifts such as are due to guests, and among
them gave a sacred robe of Hypsipyle, of crimson hue. The Graces with
their own hands had wrought it for Dionysus in sea-girt Dia, and he gave
it to his son Thoas thereafter, and Thoas left it to Hypsipyle, and she
gave that fair-wrought guest-gift with many another marvel to Aeson's
son to wear. Never couldst thou satisfy thy sweet desire by touching it
or gazing on it. And from it a divine fragrance breathed from the time
when the king of Nysa himself lay to rest thereon, flushed with wine
and nectar as he clasped the beauteous breast of the maiden-daughter
of Minos, whom once Theseus forsook in the island of Dia, when she had
followed him from Cnossus. And when she had worked upon the heralds to
induce her brother to come, as soon as she reached the temple of
the goddess, according to the agreement, and the darkness of night
surrounded them, that so she might devise with him a cunning plan for
her to take the mighty fleece of gold and return to the home of Aeetes,
for, she said, the sons of Phrixus had given her by force to the
strangers to carry off; with such beguiling words she scattered to the
air and the breezes her witching charms, which even from afar would have
drawn down the savage beast from the steep mountain-height.

(ll. 445-451) Ruthless Love, great bane, great curse to mankind, from
thee come deadly strifes and lamentations and groans, and countless
pains as well have their stormy birth from thee. Arise, thou god, and
arm thyself against the sons of our foes in such guise as when thou
didst fill Medea's heart with accursed madness. How then by evil doom
did she slay Apsyrtus when he came to meet her? For that must our song
tell next.

(ll. 452-481) When the heroes had left the maiden on the island of
Artemis, according to the covenant, both sides ran their ships to land
separately. And Jason went to the ambush to lie in wait for Apsyrtus and
then for his comrades. But he, beguiled by these dire promises, swiftly
crossed the swell of the sea in his ship, and in dark night set foot
on the sacred island; and faring all alone to meet her he made trial in
speech of his sister, as a tender child tries a wintry torrent which not
even strong men can pass through, to see if she would devise some guile
against the strangers. And so they two agreed together on everything;
and straightway Aeson's son leapt forth from the thick ambush, lifting
his bare sword in his hand; and quickly the maiden turned her eyes aside
and covered them with her veil that she might not see the blood of her
brother when he was smitten. And Jason marked him and struck him down,
as a butcher strikes down a mighty strong-horned bull, hard by the
temple which the Brygi on the mainland opposite had once built for
Artemis. In its vestibule he fell on his knees; and at last the hero
breathing out his life caught up in both hands the dark blood as it
welled from the wound; and he dyed with red his sister's silvery veil
and robe as she shrank away. And with swift side-glance the irresistible
pitiless Fury beheld the deadly deed they had done. And the hero,
Aeson's son, cut off the extremities of the dead man, and thrice licked
up some blood and thrice spat the pollution from his teeth, as it is
right for the slayer to do, to atone for a treacherous murder. And the
clammy corpse he hid in the ground where even now those bones lie among
the Apsyrtians.

(ll. 481-494) Now as soon as the heroes saw the blaze of a torch, which
the maiden raised for them as a sign to pursue, they laid their own ship
near the Colchian ship, and they slaughtered the Colchian host, as kites
slay the tribes of wood-pigeons, or as lions of the wold, when they have
leapt amid the steading, drive a great flock of sheep huddled together.
Nor did one of them escape death, but the heroes rushed upon the whole
crew, destroying them like a flame; and at last Jason met them, and was
eager to give aid where none was needed; but already they were taking
thought for him too. Thereupon they sat to devise some prudent counsel
for their voyage, and the maiden came upon them as they pondered, but
Peleus spake his word first:

(ll. 495-502) "I now bid you embark while it is still night, and take
with your oars the passage opposite to that which the enemy guards, for
at dawn when they see their plight I deem that no word urging to further
pursuit of us will prevail with them; but as people bereft of their
king, they will be scattered in grievous dissension. And easy, when the
people are scattered, will this path be for us on our return."

(ll. 503-506) Thus he spake; and the youths assented to the words of
Aeacus' son. And quickly they entered the ship, and toiled at their oars
unceasingly until they reached the sacred isle of Electra, the highest
of them all, near the river Eridanus.

(ll. 507-521) But when the Colchians learnt the death of their prince,
verily they were eager to pursue Argo and the Minyans through all the
Cronian sea. But Hera restrained them by terrible lightnings from the
sky. And at last they loathed their own homes in the Cytaean land,
quailing before Aeetes' fierce wrath; so they landed and made abiding
homes there, scattered far and wide. Some set foot on those very islands
where the heroes had stayed, and they still dwell there, bearing a name
derived from Apsyrtus; and others built a fenced city by the dark deep
Illyrian river, where is the tomb of Harmonia and Cadmus, dwelling among
the Encheleans; and others live amid the mountains which are called
the Thunderers, from the day when the thunders of Zeus, son of Cronos,
prevented them from crossing over to the island opposite.

(ll. 522-551) Now the heroes, when their return seemed safe for them,
fared onward and made their hawsers fast to the land of the Hylleans.
For the islands lay thick in the river and made the path dangerous for
those who sailed thereby. Nor, as aforetime, did the Hylleans devise
their hurt, but of their own accord furthered their passage, winning as
guerdon a mighty tripod of Apollo. For tripods twain had Phoebus given
to Aeson's son to carry afar in the voyage he had to make, at the time
when he went to sacred Pytho to enquire about this very voyage; and it
was ordained by fate that in whatever land they should be placed, that
land should never be ravaged by the attacks of foemen. Therefore even
now this tripod is hidden in that land near the pleasant city of Hyllus,
far beneath the earth, that it may ever be unseen by mortals. Yet they
found not King Hyllus still alive in the land, whom fair Melite bare
to Heracles in the land of the Phaeacians. For he came to the abode of
Nausithous and to Macris, the nurse of Dionysus, to cleanse himself from
the deadly murder of his children; here he loved and overcame the water
nymph Melite, the daughter of the river Aegaeus, and she bare mighty
Hyllus. But when he had grown up he desired not to dwell in that island
under the rule of Nausithous the king; but he collected a host of native
Phaeacians and came to the Cronian sea; for the hero King Nausithous
aided his journey, and there he settled, and the Mentores slew him as he
was fighting for the oxen of his field.

(ll. 552-556) Now, goddesses, say how it is that beyond this sea,
near the land of Ausonia and the Ligystian isles, which are called
Stoechades, the mighty tracks of the ship Argo are clearly sung of? What
great constraint and need brought the heroes so far? What breezes wafted
them?

(ll. 557-591) When Apsyrtus had fallen in mighty overthrow Zeus himself,
king of gods, was seized with wrath at what they had done. And he
ordained that by the counsels of Aeaean Circe they should cleanse
themselves from the terrible stain of blood and suffer countless woes
before their return. Yet none of the chieftains knew this; but far
onward they sped starting from the Hyllean land, and they left behind
all the islands that were beforetime thronged by the Colchians--the
Liburnian isles, isle after isle, Issa, Dysceladus, and lovely Pityeia.
Next after them they came to Corcyra, where Poseidon settled the
daughter of Asopus, fair-haired Corcyra, far from the land of Phlius,
whence he had carried her off through love; and sailors beholding it
from the sea, all black with its sombre woods, call it Corcyra the
Black. And next they passed Melite, rejoicing in the soft-blowing
breeze, and steep Cerossus, and Nymphaea at a distance, where lady
Calypso, daughter of Atlas, dwelt; and they deemed they saw the misty
mountains of Thunder. And then Hera bethought her of the counsels and
wrath of Zeus concerning them. And she devised an ending of their voyage
and stirred up storm-winds before them, by which they were caught and
borne back to the rocky isle of Electra. And straightway on a sudden
there called to them in the midst of their course, speaking with a human
voice, the beam of the hollow ship, which Athena had set in the centre
of the stem, made of Dodonian oak. And deadly fear seized them as
they heard the voice that told of the grievous wrath of Zeus. For it
proclaimed that they should not escape the paths of an endless sea
nor grievous tempests, unless Circe should purge away the guilt of the
ruthless murder of Apsyrtus; and it bade Polydeuces and Castor pray to
the immortal gods first to grant a path through the Ausonian sea where
they should find Circe, daughter of Perse and Helios.

(ll. 592-626) Thus Argo cried through the darkness; and the sons of
Tyndareus uprose, and lifted their hands to the immortals praying for
each boon: but dejection held the rest of the Minyan heroes. And far
on sped Argo under sail, and entered deep into the stream of Eridanus;
where once, smitten on the breast by the blazing bolt, Phaethon
half-consumed fell from the chariot of Helios into the opening of that
deep lake; and even now it belcheth up heavy steam clouds from the
smouldering wound. And no bird spreading its light wings can cross that
water; but in mid-course it plunges into the flame, fluttering. And all
around the maidens, the daughters of Helios, enclosed in tall poplars,
wretchedly wail a piteous plaint; and from their eyes they shed on the
ground bright drops of amber. These are dried by the sun upon the sand;
but whenever the waters of the dark lake flow over the strand before
the blast of the wailing wind, then they roll on in a mass into Eridanus
with swelling tide. But the Celts have attached this story to them, that
these are the tears of Leto's son, Apollo, that are borne along by the
eddies, the countless tears that he shed aforetime when he came to the
sacred race of the Hyperboreans and left shining heaven at the chiding
of his father, being in wrath concerning his son whom divine Coronis
bare in bright Lacereia at the mouth of Amyrus. And such is the story
told among these men. But no desire for food or drink seized the heroes
nor were their thoughts turned to joy. But they were sorely afflicted
all day, heavy and faint at heart, with the noisome stench, hard to
endure, which the streams of Eridanus sent forth from Phaethon still
burning; and at night they heard the piercing lament of the daughters
of Helios, wailing with shrill voice; and, as they lamented, their tears
were borne on the water like drops of oil.

(ll. 627-658) Thence they entered the deep stream of Rhodanus which
flows into Eridanus; and where they meet there is a roar of mingling
waters. Now that river, rising from the ends of the earth, where are the
portals and mansions of Night, on one side bursts forth upon the beach
of Ocean, at another pours into the Ionian sea, and on the third through
seven mouths sends its stream to the Sardinian sea and its limitless
bay. [1403] And from Rhodanus they entered stormy lakes, which spread
throughout the Celtic mainland of wondrous size; and there they would
have met with an inglorious calamity; for a certain branch of the river
was bearing them towards a gulf of Ocean which in ignorance they were
about to enter, and never would they have returned from there in safety.
But Hera leaping forth from heaven pealed her cry from the Hercynian
rock; and all together were shaken with fear of her cry; for terribly
crashed the mighty firmament. And backward they turned by reason of
the goddess, and noted the path by which their return was ordained.
And after a long while they came to the beach of the surging sea by the
devising of Hera, passing unharmed through countless tribes of the Celts
and Ligyans. For round them the goddess poured a dread mist day by
day as they fared on. And so, sailing through the midmost mouth, they
reached the Stoechades islands in safety by the aid of the sons of Zeus;
wherefore altars and sacred rites are established in their honour for
ever; and not that sea-faring alone did they attend to succour; but
Zeus granted to them the ships of future sailors too. Then leaving the
Stoechades they passed on to the island Aethalia, where after their toil
they wiped away with pebbles sweat in abundance; and pebbles like skin
in colour are strewn on the beach; [1404] and there are their quoits
and their wondrous armour; and there is the Argoan harbour called after
them.

(ll. 659-684) And quickly from there they passed through the sea,
beholding the Tyrrhenian shores of Ausonia; and they came to the famous
harbour of Aeaea, and from the ship they cast hawsers to the shore
near at hand. And here they found Circe bathing her head in the salt
sea-spray, for sorely had she been scared by visions of the night. With
blood her chambers and all the walls of her palace seemed to be running,
and flame was devouring all the magic herbs with which she used to
bewitch strangers whoever came; and she herself with murderous blood
quenched the glowing flame, drawing it up in her hands; and she ceased
from deadly fear. Wherefore when morning came she rose, and with
sea-spray was bathing her hair and her garments. And beasts, not
resembling the beasts of the wild, nor yet like men in body, but with a
medley of limbs, went in a throng, as sheep from the fold in multitudes
follow the shepherd. Such creatures, compacted of various limbs, did
each herself produce from the primeval slime when she had not yet grown
solid beneath a rainless sky nor yet had received a drop of moisture
from the rays of the scorching sun; but time combined these forms and
marshalled them in their ranks; in such wise these monsters shapeless of
form followed her. And exceeding wonder seized the heroes, and at once,
as each gazed on the form and face of Circe, they readily guessed that
she was the sister of Aeetes.

(ll. 685-717) Now when she had dismissed the fears of her nightly
visions, straightway she fared backwards, and in her subtlety she bade
the heroes follow, charming them on with her hand. Thereupon the host
remained stedfast at the bidding of Aeson's son, but Jason drew with him
the Colchian maid. And both followed the selfsame path till they reached
the hall of Circe, and she in amaze at their coming bade them sit on
brightly burnished seats. And they, quiet and silent, sped to the hearth
and sat there, as is the wont of wretched suppliants. Medea hid her face
in both her hands, but Jason fixed in the ground the mighty hilted sword
with which he had slain Aeetes' son; nor did they raise their eyes
to meet her look. And straightway Circe became aware of the doom of
a suppliant and the guilt of murder. Wherefore in reverence for the
ordinance of Zeus, the god of suppliants, who is a god of wrath yet
mightily aids slayers of men, she began to offer the sacrifice with
which ruthless suppliants are cleansed from guilt when they approach the
altar. First, to atone for the murder still unexpiated, she held above
their heads the young of a sow whose dugs yet swelled from the fruit of
the womb, and, severing its neck, sprinkled their hands with the blood;
and again she made propitiation with other drink offerings, calling on
Zeus the Cleanser, the protector of murder-stained suppliants. And all
the defilements in a mass her attendants bore forth from the palace--the
Naiad nymphs who ministered all things to her. And within, Circe,
standing by the hearth, kept burning atonement-cakes without wine,
praying the while that she might stay from their wrath the terrible
Furies, and that Zeus himself might be propitious and gentle to them
both, whether with hands stained by the blood of a stranger or, as
kinsfolk, by the blood of a kinsman, they should implore his grace.

(ll. 718-738) But when she had wrought all her task, then she raised
them up and seated them on well polished seats, and herself sat near,
face to face with them. And at once she asked them clearly of their
business and their voyaging, and whence they had come to her land and
palace, and had thus seated themselves as suppliants at her hearth. For
in truth the hideous remembrance of her dreams entered her mind as she
pondered; and she longed to hear the voice of the maiden, her kinswoman,
as soon as she saw that she had raised her eyes from the ground. For
all those of the race of Helios were plain to discern, since by the far
flashing of their eyes they shot in front of them a gleam as of gold.
So Medea told her all she asked--the daughter of Aeetes of the gloomy
heart, speaking gently in the Colchian tongue, both of the quest and the
journeyings of the heroes, and of their toils in the swift contests, and
how she had sinned through the counsels of her much-sorrowing sister,
and how with the sons of Phrixus she had fled afar from the tyrannous
horrors of her father; but she shrank from telling of the murder of
Apsyrtus. Yet she escaped not Circe's ken; nevertheless, in spite of
all, she pitied the weeping maiden, and spake thus:

(ll. 739-748) "Poor wretch, an evil and shameful return hast thou
planned. Not for long, I ween, wilt thou escape the heavy wrath of
Aeetes; but soon will he go even to the dwellings of Hellas to avenge
the blood of his son, for intolerable are the deeds thou hast done. But
since thou art my suppliant and my kinswoman, no further ill shall
I devise against thee at thy coming; but begone from my halls,
companioning the stranger, whosoever he be, this unknown one that thou
hast taken in thy father's despite; and kneel not to me at my hearth,
for never will I approve thy counsels and thy shameful flight."

(ll. 749-752) Thus she spake, and measureless anguish seized the maid;
and over her eyes she cast her robe and poured forth a lamentation,
until the hero took her by the hand and led her forth from the hall
quivering with fear. So they left the home of Circe.

(ll. 753-756) But they were not unmarked by the spouse of Zeus, son of
Cronos; but Iris told her when she saw them faring from the hall. For
Hera had bidden her watch what time they should come to the ship; so
again she urged her and spake:

(ll. 757-769) "Dear Iris, now come, if ever thou hast fulfilled my
bidding, hie thee away on light pinions, and bid Thetis arise from the
sea and come hither. For need of her is come upon me. Then go to the
sea-beaches where the bronze anvils of Hephaestus are smitten by sturdy
hammers, and tell him to still the blasts of fire until Argo pass by
them. Then go to Aeolus too, Aeolus who rules the winds, children of the
clear sky; and to him also tell my purpose so that he may make all winds
cease under heaven and no breeze may ruffle the sea; yet let the breath
of the west wind blow until the heroes have reached the Phaeacian isle
of Alcinous."

(ll. 770-782) So she spake, and straightway Iris leapt down from Olympus
and cleft her way, with light wings outspread. And she plunged into
the Aegean Sea, where is the dwelling of Nereus. And she came to Thetis
first and, by the promptings of Hera, told her tale and roused her to go
to the goddess. Next she came to Hephaestus, and quickly made him cease
from the clang of his iron hammers; and the smoke-grimed bellows were
stayed from their blast. And thirdly she came to Aeolus, the famous son
of Hippotas. And when she had given her message to him also and rested
her swift knees from her course, then Thetis leaving Nereus and her
sisters had come from the sea to Olympus to the goddess Hera; and the
goddess made her sit by her side and uttered her word:

(ll. 783-832) "Hearken now, lady Thetis, to what I am eager to tell
thee. Thou knowest how honoured in my heart is the hero, Aeson's son,
and the others that have helped him in the contest, and how I saved them
when they passed between the Wandering rocks, [1405] where roar terrible
storms of fire and the waves foam round the rugged reefs. And now past
the mighty rock of Scylla and Charybdis horribly belching, a course
awaits them. But thee indeed from thy infancy did I tend with my own
hands and love beyond all others that dwell in the salt sea because thou
didst refuse to share the couch of Zeus, for all his desire. For to him
such deeds are ever dear, to embrace either goddesses or mortal women.
But in reverence for me and with fear in thy heart thou didst shrink
from his love; and he then swore a mighty oath that thou shouldst never
be called the bride of an immortal god. Yet he ceased not from spying
thee against thy will, until reverend Themis declared to him the whole
truth, how that it was thy fate to bear a son mightier than his sire;
wherefore he gave thee up, for all his desire, fearing lest another
should be his match and rule the immortals, and in order that he might
ever hold his own dominion. But I gave thee the best of the sons of
earth to be thy husband, that thou mightest find a marriage dear to thy
heart and bear children; and I summoned to the feast the gods, one and
all. And with my own hand I raised the bridal torch, in return for
the kindly honour thou didst pay me. But come, let me tell a tale that
erreth not. When thy son shall come to the Elysian plain, he whom now
in the home of Cheiron the Centaur water-nymphs are tending, though
he still craves thy mother milk, it is fated that he be the husband
of Medea, Aeetes' daughter; do thou aid thy daughter-in-law as a
mother-in-law should, and aid Peleus himself. Why is thy wrath so
steadfast? He was blinded by folly. For blindness comes even upon
the gods. Surely at my behest I deem that Hephaestus will cease from
kindling the fury of his flame, and that Aeolus, son of Hippotas, will
check his swift rushing winds, all but the steady west wind, until they
reach the havens of the Phaeacians; do thou devise a return without
bane. The rocks and the tyrannous waves are my fear, they alone, and
them thou canst foil with thy sisters' aid. And let them not fall in
their helplessness into Charybdis lest she swallow them at one gulp, or
approach the hideous lair of Scylla, Ausonian Scylla the deadly, whom
night-wandering Hecate, who is called Crataeis, [1406] bare to Phoreys,
lest swooping upon them with her horrible jaws she destroy the chiefest
of the heroes. But guide their ship in the course where there shall be
still a hair's breadth escape from destruction."

(ll. 833-841) Thus she spake, and Thetis answered with these words: "If
the fury of the ravening flame and the stormy winds cease in very deed,
surely will I promise boldly to save the ship, even though the waves bar
the way, if only the west wind blows fresh and clear. But it is time to
fare on a long and measureless path, in quest of my sisters who will aid
me, and to the spot where the ship's hawsers are fastened, that at early
dawn the heroes may take thought to win their home-return."

(ll. 842-855) She spake, and darting down from the sky fell amid the
eddies of the dark blue sea; and she called to aid her the rest of the
Nereids, her own sisters; and they heard her and gathered together; and
Thetis declared to them Hera's behests, and quickly sped them all on
their way to the Ausonian sea. And herself, swifter than the flash of an
eye or the shafts of the sun, when it rises upwards from a far-distant
land, hastened swiftly through the sea, until she reached the Aeaean
beach of the Tyrrhenian mainland. And the heroes she found by the ship
taking their pastime with quoits and shooting of arrows; and she drew
near and just touched the hand of Aeaeus' son Peleus, for he was her
husband; nor could anyone see her clearly, but she appeared to his eyes
alone, and thus addressed him:

(ll. 856-864) "No longer now must ye stay sitting on the Tyrrhenian
beach, but at dawn loosen the hawsers of your swift ship, in obedience
to Hera, your helper. For at her behest the maiden daughters of Nereus
have met together to draw your ship through the midst of the rocks which
are called Planctae, [1407] for that is your destined path. But do thou
show my person to no one, when thou seest us come to meet time, but keep
it secret in thy mind, lest thou anger me still more than thou didst
anger me before so recklessly."

(ll. 865-884) She spake, and vanished into the depths of the sea; but
sharp pain smote Peleus, for never before had he seen her come, since
first she left her bridal chamber and bed in anger, on account of noble
Achilles, then a babe. For she ever encompassed the child's mortal flesh
in the night with the flame of fire; and day by day she anointed with
ambrosia his tender frame, so that he might become immortal and that she
might keep off from his body loathsome old age. But Peleus leapt up from
his bed and saw his dear son gasping in the flame; and at the sight he
uttered a terrible cry, fool that he was; and she heard it, and catching
up the child threw him screaming to the ground, and herself like a
breath of wind passed swiftly from the hall as a dream and leapt into
the sea, exceeding wroth, and thereafter returned not again. Wherefore
blank amazement fettered his soul; nevertheless he declared to his
comrades all the bidding of Thetis. And they broke off in the midst
and hurriedly ceased their contests, and prepared their meal and
earth-strewn beds, whereon after supper they slept through the night as
aforetime.

(ll. 885-921) Now when dawn the light-bringer was touching the edge of
heaven, then at the coming of the swift west wind they went to their
thwarts from the land; and gladly did they draw up the anchors from
the deep and made the tackling ready in due order; and above spread the
sail, stretching it taut with the sheets from the yard-arm. And a fresh
breeze wafted the ship on. And soon they saw a fair island, Anthemoessa,
where the clear-voiced Sirens, daughters of Achelous, used to beguile
with their sweet songs whoever cast anchor there, and then destroy him.
Them lovely Terpsichore, one of the Muses, bare, united with Achelous;
and once they tended Demeter's noble daughter still unwed, and sang to
her in chorus; and at that time they were fashioned in part like birds
and in part like maidens to behold. And ever on the watch from their
place of prospect with its fair haven, often from many had they taken
away their sweet return, consuming them with wasting desire; and
suddenly to the heroes, too, they sent forth from their lips a lily-like
voice. And they were already about to cast from the ship the hawsers to
the shore, had not Thracian Orpheus, son of Oeagrus, stringing in his
hands his Bistonian lyre, rung forth the hasty snatch of a rippling
melody so that their ears might be filled with the sound of his
twanging; and the lyre overcame the maidens' voice. And the west wind
and the sounding wave rushing astern bore the ship on; and the Sirens
kept uttering their ceaseless song. But even so the goodly son of Teleon
alone of the comrades leapt before them all from the polished bench into
the sea, even Butes, his soul melted by the clear ringing voice of the
Sirens; and he swam through the dark surge to mount the beach, poor
wretch. Quickly would they have robbed him of his return then and there,
but the goddess that rules Eryx, Cypris, in pity snatched him away,
while yet in the eddies, and graciously meeting him saved him to dwell
on the Lilybean height. And the heroes, seized by anguish, left the
Sirens, but other perils still worse, destructive to ships, awaited them
in the meeting-place of the seas.

(ll. 922-981) For on one side appeared the smooth rock of Scylla; on
the other Charybdis ceaselessly spouted and roared; in another part the
Wandering rocks were booming beneath the mighty surge, where before the
burning flame spurted forth from the top of the crags, above the rock
glowing with fire, and the air was misty with smoke, nor could you have
seen the sun's light. Then, though Hephaestus had ceased from his toils,
the sea was still sending up a warm vapour. Hereupon on this side and on
that the daughters of Nereus met them; and behind, lady Thetis set her
hand to the rudder-blade, to guide them amid the Wandering rocks. And as
when in fair weather herds of dolphins come up from the depths and
sport in circles round a ship as it speeds along, now seen in front, now
behind, now again at the side and delight comes to the sailors; so the
Nereids darted upward and circled in their ranks round the ship Argo,
while Thetis guided its course. And when they were about to touch the
Wandering rocks, straightway they raised the edge of their garments over
their snow-white knees, and aloft, on the very rocks and where the
waves broke, they hurried along on this side and on that apart from one
another. And the ship was raised aloft as the current smote her, and all
around the furious wave mounting up broke over the rocks, which at
one time touched the sky like towering crags, at another, down in the
depths, were fixed fast at the bottom of the sea and the fierce waves
poured over them in floods. And the Nereids, even as maidens near some
sandy beach roll their garments up to their waists out of their way and
sport with a shapely-rounded ball; then they catch it one from another
and send it high into the air; and it never touches the ground; so they
in turn one from another sent the ship through the air over the waves,
as it sped on ever away from the rocks; and round them the water spouted
and foamed. And lord Hephaestus himself standing on the summit of a
smooth rock and resting his massy shoulder on the handle of his hammer,
beheld them, and the spouse of Zeus beheld them as she stood above the
gleaming heaven; and she threw her arms round Athena, such fear seized
her as she gazed. And as long as the space of a day is lengthened out in
springtime, so long a time did they toil, heaving the ship between
the loud-echoing rocks; then again the heroes caught the wind and sped
onward; and swiftly they passed the mead of Thrinacia, where the kine of
Helios fed. There the nymphs, like sea-mews, plunged beneath the depths,
when they had fulfilled the behests of the spouse of Zeus. And at the
same time the bleating of sheep came to the heroes through the mist and
