"None but the wind and the water," said the voice, "and I would I had
them not."

"The wind and the water have many voices," said Robin, "but I never
before heard them say, What shall we do?"

Another pause ensued: after which,

"Look ye, master cottager," said the voice, in an altered tone, "if you
do not let us in willingly, we will break down the door."

"Ho! ho!" roared the baron, "you are become plural are you, rascals? How
many are there of you, thieves? What, I warrant, you thought to rob and
murder a poor harmless cottager and his wife, and did not dream of a
garrison? You looked for no weapon of opposition but spit, poker, and
basting ladle, wielded by unskilful hands: but, rascals, here is short
sword and long cudgel in hands well tried in war, wherewith you shall be
drilled into cullenders and beaten into mummy."

No reply was made, but furious strokes from without resounded upon the
door. Robin, Marian, and the baron threw by their pilgrim's attire, and
stood in arms on the defensive. They were provided with swords, and the
cottager gave them bucklers and helmets, for all Robin's haunts were
furnished with secret armouries. But they kept their swords sheathed,
and the baron wielded a ponderous spear, which he pointed towards the
door ready to run through the first that should enter, and Robin and
Marian each held a bow with the arrow drawn to its head and pointed in
the same direction. The cottager flourished a strong cudgel (a weapon
in the use of which he prided himself on being particularly expert), and
the wife seized the spit from the fireplace, and held it as she saw the
baron hold his spear. The storm of wind and rain continued to beat on
the roof and the casement, and the storm of blows to resound upon the
door, which at length gave way with a violent crash, and a cluster of
armed men appeared without, seemingly not less than twelve. Behind
them rolled the stream now changed from a gentle and shallow river to a
mighty and impetuous torrent, roaring in waves of yellow foam, partially
reddened by the light that streamed through the open door, and turning
up its convulsed surface in flashes of shifting radiance from restless
masses of half-visible shadow. The stepping-stones, by which the
intruders must have crossed, were buried under the waters. On the
opposite bank the light fell on the stems and boughs of the rock-rooted
oak and ash tossing and swaying in the blast, and sweeping the flashing
spray with their leaves.

The instant the door broke, Robin and Marian loosed their arrows.
Robin's arrow struck one of the assailants in the juncture of the
shoulder, and disabled his right arm: Marian's struck a second in the
juncture of the knee, and rendered him unserviceable; for the night.
The baron's long spear struck on the mailed breastplate of a third, and
being stretched to its full extent by the long-armed hero, drove him to
the edge of the torrent, and plunged him into its eddies, along which he
was whirled down the darkness of the descending stream, calling vainly
on his comrades for aid, till his voice was lost in the mingled roar of
the waters and the wind. A fourth springing through the door was laid
prostrate by the cottager's cudgel: but the wife being less dexterous
than her company, though an Amazon in strength, missed her pass at a
fifth, and drove the point of the spit several inches into the right
hand door-post as she stood close to the left, and thus made a new
barrier which the invaders could not pass without dipping under it and
submitting their necks to the sword: but one of the assailants seizing
it with gigantic rage, shook it at once from the grasp of its holder
and from its lodgment in the post, and at the same time made good the
irruption of the rest of his party into the cottage.

Now raged an unequal combat, for the assailants fell two to one on
Robin, Marian, the baron, and the cottager; while the wife, being
deprived of her spit, converted every thing that was at hand to a
missile, and rained pots, pans, and pipkins on the armed heads of the
enemy. The baron raged like a tiger, and the cottager laid about him
like a thresher. One of the soldiers struck Robin's sword from his hand
and brought him on his knee, when the boy, who had been roused by the
tumult and had been peeping through the inner door, leaped forward in
his shirt, picked up the sword and replaced it in Robin's hand, who
instantly springing up, disarmed and wounded one of his antagonists,
while the other was laid prostrate under the dint of a brass cauldron
launched by the Amazonian dame. Robin now turned to the aid of Marian,
who was parrying most dexterously the cuts and slashes of her two
assailants, of whom Robin delivered her from one, while a well-applied
blow of her sword struck off the helmet of the other, who fell on his
knees to beg a boon, and she recognised Sir Ralph Montfaucon. The men
who were engaged with the baron and the peasant, seeing their leader
subdued, immediately laid down their arms and cried for quarter. The
wife brought some strong rope, and the baron tied their arms behind
them.

"Now, Sir Ralph," said Marian, "once more you are at my mercy."

"That I always am, cruel beauty," said the discomfited lover.

"Odso! courteous knight," said the baron, "is this the return you make
for my beef and canary, when you kissed my daughter's hand in token of
contrition for your intermeddling at her wedding? Heart, I am glad to
see she has given you a bloody coxcomb. Slice him down, Mawd! slice him
down, and fling him into the river."

"Confess," said Marian, "what brought you here, and how did you trace
our steps?"

"I will confess nothing," said the knight.

"Then confess you, rascal," said the baron, holding his sword to the
throat of the captive squire.

"Take away the sword," said the squire, "it is too near my mouth, and
my voice will not come out for fear: take away the sword, and I will
confess all." The baron dropped his sword, and the squire proceeded;
"Sir Ralph met you, as you quitted Lady Falkland's castle, and by
representing to her who you were, borrowed from her such a number of
her retainers as he deemed must ensure your capture, seeing that your
familiar the friar was not at your elbow. We set forth without delay,
and traced you first by means of a peasant who saw you turn into this
valley, and afterwards by the light from the casement of this solitary
dwelling. Our design was to have laid an ambush for you in the morning,
but the storm and your observation of my unlucky face through the
casement made us change our purpose; and what followed you can tell
better than I can, being indeed masters of the subject."

"You are a merry knave," said the baron, "and here is a cup of wine for
you."

"Gramercy," said the squire, "and better late than never: but I lacked a
cup of this before. Had I been pot-valiant, I had held you play."

"Sir knight," said Marian, "this is the third time you have sought the
life of my lord and of me, for mine is interwoven with his. And do you
think me so spiritless as to believe that I can be yours by compulsion?
Tempt me not again, for the next time shall be the last, and the fish of
the nearest river shall commute the flesh of a recreant knight into the
fast-day dinner of an uncarnivorous friar. I spare you now, not in pity
but in scorn. Yet shall you swear to a convention never more to pursue
or molest my lord or me, and on this condition you shall live."

The knight had no alternative but to comply, and swore, on the honour of
knighthood, to keep the convention inviolate. How well he kept his oath
we shall have no opportunity of narrating: Di lui la nostra istoria piu
non parla.




CHAPTER XVI

     Carry me over the water, thou fine fellowe.--Old Ballad.


The pilgrims, without experiencing further molestation, arrived at the
retreat of Sir Guy of Gamwell. They found the old knight a cup too low;
partly from being cut off from the scenes of his old hospitality and the
shouts of his Nottinghamshire vassals, who were wont to make the rafters
of his ancient hall re-echo to their revelry; but principally from being
parted from his son, who had long been the better half of his flask and
pasty. The arrival of our visitors cheered him up; and finding that
the baron was to remain with him, he testified his delight and the
cordiality of his welcome by pegging him in the ribs till he made him
roar.

Robin and Marian took an affectionate leave of the baron and the old
knight; and before they quitted the vicinity of Barnsdale, deeming
it prudent to return in a different disguise, they laid aside their
pilgrim's attire, and assumed the habits and appurtenances of wandering
minstrels.

They travelled in this character safely and pleasantly, till one evening
at a late hour they arrived by the side of a river, where Robin looking
out for a mode of passage perceived a ferry-boat safely moored in a nook
on the opposite bank; near which a chimney sending up a wreath of smoke
through the thick-set willows, was the only symptom of human habitation;
and Robin naturally conceiving the said chimney and wreath of smoke to
be the outward signs of the inward ferryman, shouted "Over!" with much
strength and clearness; but no voice replied, and no ferryman appeared.
Robin raised his voice, and shouted with redoubled energy, "Over, Over,
O-o-o-over!" A faint echo alone responded "Over!" and again died away
into deep silence: but after a brief interval a voice from among the
willows, in a strange kind of mingled intonation that was half a shout
and half a song, answered:

 Over, over, over, jolly, jolly rover,
 Would you then come over? Over, over, over?
 Jolly, jolly rover, here's one lives in clover:
 Who finds the clover? The jolly, jolly rover.
 He finds the clover, let him then come over,
 The jolly, jolly rover, over, over, over,


"I much doubt," said Marian, "if this ferryman do not mean by clover
something more than the toll of his ferry-boat."

"I doubt not," answered Robin, "he is a levier of toll and tithe, which
I shall put him upon proof of his right to receive, by making trial of
his might to enforce."

The ferryman emerged from the willows and stepped into his boat. "As I
live," exclaimed Robin, "the ferryman is a friar."

"With a sword," said Marian, "stuck in his rope girdle."

The friar pushed his boat off manfully, and was presently half over the
river.

"It is friar Tuck," said Marian.

"He will scarcely know us," said Robin; "and if he do not, I will break
a staff with him for sport."

The friar came singing across the water: the boat touched the land:
Robin and Marian stepped on board: the friar pushed off again.

"Silken doublets, silken doublets," said the friar: "slenderly lined, I
bow: your wandering minstrel is always poor toll: your sweet angels of
voices pass current for a bed and a supper at the house of every
lord that likes to hear the fame of his valour without the trouble of
fighting for it. What need you of purse or pouch? You may sing before
thieves. Pedlars, pedlars: wandering from door to door with the small
ware of lies and cajolery: exploits for carpet-knights; honesty for
courtiers; truth for monks, and chastity for nuns: a good saleable stock
that costs the vender nothing, defies wear and tear, and when it has
served a hundred customers is as plentiful and as marketable as ever.
But, sirrahs, I'll none of your balderdash. You pass not hence without
clink of brass, or I'll knock your musical noddles together till
they ring like a pair of cymbals. That will be a new tune for your
minstrelships."

This friendly speech of the friar ended as they stepped on the opposite
bank. Robin had noticed as they passed that the summer stream was low.

"Why, thou brawling mongrel," said Robin, "that whether thou be thief,
friar, or ferryman, or an ill-mixed compound of all three, passes
conjecture, though I judge thee to be simple thief, what barkest thou
at thus? Villain, there is clink of brass for thee. Dost thou see this
coin? Dost thou hear this music? Look and listen: for touch thou shalt
not: my minstrelship defies thee. Thou shalt carry me on thy back over
the water, and receive nothing but a cracked sconce for thy trouble."

"A bargain," said the friar: "for the water is low, the labour is light,
and the reward is alluring." And he stooped down for Robin, who mounted
his back, and the friar waded with him over the river.

"Now, fine fellow," said the friar, "thou shalt carry me back over the
water, and thou shalt have a cracked sconce for thy trouble."

Robin took the friar on his back, and waded with him into the middle
of the river, when by a dexterous jerk he suddenly flung him off and
plunged him horizontally over head and ears in the water. Robin waded to
shore, and the friar, half swimming and half scrambling, followed.

"Fine fellow, fine fellow," said the friar, "now will I pay thee thy
cracked sconce."

"Not so," said Robin, "I have not earned it: but thou hast earned it,
and shalt have it."

It was not, even in those good old times, a sight of every day to see a
troubadour and a friar playing at single-stick by the side of a river,
each aiming with fell intent at the other's coxcomb. The parties were
both so skilled in attack and defence, that their mutual efforts for a
long time expended themselves in quick and loud rappings on each other's
oaken staves. At length Robin by a dexterous feint contrived to score
one on the friar's crown: but in the careless moment of triumph a
splendid sweep of the friar's staff struck Robin's out of his hand into
the middle of the river, and repaid his crack on the head with a degree
of vigour that might have passed the bounds of a jest if Marian had not
retarded its descent by catching the friar's arm.

"How now, recreant friar," said Marian; "what have you to say why you
should not suffer instant execution, being detected in open rebellion
against your liege lord? Therefore kneel down, traitor, and submit your
neck to the sword of the offended law."

"Benefit of clergy," said the friar: "I plead my clergy. And is it you
indeed, ye scapegraces? Ye are well disguised: I knew ye not, by my
flask. Robin, jolly Robin, he buys a jest dearly that pays for it with
a bloody coxcomb. But here is balm for all bruises, outward and inward.
(The friar produced a flask of canary.) Wash thy wound twice and thy
throat thrice with this solar concoction, and thou shalt marvel where
was thy hurt. But what moved ye to this frolic? Knew ye not that ye
could not appear in a mask more fashioned to move my bile than in that
of these gilders and lackerers of the smooth surface of worthlessness,
that bring the gold of true valour into disrepute, by stamping the baser
metal with the fairer im-pression? I marvelled to find any such given
to fighting (for they have an old instinct of self-preservation): but
I rejoiced thereat, that I might discuss to them poetical justice:
and therefore have I cracked thy sconce: for which, let this be thy
medicine."

"But wherefore," said Marian, "do we find you here, when we left you
joint lord warden of Sherwood?"

"I do but retire to my devotions," replied the friar. "This is my
hermitage, in which I first took refuge when I escaped from my beloved
brethren of Rubygill; and to which I still retreat at times from the
vanities of the world, which else might cling to me too closely, since
I have been promoted to be peer-spiritual of your forest-court. For,
indeed, I do find in myself certain indications and admonitions that my
day has past its noon; and none more cogent than this: that daily of
bad wine I grow more intolerant, and of good wine have a keener and
more fastidious relish. There is no surer symptom of receding years. The
ferryman is my faithful varlet. I send him on some pious errand, that I
may meditate in ghostly privacy, when my presence in the forest can best
be spared: and when can it be better spared than now, seeing that
the neighbourhood of Prince John, and his incessant perquisitions for
Marian, have made the forest too hot to hold more of us than are
needful to keep up a quorum, and preserve unbroken the continuity of
our forest-dominion? For, in truth, without your greenwood majesties, we
have hardly the wit to live in a body, and at the same time to keep our
necks out of jeopardy, while that arch-rebel and traitor John infests
the precincts of our territory."

The friar now conducted them to his peaceful cell, where he spread his
frugal board with fish, venison, wild-fowl, fruit, and canary. Under the
compound operation of this materia medica Robin's wounds healed apace,
and the friar, who hated minstrelsy, began as usual chirping in his
cups. Robin and Marian chimed in with his tuneful humour till the
midnight moon peeped in upon their revelry.

It was now the very witching time of night, when they heard a voice
shouting, "Over!" They paused to listen, and the voice repeated "Over!"
in accents clear and loud, but which at the same time either were in
themselves, or seemed to be, from the place and the hour, singularly
plaintive and dreary. The friar fidgetted about in his seat: fell into a
deep musing: shook himself, and looked about him: first at Marian, then
at Robin, then at Marian again; filled and tossed off a cup of canary,
and relapsed into his reverie.

"Will you not bring your passenger over?" said Robin. The friar shook
his head and looked mysterious.

"That passenger," said the friar, "will never come over. Every full
moon, at midnight, that voice calls, 'Over!' I and my varlet have more
than once obeyed the summons, and we have sometimes had a glimpse of a
white figure under the opposite trees: but when the boat has touched the
bank, nothing has been to be seen; and the voice has been heard no more
till the midnight of the next full moon."

"It is very strange," said Robin.

"Wondrous strange," said the friar, looking solemn.

The voice again called "Over!" in a long plaintive musical cry.

"I must go to it," said the friar, "or it will give us no peace. I would
all my customers were of this world. I begin to think that I am Charon,
and that this river is Styx."

"I will go with you, friar," said Robin.

"By my flask," said the friar, "but you shall not."

"Then I will," said Marian.

"Still less," said the friar, hurrying out of the cell. Robin and Marian
followed: but the friar outstepped them, and pushed off his boat.

A white figure was visible under the shade of the opposite trees.
The boat approached the shore, and the figure glided away. The friar
returned.

They re-entered the cottage, and sat some time conversing on the
phenomenon they had seen. The friar sipped his wine, and after a time,
said:

"There is a tradition of a damsel who was drowned here some years ago.
The tradition is----"

But the friar could not narrate a plain tale: he therefore cleared his
throat, and sang with due solemnity, in a ghostly voice:

 A damsel came in midnight rain,
     And called across the ferry:
 The weary wight she called in vain,
     Whose senses sleep did bury.
 At evening, from her father's door
     She turned to meet her lover:
 At midnight, on the lonely shore,
     She shouted "Over, over!"

 She had not met him by the tree
     Of their accustomed meeting,
 And sad and sick at heart was she,
     Her heart all wildly beating.
 In chill suspense the hours went by,
     The wild storm burst above her:
 She turned her to the river nigh,
     And shouted, "Over, over!"

 A dim, discoloured, doubtful light
     The moon's dark veil permitted,
 And thick before her troubled sight
     Fantastic shadows flitted.
 Her lover's form appeared to glide,
     And beckon o'er the water:
 Alas! his blood that morn had dyed
     Her brother's sword with slaughter.

 Upon a little rock she stood,
     To make her invocation:
 She marked not that the rain-swoll'n flood
     Was islanding her station.
 The tempest mocked her feeble cry:
     No saint his aid would give her:
 The flood swelled high and yet more high,
     And swept her down the river.

 Yet oft beneath the pale moonlight,
     When hollow winds are blowing,
 The shadow of that maiden bright
     Glides by the dark stream's flowing.
 And when the storms of midnight rave,
     While clouds the broad moon cover,
 The wild gusts waft across the wave
     The cry of, "Over, over!"


While the friar was singing, Marian was meditating: and when he had
ended she said, "Honest friar, you have misplaced your tradition, which
belongs to the aestuary of a nobler river, where the damsel was
swept away by the rising of the tide, for which your land-flood is an
indifferent substitute. But the true tradition of this stream I think I
myself possess, and I will narrate it in your own way:

 It was a friar of orders free,
 A friar of Rubygill:
 At the greenwood-tree a vow made he,
 But he kept it very ill:
 A vow made he of chastity,
 But he kept it very ill.
 He kept it, perchance, in the conscious shade
 Of the bounds of the forest wherein it was made:
 But he roamed where he listed, as free as the wind,
 And he left his good vow in the forest behind:
 For its woods out of sight were his vow out of mind,
 With the friar of Rubygill.

 In lonely hut himself he shut,
 The friar of Rubygill;
 Where the ghostly elf absolved himself,
 To follow his own good will:
 And he had no lack of canary sack,
 To keep his conscience still.
 And a damsel well knew, when at lonely midnight
 It gleamed on the waters, his signal-lamp-light:
 "Over! over!" she warbled with nightingale throat,
 And the friar sprung forth at the magical note,
 And she crossed the dark stream in his trim ferryboat,
 With the friar of Rubygill."


"Look you now," said Robin, "if the friar does not blush. Many strange
sights have I seen in my day, but never till this moment did I see a
blushing friar."

"I think," said the friar, "you never saw one that blushed not, or
you saw good canary thrown away. But you are welcome to laugh if it so
please you. None shall laugh in my company, though it be at my expense,
but I will have my share of the merriment. The world is a stage,
