
    2. On an outline map mark the names of the peoples mentioned in the
    chapter on the countries where they settled.

    3. Ask children in school who know some other language than English
    what are their names for England, Germany, France, Spain, and Italy.

    _Important dates_:

    Alaric's capture of Rome, 410 A.D.

    Discovery of America by the Northmen, 1000 A.D.




CHAPTER XI


HOW ENGLISHMEN LEARNED TO GOVERN THEMSELVES

HEROES OF THE MIDDLE AGES. The Middle Ages, like Ancient Times, are
  recalled by many interesting tales. Some of them, such as the stories of
  King Arthur and his Knights, the story of Roland, and the Song of the
  Niebelungs, are only tales and not history. Others tell us about great
  kings, Charlemagne and St. Louis of France, Frederick the Redbeard of
  Germany, or St. Stephen of Hungary. The hero-king for England was
  Alfred, who fought bravely against the pirate Danes and finally
  conquered and persuaded many of them to live quietly under his rule.

KING ALFRED BEGAN TO REIGN IN 871. King Alfred was a skilful
  warrior, but he was also an excellent ruler in time of peace. When he
  was a boy he had shown his love of books. His mother once offered a
  beautifully written Saxon poem as a prize to the one of her sons who
  should be the first to learn it. Alfred could not yet read, but he had a
  ready memory, and with the aid of his teacher he learned the poem and
  won the prize.

  At that time almost all books were written in Latin and few even of the
  clergy could read. During the long wars with the Danes many books had
  been destroyed. Men found battle-axes more useful than books and ceased
  to care about reading. King Alfred feared that the Saxons would soon
  become ignorant barbarians, and sent for priests and monks who were
  learned and were able to teach his clergy. He sent even into France
  for such men.

EARLY ENGLISH BOOKS. As it would be easier for people to learn to
  read books written in the language they spoke rather than in Latin,
  Alfred helped to translate several famous Latin books into English.
  Among these was a history written by a Roman before the Germans had
  overthrown the Roman Empire. This history told about the world of the
  Greeks and the Romans.

  Alfred commanded some of his clergy to keep a record from year to year
  of things which happened in his kingdom. This record was called the
  Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, and was the first history written in the English
  language. It was carefully kept for many years after Alfred's death.
  Another wise thing Alfred did was to collect the laws or "dooms" of the
  earlier kings, so that every one might know what the law required.

  [Illustration: EXTRACT FROM THE SAXON CHRONICLE From a copy in
  the British Museum]

THE BEGINNING OF A NAVY. Alfred has been called the creator of the
  English navy. He thought that the only way to keep the Danes from
  plundering his shores was to fight them on the sea. He built several
  ships which were bigger than the Danish ships, but they were not always
  victorious, for they could not follow the Danish ships into shallow
  water. Nevertheless, the Danes could not plunder England as easily
  as before.

THE NEW ARMY. Alfred organized his fighting men in a better way. In
  times past the men had been called upon to fight only when the Danes
  were near, but now he kept a third of his men ready all the time, and
  another third he placed in forts, so the rest were able to work in the
  fields in safety. There are good reasons why Englishmen regard Alfred
  as a hero.

WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR BEGAN TO RULE ENGLAND IN 1066. About a
  hundred and fifty years after Alfred died, William, duke of Normandy,
  crossed the Channel with an army, killed the English king in battle, and
  seized the throne. This was not altogether a misfortune to the English,
  for they came under the same ruler as the Normans and they shared in all
  that the men of the Continent were beginning to learn. For one thing,
  builders from the Continent taught the English to construct the great
  Norman churches or cathedrals which every traveler in England sees.
  Besides, William the Conqueror was a strong king and put down the chiefs
  or lords that were inclined to oppress the common people.

HENRY II. Henry II, one of William's successors, ruled over most of
  western France as well as over England. His officers and nobles were
  tired out by his endless traveling in his lands, which extended from the
  banks of the river Loire in France to the borders of Scotland. All
  Englishmen and Americans should remember him with gratitude because of
  the improvements he made in the ways of discovering the truth when
  disputes arose and were carried into courts.

  [Illustration: THE NORMANS CROSSING THE ENGLISH CHANNEL From the
  Bayeux Tapestry, embroidered in the time of William the Conqueror. The
  figures are worked on a band of linen two hundred and thirty feet long,
  and twenty inches wide. Worsteds of eight colors are used]

ORDEALS AND TRIALS BY BATTLE. Before Henry's reign it was the
  custom when a man was accused of a crime to find out the truth by
  arranging a wager of battle or what were called ordeals. The two most
  common ordeals were the ordeal by fire and the ordeal by water. In the
  ordeal by fire an iron was heated red-hot, and after it had been blessed
  by a priest it was put into the hand of the man the truth of whose word
  was being tested, and he had to carry it a certain number of feet. His
  hand was then bound up and left for three days. If at the end of that
  time the wound was healing, men believed he was innocent, for they
  thought God would keep an innocent man from being punished.

  In the ordeal by water the man was tied and thrown into water which had
  been blessed by the priest. If he was guilty, the people thought the
  water would not receive him. If he sank at once, he was pulled out and
  treated as if he had told the truth.

  [Illustration: TRIAL BY BATTLE After a drawing in an old
  manuscript]

  A wager of battle was a fight between the two men whose dispute was to
  be settled, or between a man and his accuser. Each was armed with a
  hammer or a small battle-axe, and the one who gave up lost his case.

TRIAL BY JURY. King Henry introduced a better way of finding out
  the truth. He called upon twelve men from a neighborhood to come before
  the judges, to promise solemnly to tell what they knew about a matter,
  and then to decide which person was in the right. They were supposed to
  know about the facts, and they were allowed to talk the matter over with
  one another before they made a decision.

  Later these men from the neighborhood were divided into two groups, one
  to tell what they knew and the other to listen and decide what was true.
  Those who told what they knew were called the witnesses, and those who
  listened and decided were called jurors. The name jurors came from a
  Latin word meaning to take an oath.

RICHARD THE LIONHEARTED. King Henry had two sons, Richard and John.
  Richard was the boldest and most skilful fighter of his time. When the
  news was brought to England that Jerusalem had been captured by the
  Mohammedans, he led an army to Palestine to recapture it. He failed to
  take the city, but he became famous throughout the East as a fearless
  warrior and was ever afterwards called the "Lionhearted." At his death
  his brother John became king. He was as cowardly and wicked as Richard
  was brave and generous.

THE GREAT CHARTER. The leaders of the people, the nobles and the
  clergy, soon grew tired of John's wickedness. In 1215 they raised an
  army and threatened to take the kingdom from John and crown another
  prince as king. John was soon ready to promise anything in order to
  obtain power once more, and the nobles and bishops met him at Runnymede
  on the river Thames, a few miles west of London, and compelled him to
  sign a list of promises. As the list contained sixty-three separate
  promises, it was called the Great Charter or Magna Charta. If John did
  not keep these promises, the lords and clergy agreed to make war on him,
  and he even said that this would be their duty.

PROMISES OF THE CHARTER. Many of the articles of the Great Charter
  were important only to the men of King John's day, but others are as
  important to us as to them. In these the king promised that every one
  should be treated justly. He said he would not refuse to listen to the
  complaints of those who thought they were wronged. The king also
  promised that he would not decide in favor of a rich man just because
  the rich man might offer him money. He would put no one in prison who
  had not been tried and found guilty by a jury. By another important
  promise the king said he would not levy new taxes without the consent of
  the chief men of the kingdom. This opened the way for the people to have
  something to say about how their money should be spent. This right is a
  very important part of what we call self-government.

  [Illustration: A PORTION OF THE GREAT CHARTER]

PROMISES OF THE GREAT CHARTER RENEWED. In after times whenever the
  English thought a king was doing them a wrong they reminded him of the
  promises made by King John in the Great Charter and demanded that the
  promises be solemnly renewed.

  In 1265 a great noble named Simon de Montfort asked many towns to send a
  number of their chief men to meet with the nobles and clergy to talk
  over the conduct of the king. Others, even kings, soon followed Simon's
  example by asking the townsmen for advice about matters of government.
  After a while this became the custom. Occasionally the king wanted the
  advice of the clergy, the nobles, and the townsmen at the same time and
  called them together. The meeting was called a parliament, that is, an
  assembly in which talking or discussion goes on.

  [Illustration: Parliament House Westminster Hall Westminster
  Abbey--WHERE PARLIAMENT MET IN LONDON IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY]

THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. Only the most important nobles or lords
  could go in person to the assemblies, otherwise the meeting would be too
  large to do any business. The other lords chose certain ones from their
  number to go in place of all the rest. We call such men representatives.
  In this way, besides the men who represented the towns, there were
  present these nobles who represented the landowners of the counties.
  Gradually these nobles and the townsmen formed an assembly of their own,
  while the greater lords, the bishops, and abbots sat together in another
  assembly. The two assemblies were called the House of Commons and the
  House of Lords, and the two made up the parliament.

AN ASSEMBLY OF REPRESENTATIVES. This parliament was a great
  invention. The English had discovered a better way of governing
  themselves than either the Greeks or the Romans. We call it the
  representative system. If a Roman citizen who lived far from Rome wanted
  to take part in the elections, he was obliged to leave his farm or his
  business and travel to Rome, for only the citizens who were at Rome
  could have a share in making the laws. It never occurred to the Romans
  that the citizens outside of Rome could send some of their number as
  representatives to Rome. The formation of the English parliament was an
  important step towards what we mean in America by "government of the
  people, for the people, and by the people."



    QUESTIONS

    1. Mention the names of heroes or hero-kings of the Middle Ages.
    What stories have you learned about these heroes?

    2. Who was the hero-king of the English? How did he early show his
    love of books? What did he do to help his people to a knowledge
    of books?

    3. How did he succeed better than other kings in driving back the
    Danes? Why has he been called the creator of the English navy?

    4. What was the name of the Norman duke who conquered the English
    and ruled over them? Did this conquest hinder or help them?

    5. Why should we remember Henry II gratefully? Explain an ordeal and
    a trial by battle. How were the first juries formed and what did
    they do? How were they afterwards divided?

    6. For what was King Richard most celebrated? What sort of a king
    was his brother John?

    7. Why was the Charter which John was forced to grant called
    "Great"? Repeat some of its promises. Did the English soon forget
    these promises?

    8. Who asked the townsmen to send several of their number to talk
    over affairs with the clergy and the nobles? What was this body
    finally called? Into what two bodies was it divided?

    9. What is a "representative system"? Why was it an invention? What
    did the Romans do when they lived in towns distant from Rome and
    wanted to take part in elections or help make the laws?



    EXERCISES

    1. Learn and tell one of the King Arthur stories and a part of the
    story of the Niebelungs. Find a story about Charlemagne, Frederick
    the Redbeard, St. Louis, or St. Stephen.

    2. Collect pictures of war vessels, those of old times and those of
    to-day, and explain their differences.

    3. Find out how men nowadays decide whether an accused man is
    guilty.

    4. What is the name of the assembly in your state which makes the
    laws? What assembly at Washington makes the laws for the
    whole country?




CHAPTER XII


THE CIVILIZATION OF THE MIDDLE AGES

WHAT THE ENGLISH OWED TO THEIR EUROPEAN NEIGHBORS. If the English
  succeeded better than other Europeans in learning how to govern
  themselves, one reason was that the Channel protected them from attack,
  and they could quarrel with their king without running much risk that
  their enemies in other countries would take advantage of the quarrel to
  seize their lands or attempt to conquer them.

  The French were not so well placed. France also was not united like
  England, and whole districts called counties or duchies were almost
  independent of the king, being ruled by their counts and dukes. In
  France it would not have been wise for the people to quarrel with the
  king, for he was their natural protector against cruel lords. Germany
  and Italy were even more divided, with not only counties and duchies,
  but also cities nearly as independent as the ancient cities of Greece.

  The Europeans on the Continent did many things which the English were
  doing, and some of these were so well done that the English were ready
  to accept these Europeans as their teachers. The memory of what the
  Greeks and the Romans had done remained longer in southern France and
  Italy because so many buildings were still standing which reminded
  Frenchmen and Italians of the people who built them.

  [Illustration: A MONK COPYING MANUSCRIPT BOOKS]

CLASSES OF PEOPLE. The people of Europe, as well as of England,
  were divided into two classes, nobles and peasants. The clergy seemed to
  form another class because there were so many of them. Besides the
  parish priests and the bishops there were thousands of monks, who were
  persons who chose to dwell together in monasteries under the rule of an
  abbot or a prior, rather than live among ordinary people where men were
  so often tempted to do wrong or were so likely to be wronged by others.
  The monks worked on the farms of the monasteries, or studied in the
  libraries, or prayed and fasted. For a long time the men who knew how to
  read were nearly always monks or priests. Outside of the monasteries or
  the bishops' houses there were few books.

THE NOBLES. The nobles were either knights, barons, counts, or
  dukes. In England there were also earls. Many mediaeval nobles ruled
  like kings, but over a smaller territory. They gained their power
  because they were rich in land and could support many men who were ready
  to follow them in battle, or because in the constant wars they proved
  themselves able to keep anything they took, whether it was a hilltop or
  a town. Timid and peaceable people were often glad to put themselves
  under the protection of such a fighter, who saved them from being robbed
  by other fighting nobles.

  In this way the nobles served a good purpose until the kings, who were
  at first only very successful nobles, were able to bring nobles as well
  as peasants under their own rule and to compel every one to obey the
  same laws. After this the nobles became what we call an aristocracy,
  proud of their family history, generally living in better houses and
  owning more land than their neighbors, but with little power
  over others.

  [Illustration: PLAN OF A MEDIAEVAL CASTLE 1. The Donjon-keep. 2.
  Chapel. 3. Stables. 4. Inner Court. 5. Outer Court. 6. Outworks. 7.
  Mount, where justice was executed. 8. Soldiers' Lodgings]

  [Illustration: PIERREFONDS--ONE OF THE GREAT CASTLES OF FRANCE]

CASTLES. For safety, kings and nobles in the Middle Ages were
  obliged to build strong stone forts or fortified houses called castles.
  They were often placed on a hilltop or on an island or in a spot where
  approach to the walls could be made difficult by a broad canal, or moat,
  filled with water. At different places along the walls were towers, and
  within the outer ring of walls a great tower, or keep, which was hard to
  capture even after the rest of the castle had been entered by the enemy.
  These castles were gloomy places to live in until, centuries later,
  their inner walls were pierced with windows. Many are still standing,
  others are interesting heaps of ruins.

KNIGHTHOOD. The lords of the castles were occupied mostly in
  hunting or fighting. They fought to keep other lords from interfering
  with them or to win for themselves more lands and power. They hunted
  that they might have meat for their tables. In later times, when it was
  not so necessary to kill animals for food, they hunted as a sport.
  Fighting also ceased to be the chief occupation, although the nobles
  were expected to accompany the king in his wars.

  From boyhood the sons of nobles, unless they entered the Church as
  priests or monks, were taught the art of fighting. A boy was sent to the
  castle of another lord, where he served as a page, waiting on the lord
  at table or running errands. He was trained to ride a horse boldly and
  to be skilful with the sword and the lance. When his education was
  finished he was usually made a knight, an event which took place with
  many interesting ceremonies.

  The young man bathed, as a sign that he was pure. The weapons and arms
  for his use were blessed by a priest and laid on the altar of the
  church, and near them he knelt and prayed all night. In the final
