they were, they wounded and were wounded, slew and were slain, until late
in the day. And if all had contested with all, as may happen under such
circumstances, or if Brutus had been arrayed against Antony and Cassius
against Caesar, they would have proved equally matched. As it was, Brutus
forced the invalid Caesar from his path, while Antony overruled Cassius,
who was by no means his equal in warfare. At this juncture, because not
all were conquering the other side at once, but both parties were in turn
defeated and victorious, the results[37] were practically the same. Both
had conquered and had been defeated, each had routed their adversaries
and had been routed, pursuits and flights had fallen to the lot of both
alike and the camps on both sides had been captured. As they were many
they occupied a large expanse of plain, so that they could not see each
other distinctly. In the battle each one could recognize only what was
opposite him, and when the rout took place each side fled the opposite
way to its own fortifications, situated at a distance from each
other, without stopping to look back. Because of this fact and of the
immeasurable quantity of dust that rose they were ignorant of the
termination of the battle, and those who had conquered thought they had
been victorious over everything, and those who were defeated deemed they
had been worsted everywhere. They did not learn what had happened until
the ramparts had been laid in ruins, and the victors on each side on
retiring to their own head-quarters encountered each other.

[-46-] So far, then, as the battle was concerned, both sides both
conquered thus and were defeated. At this time they did not resume the
conflict, but as soon as they had retired and beheld each other and
recognized what had taken place, they both withdrew, not venturing
anything further. They had beaten and had proved inferior to each other.
This was shown first by the fact that the entire ramparts of Caesar
and Antony and everything within them had been captured. (That proved
practically the truth of the dream, for if Caesar had remained in his
place, he would certainly have perished with the rest.) It was shown
again in the fate of Cassius. He came away safe from the battle, but
stripped of his fortifications he had fled to a different spot, and
suspecting that Brutus, too, had been defeated and that several of the
victors were hastening to attack him he made haste to die. He had sent a
certain centurion to view the situation and report to him where Brutus
was and what he was doing. This man fell in with some horsemen whom
Brutus had dispatched to seek his colleague, turned back with them and
proceeded leisurely, with the idea that there was hurry, because no
danger presented itself. Cassius, seeing them afar off, suspected they
were enemies and ordered Pindarus, a freedman, to kill him. The centurion
on learning that his leader's death was due to his dilatoriness slew
himself upon his body.

[-47-] Brutus immediately sent the body of Cassius secretly to Thasos. He
shrank from burying it upon the ground, for fear the army would be filled
with grief and dejection at sight of the preparations. The remainder
of his friend's soldiers he took under his charge, consoled them in a
speech, won their devotion by a gift of money to make up for what they
had lost, and then transferred his position to their enclosure, which
was more suitable. From there he started out to harass his opponents in
various ways, especially by assaulting their camp at night. He had no
intention of joining issue with them again in a set battle, but had great
hopes of overcoming them without danger by the lapse of time. Hence he
tried regularly to startle them in various ways and disturb them by
night, and once by diverting the course of the river he washed away
considerable of their wall. Caesar and Antony were getting short of both
food and money, and consequently gave their soldiers nothing to replace
what had been seized and carried off. Furthermore, the force that was
sailing to them in transports from Brundusium had been destroyed by
Staius. Yet they could not safely transfer their position to any other
quarter nor return to Italy, and so, even as late as this, they set all
their hopes upon their weapons,--hopes not merely of victory but even
of preservation. They were eager to meet the danger before the naval
disaster became noised abroad among their opponents and their own men.
[-48-] As Brutus evinced an unwillingness to meet them in open fight,
they somehow cast pamphlets over his palisade, challenging his soldiers
either to embrace their cause (promises being attached) or to come into
conflict if they had the least particle of strength. During this delay
some of the Celtic force deserted from their side to Brutus, and Amyntas,
the general of Deiotarus, and Rhascuporis deserted to them. The latter,
as some say, immediately returned home. Brutus was afraid, when this
happened, that there might be further similar rebellion and decided to
join issue with them. And since there were many captives in his camp, and
he neither had any way to guard them during the progress of the battle,
and could not trust them to refrain from doing mischief, he despatched
the majority of them, contrary to his own inclination, being a slave in
this matter to necessity; but he was the more ready to do it because of
the fact that his opponents had killed such of his soldiers as had been
taken alive. After doing this he armed his men for battle. When the
opposing ranks were arrayed, two eagles that flew above the heads of the
two armies battled together and indicated to the combatants the outcome
of the war. The eagle on the side of Brutus was beaten and fled: and
similarly his heavy-armed force, after a contest for the most part even,
was defeated, and then when many had fallen his cavalry, though it fought
nobly, gave way. Thereupon the victors pursued them, as they fled, this
way and that, but neither killed nor captured any one; and then they kept
watch of the separate contingents during the night and did not allow them
to unite again.

[-49-] Brutus, who had reached in flight a steep and lofty spot,
undertook to break through in some way to the camp. In this he was
unsuccessful, and on learning that some of his soldiers had made terms
with the victors he had no further hope, but despairing of safety and
disdaining capture he himself also took refuge in death. He uttered aloud
this sentence of Heracles:

  "Unhappy Virtue, thou wert but a name, while I,
  Deeming thy godhead real, followed thee on,
  Who wert but Fortune's slave." [38]

Then he called one of the bystanders to kill him. His body received
burial by Antony,--all but his head, which was sent to Rome: but as the
ships encountered a storm during the voyage across from Dyrrachium that
was thrown into the sea. At his death the mass of his soldiers, on
amnesty being proclaimed for them, immediately transferred their
allegiance. Portia perished by swallowing red-hot charcoal. Most of the
prominent men who had held any offices or belonged to the assassins or
the proscribed, straightway killed themselves, or, like Favonius, were
captured and destroyed: the remainder at this time escaped to the sea and
thereafter joined Sextus.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY

48

The following is contained in the Forty-eighth of Dio's Rome:

How Caesar contended with Fulvia and Lucius Antonius (chapters 1-16).

How Sextus Pompey occupied Sicily (chapters 17-23).

How the Parthians occupied the country to the edge of the Hellespont
(chapters 24-26).

How Caesar and Antony reached an agreement with Sextus (chapters 27-38).

How Publius Ventidius conquered the Parthians and recovered Asia
(chapters 39-42).

How Caesar began to make war upon Sextus (chapters 43-48).

About Baiae (chapters 49-54).

Duration of time five years, in which there were the following
magistrates here enumerated:

L. Antonius M. F. Pietas, P. Servilius P. F. Isauricus consul (II).(B.C.
41 = a. u. 713.)

Cn. Domitius M. F Calvinus [consul] (II), C. Asinius|| Cn. F. Pollio.
(B.C. 40 = a. u. 714.)

L. Marcius L. F. Censorinus, C. Calvisius||[39] C. F. Sabinus. (B.C. 39 =
a. u. 715.)

Appius Claudius C. F. Pulcher, C. Norbanus C. F. Flaccus. (B.C. 38 = a.
u. 716.)

M. Vipsanius L. F. Agrippa, L. Caninius L. F. Gallus. (B.C. 37 = a. u.
717.)


(_BOOK 48, BOISSEVAIN_.)

[B.C. 42(_a. u_.712)]

[-1-] So perished Brutus and Cassius, slain by the swords with which they
had despatched Caesar. The rest also who had shared in the plot against
him were all except a very few destroyed, some previously, some at this
time, and some subsequently. Justice and the Divine Will seemed to sweep
onward and lead forward to such a fate the men who had killed their
benefactor, one who had attained such eminence in both excellence and
good fortune. Caesar and Antony for the moment secured an advantage over
Lepidus, because he had not shared the victory with them; yet they
were destined ere long to turn their arms against each other. It is a
difficult matter for three men or two that are equal in rank and have
come into power over such vast interests as a result of war to be of one
accord. Hence, whatever they had gained for a time while in harmony for
the purpose of the overthrow of their adversaries they now began to
set up as prizes in their rivalry with each other. They immediately
redistributed the empire, so that Spain and Numidia fell to Caesar, Gaul
and Africa to Antony; they further agreed that in case Lepidus showed any
vexation at this Africa should be evacuated for him. [-2-] This was all
they could allot between them, since Sextus was still occupying Sardinia
and Sicily, and other regions outside of Italy were in a state of
turmoil. About the peninsula itself I need say nothing, for it has always
remained a kind of choice exception in such divisions: and not even now
did they talk as if they were struggling to obtain it, but to defend it.
So, leaving these other regions to be common property, Antony took it
upon himself to settle affairs of nations that had fought against them
and to collect the money which had been offered to the soldiers in
advance: Caesar was charged with curtailing the power of Lepidus, if he
should make any hostile move, with conducting the war against Sextus, and
with assigning to those of his campaigners who had passed the age limit
the land which he had promised them; and these he forthwith dismissed.
Furthermore he sent with Antony two legions of his followers, and his
colleague sent word that he would give him in return an equal number
of those stationed at that tune in Italy. After making these compacts
separately, putting them in writing, and sealing them, they exchanged the
documents, to the end that if any transgression were committed, it might
be proved from the very records. Thereupon Antony set out for Asia and
Caesar for Italy. [-3-] Sickness attacked the latter violently on the
journey and during the voyage, giving rise in Rome to an expectation of
his death. They did not believe, however, that he was lingering so
much by reason of ill health as because he was devising some harm, and
consequently they expected to fall victims to every possible persecution.
Yet they voted to these men many honors for their victory, such as would
have been given assuredly to the others, had they conquered; in such
crises it is ever the case that all trample on the loser and honor the
victor; and in particular they decided, though against their will, to
celebrate thanksgivings during practically the entire year. This
Caesar ordered them outright to do in gratitude for vengeance upon the
assassins. At any rate during his delay all sorts of stories were
current, and all sorts of behavior resulted. For example, some spread a
report that he was dead, and aroused delight in many breasts: others
said he was planning some evil, and filled numerous persons with fear.
Therefore some hid their property and took care to protect themselves,
and others considered in what way they might make their escape. Others,
and the majority, not being able to apprehend anything clearly by reason
of their excessive fear, prepared to meet a certain doom. The confident
element was extremely small, and its numbers few. In the light of the
former frequent and diverse destruction of both persons and possessions
they expected that anything similar or still worse might happen, because
now they had been utterly vanquished. Wherefore Caesar, in dread that
they might take some rebellious step, especially since Lepidus was there,
forwarded a letter to the senate urging its members to be of good cheer,
and further promising that he would do everything in a mild and humane
way, after the manner of his father.

[B.C. 41 (_a. u_.713)]

[-4-] This was what then took place. The succeeding year Publius
Servilius and Lucius Antonius nominally became consuls, but in reality it
was the latter and Fulvia. She, the mother-in-law of Caesar and wife of
Antony, had no respect for Lepidus because of his slothfulness, and
herself managed affairs, so that neither the senate nor the people dared
transact any business contrary to her pleasure. Actually, when Lucius
himself was anxious to have a triumph over certain peoples dwelling in
the Alps, on the ground that he had conquered them, for a time Fulvia
opposed him and no one would grant it; but when her favor was courted and
she permitted it, all voted for the measure: therefore it was nominally
Antonius ... over the people whom he said he had vanquished (in reality
he had done nothing deserving a triumph nor had any command at all in
those regions),--but in truth Fulvia ...[40] and had the procession. And
she assumed a far prouder bearing over the affair than did he, because
she had a truer cause; to give any one authority to hold a triumph was
greater than to celebrate it by securing the privilege from another.
Except that Lucius donned the triumphal apparel, mounted the chariot, and
performed the other rites customary in such cases, Fulvia herself seemed
to be giving the spectacle, employing him as her assistant. It took
place on the first day of the year, and Lucius, just as Marius had done,
exulted in the circumstance that he held it on the first day of the month
that he began to be consul. Moreover he exalted himself even above his
predecessor, saying that he had voluntarily laid aside the decorations of
the procession and had assembled the senate in his street dress, whereas
Marius had done it unwillingly. He added that the latter had received a
crown from almost nobody, whereas he obtained many, and particularly from
the people, tribe by tribe, as had never been the case with any former
triumphator. (It was done by the aid of Fulvia and by the money which he
had secretly given some persons to spend.)

[-5-] It was in this year that Caesar arrived in Rome, and, after taking
the usual steps to celebrate the victory, turned his attention to the
administration and despatch of business. For Lepidus through fear of him
and out of his general weakness of heart had not rebelled; and Lucius and
Fulvia, on the supposition that they were relatives and sharers in his
supremacy were quiet,--at least at first. As time went on they became at
variance, the persons just mentioned because they did not get a share in
the portion of lands to be assigned which belonged to Antony, and Caesar
because he did not get back his troops from the other two. Hence their
kinship by marriage was dissolved and they were brought to open warfare.
Caesar would not endure the domineering ways of his mother-in-law, and,
choosing to appear to be at odds with her rather than with Antonius, sent
back her daughter, whom he declared on oath to be still a virgin. In
pursuing such a course he was careless whether it should be thought
that the woman had remained a virgin in his house so long a time for
common-place reasons, or whether it should seem that he had planned the
situation considerably in advance, as a measure of preparation for the
future. After this action there was no longer any friendship between
them. Lucius together with Fulvia attempted to get control of affairs,
pretending to be doing this in behalf of Marcus, and would yield to Caesar
on no point: therefore on account of his devotion to his brother he took
the additional title of Pietas. Caesar naturally found no fault with
Marcus, not wishing to alienate him while he was attending to the nations
in Asia, but reproached and resisted the pair, giving out that they were
behaving in all respects contrary to their brother's desire and were
eager for individual supremacy.

[-6-] In the land allotments both placed the greatest hope of power, and
consequently the beginning of their quarrel was concerned with them.
Caesar for his part wished to distribute the territory to all such as had
made the campaign with himself and Antony, according to the compact
made with them after the victory, that by so doing he might win their
good-will: the others demanded to receive the assignment that appertained
to their party and settle the cities themselves, in order that they might
get the power of these settlements on their side. It seemed to both to
be the simplest method to grant the land of the unarmed to those who
had participated in the conflict. Contrary to their expectation great
disturbance resulted and the matter took the aspect of a war. For at
first Caesar was for taking from the possessors and giving to the veterans
all of Italy (except what some old campaigner had received as a gift or
bought from the government and was now holding), together with the bands
of slaves and other wealth. The persons deprived of their property were
terribly enraged against him, and caused a change of policy. Fulvia and
the consul now hoped to find more power in the cause of the others, the
oppressed, and consequently neglected those who were to receive the
fields, but turned their attention to that party which was of greater
numbers and was animated by a righteous indignation at the deprivation
they were suffering. Next they took some of them individually, aided and
united them, so that the men who were before afraid of Caesar now that
they had got leaders became courageous and no longer gave up any of their
property: they thought that Marcus, too, would approve their course.
[-7-] Among these, therefore, Lucius and Fulvia secured a following, and
still made no assault upon the adherents of Caesar. Their attitude was not
that there was no need for the soldiers to receive allotments, but
they maintained that the goods of their adversaries in the combat were
sufficient for them; especially they pointed out lands and furniture,
some still being held intact, others that had been sold, of which they
declared the former ought to be given to the men outright and in the
second case the price realized should be presented to them. If even this
did not satisfy them, they tried to secure the affection of them all by
holding out hopes in Asia. In this way it quickly came about that Caesar,
who had forcibly robbed the possessors of any property and caused
troubles and dangers on account of it to all alike, found himself
disliked by both parties; whereas the other two, since they took nothing
from anybody and showed those who were to receive the gifts a way to the
fulfillment of the pledges from already existing assets and without a
combat, won over each of the bodies of men. As a result of this and
through the famine which was trying them greatly at this time, because
the sea off Sicily was in control of Sextus, and the Ionian Gulf was
in the grasp of Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, Caesar found himself in a
considerable dilemma. For Domitius was one of the assassins, and, having
escaped from the battle fought at Philippi, he had got together a small
fleet, had made himself for a time master of the Gulf, and was doing the
greatest damage to the cause of his opponents.

[-8-] There was not only this to trouble Caesar greatly but also the fact
that in the disputes which had been inaugurated between the ex-soldiers
and the senators as well as the rest of the multitude that possessed
lands,--and these proved very numerous because the contestants were
struggling for the greatest interests,--he could not attach himself to
either side without danger. It was impossible for him to please both. The
one side wished to run riot, the other to be unharmed: the one side to
get the other's property, the other to hold what belonged to it. As
often as he gave the preference to the interests of this party or that,
according as he found it necessary, he incurred the hatred of the others:
and he did not meet with so much gratitude for the favors he conferred as
with anger for what he failed to yield. Those benefited took all that was
given them as their due and regarded it as no kindness, and the opposite
party was wrathful because robbed of their own belongings. And as a
result he continued to offend either this group or the other, at one
time reproached with being a friend of the people and again with being
a friend of the army. He could make no headway, and further learned by
actual experience that arms had no power to hold those injured friendly
toward him, and that it was possible for all such as would not submit to
perish by the use of weapons, but out of the question for any one to be
forced to love a person whom he will not. After this, though reluctantly,
he stopped taking anything from the senators; previously he used to deem
it his right to distribute everything that was theirs, asking seriously:
"From what source else shall we pay the prizes of war to those who have
served?"--as if any one had commanded him to wage war or to make such
great promises. He also kept his hands off the valuables,--whatever
costly objects women had for dowries, or others had less in value than
the land individually given to the old soldiers. [-9-] When this was done
the senate and the rest, finding nothing taken from them, became fairly
resigned to his rule, but the veterans were indignant, regarding his
sparingness and the honor shown to the others to be their own dishonor
and loss, since they were to receive less. They killed not a few of the
centurions and the other intimates of Caesar who tried to restrain
them from mutiny, and came very near compassing their leader's own
destruction, using every plausible excuse possible for their anger. They
did not cease their irritation till the land that belonged to their
relatives and the fathers and sons of those fallen in battle but was held
by somebody else was granted to these three classes freely. This measure
caused the soldier element to become somewhat more conciliatory, but that
very thing produced vexation again among the people. The two used to come
in conflict and there was continual fighting amongst them, so that many
were wounded and killed on both sides alike. The one party was superior
by being equipped with weapons and having experience in wars, and the
other by its numbers and the ability to pelt opponents from the roofs.
Owing to this a number of houses were burned down, and to those dwelling
in the city rent was entirely remitted to the extent of five hundred
denarii, while for those in the rest of Italy it was reduced a fourth for
one year. For they used to fight in all the cities alike, wherever they
fell in with each other.

[-10-] When this took place constantly and soldiers sent ahead by Caesar
into Spain made a kind of uprising at Placentia and did not come to
order until they received money from the people there, and they were
furthermore hindered from crossing the Alps by Calenus and Ventidius,
who held Farther Gaul, Caesar became afraid that he might meet with some
disaster and began to wish to be reconciled with Fulvia and the consul.
He could not accomplish anything by sending messages personally and with
only his own authorization, and so went to the veterans and through them
attempted to negotiate a settlement. Elated at this they took charge of
those who had lost their land, and Lucius went about in every direction
uniting them and detaching them from Caesar, while Fulvia occupied
Praeneste, had senators and knights for her associates, and was wont to
conduct all her deliberations with their help, even sending orders to
whatever points required it. Why should any one be surprised at this,
when she was girt with a sword, and used to pass the watchwords to the
soldiers, yes, often harangued them,--an additional means of giving
offence to Caesar? [-11-] The latter, however, had no way to overthrow
them, being far inferior to them not only in troops, but in good-will on
the part of the population; for he caused many distress, whereas they
filled every one with hope. He had often privately through friends
proposed reconciliation to them, and when he accomplished nothing, he
sent envoys from the number of the veterans to them. He expected by
this stroke pretty surely to obtain his request, to adjust present
difficulties, and to gain a strength equal to theirs for the future. And
even though he should fail of these aims, he expected that not he but
they would bear the responsibility for their quarrel. This actually took
place. When he effected nothing even through the soldiers, he despatched
senators, showing them the covenants made between himself and Antony, and
offering the envoys as arbitrators of the differences. But his opponents
in the first place made many counter-propositions, demands with which
Caesar was sure not to comply, and again, in respect to everything that
they did said they were doing it by the orders of Mark Antony. So that
when nothing was gained in this way either, he betook himself once more
to the veterans. [-12-] Thereupon these assembled in Rome in great
numbers, with the avowed intention of making some communication to the
people and the senate. But instead of troubling themselves about this
errand they collected on the Capitol and commanded that the compacts
which Antony and Caesar made be read to them. They ratified these
agreements and voted that they should be made arbitrators of the
differences existing. After recording these acts on tablets and sealing
them they delivered them to the vestal virgins to keep. To Caesar, who was
present, and to the other party by an embassy they gave orders to meet
for adjudication at Gabii on a stated day. Caesar showed his readiness to
submit to arbitration, and the others promised to put in an appearance,
but out of fear or else perhaps disdain did not come. (For they were wont
to make fun of the warriors, calling them among other names _senatus
caligatus_ on account of their use of military boots.) So they condemned
Lucius and Fulvia as guilty of some injustice, and gave precedence to the
cause of Caesar. After this, when the latter's adversaries had deliberated
again and again, they took up the war once more and did not make ready
for it in any quiet fashion. Chief among their measures was to secure
money from sources, even from temples. They took away all the votive
offerings that could be turned into bullion, those deposited in Rome
