Then they removed the images of Vitellius from their standards and took an
oath that they would be governed by Vespasian. But, after the meeting had
broken up and they had retired to their tents, they changed their minds
and suddenly gathering excitedly in force with great outcry they again
saluted Vitellius as emperor and imprisoned Alienus for having betrayed
them, and they paid no heed to his consular office. Such are the regular
practices of civil wars.

[Sidenote:--11--] The great confusion which under these conditions
prevailed in the camp of Vitellius was increased that night by an eclipse
of the moon. It was not so much its being obscured (though even such
phenomena cause fear to men in excitement) as the fact that the luminary
appeared both blood-colored and black and reflected still other terrifying
shades. Not for this, however, would the men change their attitude or
yield: but when they encountered each other they contended most
vigorously, although, as I said, the Vitellians were leaderless; for
Alienus had been imprisoned at Cremona.

On the following day, when Primus through messengers tried to induce them
to come to terms, the soldiers of Vitellius sent a return message to him
urging that he espouse the cause of Vitellius. When, moreover, they joined
battle with his soldiers they contended most vigorously. The battle was
not the result of any concerted plan. Some few horsemen, as often happens
when two forces are encamped opposite each other, were out foraging in
front of the others and suddenly made an attack. After that reinforcements
came from both armies to each of the two parties in whatever order the
troops happened to become aware of the situation,--first to one side, then
to the other, now of one kind of fighting force, now of another, infantry
or cavalry: and the conflict was marked by vicissitudes until all had
hastened to the front. Then they got into some kind of regular formation
and carried on the struggle with some order even though leaderless.
Alienus, as you remember, had been imprisoned.

[Sidenote:--12--] From this point on the battle between them was a well
matched and evenly balanced affair, not only during the day but at night
as well. For the coming of night did not separate them. They were
thoroughly angry and determined, although they were acquainted with each
other and talked back and forth. Hence not hunger nor fatigue nor cold nor
darkness nor wounds nor deaths nor the remains of men that fell on this
field before [nor the memory of the disaster nor the number of those that
perished to no purpose] mitigated their fierceness. Such was the madness
that possessed both sides alike [and so eager were they, incited by the
very memories of the spot, which made one party resolved to conquer this
time also, and the other not to be conquered this time either. So they
fought as against foreigners instead of kindred, and as if all on both
sides were absolutely obliged either to perish at once or thereafter to be
slaves. Therefore, not even when night came on, as I stated, would they
yield; but though tired out and for that reason often resting and
indulging in conversation together, they nevertheless continued to
struggle]. As often as the moon shone out (it was constantly being
concealed by [numerous] clouds [of all shapes that kept passing in front
of it]), one might see them sometimes fighting, sometimes
[Sidenote:--13--] standing and leaning on their spears, sometimes sitting
down. Now and then they would shout in unison on one side the name of
Vespasian and on the other that of Vitellius, and again they would
challenge each other with abuse and praise of the two men. At intervals
one soldier would have a private chat with an opponent:--"Comrade,
fellow-citizen, what are we doing? Why are we fighting? Come over to my
side." "Oh, no, you come to my side." But what is there surprising about
this, considering that when the women of the city in the course of the
night brought food and drink to give to the soldiers of Vitellius, the
latter after eating and drinking themselves passed the supplies on to
their antagonists? One of them would call out the name of his adversary
(for they practically all knew one another and were well acquainted) and
would say: "Comrade, take and eat this. I give you not a sword, but bread.
Take and drink: I hold toward you not a shield but a cup. For whether you
kill me or I you, this will afford us a more comfortable leave-taking, and
will save from feebleness and weakness the hand with which either you cut
me down or I you. These are the consecrated offerings that Vitellius and
Vespasian give us while we are yet alive, that they may sacrifice us to
the corpses of the past." That would be the style of their conversation,
after which they would rest a while, eat a bit, and then renew the battle.
Soon they would stop again, and then once more join in conflict.

[Sidenote:--14--] It went on this way the whole night through till dawn
broke. At that time two men of the Vespasian party wrought a notable
achievement. Their side was being severely damaged by an engine of some
sort, and these two, seizing shields from among the spoils of the
Vitellian faction, mingled with the opposing ranks, and made their way to
the engine without its being noticed that they did not belong to that
side. Thus they managed to cut the ropes of the affair, so that not
another missile could be discharged from it. As the sun was rising the
soldiers of the third legion, called the Gallic, that wintered in Syria
but was now by chance in the party of Vespasian, suddenly according to
custom saluted the Sun God. The followers of Vitellius, suspecting that
Mucianus had arrived, underwent a revulsion of feeling, and panic-stricken
at the shout took to flight. (Another instance of how the smallest things
can produce great alarm in men who are completely tired out). They retired
within the wall, from which they stretched forth their hands and made
supplications. As no one listened to them, they released the consul, and,
having arrayed him in his robe of office with the fasces, then sent him as
an intercessor. Thus they obtained a truce, for Alienus because of his
rank and the way he had been treated easily persuaded Primus to accept
their submission.

[Sidenote:--15--] When, however, the gates were opened and an amnesty had
been declared for all, suddenly soldiers came rushing in from all
directions and began plundering and setting fire to everything. This
catastrophe proved to be one of the greatest recorded. The city was
distinguished for the size and beauty of its buildings, and great sums of
money belonging to natives and to strangers had been accumulated there.
The larger portion of the harm was done by the Vitellians, since they knew
exactly which were the houses of the richest men and all about the
entrances on the alleys. They showed no scruples about destroying the
persons in whose behalf they had fought, but dealt blows, committed
murder, and acted as if it were they who had been wronged and had
conquered. Thus, counting those that fell in battle, five myriads perished
altogether.

[Sidenote:--16--] Vitellius, on learning of the defeat, was for a time
quite disturbed. Omens had contributed to make him uneasy. He had been
offering a certain sacrifice, and after it was addressing the soldiers,
when a lot of vultures swooped down, scattered the sacred meats, and
nearly knocked him from the platform. Accordingly, the news of the defeat
troubled him still more, and he quietly sent his brother to Tarracina, a
strong city, which the latter occupied. But when the generals of Vespasian
approached Rome he became alarmed and took his departure. He did nothing
and formed no plan, but in a state of terror was carried back and forth on
the billows of chance. One moment he was for clinging to the sovereignty
and he was making definite preparations for warfare: the next he was quite
willing to give it up and was definitely getting ready to live as a
private person. At times he wore the purple chlamys and girded on a sword:
again he assumed dark colored clothing. His public addresses both in the
palace and in the Forum were now of one tenor, now of another, first
urging battle and next terms of peace. At times he was inclined to
surrender himself for the public welfare, and later he would clasp his
child in his arms, kiss him, and hold him out to the people as if to
arouse their pity. Similarly he would dismiss the Pretorians and then send
for them again, would leave the palace to retire to his brother's house
and then return: in this way he dulled the enthusiasm of almost everybody
interested in him. Seeing him dashing hither and thither so frenziedly
they ceased to carry out commands with their usual diligence, and began to
consider their own interests as well as his. They ridiculed him a great
deal, especially when in the assemblies he proffered his sword to the
consuls and to the senators present as if to show that by this act he had
divested himself of the imperial office. No one of the above persons dared
to take it, and the bystanders jeered.

[Sidenote:--17--] In view of these conditions, when Primus at last drew
near, the consuls, Gaius Quintius Atticus and Gnaeus Caecilius Simplex,
together with Sabinus (a relative of Vespasian) and the other foremost men
held a consultation, the result of which was that they set out for the
palace in company with the soldiers that favored their cause, intending to
either persuade or force Vitellius to resign his position as emperor. They
encountered, however, the Celtae who were guarding him, and getting
decidedly the worst of the encounter they fled to the Capitol. Arrived
there they sent for Domitian, son of Vespasian, and his relatives, and put
themselves in a state of defence. The following day, when their
adversaries assailed them, they managed for a time to repulse them; but
when the environs of the Capitol were set on fire, its defenders were
beaten back by the flame. In this way the soldiers of Vitellius forced
their way up, slaughtered many of the resisting party, and after
plundering the whole stock of votive offerings burned down with other
structures the great temple. Sabinus and Atticus they arrested and sent
them to Vitellius. Domitian and the junior Sabinus had made their escape
from the Capitol at the first noise of conflict and by concealing
themselves in houses had succeeded in eluding observation.

[Sidenote:--18--] Those soldiers of Vespasian that were led by Quintus
Petilius Cerialis [Footnote: The epitome of Dio spells uniformly
_Cerealius_.] (one of the foremost senators and a relative of Vespasian
by marriage) and by Antonius Primus--for Mucianus had not yet overtaken
them--were by this time close at hand, and Vitellius fell into the depths
of terror. The oncoming leaders through the medium of certain messengers
and by placing their letters in coffins with dead bodies, in baskets full
of fruit, or the reed traps of bird-catchers, learned all that was being
done in the city and formed their plans accordingly. Now, when they saw
the blaze rising from the Capitol as from a beacon, they made haste. The
first of the two to approach the city with his cavalry was Cerialis, [and
he was defeated at the very entrance by being cut off with horsemen in a
narrow spot. However, he prevented any harm being done by his opponents.
For Vitellius, hoping that his proved superiority would afford him an
opportunity to make terms, restrained his soldiers]. And having convened
the senate he sent envoys chosen from that body together with the vestal
virgins to Cerialis as envoys.

[Sidenote:--19--] Since no one would listen to them and they came very
near losing their lives, the emissaries visited Primus, who was also at
last approaching; from him they secured an audience, but accomplished
nothing. For at this juncture his soldiers came angrily toward him and
overcame with ease the guard at the Tiber bridge. (When the latter took
their stand upon it and disputed their passage, the horsemen forded the
stream and fell upon them from the rear). After this various bodies of men
made assaults at various points and committed some of the most atrocious
deeds. All the behavior for which they censured Vitellius and his
followers, behavior which they pretended was the cause of the war between
them, they themselves repeated, slaying great numbers. Many of those
killed were struck with pieces of tiling from the roof or cut down in
alleyways while jostled about by a throng of adversaries. Thus as many as
fifty thousand human beings were destroyed during those days of carnage.

[Sidenote:--20--] So the city was being pillaged, and the men were some
fighting, some fleeing, some actually plundering and murdering by
themselves in order that they might be taken for the invaders and so
preserve their lives. Vitellius in dread put on a ragged, dirty, little
tunic and concealed himself in an obscure alcove where dogs were kept,
intending to run off during the night to Tarracina and join his brother.
But the soldiers found him after a short search, for he could not long be
sure of remaining hid, seeing that he had been emperor. They seized him, a
mass of shavings and blood--for the dogs had done him some harm
already--and stripping off his clothes they bound his hands behind his
back, put a rope around his neck and dragged from the palace the Caesar
who had reveled there. Down the Sacred Way they hauled the emperor who had
frequently paraded past in his chair of state. Then they conducted the
Augustus to the Forum, where he had often addressed the people. Some
buffeted him, some plucked at his beard, all ridiculed him, all insulted
him, laying especial stress in their remarks on his intemperance, since he
had an expansive paunch. [Sidenote:--21--] When in shame at this treatment
he kept his eyes lowered, the soldiers would prick him under the chin with
their daggers, to make him look up even against his will. A certain Celt
who saw this would not endure it, but taking pity on him cried: "I will
help you, as well as I can alone." Then he wounded Vitellius and killed
himself. However, Vitellius did not die of the wound but was haled to the
prison, as were also his statues, while many amusing and many disgraceful
remarks were made about them. Finally, grieved to the heart at the way he
had been treated and what he was compelled to hear, he was heard to
exclaim: "Yet I was once your emperor!" At that the soldiers flew into a
rage and took him to the top of the Scalae Gemoniae, where they struck him
down. His head was cut off and carried about all over the city.

[Sidenote:--22--] Subsequently his wife saw to his burial. He had lived
fifty-four years [and eighty-nine days] and had reigned for a year lacking
ten days. His brother had started from Tarracina to come to his
assistance, but learned while _en route_ that he was dead. He also
encountered a detachment of men sent against him and made terms with them
on condition that his life should be spared. In spite of this he was
murdered not long afterward. The son of Vitellius, too, perished soon
after his father, notwithstanding that Vitellius had killed no relative
either of Otho or of Vespasian. After all these various events had taken
place, Mucianus came up and administered necessary details in conjunction
with Domitian, whom he also presented to the soldiers and had him make a
speech, boy though he was. Each of the soldiers received twenty-five
denarii.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY
66

Vespasian is made Emperor: is also designated as such by portents (chapter
1).

The arrogance of Mucianus and Domitian (chapter 2).

Revolt of the Germans (chapter 3).

About the taking of Jerusalem by Titus (chapters 4-7).

Vespasian levies money in Egypt (chapter 8).

He treats the Romans considerately: drives philosophers from the capital
(chapters 9-13).

He gathers money by the efforts of his concubine Caenis, as well as by his
own (chapter 14).

The Temple of Peace and the Colossus are erected: Berenice is dismissed:
the Cynics are punished (chapter 15).

The punishment of Julius Sabinus: likewise of the conspirators, Alienus
and Marcellus (chapter 16).

How Vespasian met his death (chapter 17).

The mildness of character of Titus Caesar Augustus (chapters 18, 19).

War in Britain, which is ascertained to be an island (chapter 20).

How Mount Vesuvius flamed forth: conflagration at Rome (chapters 21-24).

Spectacles: death of Titus (chapters 25, 26).


DURATION OF TIME.

Fl. Vespasianus Aug. (II), Titus Caesar. (A.D. 70 = a.u. 823 = Second of
Vespasian, from July 1st).

Fl. Vespasianus Aug. (III), M. Cocceius Nerva. (A.D. 71 = a.u. 824 =
Second of Vespasian).

Fl. Vespasianus Aug. (IV), Titus Caesar (II). (A.D. 72 = a.u. 825 = Third
of Vespasian).

Domitianus Caesar (II), M. Valerius Messalinus. (A.D. 73 = a.u. 826 =
Fourth of Vespasian).

Fl. Vespasianus Aug. (V), Titus Caesar (III). (A.D. 74 = a.u. 827 = Fifth
of Vespasian).

Fl. Vespasianus Aug. (VI), Titus Caesar (IV). (A.D. 75 = a.u. 828 = Sixth
of Vespasian).

Fl. Vespasianus (VII), Titus Caesar (V). (A.D. 76 = a.u. 829 = Seventh of
Vespasian). Fl. Vespasianus (VIII), Titus Caesar (VI). (A.D. 77 = a.u. 830
= Eighth of Vespasian).

L. Ceionius Commodus, D. Novius Priscus. (A.D. 78 = a.u. 831 = Ninth of
Vespasian).

Fl. Vespasianus (IX), Titus Caesar (VII). (A.D. 79 = a.u. 832 = First of
Titus, from June 23rd).

T. Vespasianus (VIII), Domitianus (VII). (A.D. 80 = a.u. 833 = Second of
Titus).

L. Fl. Silva Nonius Bassus, Asinius Pollio Verrucosus. (A.D. 81 = a.u. 834
= Third of Titus, to September 13th).


[Sidenote: A.D. 70 (a.u. 823)] [Sidenote:--1--] Such was the course of
events on the heels of which Vespasian was declared emperor by the senate
and Titus and Domitian were given the title of Caesars. The consular
office was assumed by Vespasian and Titus while the former was in Egypt
and the latter in Palestine. Vespasian had seen portents and dreams that
long beforehand indicated that he was destined to rule. As he was eating
dinner in the country, where most of his time was spent, a cow approached
him, knelt down, and put her head beneath his feet. Another time, when he
was taking food, a dog threw a human hand under the table. And a
conspicuous cypress tree, which had been uprooted and overthrown by a
violent wind, on the next day stood upright again by its own power and
continued to flourish. From a dream he learned that when Nero Caesar
should lose a tooth, he should be emperor: and this matter of the tooth
