again, as soon as the scrivener had finished the attestation. "All is
done in due form. This deed makes you Lord of Mounchensey, Lanyere." And
he handed it to him.

"And this makes Sir Francis Mitchell ruler of the destiny of Aveline
Calveley," rejoined Lanyere, giving a paper to the old usurer.

"This chest and its contents are yours also, Lanyere," pursued Sir
Giles, putting in the deeds, and locking it. "Will it please you to take
the key. From this moment we cease to be master and servant, and become
equals and friends!"

"Equals, it may be, Sir Giles!" cried Lanyere, drawing himself up to his
full height, and speaking with great haughtiness; "but never friends."

"Ha! what are we, then?" demanded the extortioner, fiercely. "Am I
mistaken in you? Take heed. You are yet in my power."

"Not so, Sir Giles. I have nothing to apprehend from you now," replied
Lanyere; "but you have much to fear from me."

So saying, and placing the parchment within his doublet, he hastily
quitted the chamber.

"Perdition! have I been outwitted?" cried Sir Giles. "But he shall not
escape me." And rushing after him, he called from the head of the great
staircase--"What, ho! Captain Bludder!--and ye, Tom Wootton and Cutting
Dick--let not Lanyere go forth. Stay him and take from him the deed
which he hath placed in his doublet. Cut him down, or stab him if he
resists."

But, though efforts were made to obey Sir Giles's commands, the promoter
effected his retreat.




CHAPTER XVI.

Sir Jocelyn's rupture with de Gondomar.


Far and wide echoed the report of Sir Jocelyn's brilliant achievements
at the jousts; and wherever he went, he was hailed as vanquisher of the
hitherto-unconquered Buckingham. He bore his honours meekly, yet he did
not escape calumny; for at a court, as everywhere else, distinguished
success is certain to awaken a spirit of envy and detraction. These
paltry feelings, however, were entirely confined to the disappointed of
his own sex. By fairer and more impartial judges, who had witnessed his
exploits, he was spoken of in terms of unmingled admiration; and at the
grand revel at Whitehall that followed the jousts, many a soft glance
told him how tenderly the gentle heart, whose feelings it betrayed, was
inclined towards him. Faithful, loyal, and chivalrous, our young knight
was as much proof against these lures, as against the ruder attacks of
his armed opponents in the lists; and his constancy to the lady of his
love remained entirely unshaken. Far rather would he have been with
Aveline, in her humble dwelling, than in those superb festal halls,
surrounded by all that was noble and beautiful--all that was dangerous
and delusive. Far rather would he have received one smile from her, one
kindly look, than all the blandishments showered upon him by these
enchantresses.

Fain would he have avoided the banquet--but as the hero of the day, he
was compelled to attend it. Indeed, he had to enact a principal part at
the revel; and so well did he play it that compliments were lavished
upon him, enough to have turned an ordinary head. Not from any desire
for ostentatious display, but because Prince Charles had signified to
him his wishes on the subject, he was arrayed in all the pearls and
ornaments he had won from Buckingham; and more than one subtle courtier,
anxious to stand well with him, flatteringly declared that they became
him infinitely better than the Marquis. Others, less favourably
disposed, remarked that his gem-bedecked doublet was like the garment of
Nessus, and would cause its wearer's destruction; and if they could have
read Buckingham's secret thoughts, when he beheld his rival so adorned,
they would have felt that the observation was not unwarranted. But,
though fully determined upon revenge, Buckingham allowed neither look
nor word to betray his purpose. On the contrary, he displayed more than
his usual affability to Mounchensey, laughed at his own ill-luck, and
even went so far as to say that Sir Giles Mompesson had been rightly
served; adding, that he blamed himself for including him in his party,
and was glad Sir Jocelyn had handled him so rudely.

Though our young knight might well doubt Buckingham's sincerity; he
replied to all his courtly speeches in similar terms, and the greatest
cordiality appeared to subsist between them. Enchanted with this show of
friendship, the King endeavoured to promote it by keeping them near him
throughout the evening, leading them to converse together, and fawning
upon them, as was his way with those he highly favoured. All this could
not fail to be satisfactory to Mounchensey; but he was far more pleased
with the notice of Prince Charles, who treated him with marked
consideration.

Next morning, in compliance with an invitation to that effect he had
received at the revel, Sir Jocelyn repaired to Ely House, in Holborn,
the residence of the Spanish Ambassador, and was at once admitted to his
presence.

They were alone, and after a few preliminary observations upon the
events of the previous day, De Gondomar remarked--"I think I have
already afforded you abundant proof of my friendly feeling towards you,
Sir Jocelyn. But I will not stop with what I have done. My power of
serving you is greater than you may imagine it to be. I can lead you yet
higher--and put you in a firmer position. In a word, I can place you on
a level with Buckingham,--perchance above him,--if your ambition soars
so high."

Mounchensey endeavoured to express his deep sense of gratitude to the
ambassador, and regretted his small means of requiting the numerous and
important favours he had received from him.

"I will tell you what to do," said De Gondomar. "You can procure me
certain information which I desire to obtain. By my instrumentality you
have, in some degree, already obtained the King's confidence, and ere
long are sure to become the depositary of many important state secrets.
These you shall communicate to me. And you must also use your best
endeavours to win Prince Charles over to the Church of Rome."

"Is this proposal seriously made to me, Count?" demanded Mounchensey,
looking at him with astonishment, mingled with displeasure.

"Unquestionably it is serious--perfectly serious," replied De Gondomar.
"I ask you only to serve me as a certain young nobleman of your
acquaintance served me before he was compelled to fly from England to
avoid the consequences of a quarrel with his wife's family. Your
opportunities will be greater than his, and therefore your service will
be more valuable."

"I regret that such disloyalty should be laid to the charge of any
English noble," said Sir Jocelyn sternly. "But think not, because Lord
Roos played the spy and traitor, as your Excellency insinuates he did,
that I will be guilty of like baseness. Up to this moment I have felt
nothing but gratitude to you for the favours you have heaped upon me;
but the feeling is changed to resentment when I understand they are to
be purchased at the price of my honour. I cannot accede to your wishes,
Count. You must seek out some other tool. I can be none in your hands."

"If this be real, and not affected indignation, Sir Jocelyn," said De
Gondomar coldly, "it would seem that I have been altogether mistaken in
you, and that I have been helping you up the ladder only to be kicked
aside when you have gained a secure footing. But you have not reached
the last step yet, and never will, unless I find you more reasonable.
And allow me to ask you, if you are as scrupulous as you profess to be,
how you came to bring a token to me from a hired spy--a token intended
to let me know you were willing to undertake any secret service I might
choose to confide to you? Have you changed your mind since then? or
rather, do you not fancy yourself out of danger, and able to dispense
with my assistance?"

"I have ever been of the same opinion, Count; have ever been influenced
by the same feelings of loyalty and devotion to my sovereign, and of
detestation of all treasonable practices. Had I been aware of the import
of the ring I showed your Excellency on our first meeting, I would have
hacked off my finger rather than have displayed it. Neither did I know
the character of the man who confided it to me; though I ought to have
distrusted him. He has played us both false, and for what end I cannot
divine."

"I will solve the riddle for you, Sir: he thought to serve you," said De
Gondomar; "and he has done so, and most effectually, though you are now
unwilling to admit it. I have good reason to complain of him--you have
none."

"I have more reason for complaint than your Excellency," rejoined
Mounchensey. "He has placed me in a most painful and perplexing
position."

"There you are right, Sir," said De Gondomar. "No matter how arrived at,
you are in a position from which you cannot extricate yourself with
honour. However disinclined you may be to act in concert with me, you
have no other alternative. If I withdraw my support from you, your fall
is inevitable. Think not I talk lightly. You are surrounded by enemies,
though you discern them not. Buckingham's magnanimous conduct at the
revel last night was feigned to mask his purposes towards you. He has
not forgiven his defeat, and means to avenge it. You fancy yourself on
the high road to preferment; but you are on the verge of disgrace and
ruin. I alone can save you. Choose, then, between compliance with my
wishes, coupled with present protection and future advancement, and the
consequences certain to attend your refusal. Choose, I say, between my
friendship and my enmity."

"My answer shall be as prompt and decisive as your proposal, Count,"
replied Sir Jocelyn. "I at once reject a friendship fettered with such
conditions. And that I do not resent the affront put upon me in your
dishonourable proposal, must be set down to the obligations you have
imposed upon me, and which tie up my hands. But we are now quits; and if
any further indignity be offered me, it will not be so lightly borne."

"_Perdone, vuestra merced_!--we are not quits," cried De Gondomar
quickly. "The account between us is far from settled; nor will I rest
content till you have paid me in full. But we had better break off this
interview," he added, more calmly, "since no good is like to result from
it. It is useless to reason with you; but you are wantonly throwing away
a fairer opportunity than falls to the lot of most men, and will see
your folly when too late."

"In taking my leave of your Excellency, as there are no terms henceforth
to be observed between us, except those of hostility, I deem it right to
state, that though I shall make no especial reference to yourself, I
shall hold it my duty to acquaint his Majesty with the system of
_espionage_ introduced into the palace; and, above all, I shall take
care to guard the Prince against the insidious snares laid for him."

"It is a pity so faithful a councillor as yourself should not be
listened to," rejoined De Gondomar. "Yet, when I shut the doors of the
palace against you--as I will do--you will find it difficult to obtain a
hearing either from Prince or King. In spite of all your efforts to the
contrary, I shall learn any state secrets I desire to know, and I have
great hopes of winning over Charles Stuart to the faith for which his
lovely and martyred ancestress died. One more word at parting, Sir
Jocelyn. You will remember, when we first met, you were in danger from
the Star-Chamber. It would be useless now to say how I saved you from
the punishment your rashness had incurred--how, while aiding you with
the King, I kept aloof your enemies, Mompesson and Mitchell, who were
prepared to attach your person for contempt of that terrible court, and
would have done so, if I had not prevented them. The warrant for your
arrest still exists, and can be employed at any moment; so you will
consider how long you can count upon your freedom, now that you have no
strong arm to protect you."

"I have my own arm to trust to," rejoined Sir Jocelyn, resolutely, "and
have no apprehensions."

_"Vaya usted con dios!"_ said the Spaniard, bowing him out; "or I should
rather say," he added to himself, "_Vaya mucho en mala hora_!"




CHAPTER XVII.

Disgrace.


Sir Jocelyn was not without great uneasiness at the result of his
interview with De Gondomar. Had it been possible, he would have avoided
a rupture with so influential a personage--an event to be dreaded at any
time, but especially so at a juncture like the present, when dangers
menaced him on all sides, and the only question appeared to be, from
what side the first blow would come. His chief anxiety, however, was for
Aveline, whose position was one of such strange and imminent peril,
against which he knew not how to guard her. He was still left in the
same state of uncertainty as to who would be the claimant of her hand;
for the mysterious personage in the mask had not appeared again,
according to his promise, after the jousts. This suspense was terrible,
and Sir Jocelyn found it so difficult of endurance, that he would have
preferred the actual presence of the calamity by which he was
threatened. His fears were, that the claim he so much dreaded would be
made by Sir Giles Mompesson in person, and in that case he had
determined forcibly to resist him. And this supposition might account
for the delay--since he knew that Sir Giles was suffering severely from
the effects of the blow he had dealt him in the tilt-yard.

De Gondomar's were not idle threats, as Sir Jocelyn soon found. On the
next day, as he entered the palace, he was informed by the Lord
Chamberlain that he was deprived of his office of Gentleman of the
Bed-Chamber; and when he demanded the reason of his sudden dismissal,
the Duke of Lennox, with a shrug of the shoulders, declared he was
unable to afford him any information. But what the Duke refused was
afforded by De Gondomar, who at that moment entered the corridor, in
company with Buckingham and some other nobles, on his way to the
presence-chamber. On seeing his late _protege_, the ambassador halted
for a moment, and with a smile of triumph said--"You owe your dismissal
to me, Sir Jocelyn. I have made some few circumstances concerning you
that had just come to my ears known to his Majesty; and as he does not
choose to have spies about his person, he has released you from all
further attendance upon him."

"In a word, he has forbidden your attendance again at the palace," added
Buckingham, who had paused likewise, with an insulting laugh.

"I must to the King, your Grace," cried Sir Jocelyn to the Lord
Chamberlain. "I will explain the falsehood of this charge to his
Majesty, and show him who is the spy and traitor he has to fear."

"You cannot pass, Sir Jocelyn," said the Duke of Lennox, placing
himself in his way, while two halberdiers advanced to bar his passage
with their partizans. "I say not a word as to the cause of your
disgrace; but I may tell you, that his Majesty is greatly offended with
you, and that it would be highly imprudent to approach him in his
present frame of mind, even were it permitted you to do so--which it is
not. As I have said, you are deprived of your office, and enjoined to
absent yourself from the palace, till it shall be his Majesty's pleasure
to recall you."

"And that is not likely to be soon the case--eh, Count?" observed
Buckingham, with a laugh.

"Not very likely indeed, Marquis," said the ambassador. "I much regret
that I have been the means of introducing so unworthy a person to his
Majesty; but I have made all the amends in my power."

"Must I tamely endure all these insults and calumnies, your Grace?"
cried Sir Jocelyn furiously.

"If you will be guided by me, you will retire," rejoined the Duke of
Lennox; "or the provocation you will receive may induce you to do some
desperate act which may render your position worse, and put your
restoration to the King's favour entirely out of the question."

While Sir Jocelyn was debating whether he should comply with the Duke's
advice, the door of the presence-chamber was thrown open; and James,
coming forth from it, marched slowly along the corridor.

Our young knight now fondly hoped that the King might deign to look
upon him, and so enable him to plead his cause; and perhaps the Lord
Chamberlain himself entertained similar expectations, for he did not
insist upon Sir Jocelyn's withdrawal, but allowed him to remain within
the corridor, though he was kept aloof by the halberdiers. But both were
disappointed. James, no doubt, designedly, bestowed his most gracious
marks of condescension on Buckingham and De Gondomar, and lingered for a
few minutes to laugh and talk with them. After this, as he was passing
Sir Jocelyn, he pretended to notice him for the first time, and
observed, in a tone of reproof to the Lord Chamberlain, "What doth the
spy here, my Lord Duke? I thought you had our orders concerning him. See
they are better obeyed in future." And, when the young knight would have
spoken, he interrupted him by an imperious gesture, crying out, "Not a
word, Sir!--not a word! We will hear naught mair frae ye. We hae heard
ower meikle already." And he passed on.

Thus was Mounchensey's disgrace accomplished by his enemies.




CHAPTER XVIII.

How Sir Jocelyn's cause was espoused by the 'prentices.


Stung almost to madness by the sense of intolerable wrong, our young
knight quitted Whitehall, never, as he imagined at the moment, to enter
the palace again. Yet he was not humiliated by his disgrace, because he
felt it to be wholly unmerited. His enemies had triumphed over him; but
he would not have heeded the defeat, provided he could efface the foul
stigma cast upon his reputation, and rebut the false charge brought
against him by De Gondomar.

With a heart overflowing with rage and bitterness, and with a thousand
wild projects passing through his brain, Sir Jocelyn took a boat at
Whitehall stairs, and ordered the watermen to row down the river,
without assigning any paticular place of landing. After awhile, he
succeeded, to a certain extent, in controlling his angry emotions; and
as the watermen rested on their oars for a moment, to inquire his
destination, he looked round, and perceiving he was just opposite the
Three Cranes in the Vintry, he desired to be put ashore there.

No better retreat wherein to recover his composure seemed to offer
itself than Madame Bonaventure's comfortable house of entertainment;
and thither, therefore, he proceeded, and at his request was shown into
a private room overlooking the river. Scarcely was he installed within
it, than the buxom hostess, who had caught sight of him as he mounted
the stairs, entered, and in her blandest accents, and with her most
bewitching smiles, begged to know his commands; declaring that all that
her house possessed was at his service.

She was running on thus, but perceiving the young knight to be much
disturbed, she instantly changed her tone, and expressed such genuine
concern for him, that he could not fail to be moved by it. Without
making her an entire confidante, Sir Jocelyn told her enough of what had
occurred to make her comprehend his position; and highly indignant she
was at the treatment he had experienced. She did her best to console
him; and so far succeeded, that he was prevailed upon to partake of some
delicacies which she caused Cyprien to set before him, together with a
flask of the best vintage in her cellar; and the discussion of these
good things, coupled with the hostess's assiduities, certainly operated
as a balm upon his wounded feelings.

The repast over, the good-natured dame thought it best to leave him to
himself; and drawing his chair to the open window, he began to ruminate
upon the many strange events that had happened to him since he first
beheld that fair prospect almost from the same place; and he was
indulging in this retrospect, when his own name, pronounced in tones
familiar to him, caught his ear, and looking forth, he perceived Dick
Taverner, seated on a bench in front of the house, drinking in company
with some half dozen other apprentices, his boon companions.

The conversation of these roysterers was held in so loud a key that it
could not fail to reach his ears; and he soon ascertained that his own
dismissal from court was the theme of their discourse, and that they
rightly attributed it--doubtless owing to information derived from their
hostess--to the instrumentality of De Gondomar. It was evidently Dick
Taverner's design to rouse the indignation of his companions; and he had
little difficulty in accomplishing his purpose, as they were all
composed of very inflammable material, and prone to take fire on the
slightest application of the match. Dick denounced the plotting and
perfidious Spaniard as a traitor to the King and a subverter of the
Protestant faith; and counselled vengeance upon him.

Finding Dick's suggestions eagerly caught up by his companions, and that
the number of his listeners was momently increasing, while all were
