thoughts of what might lie before Havelok in days to come.

As we went inland from the sea, the track of the pestilence was more
dread, for we passed house after house that had none living in them, and
some held the deserted dead. I might say many things of what we saw, but
I do not like to think of them much. Many a battlefield have I seen
since that day, but I do not think them so terrible as the field over
which has gone the foe that is unseen ere he smites. One knows the worst
of the battle when it is over and the roll is called, but who knows
where famine and pestilence stay? And those have given life for king or
land willingly, but these were helpless.

It was good to climb the welds and look back, for in the high lands
there was none of this. Below us the levels, with their bright waters,
were wrapped in a strange blue haze, that had come with the famine at
its worst, and, as men said, had brought or made the sickness. I had
heard of it; but it was not so plain when one was in it, or else our
shore was free, which is likely, seeing how little we suffered.

After that we kept to the high land, not so much fearing the blue robe
of the pestilence as what things of its working we might see; and so it
was late in the afternoon that we came in sight of Lincoln town, on its
hill, with the wide meres and river at its feet. I have seen no city
that stands more wonderfully than this of ours, with the grey walls of
the Roman town to crown the gathering of red and brown roofs that nestle
on the slope and within them. And ever as we drew nearer Havelok became
more silent, as I thought because he had never seen so great a town
before, until we passed the gates of the stockade that keeps the town
that lies without the old walls, and then he said, looking round him
strangely, "Brother, you will laugh at me, no doubt, for an arrant
dreamer, but this is the place whereto in dreams I have been many a
time. Now we shall come to yon turn of the road among the houses, and
beyond that we shall surely see a stone-arched gate in a great wall, and
spearmen on guard thereat."

It was so, and the gate and guard were before us in a few more steps. It
was the gate of the old Roman town, inside which was the palace of the
king and one or two more great houses only. Our English kin hate a
walled town or a stone house, and they would not live within the strong
walls, whose wide span was, save for the king's palace, which was built
partly of the house of the Roman governor, and these other halls, which
went for naught in so wide a meadow, empty and green, and crossed by two
paved roads, with grass growing between the stones. There were brown
marks, as of the buried stones of other foundations, on the grass where
the old streets had been.

All the straggling English town was outside the walls, and only in time
of war would the people use them as a stronghold, as they used the still
more ancient camps on the hills.

"Many times have you heard us tell of this place, Havelok," I said. "It
is no wonder that you seem to know it."

"Nay," he answered, "but this is the city of my dreams, and somewhat is
to happen here."


    CHAPTER VIII. BERTHUN THE COOK.

For that night we went to the house of the old dame with whom my father
and I were wont to lodge when we came to the market, and she took us in
willingly, though she could make little cheer for us. Truly, as had been
said, the scarcity was not so great in Lincoln, but everything was
terribly dear, and that to some is almost as bad.

"No money have I now, dame," I said ruefully, "but I think that for old
sake's sake you will not turn us away."

"Not I, faith," she answered. "I mind the first day your father came
here, and never a penny had he, and since then there has been no want in
this house. Luck comes with Grim and his folk, as I think. But this is a
son whom I have not seen before, if he is indeed your brother."

"I am Grim's son Curan," said Havelok, "and I have not been to Lincoln
ere this. But I have heard of you many times."

That pleased our old hostess, and then she asked after Grim. Hard it was
to have to tell her that he was gone, and hard it was for her to hear,
for the little house had been open to us for ten years.

"What will you do now, masters?" she asked, when she had told us of many
a kindness done to her and her husband, who was long dead now, by my father.

I told her that we were too many at home since the fishing had failed,
and had therefore come to find some work here, at the court if possible.

"Doubtless two strong men will not have to go far to find somewhat," she
said; "but the court is full of idle folk, and maybe no place is empty.
Now I will have you bide with me while you are at a loose end, for there
are yet a few silver pennies in store, and I ween that they came out of
Grim's pouch to me. Lonely am I, and it is no good hoarding them when
his sons are hungry."

We thanked her for that kind saying, but she made light of it, saying
that almost did she hope that we should find no work, that we might bide
and lighten her loneliness for a time.

"But if an old woman's advice is good for aught, you shall not go to the
court first of all. Sour is King Alsi, and he is likely to turn you away
offhand rather than grant the smallest boon. But there is Berthun the
cook, as we call him--steward is his court name though--and he
orders the household, and is good-natured, so that all like him. Every
morning he comes into the market, and there you can ask him if there is
a place for you, and he loves to look on a man such as Curan. But if it
is weapons you want--and I suppose that is in the minds of tall men
always, though it brings sorrow in the end--there is the captain of
the guard who lives over the gate, and he might be glad to see you enough."

We said that we would see the steward, for we wanted no long employment.
We would go back to Grimsby when the famine ended, if it were only by
the coming of the fish again.

Then she gave us of the best she had--black bread and milk to wit; and
after that we slept soundly before the fire, as I had done many times
before in that humble house. Black bread and milk it was again in the
morning; but there was plenty, and goodwill to season it. Then the old
dame sent us forth cheerfully and early, that we might not miss Berthun
the steward, from whom she hoped great things for us.

So we sat in the marketplace for an hour or more watching the gates of
the wall for his coming; and men stared at Havelok, so that we went to
the bridge and waited there. One could see all the market from thence.
There were a good many of the market folk coming in presently, and most
of them knew me, and more than one stopped and spoke.

Now Havelok grew restless, and wandered here and there looking at
things, though not going far from me; and while I was thus alone on the
bridge, a man I knew by sight came and leaned on the rail by me, and
told me that he had just seen the most handsome man and the goodliest to
look on that was in the kingdom, as he thought.

"Yonder he stands," he said, "like a king who has fallen on bad times. I
mind that I thought that Alsi, our king, would look like that, before I
saw him, and sorely disappointed was I in him therefore. Now I wonder
who yon man may be?"

I did not say that I knew, but I looked at Havelok, and for the first
time, perhaps because I had never seen him among strangers before, I
knew that he was wondrous to look on. Full head and shoulders was he
above all the folk, and the Lindseymen are no babes in stature. And at
the same moment it came to me that it were not well that men should know
him as the son of Grim the fisher. If my father, who was the wisest of
men, had been so careful for all these years, I must not be less so; for
if there were ever any fear of the spies of Hodulf, it would be now when
his foe might be strong enough in years to think of giving trouble. Not
that I ever thought much of the said Hodulf, seeing how far off he was;
but my father had brought me up to dread him for this brother of mine.
Certainly by this time Hodulf knew that Grim had come to England in
safety, for the name of the new town must have come to his ears: and if
Grim, then the boy he had given to him.

The man who spoke to me went away soon, and Havelok strolled back to me.

"I would that the cook, or whoever he is, would come," he said. "I grow
weary of this crowd that seems to have naught to do but stare at a
stranger."

"What shall we ask, when he does come? and supposing that there is a
place for but one of us?" I said.

"Why, then, the one it fits best will take it, and the other must seek
some other chance. That is all."

"As you will, brother," I answered, "but I would rather that we should
be together."

"And I also. But after all, both will be in Lincoln, and we must take
what comes. It is but for a little while, and we shall not like to
burden that good old dame by being too hard to please. We want somewhat
to do until we can go home, not for a day longer, and I care not what it
is."

"That is right," I said; "and the sooner I see one of our folk coming
over this bridge with a full basket of fish, the better I shall like it.
But it may be a long day before that. Now, I have been thinking that it
were not well that you should say that you are the son of Grim."

I did not quite know how he would take this, for he was proud of my
father as I. But that very pride made it easy.

"Maybe not," he said thoughtfully, "for it seems unworthy of his sons
that we have to ask for service from any man. But I do not think that he
could blame us, as things are. Nevertheless, folk shall not talk."

"Men know me," said I, "but that cannot be helped."

He laughed gaily at that.

"Why, here we speak as if one man in a hundred knew you. And after all
it may be that we shall get a place that none need be ashamed of. Look,
here comes a mighty fine lord from the gateway."

It was Berthun the steward, for whom we were waiting, and I knew him
well by sight. Often had he bought our fish, but I did not think that he
would remember me by name, if he had ever heard it. He was a portly and
well-favoured man, not old, and as he came down the street to the
marketplace at the hill foot he laughed and talked with one and another
of the townsfolk, whether high or low, in very pleasant wise.

Presently he stopped at a stall, and priced some meat; and when he had
bought it he looked round and called for some men to carry it for him;
and at that the idlers made a rush for him, tripping over one another in
haste to be first, while he laughed at them.

He chose two or three, and sent them up the hill to the palace with
their burdens, and then went to another booth and bought.

"This is work at which I should make a good hand," said Havelok,
laughing at the scrambling men who ran forward when the steward again
called for porters. "Well paid also the job must be, to judge of their
eagerness."

The three men who had been chosen took their burden and went away, and
the steward came near us, to a bakery that was close to the bridge end.

"I have a mind to do porter for once," Havelok said. "Then I can at
least earn somewhat to take back to the dame tonight."

"If you do so," I answered, "I will wait here for you. But you will have
to fight for the place."

Now the steward bought all that he needed, and that was bread for the
whole palace for the day, and again he called for porters. Whereon
Havelok got up from the bridge rail and went towards him in no great
hurry, so that the idlers were in a crowd before him.

"Ho! friends," cried Havelok, "let the good cook see all of us and make
his choice. He can only take one at a time."

"One, forsooth," said a man from the crowd; "why, there is a load for
four men there."

"Well, then, let him pick four little ones, and give these little ones a
chance of being seen."

Now I do not think that he would have troubled with the matter any more;
but whether the men knew that this was the last load that the steward
had to send home, or whether they quarrelled, I cannot say, but in their
eagerness to raise the two great baskets they fell to struggling over
them, and the steward tried to quiet the turmoil by a free use of his
staff, and there was a danger that the bread should be scattered.

"Here will be waste of what there is none too much of just now," said
Havelok; and with that he went to the aid of the steward, picking up and
setting aside the men before him, and then brushing the struggling
rivals into a ruefully wondering heap from about the baskets, so that he
and the steward faced each other, while there fell a silence on the
little crowd that had gathered. Even the men who had been put aside
stayed their abuse as they saw what manner of man had come to the rescue
of the baskets, and Havelok and the cook began to laugh.

"Fe, fi, fo, fum!" said Berthun; "here is surely a Cornish giant among
us! Now I thank you, good Blunderbore, or whatever your name is, for
brushing off these flies."

"The folk in this place are unmannerly," said Havelok; "hut if you want
the bread carried up the hill I will do it for you."

Berthun looked him up and down in a puzzled sort of way once or twice
ere he answered, "Well, as that is your own proposal, pick your helpers
and do so; I would not have asked such a thing of you myself."

"There is not much help needed," said Havelok. "I think this may be
managed if I get a fair hold."

Now we were used to seeing him carry such loads as would try the
strength of even Raven and myself, who could lift a load for three men;
but when he took the two great baskets of bread and swung them into
place on either arm, a smothered shout went round the crowd, and more
than once I heard the old Welsh name that the marsh folk had given him
spoken.

"Let us be going," said Havelok to the steward on that. "One would think
that none of these had ever hefted a fair load in his life, to listen to
them."

So he nodded to me across the heads of the crowd, and followed Berthun,
and the idlers followed him for a little. The guard turned these back at
the gate, and Havelok went through, and I could see him no more.

Presently the crowd drifted back to their places, and I heard them
talking. Havelok and his strength was likely to be a nine days' wonder
in Lincoln, and I was glad that I had asked him not to say whence he was.

"He is some thane's son who is disguised," said one.

"Maybe he is under a vow," said another; and then one chimed in with a
story of some prince of Arthur's time, by name Gareth, who hid his state
at his mother's command.

"As for me," said the baker, "I think that he is a fisher, as he looks
--at least, that is, as his clothes make him."

So even he had his doubts, and I will say that I understood well enough
now why my father never brought him here before.

Havelok was long in coming back, as I thought, and I seemed to be
wasting time here, and so I bethought me of the other man to whom the
old dame had said we might go--namely, the captain of the gate. I
should see Havelok if I stood there.

The captain was talking with some of his men as I came up, and of course
it was of Havelok that they spoke; and seeing that I wore the same dress
as he, they asked me if I knew who he was.

"He is a fisher from the coast," I answered. "I have heard him called
Curan."

"Welsh then," the captain answered, somewhat disappointed, as it seemed.
"If he had been a Mercian, or even a Saxon, I would have had him here,
but a fisher has had no training in arms after all."

"Some of us have," said I.

The captain looked me up and down, and then walked round me, saying
nothing until we were face to face again.

"That, I take it, is a hint that you might like to be a housecarl of the
king's," he said. "Are you a Lindseyman?"

"I am the son of Grim of Grimsby," I said.

"Why, then, I suppose you would not think of it, seeing that my place is
not empty; but if you will dress in that way you must not wonder if I
took you for a likely man for a housecarl. We know Grim well by repute.
Come in and tell me about the famine, and this new town of yours that
one hears of."

Now I could not see Havelok as yet, and so I went into the stone-arched
Roman guardroom, and Eglaf the captain fetched out a pot of wine and
some meat, and made me very welcome while we talked. And presently I
thought that I might do worse than be a housecarl for a time, if Eglaf
would have me. I should be armed at least, and with comrades to help if
Havelok needed me; though all the while I thought myself foolish for
thinking that any harm could come to him who was so strong.
Nevertheless, what my father had laid on us all was to be heeded, and I
was to be his helper in arms. So presently I told Eglaf that the
housecarl's life seemed an easy one, and that it would be pleasant to go
armed for a while, if he would have me for a short time, seeing that the
famine had left us naught to do.

"Well, there is plenty to eat and drink," he said, "and good lodging in
the great hall or here, as one's post may be, and a silver penny every
day; but no fighting to be done, seeing that Alsi will sooner pay a foe
to go away than let us see to the matter. Doing naught is mighty hard
