course, coins--these are characteristic remains found on mounds of
this period. About l00 B.C. the use of cuneiform was given up; clay
tablets were no longer used. Aramaic became the usual form of
writing; ink used on sherds; wax tablets. Small bowls often found
with ink-written incantations in Judaeo-Aramaic (see XV, Fig. 19).
Mounds of this period are perhaps most easily recognized by the
quantities of deep-blue glazed sherds found lying about on them. The
glaze is rather thin, laid on a coarse drab ware, and is often
cracked. The blue is very fine, rivalling the old Egyptian. Burials
of this period are often found in (besides the shallow pottery
coffins mentioned above) rectangular oblong boxes of thin coarse ware
with light friable blue glaze (Babylon), or (later) in slipper-shaped
coffins (possibly Sassanian) of the same ware, rudely decorated with
human figures (warriors) in relief, on panels (Warka). The blue glaze
has often changed to a dark green, especially in the case of the
Warka slipper-coffins. The lids are cemented to the coffins.
Internments are now full length, the old custom of contraction having
been entirely abandoned [1]. Gold ornaments and pieces of gold leaf,
gold fillets, &c., are not unfrequently found with the bodies,
besides armlets, toe and finger rings, &c., of silver and bronze, the
finger-rings usually of ordinary Roman types; pottery, lamps, and
glass vessels. These coffins are often in brick vaults, usually
placed haphazard in the ground, as in earlier times. Bricks small,
hard, and yellow.

[1] The western custom of cremation was never adopted, in spite of
the Hellenization of culture. It offended both Babylonian and Iranian
sentiment, although the Parthians were never very orthodox followers
of Ahuramazda, and venerated (at least platonically) the most popular
deities of the Greek pantheon.


2. Sassanian Period; c. 220-650 A.D.

Characteristics. Reaction towards Oriental motives in art: a typical
_antika_ of the period is the Sassanian seal of cornelian,
chalcedony, or haematite, in shape sometimes a ring, more often a
flat sphere with one-third cut off to form a seal-base, perforated
for stringing (see XIV, Fig. 8), and inscribed in Pehlevi (see XV,
Fig. 20) a script that to the unitiated looks very like Cufie Arabic:
the language is Old-Persian, which was spoken by the court officials
at Ctesiphon, the language of the people being Aramaic. Sculpture
barbarized, but with a picturesque character of its own (Nakhsh-i-
Rustam, Tak-i-Bostan), sometimes reminiscent of Indian work.
Architecture: Parthian-Roman traditions (Ctesiphon). Pottery usually
glazed blue (thicker glaze). Unglazed bowls with Hebrew and Mandaitic
magical inscriptions. Bronze no longer used except for coins. Objects
from mounds very like those of preceding age, but less of Roman
origin. Not much known of burials; the Warka slipper-coffins usually
regarded as Parthian may possibly be of early Sassanian age.


VII. LATER IRON AGE:
Muhammadan Period; c. 650-1500 A.D.[1]

Characteristics. Development of art under Persian influence till
Tartar conquest in thirteenth century: the destruction and
depopulation of the country at that time brought all real artistic
development to an end. Flourishing period: the 'Abbasid Khalifate:
ninth century: Harun al-Rashid. Ruins of the ancient city and palaces
of Samarra: halls with modelled and painted plaster-decorations, not
only geometrical but also (Persian heterodox influence) representing
trees, birds, &c. No more sculpture in round or relief of human
figures or animals. The only survival of classical tradition would
appear to be to some extent in architecture: Greek architects.

Coins: thin gold, and silver, with Cufic inscriptions only (see XV,
Fig. 21). Mounds of this period may be known by fragments of marble-
carving with Cufic inscriptions, plasterwork, Arab and Persian vase
and tile fragments in thick blue, green, yellow, or brown glaze,
metallic lustre-glaze, &c., variegated glass bangles, and rings; bits
of cloudy white glass (from lamps); fragments of wood, carved and
inlaid with bone, nacre, &c., in geometrical patterns; textile
fragments, (which are naturally not commonly found in older mounds),
&c.

Nothing is said with regard to burials as these may not be touched.

[1] The limit of age which constitutes an 'antiquity' for legal
purposes is fixed in most antiquity-laws at 1500 A.D.




APPENDIX

LAWS OF ANTIQUITIES

 The following brief notes on the Laws of Antiquities in force in the
various territories with which this book is concerned must not be
taken as absolving the traveller from the necessity of consulting the
full text of the laws. At the time of going to press, the Turkish Law
presumably prevails in such parts of the Turkish Empire as are not
occupied by the troops of the Entente; in the remainder, temporary
regulations are in force which will doubtless be modified when the
new governments are established; and it is possible that the Turkish
Law itself may be brought into greater harmony with modern ideas.

The Greek Law of Antiquities.

[Greek], 24 July 1899, Athens, [Greek] 1889.

All antiquities found are the property of the Government and are
controlled by an Archaeological Commission, consisting of the Ephor
General of Antiquities and the ephors of the archaeological
collections in Athens. Fixed antiquities must be reported by the
discoverer to the Ephor General or one of the ephors of antiquities
or other official. Damaging of ruins or remains of monuments is
forbidden. Owners of the land on which portable antiquities desirable
for the National Museums are found are compensated to the extent of
half their value. Any person who finds antiquities on his land must
report them within five days, on pain of confiscation. The same
applies to any one who finds antiquities on another person's land, or
in any other way comes into possession of antiquities. Informers
against breaches of the law are rewarded by the amount of the
compensation due to those who keep the law. Objects not considered
worth keeping by the Museums are returned to the owner of the land.
Excavations, even on private property, must be authorized by the
Ministry of Education. The Government has the right of expropriating
land for purposes of excavation. In Government excavations, the owner
of the land receives one-third of the value of the objects considered
worth keeping by the Museums. Secret excavation is punished by
confiscation of the finds, imprisonment and temporary loss of civil
rights. In authorized excavations by a landowner or his
representative the excavator receives half the value of the finds
taken by the Museums. Any one attempting to excavate on another man's
land is punished by imprisonment. Antiquities found in the country
may not be exported (on pain of imprisonment or fine and temporary
loss of civil rights) without permission, which is only granted for
objects not considered by the Archaeological Commission to be of use
to the Museums. Such objects on export are subject to a tax of 10
percent. _ad valorem_ unless declared entirely valueless by the
Commission. Antiquities imported into the country must be declared in
the Customs House and reported to the Ephor General of Antiquities, a
descriptive catalogue in duplicate being sent, and cannot be re-
exported without permission, which is obtained by producing the
articles with the original catalogue to the Ephor General; if not
reported they are regarded as having been found in the country.

The Turkish Law of Antiquities.

Loi sur les Antiquites promulguee le 29 Sefer 1324 (10 Avril 1322).
Extrait du _Levant Herald_ du 8, 9, 11 et 13 Juin 1906. Constantinople,
Imprimerie du _Levant Herald,_ Pera, 1906.

Antiquities are controlled by the Director-General of the Imperial
Museums and a Commission, the Directors of Public Instruction in the
provinces acting as agents. All ancient monuments and objects
(including those of Islamic date) are the property of the Government.
Any fixed antiquities discovered must be reported under pain of fine
within 15 days to the official in charge of antiquities, or in his
absence to the nearest civil or military official. Punishment by fine
and imprisonment is inflicted for destroying or injuring monuments,
measuring or making impressions without authorization.

Transportable antiquities found on a man's land must be reported by
him within a week. The landowner receives half the value of objects
thus reported and bought by the State; objects not reported are
confiscated, and the landowner fined. This clause applies to those
who find antiquities on land belonging to other private persons or to
the State. Excavation is the exclusive privilege of the Museums, but
firmans may be obtained by scientific societies and specialists.
Unauthorized excavation is punished by imprisonment and confiscation.
The State has the right of making preliminary soundings and of
expropriation. Applications for leave to excavate must be made to the
Minister of Public Instruction. All finds belong to the State.
Unauthorized dealing in antiquities is punishable by fine,
imprisonment, and confiscation. Exportation of antiquities found in
the Empire is forbidden. Antiquities imported must be reported to the
directorate of antiquities, and may not be sent from one part of the
Empire to another, or re-exported, without permission from the
Director-General.

The Cypriote Law of Antiquities.

To Consolidate and Amend the Law relating to Ancient Monuments and
Antiquities, and to provide Museums. Law no. IV of 1905. See Sir J.
T. Hutchinson and S. Fisher, _The Statute Laws of Cyprus,_ 1878-1906
(London, 1906), pp. 595-608.

Objects later than the Turkish conquest, and coins of Byzantine or
later times, are not deemed to be antiquities. All undiscovered
antiquities of movable character are the property of the Government;
all immovable antiquities are also the property of the Government,
unless some person shall be the owner of them. All antiquities must
be reported by the person in possession of them to the Museum
Committee, on pain of confiscation; antiquities found except in the
course of authorized excavations must be reported within five days to
the District Commissioner, One-third of such movable antiquities is
taken by the Government, one-third by the finder, and one-third by
the owner of the land. Damage to ancient monuments is punished by
fine or imprisonment or both. Unauthorized excavation, even on land
belonging to the excavator, and the purchasing of objects illegally
excavated, are punished by fine or imprisonment or both. Application
for leave to excavate must be made to the Chief Secretary for
Government. All antiquities found in excavation belong to the
Government; only duplicates, and objects not required by the Museum,
are given to the excavator. The Government has the right to
expropriate land for the purpose of excavations. The Museum Committee
may acquire the interests of any private person in an antiquity on
payment of compensation. If the sum agreed on is not paid within six
months, the Museum Committee loses all right to its acquisition.
Export of antiquities is forbidden except with the permission of the
High Commissioner, which is granted only for objects not required by
the Museum or for antiquities the interests in which the Museum
Committee has failed to acquire in the manner described.


The Egyptian Law of Antiquities.

La Nouvelle Loi sur les Antiquites de l'Egypte et ses annexes.
Service des Antiquites. Le Caire, Imprimerie de l'Institut francais
d'archeologie orientala. 1913.

All antiquities belong to the State. The State has the right of
expropriating ground containing antiquities. Transportable
antiquities when found must be reported to nearest administrative
authority or agents of the Service of Antiquities: the finder
receives half the objects thus reported or their value. Excavation,
dealing in antiquities, and exportation are forbidden unless under
authorization. Destruction of and damage to antiquities is punishable
by fine and imprisonment. Applications for leave to export or to
excavate should be made to the Director-General of Service of
Antiquities. A tax of 1 1/2 per cent. is levied on the declared value
of objects passed for export. Leave to excavate is granted only to
savants recommended by Governments or learned societies, or to
private persons presenting proper guarantees. The excavator pays the
cost of guarding the site. The Government takes half the portable
objects found.


General Principles of a Model Law of Antiquities for the Near and
Middle East.

The following statement of Principles which should form the
foundation of the Laws of Antiquities to be enacted for the various
Provinces formerly under Turkish rule was drawn up by an
International Committee in Paris and recommended to the Commission
for regulating the Mandates under the League of Nations. It follows
closely the Recommendations of the Archaeological Joint Committee on
the same subject. It was proposed at the same time that the Treaty
with Turkey should enjoin the adoption by that Power of a Law of
Antiquities on the same lines:

Principes du reglement devant etre adopte par chacune des Puissances
mandataires.

1. 'ANTIQUITY' signifie toute construction, tout produit de
l'activite humaine, anterieur a l'annee 1700.

2, Toute personne qui, ayant decouvert une antiquite, la signalera a
un employe du Departement des Antiquites du pays, sera recompensee
suivant la valeur de l'objet, le principe a adopter devant etre
d'agir par encouragement plutot que par menace.

3. Aucun objet antique ne pourra etre vendu sauf au Departement des
Antiquites du pays, mais si ce Departement renonce a l'acquerir la
vente en deviendra libre. Aucune antiquite ne pourra sortir du pays
sans un permis d'exportation dudit Departement.

4. Toute personne qui, expres ou par negligence, detruira ou
deteriorera un objet ou une construction antique, devra etre passible
d'une peine a fixer par l'autorite du pays.

5. Aucun deblaiement ni aucune fouille ayant pour objet la recherche
d'antiquites ne seront permis sous peine d'amendc, sauf aux personnes
autorisees par le Departement des Antiquites du pays.

6. Des conditions equitables devront etre fixees par chaque Puissance
mandataire pour l'expropriation temporaire ou permanente des terrains
qui pourraient offrir un interet historique ou archeologique.

7. Les autorisations pour les fouilles ne devront etre accordees
qu'aux personnes qui offrent des garanties suffisantes d'experience
archeologique. Aucune des Puissances mandataires ne devra, en
accordant ces autorisations, agir de facon a ecarter, sans motif
valable, les savants des autres nations.

 8. Les produits des fouilles pourront etre divises entre le
fouilleur et le Departement des Antiquites de chaque pays dans une
proportion fixee par ce Departement. Si, pour des raisons
scientifiques, la division ne semble pas possible, le fouilleur devra
recevoir, au lieu d'une partie de la trouvaille, une juste indemnite.




INDEX

Abu Shahrein, 85, 88, 90.
Achaemenian period in Mesopotamia, 93.
Aegean, prehistoric age in the 36 f: pottery in Palestine, 73.
Aeneolithic; see Chalcolithic.
Akkadian period, 90.
Alphabets: see Inscriptions.
Aramaic inscriptions, 62, 66; in Mesopotamia, 93.
Archaeological Joint Committee, 38.
Arches, corbelled, 40.
Arcosolium tombs, 71 f.
Asia Minor, 47 ff.
Assyrian period, 91.
Attic pottery, 44 f.

Babylon. 85, 90, 92 f.
Babylonian period, 91.
Bandar Bushir, 85.
Barometer, 10, 33.
Bavian, 83.
Beads: Cypriote, 56: Egyptian, 78 f.; Greek, 41; Hittite, 60;
Mesopotamian, 88 ff.; Syrian, 64.
Belt Jibrin, 73.
Bitumen in Mesopotamia, 84, 88.
Black-figured Greek pottery, 44.
Bricks, 14 f.; in Egypt, 82; in Mesopotamia, 84-93.
Bronze Age: in Asia Minor, 48; in Cyprus, 56; in Greece, 36 f.; in
Mesopotamia, 88; in Syria, 60.
Bronze, forgeries in, 24.
Brooches (fibulae): Greek, 40, 44; in Syria, 61 f.
Bubastites, 79.
Buildings, recording of, 14.
Burials: see Tombs.
Buying, advice about. 24 f.

Calah, 92.
Camera, 10 f.
Casting in plaster, 19.
Caves, 15, 72.
Cemeteries, 15, 55, 70, 78: see also Tombs.
Chalcolithic period: in Mesopotamia, 85: in Syria, 59 f.
Cisterns in Palestine, 77.
Coins; in Cyprus, 58; in Egypt, 79; in Mesopotamia, 84, 92 ff.;
forgeries of, 24; making impressions of, 19 f; recording finds of, 9.
Combs, Egyptian, 78.
Committee, Archaeological Joint, 28.
Compass, prismatic, 10.
Copper: in Mesopotamia, 88 f.; in Syria, 60.
Copying, 17 ff.
Corbelled arches, 40.
'Corinthian' pottery, 41.
Crete, 36; pottery from, in Palestine, 73.
Crusaders' churches in Palestine, 76.
Ctesiphon, 84, 94.
Cuneiform inscriptions: in Asia Minor, 51; in Mesopotamia, 90 ff.

Cup-markings in Palestine, 77.
Cyclopean walls, 40
Cylinders and cylinder-sealings: in Cyprus, 56; in Egypt, 78;
Hittite, 60, 62, 64; in Mesopotamia, 89 ff.
Cyprus, 54 ff.; Law of Antiquities, 97; pottery from, in Palestine,
73.

Dipylon period, 40.
Dolmens in Palestine, 77.
Drawing and copying, 17 f.

Egypt, 78-82; Law of Antiquities, 98.
Egyptian hieroglyphics, 20; pottery in Palestine, 73; scarabs
imitated in Syria, 62; stone bowls, Mesopotamian pottery types
resembling, 88.
Eridu, 85, 88.
Excavations: laws controlling, 95 ff.; unauthorized, 7.

Fara, 85, 88 f.
Fibulae: see Brooches.
Figurines: Cypriote, 55; Greek, 35, 40 f., 44 f.; Syrian, 60, 62, 64.
Finds, importance of not breaking up, 9.
Flint implements, 29 ff.: see also Stone Age.
Forgeries, 24 f.

Geometric bronze age ware in Greece, 36; period, 40.
Glass; in Cyprus, 57; in  Egypt, 78 ff.; in Mesopotamia, 91; in
Syria, 64.
Glaze, Egyptian, 78 f.; imitated in Babylonia, 91.
Greece, 35 ff., Law of Antiquities, 95.

Hatra, 84.
Hebrew alphabets, 66.
Hieroglyphics, copying of, 17, 20; Hittite, 51, 62.
Hill sanctuaries in Palestine, 76.
Hittite antiquities: in Asia Minor, 51; in Syria, 59 ff.

Inscriptions: copying of, 17, 20 f.; Aramaic, 63, 66, 93; cuneiform,
51, 87, in Cyprus, 57, Greek, 44, 51 f; Hittite, 51, 62; Latin, 53;
Lycian,51; Lydian, 51; in Palestinian tombs, 71; Semitic, 62, 66 f.,
87.
Institutions, archaeological, 26 f.
Iron Age: in Asia Minor, 50; in Cyprus, 56; in Greece, 40; in
Mesopotamia, 91-93; in Syria, 60, 62.
Itinerary, recording of, 13 f.

Jewellery, forged, 24.

Kassite period, 91.
Khirbet (khirbah), 68 ff.
Khorsabad, 92.
Kohl-pots, 62,78 f.
Kok tombs, 71 f.
Kuyunjik, 85, 92.

Laconian pottery, 45.
Lagash, 88.
Lamps, Aegean, 37.
Latin inscriptions in Asia Minor, 53.
Laws of Antiquities, 7, 95 ff.
Levelling, 33.
Licences for acquiring antiquities, 9.
Lycian inscriptions and monuments, 51.
Lydian inscriptions, 51.

Ma'abed, Tell el-, 85.
Mastabas, 78.
Mapping, 13.
Mesopotamia, 83 ff.
Minoan Age. 36; pottery in Palestine, 73.
'Minyan' ware, 37.
Mortar, bitumen, 84, 90, 92.
Mosaic, 77, 79.
Mounds, 14: see also Tell.
Muqayyar, Tell, 85.
Museums, use of, 7 f.
'Mycenaean' Age, 37; pottery in Palestine, 73.

Naksh-i-Rustam, 94.
Neolithic Age: see Stone Age.
Niffer, 90.
Nimrud, 92.
Nineveh, 85, 92.
Numerals, West Semitic, 67.

'Obeid, Tell el-, 85, 88 f.
Obsidian: Aegean, 37; Mesopotamian, 85, 88.
Olive-presses in Palestine, 77.
Orientalizing Greek antiquities, 41, 44.
