patrician professed for the people, and their idol, also taught the
deep-thinking Montreal that, if the Colonna possessed not the ambition,
neither did he possess the policy, requisite for empire. The Knight
found his caution against Rienzi in vain, and he turned to Rienzi
himself. Little cared the Knight of St. John which party were
uppermost--prince or people--so that his own objects were attained; in
fact, he had studied the humours of a people, not in order to serve, but
to rule them; and, believing all men actuated by a similar ambition, he
imagined that, whether a demagogue or a patrician reigned, the people
were equally to be victims, and that the cry of "Order" on the one hand,
or of "Liberty" on the other, was but the mere pretext by which the
energy of one man sought to justify his ambition over the herd. Deeming
himself one of the most honourable spirits of his age, he believed in
no honour which he was unable to feel; and, sceptic in virtue, was
therefore credulous of vice.

But the boldness of his own nature inclined him, perhaps, rather to
the adventurous Rienzi than to the self-complacent Colonna; and he
considered that to the safety of the first he and his armed minions
might be even more necessary than to that of the last. At present
his main object was to learn from Rienzi the exact strength which he
possessed, and how far he was prepared for any actual revolt.

The acute Roman took care, on the one hand, how he betrayed to the
Knight more than he yet knew, or he disgusted him by apparent reserve on
the other. Crafty as Montreal was, he possessed not that wonderful art
of mastering others which was so preeminently the gift of the eloquent
and profound Rienzi, and the difference between the grades of their
intellect was visible in their present conference.

"I see," said Rienzi, "that amidst all the events which have lately
smiled upon my ambition, none is so favourable as that which assures
me of your countenance and friendship. In truth, I require some
armed alliance. Would you believe it, our friends, so bold in private
meetings, yet shrink from a public explosion. They fear not the
patricians, but the soldiery of the patricians; for it is the remarkable
feature in the Italian courage, that they have no terror for each other,
but the casque and sword of a foreign hireling make them quail like
deer."

"They will welcome gladly, then, the assurance that such hirelings shall
be in their service--not against them; and as much as you desire for the
revolution, so many shall you receive."

"But the pay and the conditions," said Rienzi, with his dry, sarcastic
smile. "How shall we arrange the first, and what shall we hold to be the
second?"

"That is an affair easily concluded," replied Montreal. "For me, to
tell you frankly, the glory and excitement of so great a revulsion would
alone suffice. I like to feel myself necessary to the completion of high
events. For my men it is otherwise. Your first act will be to seize the
revenues of the state. Well, whatever they amount to, the product of
the first year, great or small, shall be divided amongst us. You the one
half, I and my men the other half."

"It is much," said Rienzi, gravely, and as if in calculation,--"but Rome
cannot purchase her liberties too dearly. So be it then decided."

"Amen!--and now, then, what is your force? for these eighty or a hundred
signors of the Aventine,--worthy men, doubtless,--scarce suffice for a
revolt!"

Gazing cautiously round the room, the Roman placed his hand on
Montreal's arm--

"Between you and me, it requires time to cement it. We shall be unable
to stir these five weeks. I have too rashly anticipated the period. The
corn is indeed cut, but I must now, by private adjuration and address,
bind up the scattered sheaves."

"Five weeks," repeated Montreal; "that is far longer than I
anticipated."

"What I desire," continued Rienzi, fixing his searching eyes upon
Montreal, "is, that, in the meanwhile, we should preserve a profound
calm,--we should remove every suspicion. I shall bury myself in my
studies, and convoke no more meetings."

"Well--"

"And for yourself, noble Knight, might I venture to dictate, I would
pray you to mix with the nobles--to profess for me and for the people
the profoundest contempt--and to contribute to rock them yet more in the
cradle of their false security. Meanwhile, you could quietly withdraw as
many of the armed mercenaries as you influence from Rome, and leave the
nobles without their only defenders. Collecting these hardy warriors in
the recesses of the mountains, a day's march from hence, we may be able
to summon them at need, and they shall appear at our gates, and in the
midst of our rising--hailed as deliverers by the nobles, but in reality
allies with the people. In the confusion and despair of our enemies at
discovering their mistake, they will fly from the city."

"And its revenues and its empire will become the appanage of the hardy
soldier and the intriguing demagogue!" cried Montreal, with a laugh.

"Sir Knight, the division shall be equal."

"Agreed!"

"And now, noble Montreal, a flask of our best vintage!" said Rienzi,
changing his tone.

"You know the Provencals," answered Montreal, gaily.

The wine was brought, the conversation became free and familiar, and
Montreal, whose craft was acquired, and whose frankness was natural,
unwittingly committed his secret projects and ambition more nakedly to
Rienzi than he had designed to do. They parted apparently the best of
friends.

"By the way," said Rienzi, as they drained the last goblet. "Stephen
Colonna betakes him to Corneto, with a convoy of corn, on the 19th.
Will it not be as well if you join him? You can take that opportunity to
whisper discontent to the mercenaries that accompany him on his mission,
and induce them to our plan."

"I thought of that before," returned Montreal; "it shall be done. For
the present, farewell!"

     "'His barb, and his sword,
     And his lady, the peerless,
     Are all that are prized
     By Orlando the fearless.

     "'Success to the Norman,
     The darling of story;
     His glory is pleasure--
     His pleasure is glory.'"

Chanting this rude ditty as he resumed his mantle, the Knight waved his
hand to Rienzi, and departed.

Rienzi watched the receding form of his guest with an expression of hate
and fear upon his countenance. "Give that man the power," he muttered,
"and he may be a second Totila. (Innocent VI., some years afterwards,
proclaimed Montreal to be worse than Totila.) Methinks I see, in his
griping and ferocious nature,--through all the gloss of its gaiety and
knightly grace,--the very personification of our old Gothic foes. I
trust I have lulled him! Verily, two suns could no more blaze in one
hemisphere, than Walter de Montreal and Cola di Rienzi live in the same
city. The star-seers tell us that we feel a secret and uncontrollable
antipathy to those whose astral influences destine them to work us evil;
such antipathy do I feel for yon fair-faced homicide. Cross not my path,
Montreal!--cross not my path!"

With this soliloquy Rienzi turned within, and, retiring to his
apartment, was seen no more that night.



Chapter 2.V. The Procession of the Barons.--The Beginning of the End.

It was the morning of the 19th of May, the air was brisk and clear,
and the sun, which had just risen, shone cheerily upon the glittering
casques and spears of a gallant procession of armed horsemen, sweeping
through the long and principal street of Rome. The neighing of the
horses, the ringing of the hoofs, the dazzle of the armour, and the
tossing to and fro of the standards, adorned with the proud insignia of
the Colonna, presented one of the gay and brilliant spectacles peculiar
to the middle ages.

At the head of the troop, on a stout palfrey, rode Stephen Colonna.
At his right was the Knight of Provence, curbing, with an easy hand,
a slight, but fiery steed of the Arab race: behind him followed two
squires, the one leading his war-horse, the other bearing his lance and
helmet. At the left of Stephen Colonna rode Adrian, grave and silent,
and replying only by monosyllables to the gay bavardage of the Knight
of Provence. A considerable number of the flower of the Roman nobles
followed the old Baron; and the train was closed by a serried troop of
foreign horsemen, completely armed.

There was no crowd in the street,--the citizens looked with seeming
apathy at the procession from their half-closed shops.

"Have these Romans no passion for shows?" asked Montreal; "if they could
be more easily amused they would be more easily governed."

"Oh, Rienzi, and such buffoons, amuse them. We do better,--we terrify!"
replied Stephen.

"What sings the troubadour, Lord Adrian?" said Montreal.

     "'Smiles, false smiles, should form the school
     For those who rise, and those who rule:
     The brave they trick, and fair subdue,
     Kings deceive, the States undo.
     Smiles, false smiles!

     "'Frowns, true frowns, ourselves betray,
     The brave arouse, the fair dismay,
     Sting the pride, which blood must heal,
     Mix the bowl, and point the steel.
     Frowns, true frowns!'

"The lay is of France, Signor; yet methinks it brings its wisdom from
Italy;--for the serpent smile is your countrymen's proper distinction,
and the frown ill becomes them."

"Sir Knight," replied Adrian, sharply, and incensed at the taunt, "you
Foreigners have taught us how to frown:--a virtue sometimes."

"But not wisdom, unless the hand could maintain what the brow menaced,"
returned Montreal, with haughtiness; for he had much of the Franc
vivacity which often overcame his prudence; and he had conceived a
secret pique against Adrian since their interview at Stephen's palace.

"Sir Knight," answered Adrian, colouring, "our conversation may lead to
warmer words than I would desire to have with one who has rendered me so
gallant a service."

"Nay, then, let us go back to the troubadours," said Montreal,
indifferently. "Forgive me if I do not think highly, in general, of
Italian honour, or Italian valour; your valour I acknowledge, for I have
witnessed it, and valour and honour go together,--let that suffice!"

As Adrian was about to answer, his eye fell suddenly on the burly form
of Cecco del Vecchio, who was leaning his bare and brawny arms over his
anvil, and gazing, with a smile, upon the group. There was something in
that smile which turned the current of Adrian's thoughts, and which he
could not contemplate without an unaccountable misgiving.

"A strong villain, that," said Montreal, also eyeing the smith. "I
should like to enlist him. Fellow!" cried he, aloud, "you have an arm
that were as fit to wield the sword as to fashion it. Desert your anvil,
and follow the fortunes of Fra Moreale!"

The smith nodded his head. "Signor Cavalier," said he, gravely, "we poor
men have no passion for war; we want not to kill others--we desire only
ourselves to live,--if you will let us!"

"By the Holy Mother, a slavish answer! But you Romans--"

"Are slaves!" interrupted the smith, turning away to the interior of his
forge.

"The dog is mutinous!" said the old Colonna. And as the band swept on,
the rude foreigners, encouraged by their leaders, had each some taunt
or jest, uttered in a barbarous attempt at the southern patois, for the
lazy giant, as he again appeared in front of his forge, leaning on his
anvil as before, and betraying no sign of attention to his insultors,
save by a heightened glow of his swarthy visage;--and so the gallant
procession passed through the streets, and quitted the Eternal City.

There was a long interval of deep silence--of general calm--throughout
the whole of Rome: the shops were still but half-opened; no man betook
himself to his business; it was like the commencement of some holyday,
when indolence precedes enjoyment.

About noon, a few small knots of men might be seen scattered about the
streets, whispering to each other, but soon dispersing; and every now
and then, a single passenger, generally habited in the long robes used
by the men of letters, or in the more sombre garb of monks, passed
hurriedly up the street towards the Church of St. Mary of Egypt, once
the Temple of Fortune. Then, again, all was solitary and deserted.
Suddenly, there was heard the sound of a single trumpet! It swelled--it
gathered on the ear. Cecco del Vecchio looked up from his anvil! A
solitary horseman paced slowly by the forge, and wound a long loud blast
of the trumpet suspended round his neck, as he passed through the middle
of the street. Then might you see a crowd, suddenly, and as by magic,
appear emerging from every corner; the street became thronged with
multitudes; but it was only by the tramp of their feet, and an
indistinct and low murmur, that they broke the silence. Again
the horseman wound his trump, and when the note ceased, he cried
aloud--"Friends and Romans! tomorrow, at dawn of day, let each man find
himself unarmed before the Church of St. Angelo. Cola di Rienzi convenes
the Romans to provide for the good state of Rome." A shout, that seemed
to shake the bases of the seven hills, broke forth at the end of
this brief exhortation; the horseman rode slowly on, and the crowd
followed.--This was the commencement of the Revolution!



Chapter 2.VI. The Conspirator Becomes the Magistrate.

At midnight, when the rest of the city seemed hushed in rest, lights
were streaming from the windows of the Church of St. Angelo. Breaking
from its echoing aisles, the long and solemn notes of sacred music
stole at frequent intervals upon the air. Rienzi was praying within the
church; thirty masses consumed the hours from night till morn, and all
the sanction of religion was invoked to consecrate the enterprise of
liberty. (In fact, I apprehend that if ever the life of Cola di Rienzi
shall be written by a hand worthy of the task, it will be shown that a
strong religious feeling was blended with the political enthusiasm of
the people,--the religious feeling of a premature and crude reformation,
the legacy of Arnold of Brescia. It was not, however, one excited
against the priests, but favoured by them. The principal conventual
orders declared for the Revolution.) The sun had long risen, and the
crowd had long been assembled before the church door, and in vast
streams along every street that led to it,--when the bell of the
church tolled out long and merrily; and as it ceased, the voices of the
choristers within chanted the following hymn, in which were somewhat
strikingly, though barbarously, blended, the spirit of the classic
patriotism with the fervour of religious zeal:--

The Roman Hymn of Liberty.

     Let the mountains exult around!

     ("Exultent in circuito Vestro Montes," &c.--Let the
     mountains exult around!  So begins Rienzi's letter to the
     Senate and Roman people: preserved by Hocsemius.)

     On her seven-hill'd throne renown'd,
     Once more old Rome is crown'd!
     Jubilate!

     Sing out, O Vale and Wave!
     Look up from each laurell'd grave,
     Bright dust of the deathless brave!
     Jubilate!

     Pale Vision, what art thou?--Lo,
     From Time's dark deeps,
     Like a Wind, It sweeps,
     Like a Wind, when the tempests blow:

     A shadowy form--as a giant ghost--
     It stands in the midst of the armed host!
     The dead man's shroud on Its awful limbs;
     And the gloom of Its presence the daylight dims:
     And the trembling world looks on aghast--
     All hail to the SOUL OF THE MIGHTY PAST!
     Hail! all hail!

     As we speak--as we hallow--It moves, It breathes;
     From its clouded crest bud the laurel wreaths--
     As a Sun that leaps up from the arms of Night,
     The shadow takes shape, and the gloom takes light.
     Hail! all hail!

     The Soul of the Past, again
     To its ancient home,
     In the hearts of Rome,
     Hath come to resume its reign!

     O Fame, with a prophet's voice,
     Bid the ends of the Earth rejoice!
     Wherever the Proud are Strong,
     And Right is oppress'd by Wrong;--
     Wherever the day dim shines
     Through the cell where the captive pines;--
     Go forth, with a trumpet's sound!
     And tell to the Nations round--
     On the Hills which the Heroes trod--
     In the shrines of the Saints of God--
     In the Caesars' hall, and the Martyrs' prison--
     That the slumber is broke, and the Sleeper arisen!
     That the reign of the Goth and the Vandal is o'er:
     And Earth feels the tread of THE ROMAN once more!

As the hymn ended, the gate of the church opened; the crowd gave way on
either side, and, preceded by three of the young nobles of the inferior
order, bearing standards of allegorical design, depicting the triumph
of Liberty, Justice, and Concord, forth issued Rienzi, clad in complete
armour, the helmet alone excepted. His face was pale with watching and
intense excitement--but stern, grave, and solemnly composed; and its
expression so repelled any vociferous and vulgar burst of feeling, that
those who beheld it hushed the shout on their lips, and stilled, by a
simultaneous cry of reproof, the gratulations of the crowd behind.
Side by side with Rienzi moved Raimond, Bishop of Orvietto: and behind,
marching two by two, followed a hundred men-at-arms. In complete silence
the procession began its way, until, as it approached the Capitol, the
awe of the crowd gradually vanished, and thousands upon thousands of
voices rent the air with shouts of exultation and joy.

Arrived at the foot of the great staircase, which then made the
principal ascent to the square of the Capitol, the procession halted;
and as the crowd filled up that vast space in front--adorned and
hallowed by many of the most majestic columns of the temples of
old--Rienzi addressed the Populace, whom he had suddenly elevated into a
People.

He depicted forcibly the servitude and misery of the citizens--the
utter absence of all law--the want even of common security to life
and property. He declared that, undaunted by the peril he incurred, he
devoted his life to the regeneration of their common country; and he
solemnly appealed to the people to assist the enterprise, and at once
to sanction and consolidate the Revolution by an established code of law
and a Constitutional Assembly. He then ordered the chart and outline of
the Constitution he proposed, to be read by the Herald to the multitude.

It created,--or rather revived, with new privileges and powers,--a
Representative Assembly of Councillors. It proclaimed, as its first law,
one that seems simple enough to our happier times, but never hitherto
executed at Rome: Every wilful homicide, of whatever rank, was to be
punished by death. It enacted, that no private noble or citizen should
be suffered to maintain fortifications and garrisons in the city or the
country; that the gates and bridges of the State should be under the
control of whomsoever should be elected Chief Magistrate. It forbade all
harbour of brigands, mercenaries, and robbers, on payment of a thousand
marks of silver; and it made the Barons who possessed the neighbouring
territories responsible for the safety of the roads, and the transport
of merchandise. It took under the protection of the State the widow and
the orphan. It appointed, in each of the quarters of the city, an armed
militia, whom the tolling of the bell of the Capitol, at any hour, was
to assemble to the protection of the State. It ordained, that in each
harbour of the coast, a vessel should be stationed, for the safeguard
of commerce. It decreed the sum of one hundred florins to the heirs of
every man who died in the defence of Rome; and it devoted the public
revenues to the service and protection of the State.

Such, moderate at once and effectual, was the outline of the New
Constitution; and it may amuse the reader to consider how great must
have been the previous disorders of the city, when the common and
elementary provisions of civilisation and security made the character of
the code proposed, and the limit of a popular revolution.

The most rapturous shouts followed this sketch of the New Constitution:
and, amidst the clamour, up rose the huge form of Cecco del Vecchio.
Despite his condition, he was a man of great importance at the present
crisis: his zeal and his courage, and, perhaps, still more, his brute
passion and stubborn prejudice, had made him popular. The lower order of
mechanics looked to him as their head and representative; out, then, he
spake loud and fearlessly,--speaking well, because his mind was full of
what he had to say.

"Countrymen and Citizens!--This New Constitution meets with your
approbation--so it ought. But what are good laws, if we do not have
good men to execute them? Who can execute a law so well as the man
who designs it? If you ask me to give you a notion how to make a good
shield, and my notion pleases you, would you ask me, or another smith,
to make it for you? If you ask another, he may make a good shield,
but it would not be the same as that which I should have made, and the
description of which contented you. Cola di Rienzi has proposed a Code
of Law that shall be our shield. Who should see that the shield become
what he proposes, but Cola di Rienzi? Romans! I suggest that Cola di
Rienzi be intrusted by the people with the authority, by whatsoever name
he pleases, of carrying the New Constitution into effect;--and whatever
be the means, we, the People, will bear him harmless."

"Long life to Rienzi!--long live Cecco del Vecchio! He hath spoken
well!--none but the Law-maker shall be the Governor!"

Such were the acclamations which greeted the ambitious heart of the
Scholar. The voice of the people invested him with the supreme power. He
had created a Commonwealth--to become, if he desired it, a Despot!



Chapter 2.VII. Looking after the Halter when the Mare is Stolen.

While such were the events at Rome, a servitor of Stephen Colonna was
already on his way to Corneto. The astonishment with which the old Baron
received the intelligence may be easily imagined. He lost not a moment
in convening his troop; and, while in all the bustle of departure, the
Knight of St. John abruptly entered his presence. His mien had lost its
usual frank composure.

"How is this?" said he, hastily; "a revolt?--Rienzi sovereign of
Rome?--can the news be believed?"

"It is too true!" said Colonna, with a bitter smile. "Where shall we
hang him on our return?"

"Talk not so wildly, Sir Baron," replied Montreal, discourteously;
"Rienzi is stronger than you think for. I know what men are, and you
only know what noblemen are! Where is your kinsman, Adrian?"

"He is here, noble Montreal," said Stephen, shrugging his shoulders,
with a half-disdainful smile at the rebuke, which he thought it more
prudent not to resent; "he is here!--see him enter!"

"You have heard the news?" exclaimed Montreal.

"I have."

"And despise the revolution?"

"I fear it!"

"Then you have some sense in you. But this is none of my affair: I
will not interrupt your consultations. Adieu for the present!" and, ere
Stephen could prevent him, the Knight had quitted the chamber.

"What means this demagogue?" Montreal muttered to himself. "Would he
trick me?--has he got rid of my presence in order to monopolise all the
profit of the enterprise? I fear me so!--the cunning Roman! We northern
warriors could never compete with the intellect of these Italians but
for their cowardice. But what shall be done? I have already bid Rodolf
communicate with the brigands, and they are on the eve of departure from
their present lord. Well! let it be so! Better that I should first break
the power of the Barons, and then make my own terms, sword in hand, with
the plebeian. And if I fail in this,--sweet Adeline! I shall see thee
again!--that is some comfort!--and Louis of Hungary will bid high for
the arm and brain of Walter de Montreal. What, ho! Rodolf!" he
exclaimed aloud, as the sturdy form of the trooper, half-armed and
half-intoxicated, reeled along the courtyard. "Knave! art thou drunk at
this hour?"

"Drunk or sober," answered Rodolf, bending low, "I am at thy bidding."

"Well said!--are thy friends ripe for the saddle?"

"Eighty of them already tired of idleness and the dull air of Rome, will
fly wherever Sir Walter de Montreal wishes."

"Hasten, then,--bid them mount; we go not hence with the Colonna--we
leave while they are yet talking! Bid my squires attend me!"

And when Stephen Colonna was settling himself on his palfrey, he heard,
for the first time, that the Knight of Provence, Rodolf the trooper, and
eighty of the stipendiaries, had already departed,--whither, none knew.

"To precede us to Rome! gallant barbarian!" said Colonna. "Sirs, on!"



Chapter 2.VIII. The Attack--the Retreat--the Election--and the Adhesion.

Arriving at Rome, the company of the Colonna found the gates barred, and
the walls manned. Stephen bade advance his trumpeters, with one of his
captains, imperiously to demand admittance.

"We have orders," replied the chief of the town-guard, "to admit none
who bear arms, flags, or trumpets. Let the Lords Colonna dismiss their
train, and they are welcome."

"Whose are these insolent mandates?" asked the captain.

"Those of the Lord Bishop of Orvietto and Cola di Rienzi, joint
protectors of the Buono Stato." (Good Estate.)

The captain of the Colonna returned to his chief with these tidings. The
rage of Stephen was indescribable. "Go back," he cried, as soon as
he could summon voice, "and say, that, if the gates are not forthwith
opened to me and mine, the blood of the plebeians be on their own head.
As for Raimond, Vicars of the Pope have high spiritual authority, none
temporal. Let him prescribe a fast, and he shall be obeyed; but, for
the rash Rienzi, say that Stephen Colonna will seek him in the Capitol
tomorrow, for the purpose of throwing him out of the highest window."

These messages the envoy failed not to deliver.

The captain of the Romans was equally stern in his reply.

"Declare to your Lord," said he, "that Rome holds him and his as rebels
and traitors; and that the moment you regain your troop, our archers
receive our command to draw their bows--in the name of the Pope, the
City, and the Liberator."

This threat was executed to the letter; and ere the old Baron had time
to draw up his men in the best array, the gates were thrown open, and
a well-armed, if undisciplined, multitude poured forth, with fierce
shouts, clashing their arms, and advancing the azure banners of the
Roman State. So desperate their charge, and so great their numbers, that
the Barons, after a short and tumultuous conflict, were driven back,
and chased by their pursuers for more than a mile from the walls of the
city.

As soon as the Barons recovered their disorder and dismay, a hasty
council was held, at which various and contradictory opinions were
loudly urged. Some were for departing on the instant to Palestrina,
which belonged to the Colonna, and possessed an almost inaccessible
fortress. Others were for dispersing, and entering peaceably, and in
detached parties, through the other gates. Stephen Colonna--himself
incensed and disturbed from his usual self-command--was unable to
preserve his authority; Luca di Savelli, (The more correct orthography
were Luca di Savello, but the one in the text is preserved as more
familiar to the English reader.) a timid, though treacherous and subtle
man, already turned his horse's head, and summoned his men to follow him
to his castle in Romagna, when the old Colonna bethought himself of a
method by which to keep his band from a disunion that he had the sense
to perceive would prove fatal to the common cause. He proposed that they
should at once repair to Palestrina, and there fortify themselves; while
one of the chiefs should be selected to enter Rome alone, and
apparently submissive, to examine the strength of Rienzi; and with the
discretionary power to resist if possible,--or to make the best terms he
could for the admission of the rest.

"And who," asked Savelli, sneeringly, "will undertake this dangerous
mission? Who, unarmed and alone, will expose himself to the rage of the
fiercest populace of Italy, and the caprice of a demagogue in the first
flush of his power?"

The Barons and the Captains looked at each other in silence. Savelli
laughed.

Hitherto Adrian had taken no part in the conference, and but little in
the previous contest. He now came to the support of his kinsman.

"Signors!" said he, "I will undertake this mission,--but on mine own
account, independently of yours;--free to act as I may think best, for
the dignity of a Roman noble, and the interests of a Roman citizen; free
to raise my standard on mine own tower, or to yield fealty to the new
estate."

"Well said!" cried the old Colonna, hastily. "Heaven forbid we should
enter Rome as foes, if to enter it as friends be yet allowed us! What
say ye, gentles?"

"A more worthy choice could not be selected," said Savelli; "but I
should scarce deem it possible that a Colonna could think there was an
option between resistance and fealty to this upstart revolution."

"Of that, Signor, I will judge for myself; if you demand an agent for
yourselves, choose another. I announce to ye frankly, that I have seen
enough of other states to think the recent condition of Rome demanded
some redress. Whether Rienzi and Raimond be worthy of the task they have
assumed, I know not."

Savelli was silent. The old Colonna seized the word.

"To Palestrina, then!--are ye all agreed on this? At the worst, or at
the best, we should not be divided! On this condition alone I hazard the
safety of my kinsman!"

The Barons murmured a little among themselves;--the expediency of
Stephen's proposition was evident, and they at length assented to it.

Adrian saw them depart, and then, attended only by his squire, slowly
rode towards a more distant entrance into the city. On arriving at the
gates, his name was demanded--he gave it freely.

"Enter, my Lord," said the warder, "our orders were to admit all that
came unarmed and unattended. But to the Lord Adrian di Castello, alone,
we had a special injunction to give the honours due to a citizen and a
friend."

Adrian, a little touched by this implied recollection of friendship, now
rode through a long line of armed citizens, who saluted him respectfully
as he passed, and, as he returned the salutation with courtesy, a loud
and approving shout followed his horse's steps.

So, save by one attendant, alone, and in peace, the young patrician
proceeded leisurely through the long streets, empty and deserted,--for
nearly one half of the inhabitants were assembled at the walls, and
nearly the other half were engaged in a more peaceful duty,--until,
penetrating the interior, the wide and elevated space of the Capitol
broke upon his sight. The sun was slowly setting over an immense
multitude that overspread the spot, and high above a scaffold raised
in the centre, shone, to the western ray, the great Gonfalon of Rome,
studded with silver stars.

Adrian reined in his steed. "This," thought he, "is scarcely the hour
thus publicly to confer with Rienzi; yet fain would I, mingled with the
crowd, judge how far his power is supported, and in what manner it is
borne." Musing a little, he withdrew into one of the obscurer streets,
then wholly deserted, surrendered his horse to his squire, and,
borrowing of the latter his morion and long mantle, passed to one of
the more private entrances of the Capitol, and, enveloped in his cloak,
stood--one of the crowd--intent upon all that followed.

"And what," he asked of a plainly dressed citizen, "is the cause of this
assembly?"

"Heard you not the proclamation?" returned the other in some surprise.
"Do you not know that the Council of the City and the Guilds of the
Artisans have passed a vote to proffer to Rienzi the title of king of
Rome?"

The Knight of the Emperor, to whom belonged that august dignity, drew
back in dismay.

"And," resumed the citizen, "this assembly of all the lesser Barons,
Councillors, and Artificers, is convened to hear the answer."

"Of course it will be assent?"

"I know not--there are strange rumours; hitherto the Liberator has
concealed his sentiments."

At that instant a loud flourish of martial music announced the approach
of Rienzi. The crowd tumultuously divided, and presently, from the
Palace of the Capitol to the scaffold, passed Rienzi, still in complete
armour, save the helmet, and with him, in all the pomp of his episcopal
robes, Raimond of Orvietto.

As soon as Rienzi had ascended the platform, and was thus made visible
to the whole concourse, no words can suffice to paint the enthusiasm
of the scene--the shouts, the gestures, the tears, the sobs, the wild
laughter, in which the sympathy of those lively and susceptible children
