herself came, the queen of Aeetes, on hearing the voice of Chalciope;
and straightway all the court was filled with a throng. Some of the
thralls were busied with a mighty bull, others with the axe were
cleaving dry billets, and others heating with fire water for the baths;
nor was there one who relaxed his toil, serving the king.

Meantime Eros passed unseen through the grey mist, causing confusion, as
when against grazing heifers rises the gadfly, which oxherds call the
breese. And quickly beneath the lintel in the porch he strung his bow
and took from the quiver an arrow unshot before, messenger of pain. And
with swift feet unmarked he passed the threshold and keenly glanced
around; and gliding close by Aeson's son he laid the arrow-notch on the
cord in the centre, and drawing wide apart with both hands he shot at
Medea; and speechless amazement seized her soul. But the god himself
flashed back again from the high-roofed hall, laughing loud; and the
bolt burnt deep down in the maiden's heart, like a flame; and ever she
kept darting bright glances straight up at Aeson's son, and within her
breast her heart panted fast through anguish, all remembrance left her,
and her soul melted with the sweet pain. And as a poor woman heaps dry
twigs round a blazing brand--a daughter of toil, whose task is the
spinning of wool, that she may kindle a blaze at night beneath her roof,
when she has waked very early--and the flame waxing wondrous great from
the small brand consumes all the twigs together; so, coiling round her
heart, burnt secretly Love the destroyer; and the hue of her soft cheeks
went and came, now pale, now red, in her soul's distraction.

Now when the thralls had laid a banquet ready before them, and they had
refreshed themselves with warm baths, gladly did they please their souls
with meat and drink. And thereafter Aeetes questioned the sons of his
daughter, addressing them with these words:

"Sons of my daughter and of Phrixus, whom beyond all strangers I
honoured in my halls, how have ye come returning back to Aea? Did some
calamity cut short your escape in the midst? Ye did not listen when I
set before you the boundless length of the way. For I marked it once,
whirled along in the chariot of my father Helios, when he was bringing
my sister Circe to the western land and we came to the shore of the
Tyrrhenian mainland, where even now she abides, exceeding far from
Colchis. But what pleasure is there in words? Do ye tell me plainly what
has been your fortune, and who these men are, your companions, and where
from your hollow ship ye came ashore."

Such were his questions, and Argus, before all his brethren, being
fearful for the mission of Aeson's son, gently replied, for he was the
elder-born:

"Aeetes, that ship forthwith stormy blasts tore asunder, and ourselves,
crouching on the beams, a wave drove on to the beach of the isle of
Enyalius[1] in the murky night; and some god preserved us. For even the
birds of Ares that haunted the desert isle beforetime, not even them did
we find. But these men had driven them off, having landed from their
ship on the day before; and the will of Zeus taking pity on us, or some
fate, detained them there, since they straightway gave us both food and
clothing in abundance, when they heard the illustrious name of Phrixus
and thine own; for to thy city are they faring. And if thou dost wish to
know their errand, I will not hide it from thee. A certain king,
vehemently longing to drive this man far from his fatherland and
possessions, because in might he outshone all the sons of Aeolus, sends
him to voyage hither on a bootless venture; and asserts that the stock
of Aeolus will not escape the heart-grieving wrath and rage of
implacable Zeus, nor the unbearable curse and vengeance due for Phrixus,
until the fleece comes back to Hellas. And their ship was fashioned by
Pallas Athena, not such a one as are the ships among the Colchians, on
the vilest of which we chanced. For the fierce waves and wind broke her
utterly to pieces; but the other holds firm with her bolts, even though
all the blasts should buffet her. And with equal swiftness she speedeth
before the wind and when the crew ply the oar with unresting hands. And
he hath gathered in her the mightiest heroes of all Achaea, and hath
come to thy city from wandering far through cities and gulfs of the
dread ocean, in the hope that thou wilt grant him the fleece. But as
thou dost please, so shall it be, for he cometh not to use force, but is
eager to pay thee a recompense for the gift. He has heard from me of thy
bitter foes the Sauromatae, and he will subdue them to thy sway. And if
thou desirest to know their names and lineage I will tell thee all. This
man on whose account the rest were gathered from Hellas, they call
Jason, son of Aeson, whom Cretheus begat. And if in truth he is of the
stock of Cretheus himself, thus he would be our kinsman on the father's
side. For Cretheus and Athamas were both sons of Aeolus; and Phrixus was
the son of Athamas, son of Aeolus. And here, if thou hast heard at all
of the seed of Helios, thou dost behold Augeias; and this is Telamon
sprung from famous Aeacus; and Zeus himself begat Aeacus. And so all the
rest, all the comrades that follow him, are the sons or grandsons of the
immortals."

[Footnote 1: A name of Ares.]

Such was the tale of Argus; but the king at his words was filled with
rage as he heard; and his heart was lifted high in wrath. And he spake
in heavy displeasure; and was angered most of all with the son of
Chalciope; for he deemed that on their account the strangers had come;
and in his fury his eyes flashed forth beneath his brows:

"Begone from my sight, felons, straightway, ye and your tricks, from the
land, ere someone see a fleece and a Phrixus to his sorrow. Banded
together with your friends from Hellas, not for the fleece, but to seize
my sceptre and royal power have ye come hither. Had ye not first tasted
of my table, surely would I have cut out your tongues and hewn off both
hands and sent you forth with your feet alone, so that ye might be
stayed from starting hereafter. And what lies have ye uttered against
the blessed gods!"

Thus he spake in his wrath; and mightily from its depths swelled the
heart of Aeacus' son, and his soul within longed to speak a deadly word
in defiance, but Aeson's son checked him, for he himself first made
gentle answer:

"Aeetes, bear with this armed band, I pray. For not in the way thou
deemest have we come to thy city and palace, no, nor yet with such
desires. For who would of his own will dare to cross so wide a sea for
the goods of a stranger? But fate and the ruthless command of a
presumptuous king urged me. Grant a favour to thy suppliants, and to all
Hellas will I publish a glorious fame of thee; yea, we are ready now to
pay thee a swift recompense in war, whether it be the Sauromatae or some
other people that thou art eager to subdue to thy sway."

He spake, flattering him with gentle utterance; but the king's soul
brooded a twofold purpose within him, whether he should attack and slay
them on the spot or should make trial of their might. And this, as he
pondered, seemed the better way, and he addressed Jason in answer:

"Stranger, why needest thou go through thy tale to the end? For if ye
are in truth of heavenly race, or have come in no wise inferior to me,
to win the goods of strangers, I will give thee the fleece to bear away,
if thou dost wish, when I have tried thee. For against brave men I bear
no grudge, such as ye yourselves tell me of him who bears sway in
Hellas. And the trial of your courage and might shall be a contest which
I myself can compass with my hands, deadly though it be. Two bulls with
feet of bronze I have that pasture on the plain of Ares, breathing forth
flame from their jaws; them do I yoke and drive over the stubborn field
of Ares, four plough-gates; and quickly cleaving it with the share up to
the headland, I cast into the furrows for seed, not the corn of Demeter,
but the teeth of a dread serpent that grow up into the fashion of armed
men; them I slay at once, cutting them down beneath my spear as they
rise against me on all sides. In the morning do I yoke the oxen, and at
eventide I cease from the harvesting. And thou, if thou wilt accomplish
such deeds as these, on that very day shalt carry off the fleece to the
king's palace; ere that time comes I will not give it, expect it not.
For indeed it is unseemly that a brave man should yield to a coward."

Thus he spake; and Jason, fixing his eyes on the ground, sat just as he
was, speechless, helpless in his evil plight. For a long time he turned
the matter this way and that, and could in no way take on him the task
with courage, for a mighty task it seemed; and at last he made reply
with crafty words:

"With thy plea of right, Aeetes, thou dost shut me in overmuch.
Wherefore also I will dare that contest, monstrous as it is, though it
be my doom to die. For nothing will fall upon men more dread than dire
necessity, which indeed constrained me to come hither at a king's
command."

Thus he spake, smitten by his helpless plight; and the king with grim
words addressed him, sore troubled as he was: "Go forth now to the
gathering, since thou art eager for the toil; but if thou shouldst fear
to lift the yoke upon the oxen or shrink from the deadly harvesting,
then all this shall be my care, so that another too may shudder to come
to a man that is better than he."

He spake outright; and Jason rose from his seat, and Augeias and Telamon
at once; and Argus followed alone, for he signed to his brothers to stay
there on the spot meantime; and so they went forth from the hall. And
wonderfully among them all shone the son of Aeson for beauty and grace;
and the maiden looked at him with stealthy glance, holding her bright
veil aside, her heart smouldering with pain; and her soul creeping like
a dream flitted in his track as he went. So they passed forth from the
palace sorely troubled. And Chalciope, shielding herself from the wrath
of Aeetes, had gone quickly to her chamber with her sons. And Medea
likewise followed, and much she brooded in her soul all the cares that
the Loves awaken. And before her eyes the vision still appeared--himself
what like he was, with what vesture he was clad, what things he spake,
how he sat on his seat, how he moved forth to the door--and as she
pondered she deemed there never was such another man; and ever in her
ears rung his voice and the honey-sweet words which he uttered. And she
feared for him, lest the oxen or Aeetes with his own hand should slay
him; and she mourned him as though already slain outright, and in her
affliction a round tear through very grievous pity coursed down her
cheek: and gently weeping she lifted up her voice aloud:

"Why does this grief come upon me, poor wretch? Whether he be the best
of heroes now about to perish, or the worst, let him go to his doom. Yet
I would that he had escaped unharmed; yea, may this be so, revered
goddess, daughter of Perses, may he avoid death and return home; but if
it be his lot to be o'ermastered by the oxen, may he first learn this
that I at least do not rejoice in his cruel calamity."

Thus then was the maiden's heart racked by love-cares. But when the
others had gone forth from the people and the city, along the path by
which at the first they had come from the plain, then Argus addressed
Jason with these words:

"Son of Aeson, thou wilt despise the counsel which I will tell thee,
but, though in evil plight, it is not fitting to forbear from the trial.
Ere now thou hast heard me tell of a maiden that uses sorcery under the
guidance of Hecate, Perses' daughter. If we could win her aid there will
be no dread, methinks, of thy defeat in the contest; but terribly do I
fear that my mother will not take this task upon her. Nevertheless I
will go back again to entreat her, for a common destruction overhangs us
all."

He spake with goodwill, and Jason answered with these words: "Good
friend, if this is good in thy sight, I say not nay. Go and move thy
mother, beseeching her aid with prudent words; pitiful indeed is our
hope when we have put our return in the keeping of women." So he spake,
and quickly they reached the back-water. And their comrades joyfully
questioned them, when they saw them close at hand; and to them spoke
Aeson's son grieved at heart:

"My friends, the heart of ruthless Aeetes is utterly filled with wrath
against us, for not at all can the goal be reached either by me or by
you who question me. He said that two bulls with feet of bronze pasture
on the plain of Ares, breathing forth flame from their jaws. And with
these he bade me plough the field, four plough-gates; and said that he
would give me from a serpent's jaws seed which will raise up earthborn
men in armour of bronze; and on the same day I must slay them. This
task--for there was nothing better to devise--I took on myself
outright."

Thus he spake; and to all the contest seemed one that none could
accomplish, and long, quiet and silent, they looked at one another,
bowed down with the calamity and their despair; but at last Peleus spake
with courageous words among all the chiefs: "It is time to be
counselling what we shall do. Yet there is not so much profit, I trow,
in counsel as in the might of our hands. If thou then, hero son of
Aeson, art minded to yoke Aeetes' oxen, and art eager for the toil,
surely thou wilt keep thy promise and make thyself ready. But if thy
soul trusts not her prowess utterly, then neither bestir thyself nor sit
still and look round for some one else of these men. For it is not I who
will flinch, since the bitterest pain will be but death."

So spake the son of Aeacus; and Telamon's soul was stirred, and quickly
he started up in eagerness; and Idas rose up the third in his pride; and
the twin sons of Tyndareus; and with them Oeneus' son who was numbered
among strong men, though even the soft down on his cheek showed not yet;
with such courage was his soul uplifted. But the others gave way to
these in silence. And straightway Argus spake these words to those that
longed for the contest:

"My friends, this indeed is left us at the last. But I deem that there
will come to you some timely aid from my mother. Wherefore, eager though
ye be, refrain and abide in your ship a little longer as before, for it
is better to forbear than recklessly to choose an evil fate. There is a
maiden, nurtured in the halls of Aeetes, whom the goddess Hecate taught
to handle magic herbs with exceeding skill--all that the land and
flowing waters produce. With them is quenched the blast of unwearied
flame, and at once she stays the course of rivers as they rush roaring
on, and checks the stars and the paths of the sacred moon. Of her we
bethought us as we came hither along the path from the palace, if haply
my mother, her own sister, might persuade her to aid us in the venture.
And if this is pleasing to you as well, surely on this very day will I
return to the palace of Aeetes to make trial; and perchance with some
god's help shall I make the trial."

Thus he spake, and the gods in their goodwill gave them a sign. A
trembling dove in her flight from a mighty hawk fell from on high,
terrified, into the lap of Aeson's son, and the hawk fell impaled on the
stern-ornament. And quickly Mopsus with prophetic words spake among them
all:

"For you, friends, this sign has been wrought by the will of heaven; in
no other way is it possible to interpret its meaning better, than to
seek out the maiden and entreat her with manifold skill. And I think she
will not reject our prayer, if in truth Phineus said that our return
should be with the help of the Cyprian goddess. It was her gentle bird
that escaped death; and as my heart within me foresees according to this
omen, so may it prove! But, my friends, let us call on Cytherea to aid
us, and now at once obey the counsels of Argus."

He spake, and the warriors approved, remembering the injunctions of
Phineus; but all alone leapt up Aphareian Idas and shouted loudly in
terrible wrath: "Shame on us, have we come here fellow-voyagers with
women, calling on Cypris for help and not on the mighty strength of
Enyalius? And do ye look to doves and hawks to save yourselves from
contests? Away with you, take thought not for deeds of war, but by
supplication to beguile weakling girls."

Such were his eager words; and of his comrades many murmured low, but
none uttered a word of answer back. And he sat down in wrath; and at
once Jason roused them and uttered his own thought: "Let Argus set forth
from the ship, since this pleases all; but we will now move from the
river and openly fasten our hawsers to the shore. For surely it is not
fitting for us to hide any longer cowering from the battle-cry."

So he spake, and straightway sent Argus to return in haste to the city;
and they drew the anchors on board at the command of Aeson's son, and
rowed the ship close to the shore, a little away from the back-water.

But straightway Aeetes held an assembly of the Colchians far aloof from
his palace at a spot where they sat in times before, to devise against
the Minyae grim treachery and troubles. And he threatened that when
first the oxen should have torn in pieces the man who had taken upon him
to perform the heavy task, he would hew down the oak grove above the
wooded hill, and burn the ship and her crew, that so they might vent
forth in ruin their grievous insolence, for all their haughty schemes.
For never would he have welcomed the Aeolid Phrixus as a guest in his
halls, in spite of his sore need, Phrixus, who surpassed all strangers
in gentleness and fear of the gods, had not Zeus himself sent Hermes his
messenger down from heaven, so that he might meet with a friendly host;
much less would pirates coming to his land be let go scatheless for
long, men whose care it was to lift their hands and seize the goods of
others, and to weave secret webs of guile, and harry the steadings of
herdsmen with ill-sounding forays. And he said that besides all that the
sons of Phrixus should pay a fitting penalty to himself for returning in
consort with evil-doers, that they might recklessly drive him from his
honour and his throne; for once he had heard a baleful prophecy from his
father Helios, that he must avoid the secret treachery and schemes of
his own offspring and their crafty mischief. Wherefore he was sending
them, as they desired, to the Achaean land at the bidding of their
father--a long journey. Nor had he ever so slight a fear of his
daughters, that they would form some hateful scheme, nor of his son
Apsyrtus; but this curse was being fulfilled in the children of
Chalciope. And he proclaimed terrible things in his rage against the
strangers, and loudly threatened to keep watch over the ship and its
crew, so that no one might escape calamity.

Meantime Argus, going to Aeetes' palace, with manifold pleading besought
his mother to pray Medea's aid; and Chalciope herself already had the
same thoughts, but fear checked her soul lest haply either fate should
withstand and she should entreat her in vain, all distraught as she
would be at her father's deadly wrath, or, if Medea yielded to her
prayers, her deeds should be laid bare and open to view.

Now a deep slumber had relieved the maiden from her love-pains as she
lay upon her couch. But straightway fearful dreams, deceitful, such as
trouble one in grief, assailed her. And she thought that the stranger
had taken on him the contest, not because he longed to win the ram's
fleece, and that he had not come on that account to Aeetes' city, but to
lead her away, his wedded wife, to his own home; and she dreamed that
herself contended with the oxen and wrought the task with exceeding
ease; and that her own parents set at naught their promise, for it was
not the maiden they had challenged to yoke the oxen but the stranger
himself; from that arose a contention of doubtful issue between her
father and the strangers; and both laid the decision upon her, to be as
she should direct in her mind. But she suddenly, neglecting her parents,
chose the stranger. And measureless anguish seized them and they shouted
out in their wrath; and with the cry sleep released its hold upon her.
Quivering with fear she started up, and stared round the walls of her
chamber, and with difficulty did she gather her spirit within her as
before, and lifted her voice aloud:

"Poor wretch, how have gloomy dreams affrighted me! I fear that this
voyage of the heroes will bring some great evil. My heart is trembling
for the stranger. Let him woo some Achaean girl fair away among his own
folk; let maidenhood be mine and the home of my parents. Yet, taking to
myself a reckless heart, I will no more keep aloof but will make trial
of my sister to see if she will entreat me to aid in the contest,
through grief for her own sons; this would quench the bitter pain in my
heart."

She spake, and rising from her bed opened the door of her chamber,
bare-footed, clad in one robe; and verily she desired to go to her
sister, and crossed the threshold. And for long she stayed there at the
entrance of her chamber, held back by shame; and she turned back once
more; and again she came forth from within, and again stole back; and
idly did her feet bear her this way and that; yea, as oft as she went
straight on, shame held her within the chamber, and though held back by
shame, bold desire kept urging her on. Thrice she made the attempt and
thrice she checked herself, the fourth time she fell on her bed face
downward writhing in pain. And as when a bride in her chamber bewails
her youthful husband, to whom her brothers and parents have given her,
nor yet does she hold converse with all her attendants for shame and for
thinking of him; but she sits apart in her grief; and some doom has
destroyed him, before they have had pleasure of each other's charms; and
she with heart on fire silently weeps, beholding her widowed couch, in
fear lest the women should mock and revile her: like, to her did Medea
lament. And suddenly as she was in the midst of her tears, one of the
handmaids came forth and noticed her, one who was her youthful
attendant; and straightway she told Chalciope, who sat in the midst of
her sons devising how to win over her sister. And when Chalciope heard
the strange tale from the handmaid, not even so did she disregard it.
And she rushed in dismay from her chamber right on to the chamber where
the maiden lay in her anguish, having torn her cheeks on each side; and
when Chalciope saw her eyes all dimmed with tears, she thus addressed
her:

"Ah me, Medea, why dost thou weep so? What hath befallen thee? What
terrible grief has entered thy heart? Has some heaven-sent disease
enwrapt thy frame, or hast thou heard from our father some deadly threat
concerning me and my sons? Would that I did not behold this home of my
parents, or the city, but dwelt at the ends of the earth, where not even
the name of Colchians is known!"

Thus she spake, and her sister's cheeks flushed; and though she was
eager to reply, long did maiden shame restrain her. At one moment the
word rose on the end of her tongue, at another it fluttered back deep
