"The crop-eared hound!" said Captain Dalgetty, in a rage; "What the
devil gave him the assurance to purchase the inheritance of a family of
four hundred years standing?--CYNTHIUS AUREM VELLET, as we used to say
at Mareschal-College; that is to say, I will pull him out of my father's
house by the ears. And so, my Lord Menteith, I am yours, hand and
sword, body and soul, till death do us part, or to the end of the next
campaign, whichever event shall first come to pass."

"And I," said the young nobleman, "rivet the bargain with a month's pay
in advance."

"That is more than necessary," said Dalgetty, pocketing the money
however. "But now I must go down, look after my war-saddle and
abuilziements, and see that Gustavus has his morning, and tell him we
have taken new service."

"There goes your precious recruit," said Lord Menteith to Anderson, as
the Captain left the room; "I fear we shall have little credit of him."

"He is a man of the times, however," said Anderson; "and without such we
should hardly be able to carry on our enterprise."

"Let us go down," answered Lord Menteith, "and see how our muster is
likely to thrive, for I hear a good deal of bustle in the castle."

When they entered the hall, the domestics keeping modestly in the
background, morning greetings passed between Lord Menteith, Angus
M'Aulay, and his English guests, while Allan, occupying the same settle
which he had filled the preceding evening, paid no attention whatever to
any one. Old Donald hastily rushed into the apartment. "A message from
Vich Alister More; [The patronymic of MacDonell of Glengarry.] he is
coming up in the evening."

"With how many attendants?" said M'Aulay.

"Some five-and-twenty or thirty," said Donald, "his ordinary retinue."

"Shake down plenty of straw in the great barn," said the Laird.

Another servant here stumbled hastily in, announcing the expected
approach of Sir Hector M'Lean, "who is arriving with a large following."

"Put them in the malt-kiln," said M'Aulay; "and keep the breadth of the
middenstead between them and the M'Donalds; they are but unfriends to
each other."

Donald now re-entered, his visage considerably lengthened--"The tell's
i' the folk," he said; "the haill Hielands are asteer, I think. Evan
Dhu, of Lochiel, will be here in an hour, with Lord kens how many
gillies."

"Into the great barn with them beside the M'Donalds," said the Laird.

More and more chiefs were announced, the least of whom would have
accounted it derogatory to his dignity to stir without a retinue of six
or seven persons. To every new annunciation, Angus M'Aulay answered
by naming some place of accommodation,--the stables, the loft, the
cow-house, the sheds, every domestic office, were destined for the night
to some hospitable purpose or other. At length the arrival of M'Dougal
of Lorn, after all his means of accommodation were exhausted, reduced
him to some perplexity. "What the devil is to be done, Donald?" said
he; "the great barn would hold fifty more, if they would lie heads
and thraws; but there would be drawn dirks amang them which should lie
upper-most, and so we should have bloody puddings before morning!"

"What needs all this?" said Allan, starting up, and coming forward with
the stern abruptness of his usual manner; "are the Gael to-day of softer
flesh or whiter blood than their fathers were? Knock the head out of
a cask of usquebae; let that be their night-gear--their plaids
their bed-clothes--the blue sky their canopy, and the heather their
couch.--Come a thousand more, and they would not quarrel on the broad
heath for want of room!"

"Allan is right," said his brother; "it is very odd how Allan, who,
between ourselves," said he to Musgrave, "is a little wowf, [WOWF, i.e.
crazed.] seems at times to have more sense than us all put together.
Observe him now."

"Yes," continued Allan, fixing his eyes with a ghastly stare upon the
opposite side of the hall, "they may well begin as they are to end; many
a man will sleep this night upon the heath, that when the Martinmas wind
shalt blow shall lie there stark enough, and reck little of cold or lack
of covering."

"Do not forespeak us, brother," said Angus; "that is not lucky."

"And what luck is it then that you expect?" said Allan; and straining
his eyes until they almost started from their sockets, he fell with a
convulsive shudder into the arms of Donald and his brother, who, knowing
the nature of his fits, had come near to prevent his fall. They seated
him upon a bench, and supported him until he came to himself, and was
about to speak.

"For God's sake, Allan," said his brother, who knew the impression his
mystical words were likely to make on many of the guests, "say nothing
to discourage us."

"Am I he who discourages you?" said Allan; "let every man face his world
as I shall face mine. That which must come, will come; and we shall
stride gallantly over many a field of victory, ere we reach yon fatal
slaughter-place, or tread yon sable scaffolds."

"What slaughter-place? what scaffolds?" exclaimed several voices; for
Allan's renown as a seer was generally established in the Highlands.

"You will know that but too soon," answered Allan. "Speak to me no more,
I am weary of your questions." He then pressed his hand against his
brow, rested his elbow upon his knee, and sunk into a deep reverie.

"Send for Annot Lyle, and the harp," said Angus, in a whisper, to his
servant; "and let those gentlemen follow me who do not fear a Highland
breakfast."

All accompanied their hospitable landlord excepting only Lord Menteith,
who lingered in one of the deep embrasures formed by the windows of the
hall. Annot Lyle shortly after glided into the room, not ill described
by Lord Menteith as being the lightest and most fairy figure that ever
trode the turf by moonlight. Her stature, considerably less than the
ordinary size of women, gave her the appearance of extreme youth,
insomuch, that although she was near eighteen, she might have passed
for four years younger. Her figure, hands, and feet, were formed upon a
model of exquisite symmetry with the size and lightness of her
person, so that Titania herself could scarce have found a more fitting
representative. Her hair was a dark shade of the colour usually termed
flaxen, whose clustering ringlets suited admirably with her fair
complexion, and with the playful, yet simple, expression of her
features. When we add to these charms, that Annot, in her orphan state,
seemed the gayest and happiest of maidens, the reader must allow us to
claim for her the interest of almost all who looked on her. In fact, it
was impossible to find a more universal favourite, and she often
came among the rude inhabitants of the castle, as Allan himself, in
a poetical mood, expressed it, "like a sunbeam on a sullen sea,"
communicating to all others the cheerfulness that filled her own mind.

Annot, such as we have described her, smiled and blushed, when, on
entering the apartment, Lord Menteith came from his place of retirement,
and kindly wished her good-morning.

"And good-morning to you, my lord," returned she, extending her hand to
her friend; "we have seldom seen you of late at the castle, and now I
fear it is with no peaceful purpose."

"At least, let me not interrupt your harmony, Annot," said Lord
Menteith, "though my arrival may breed discord elsewhere. My cousin
Allan needs the assistance of your voice and music."

"My preserver," said Annot Lyle, "has a right to my poor exertions; and
you, too, my lord,--you, too, are my preserver, and were the most
active to save a life that is worthless enough, unless it can benefit my
protectors."

So saying, she sate down at a little distance upon the bench on which
Allan M'Aulay was placed, and tuning her clairshach, a small harp, about
thirty inches in height, she accompanied it with her voice. The air was
an ancient Gaelic melody, and the words, which were supposed to be very
old, were in the same language; but we subjoin a translation of them,
by Secundus Macpherson, Esq. of Glenforgen, which, although submitted to
the fetters of English rhythm, we trust will be found nearly as genuine
as the version of Ossian by his celebrated namesake.

     "Birds of omen dark and foul,
     Night-crow, raven, bat, and owl,
     Leave the sick man to his dream--
     All night long he heard your scream--
     Haste to cave and ruin'd tower,
     Ivy, tod, or dingled bower,
     There to wink and mope, for, hark!
     In the mid air sings the lark.

     "Hie to moorish gills and rocks,
     Prowling wolf and wily fox,--
     Hie you fast, nor turn your view,
     Though the lamb bleats to the ewe.
     Couch your trains, and speed your flight,
     Safety parts with parting night;
     And on distant echo borne,
     Comes the hunter's early horn.

     "The moon's wan crescent scarcely gleams,
     Ghost-like she fades in morning beams;
     Hie hence each peevish imp and fay,
     That scare the pilgrim on his way:--
     Quench, kelpy!  quench, in bog and fen,
     Thy torch that cheats benighted men;
     Thy dance is o'er, thy reign is done,
     For Benyieglo hath seen the sun.

     "Wild thoughts, that, sinful, dark, and deep,
     O'erpower the passive mind in sleep,
     Pass from the slumberer's soul away,
     Like night-mists from the brow of day:
     Foul hag, whose blasted visage grim
     Smothers the pulse, unnerves the limb,
     Spur thy dark palfrey, and begone!
     Thou darest not face the godlike sun."

As the strain proceeded, Allan M'Aulay gradually gave signs of
recovering his presence of mind, and attention to the objects around
him. The deep-knit furrows of his brow relaxed and smoothed themselves;
and the rest of his features, which had seemed contorted with internal
agony, relapsed into a more natural state. When he raised his head
and sat upright, his countenance, though still deeply melancholy,
was divested of its wildness and ferocity; and in its composed state,
although by no means handsome, the expression of his features was
striking, manly, and even noble. His thick, brown eyebrows, which had
hitherto been drawn close together, were now slightly separated, as in
the natural state; and his grey eyes, which had rolled and flashed
from under them with an unnatural and portentous gleam, now recovered a
steady and determined expression.

"Thank God!" he said, after sitting silent for about a minute, until
the very last sounds of the harp had ceased to vibrate, "my soul is no
longer darkened--the mist hath passed from my spirit."

"You owe thanks, cousin Allan," said Lord Menteith, coming forward,
"to Annot Lyle, as well as to heaven, for this happy change in your
melancholy mood."

"My noble cousin Menteith," said Allan, rising and greeting him very
respectfully, as well as kindly, "has known my unhappy circumstances so
long, that his goodness will require no excuse for my being thus late in
bidding him welcome to the castle."

"We are too old acquaintances, Allan," said Lord Menteith, "and too good
friends, to stand on the ceremonial of outward greeting; but half the
Highlands will be here to-day, and you know, with our mountain Chiefs,
ceremony must not be neglected. What will you give little Annot for
making you fit company to meet Evan Dhu, and I know not how many bonnets
and feathers?"

"What will he give me?" said Annot, smiling; "nothing less, I hope, than
the best ribbon at the Fair of Doune."

"The Fair of Doune, Annot?" said Allan sadly; "there will be bloody work
before that day, and I may never see it; but you have well reminded me
of what I have long intended to do."

Having said this, he left the room.

"Should he talk long in this manner," said Lord Menteith, "you must keep
your harp in tune, my dear Annot."

"I hope not," said Annot, anxiously; "this fit has been a long one, and
probably will not soon return. It is fearful to see a mind, naturally
generous and affectionate, afflicted by this constitutional malady."

As she spoke in a low and confidential tone, Lord Menteith naturally
drew close, and stooped forward, that he might the better catch the
sense of what she said. When Allan suddenly entered the apartment,
they as naturally drew back from each other with a manner expressive of
consciousness, as if surprised in a conversation which they wished to
keep secret from him. This did not escape Allan's observation; he stopt
short at the door of the apartment--his brows were contracted--his eyes
rolled; but it was only the paroxysm of a moment. He passed his broad
sinewy hand across his brow, as if to obliterate these signs of emotion,
and advanced towards Annot, holding in his hand a very small box made
of oakwood, curiously inlaid. "I take you to witness," he said, "cousin
Menteith, that I give this box and its contents to Annot Lyle. It
contains a few ornaments that belonged to my poor mother--of trifling
value, you may guess, for the wife of a Highland laird has seldom a rich
jewel-casket."

"But these ornaments," said Annot Lyle, gently and timidly refusing the
box, "belong to the family--I cannot accept--"

"They belong to me alone, Annot," said Allan, interrupting her; "they
were my mother's dying bequest. They are all I can call my own, except
my plaid and my claymore. Take them, therefore--they are to me valueless
trinkets--and keep them for my sake--should I never return from these
wars."

So saying, he opened the case, and presented it to Annot. "If," said he,
"they are of any value, dispose of them for your own support, when this
house has been consumed with hostile fire, and can no longer afford
you protection. But keep one ring in memory of Allan, who has done, to
requite your kindness, if not all he wished, at least all he could."

Annot Lyle endeavoured in vain to restrain the gathering tears, when
she said, "ONE ring, Allan, I will accept from you as a memorial of
your goodness to a poor orphan, but do not press me to take more; for I
cannot, and will not, accept a gift of such disproportioned value."

"Make your choice, then," said Allan; "your delicacy may be well
founded; the others will assume a shape in which they may be more useful
to you."

"Think not of it," said Annot, choosing from the contents of the casket
a ring, apparently the most trifling in value which it contained; "keep
them for your own, or your brother's bride.--But, good heavens!" she
said, interrupting herself, and looking at the ring, "what is this that
I have chosen?"

Allan hastened to look upon it, with eyes of gloomy apprehension; it
bore, in enamel, a death's head above two crossed daggers. When Allan
recognised the device, he uttered a sigh so deep, that she dropped the
ring from her hand, which rolled upon the floor. Lord Menteith picked it
up, and returned it to the terrified Annot.

"I take God to witness," said Allan, in a solemn tone, "that your hand,
young lord, and not mine, has again delivered to her this ill-omened
gift. It was the mourning ring worn by my mother in memorial of her
murdered brother."

"I fear no omens," said Annot, smiling through her tears; "and nothing
coming through the hands of my two patrons," so she was wont to call
Lord Menteith and Allan, "can bring bad luck to the poor orphan."

She put the ring on her finger, and, turning to her harp, sung, to a
lively air, the following verses of one of the fashionable songs of
the period, which had found its way, marked as it was with the quaint
hyperbolical taste of King Charles's time, from some court masque to the
wilds of Perthshire:--

     "Gaze not upon the stars, fond sage,
     In them no influence lies;
     To read the fate of youth or age,
     Look on my Helen's eyes.

     "Yet, rash astrologer, refrain!
     Too dearly would be won
     The prescience of another's pain,
     If purchased by thine own."

"She is right, Allan," said Lord Menteith; "and this end of an old song
