do not know the mad villain who wrote it.  I never knew him."

"You did not," he cried, with an oath, and then laughed scornfully.

"The letter lies in ashes on the hearth," she said.  "'Twas burned
unopened.  Do not ride so close, Sir John, and do not play the madman and
the beast with the wife of my Lord Dunstanwolde."

"'The wife!'" he answered.  "'My lord!'  'Tis a new game this, and well
played, by God!"

She did not so much as waver in her look, and her wide eyes smiled.

"Quite new," she answered him--"quite new.  And could I not have played
it well and fairly, I would not have touched the cards.  Keep your horse
off, Sir John.  Mine is restive, and likes not another beast near him;"
and she touched the creature with her whip, and he was gone like a
thunderbolt.

The next day, being in her room, Anne saw her come from her
dressing-table with a sealed letter in her hand.  She went to the bell
and rang it.

"Anne," she said, "I am going to rate my woman and turn her from my
service.  I shall not beat or swear at her as I was wont to do with my
women in time past.  You will be afraid, perhaps; but you must stay with
me."

She was standing by the fire with the letter held almost at arm's length
in her finger-tips, when the woman entered, who, seeing her face, turned
pale, and casting her eyes upon the letter, paler still, and began to
shake.

"You have attended mistresses of other ways than mine," her lady said in
her slow, clear voice, which seemed to cut as knives do.  "Some fool and
madman has bribed you to serve him.  You cannot serve me also.  Come
hither and put this in the fire.  If 'twere to be done I would make you
hold it in the live coals with your hand."

The woman came shuddering, looking as if she thought she might be struck
dead.  She took the letter and kneeled, ashen pale, to burn it.  When
'twas done, her mistress pointed to the door.

"Go and gather your goods and chattels together, and leave within this
hour," she said.  "I will be my own tirewoman till I can find one who
comes to me honest."

When she was gone, Anne sat gazing at the ashes on the hearth.  She was
pale also.

"Sister," she said, "do you--"

"Yes," answered my lady.  "'Tis a man who loved me, a cur and a knave.  He
thought for an hour he was cured of his passion.  I could have told him
'twould spring up and burn more fierce than ever when he saw another man
possess me.  'Tis so with knaves and curs; and 'tis so with him.  He hath
gone mad again."

"Ay, mad!" cried Anne--"mad, and base, and wicked!"

Clorinda gazed at the ashes, her lips curling.

"He was ever base," she said--"as he was at first, so he is now.  'Tis
thy favourite, Anne," lightly, and she delicately spurned the blackened
tinder with her foot--"thy favourite, John Oxon."

Mistress Anne crouched in her seat and hid her face in her thin hands.

"Oh, my lady!" she cried, not feeling that she could say "sister," "if he
be base, and ever was so, pity him, pity him!  The base need pity more
than all."

For she had loved him madly, all unknowing her own passion, not presuming
even to look up in his beautiful face, thinking of him only as the slave
of her sister, and in dead secrecy knowing strange things--strange
things!  And when she had seen the letter she had known the handwriting,
and the beating of her simple heart had well-nigh strangled her--for she
had seen words writ by him before.

* * * * *

When Dunstanwolde and his lady went back to their house in town, Mistress
Anne went with them.  Clorinda willed that it should be so.  She made her
there as peaceful and retired a nest of her own as she had given to her
at Dunstanwolde.  By strange good fortune Barbara had been wedded to a
plain gentleman, who, being a widower with children, needed a help-meet
in his modest household, and through a distant relationship to Mistress
Wimpole, encountered her charge, and saw in her meekness of spirit the
thing which might fall into the supplying of his needs.  A beauty or a
fine lady would not have suited him; he wanted but a housewife and a
mother for his orphaned children, and this, a young woman who had lived
straitly, and been forced to many contrivances for mere decency of
apparel and ordinary comfort, might be trained to become.

So it fell that Mistress Anne could go to London without pangs of
conscience at leaving her sister in the country and alone.  The
stateliness of the town mansion, my Lady Dunstanwolde's retinue of
lacqueys and serving-women, her little black page, who waited on her and
took her pug dogs to walk, her wardrobe, and jewels, and equipages, were
each and all marvels to her, but seemed to her mind so far befitting that
she remembered, wondering, the days when she had darned the tattered
tapestry in her chamber, and changed the ribbands and fashions of her
gowns.  Being now attired fittingly, though soberly as became her, she
was not in these days--at least, as far as outward seeming went--an
awkward blot upon the scene when she appeared among her sister's company;
but at heart she was as timid and shrinking as ever, and never mingled
with the guests in the great rooms when she could avoid so doing.  Once
or twice she went forth with Clorinda in her coach and six, and saw the
glittering world, while she drew back into her corner of the equipage and
gazed with all a country-bred woman's timorous admiration.

"'Twas grand and like a beautiful show!" she said, when she came home the
first time.  "But do not take me often, sister; I am too plain and shy,
and feel that I am naught in it."

But though she kept as much apart from the great World of Fashion as she
could, she contrived to know of all her sister's triumphs; to see her
when she went forth in her bravery, though 'twere but to drive in the
Mall; to be in her closet with her on great nights when her tirewomen
were decking her in brocades and jewels, that she might show her highest
beauty at some assembly or ball of State.  And at all these times, as
also at all others, she knew that she but shared her own love and dazzled
admiration with my Lord Dunstanwolde, whose tenderness, being so fed by
his lady's unfailing graciousness of bearing and kindly looks and words,
grew with every hour that passed.

They held one night a splendid assembly at which a member of the Royal
House was present.  That night Clorinda bade her sister appear.

"Sometimes--I do not command it always--but sometimes you must show
yourself to our guests.  My lord will not be pleased else.  He says it is
not fitting that his wife's sister should remain unseen as if we hid her
away through ungraciousness.  Your woman will prepare for you all things
needful.  I myself will see that your dress becomes you.  I have
commanded it already, and given much thought to its shape and colour.  I
would have you very comely, Anne."  And she kissed her lightly on her
cheek--almost as gently as she sometimes kissed her lord's grey hair.  In
truth, though she was still a proud lady and stately in her ways, there
had come upon her some strange subtle change Anne could not understand.

On the day on which the assembly was held, Mistress Anne's woman brought
to her a beautiful robe.  'Twas flowered satin of the sheen and softness
of a dove's breast, and the lace adorning it was like a spider's web for
gossamer fineness.  The robe was sweetly fashioned, fitting her shape
wondrously; and when she was attired in it at night a little colour came
into her cheeks to see herself so far beyond all comeliness she had ever
known before.  When she found herself in the midst of the dazzling scene
in the rooms of entertainment, she was glad when at last she could feel
herself lost among the crowd of guests.  Her only pleasure in such scenes
was to withdraw to some hidden corner and look on as at a pageant or a
play.  To-night she placed herself in the shadow of a screen, from which
retreat she could see Clorinda and Dunstanwolde as they received their
guests.  Thus she found enjoyment enough; for, in truth, her love and
almost abject passion of adoration for her sister had grown as his
lordship's had, with every hour.  For a season there had rested upon her
a black shadow beneath which she wept and trembled, bewildered and lost;
though even at its darkest the object of her humble love had been a star
whose brightness was not dimmed, because it could not be so whatsoever
passed before it.  This cloud, however, being it seemed dispelled, the
star had shone but more brilliant in its high place, and she the more
passionately worshipped it.  To sit apart and see her idol's radiance, to
mark her as she reigned and seemed the more royal when she bent the knee
to royalty itself, to see the shimmer of her jewels crowning her midnight
hair and crashing the warm whiteness of her noble neck, to observe the
admiration in all eyes as they dwelt upon her--this was, indeed, enough
of happiness.

"She is, as ever," she murmured, "not so much a woman as a proud lovely
goddess who has deigned to descend to earth.  But my lord does not look
like himself.  He seems shrunk in the face and old, and his eyes have
rings about them.  I like not that.  He is so kind a gentleman and so
happy that his body should not fail him.  I have marked that he has
looked colourless for days, and Clorinda questioned him kindly on it, but
he said he suffered naught."

'Twas but a little later than she had thought this, that she remarked a
gentleman step aside and stand quite near without observing her.  Feeling
that she had no testimony to her fancifulness, she found herself thinking
in a vague fashion that he, too, had come there because he chose to be
unobserved.  'Twould not have been so easy for him to retire as it had
been for her smallness and insignificance to do so; and, indeed, she did
not fancy that he meant to conceal himself, but merely to stand for a
quiet moment a little apart from the crowd.

And as she looked up at him, wondering why this should be, she saw he was
the noblest and most stately gentleman she had ever beheld.

She had never seen him before; he must either be a stranger or a rare
visitor.  As Clorinda was beyond a woman's height, he was beyond a man's.

He carried himself as kingly as she did nobly; he had a countenance of
strong, manly beauty, and a deep tawny eye, thick-fringed and full of
fire; orders glittered upon his breast, and he wore a fair periwig, which
became him wondrously, and seemed to make his eye more deep and burning
by its contrast.

Beside his strength and majesty of bearing the stripling beauty of John
Oxon would have seemed slight and paltry, a thing for flippant women to
trifle with.

Mistress Anne looked at him with an admiration somewhat like reverence,
and as she did so a sudden thought rose to her mind, and even as it rose,
she marked what his gaze rested on, and how it dwelt upon it, and knew
that he had stepped apart to stand and gaze as she did--only with a man's
hid fervour--at her sister's self.

'Twas as if suddenly a strange secret had been told her.  She read it in
his face, because he thought himself unobserved, and for a space had cast
his mask aside.  He stood and gazed as a man who, starving at soul, fed
himself through his eyes, having no hope of other sustenance, or as a man
weary with long carrying of a burden, for a space laid it down for rest
and to gather power to go on.  She heard him draw a deep sigh almost
stifled in its birth, and there was that in his face which she felt it
was unseemly that a stranger like herself should behold, himself
unknowing of her near presence.

She gently rose from her corner, wondering if she could retire from her
retreat without attracting his observation; but as she did so, chance
caused him to withdraw himself a little farther within the shadow of the
screen, and doing so, he beheld her.

Then his face changed; the mask of noble calmness, for a moment fallen,
resumed itself, and he bowed before her with the reverence of a courtly
gentleman, undisturbed by the unexpectedness of his recognition of her
neighbourhood.

"Madam," he said, "pardon my unconsciousness that you were near me.  You
would pass?"  And he made way for her.

She curtseyed, asking his pardon with her dull, soft eyes.

"Sir," she answered, "I but retired here for a moment's rest from the
throng and gaiety, to which I am unaccustomed.  But chiefly I sat in
retirement that I might watch--my sister."

"Your sister, madam?" he said, as if the questioning echo were almost
involuntary, and he bowed again in some apology.

"My Lady Dunstanwolde," she replied.  "I take such pleasure in her
loveliness and in all that pertains to her, it is a happiness to me to
but look on."

Whatsoever the thing was in her loving mood which touched him and found
echo in his own, he was so far moved that he answered to her with
something less of ceremoniousness; remembering also, in truth, that she
was a lady he had heard of, and recalling her relationship and name.

"It is then Mistress Anne Wildairs I am honoured by having speech with,"
he said.  "My Lady Dunstanwolde has spoken of you in my presence.  I am
my lord's kinsman the Duke of Osmonde;" again bowing, and Anne curtseyed
low once more.

Despite his greatness, she felt a kindness and grace in him which was not
condescension, and which almost dispelled the timidity which, being part
of her nature, so unduly beset her at all times when she addressed or was
addressed by a stranger.  John Oxon, bowing his bright curls, and seeming
ever to mock with his smiles, had caused her to be overcome with shy
awkwardness and blushes; but this man, who seemed as far above him in
person and rank and mind as a god is above a graceful painted puppet,
even appeared to give of his own noble strength to her poor weakness.  He
bore himself towards her with a courtly respect such as no human being
had ever shown to her before.  He besought her again to be seated in her
nook, and stood before her conversing with such delicate sympathy with
her mood as seemed to raise her to the pedestal on which stood less
humble women.  All those who passed before them he knew and could speak
easily of.  The high deeds of those who were statesmen, or men honoured
at Court or in the field, he was familiar with; and of those who were
beauties or notable gentlewomen he had always something courtly to say.

Her own worship of her sister she knew full well he understood, though he
spoke of her but little.

"Well may you gaze at her," he said.  "So does all the world, and honours
and adores."

He proffered her at last his arm, and she, having strangely taken
courage, let him lead her through the rooms and persuade her to some
refreshment.  Seeing her so wondrously emerge from her chrysalis, and
under the protection of so distinguished a companion, all looked at her
as she passed with curious amazement, and indeed Mistress Anne was all
but overpowered by the reverence shown them as they made their way.

As they came again into the apartment wherein the host and hostess
received their guests, Anne felt her escort pause, and looked up at him
to see the meaning of his sudden hesitation.  He was gazing intently, not
at Clorinda, but at the Earl of Dunstanwolde.

"Madam," he said, "pardon me that I seem to detain you, but--but I look
at my kinsman.  Madam," with a sudden fear in his voice, "he is ailing--he
sways as he stands.  Let us go to him.  Quickly!  He falls!"

And, in sooth, at that very moment there arose a dismayed cry from the
guests about them, and there was a surging movement; and as they pressed
forward themselves through the throng, Anne saw Dunstanwolde no more
above the people, for he had indeed fallen and lay outstretched and
deathly on the floor.

'Twas but a few seconds before she and Osmonde were close enough to him
to mark his fallen face and ghastly pallor, and a strange dew starting
out upon his brow.

But 'twas his wife who knelt beside his prostrate body, waving all else
aside with a great majestic gesture of her arm.

"Back! back!" she cried.  "Air! air! and water!  My lord!  My dear lord!"

But he did not answer, or even stir, though she bent close to him and
thrust her hand within his breast.  And then the frightened guests beheld
a strange but beautiful and loving thing, such as might have moved any
heart to tenderness and wonder.  This great beauty, this worshipped
creature, put her arms beneath and about the helpless, awful body--for so
its pallor and stillness indeed made it--and lifted it in their powerful
whiteness as if it had been the body of a child, and so bore it to a
couch near and laid it down, kneeling beside it.

Anne and Osmonde were beside her.  Osmonde pale himself, but gently calm
and strong.  He had despatched for a physician the instant he saw the
fall.

"My lady," he said, bending over her, "permit me to approach.  I have
some knowledge of these seizures.  Your pardon!"

He knelt also and took the moveless hand, feeling the pulse; he, too,
thrust his hand within the breast and held it there, looking at the
sunken face.

"My dear lord," her ladyship was saying, as if to the prostrate man's ear
alone, knowing that her tender voice must reach him if aught would--as
indeed was truth.  "Edward!  My dear--dear lord!"

Osmonde held his hand steadily over the heart.  The guests shrunk back,
stricken with terror.

There was that in this corner of the splendid room which turned faces
pale.

Osmonde slowly withdrew his hand, and turning to the kneeling woman--with
a pallor like that of marble, but with a noble tenderness and pity in his
eyes--

"My lady," he said, "you are a brave woman.  Your great courage must
sustain you.  The heart beats no more.  A noble life is finished."

* * * * *

The guests heard, and drew still farther back, a woman or two faintly
whimpering; a hurrying lacquey parted the crowd, and so, way being made
for him, the physician came quickly forward.

Anne put her shaking hands up to cover her gaze.  Osmonde stood still,
looking down.  My Lady Dunstanwolde knelt by the couch and hid her
beautiful face upon the dead man's breast.




CHAPTER XII--Which treats of the obsequies of my Lord of Dunstanwolde, of
his lady's widowhood, and of her return to town


All that remained of my Lord Dunstanwolde was borne back to his ancestral
home, and there laid to rest in the ancient tomb in which his fathers
slept.  Many came from town to pay him respect, and the Duke of Osmonde
was, as was but fitting, among them.  The countess kept her own
apartments, and none but her sister, Mistress Anne, beheld her.

The night before the final ceremonies she spent sitting by her lord's
coffin, and to Anne it seemed that her mood was a stranger one, than ever
woman had before been ruled by.  She did not weep or moan, and only once
kneeled down.  In her sweeping black robes she seemed more a majestic
creature than she had ever been, and her beauty more that of a statue
than of a mortal woman.  She sent away all other watchers, keeping only
her sister with her, and Anne observed in her a strange protecting
gentleness when she spoke of the dead man.

"I do not know whether dead men can feel and hear," she said.  "Sometimes
there has come into my mind--and made me shudder--the thought that,
though they lie so still, mayhap they know what we do--and how they are
spoken of as nothings whom live men and women but wait a moment to thrust
away, that their own living may go on again in its accustomed way, or
perchance more merrily.  If my lord knows aught, he will be grateful that
I watch by him to-night in this solemn room.  He was ever grateful, and
moved by any tenderness of mine."

'Twas as she said, the room was solemn, and this almost to awfulness.  It
was a huge cold chamber at best, and draped with black, and hung with
hatchments; a silent gloom filled it which made it like a tomb.  Tall wax-
candles burned in it dimly, but adding to its solemn shadows with their
faint light; and in his rich coffin the dead man lay in his shroud, his
hands like carvings of yellowed ivory clasped upon his breast.

Mistress Anne dared not have entered the place alone, and was so overcome
at sight of the pinched nostrils and sunk eyes that she turned cold with
fear.  But Clorinda seemed to feel no dread or shrinking.  She went and
stood beside the great funeral-draped bed of state on which the coffin
lay, and thus standing, looked down with a grave, protecting pity in her
face.  Then she stooped and kissed the dead man long upon the brow.

"I will sit by you to-night," she said.  "That which lies here will be
alone to-morrow.  I will not leave you this last night.  Had I been in
your place you would not leave me."

She sat down beside him and laid her strong warm hand upon his cold waxen
ones, closing it over them as if she would give them heat.  Anne knelt
and prayed--that all might be forgiven, that sins might be blotted out,
that this kind poor soul might find love and peace in the kingdom of
Heaven, and might not learn there what might make bitter the memory of
his last year of rapture and love.  She was so simple that she forgot
that no knowledge of the past could embitter aught when a soul looked
back from Paradise.

Throughout the watches of the night her sister sat and held the dead
man's hand; she saw her more than once smooth his grey hair almost as a
mother might have touched a sick sleeping child's; again she kissed his
forehead, speaking to him gently, as if to tell him he need not fear, for
she was close at hand; just once she knelt, and Anne wondered if she
prayed, and in what manner, knowing that prayer was not her habit.

'Twas just before dawn she knelt so, and when she rose and stood beside
him, looking down again, she drew from the folds of her robe a little
package.

"Anne," she said, as she untied the ribband that bound it, "when first I
was his wife I found him one day at his desk looking at these things as
they lay upon his hand.  He thought at first it would offend me to find
him so; but I told him that I was gentler than he thought--though not so
gentle as the poor innocent girl who died in giving him his child.  'Twas
her picture he was gazing at, and a little ring and two locks of hair--one
a brown ringlet from her head, and one--such a tiny wisp of down--from
the head of her infant.  I told him to keep them always and look at them
often, remembering how innocent she had been, and that she had died for
him.  There were tears on my hand when he kissed it in thanking me.  He
kept the little package in his desk, and I have brought it to him."

The miniature was of a sweet-faced girl with large loving childish eyes,
and cheeks that blushed like the early morning.  Clorinda looked at her
almost with tenderness.

"There is no marrying or giving in marriage, 'tis said," quoth she; "but
were there, 'tis you who were his wife--not I.  I was but a lighter
thing, though I bore his name and he honoured me.  When you and your
child greet him he will forget me--and all will be well."

She held the miniature and the soft hair to his cold lips a moment, and
Anne saw with wonder that her own mouth worked.  She slipped the ring on
his least finger, and hid the picture and the ringlets within the palms
of his folded hands.
