and Memphis; but something there is, here and there, that may serve to
express to you some notion of that antique civilization which has
humanized the world.  Devote, then, to the austere friend of your youth,
one of these bright summer evenings, and let me boast that my gloomy
mansion has been honored with the presence of the admired Ione.'

Unconscious of the pollutions of the mansion, of the danger that awaited
her, Ione readily assented to the proposal.  The next evening was fixed
for the visit; and the Egyptian, with a serene countenance, and a heart
beating with fierce and unholy joy, departed. Scarce had he gone, when
another visitor claimed admission....  But now we return to Glaucus.



Chapter V

THE POOR TORTOISE.  NEW CHANGES FOR NYDIA.

THE morning sun shone over the small and odorous garden enclosed within
the peristyle of the house of the Athenian.  He lay reclined, sad and
listlessly, on the smooth grass which intersected the viridarium; and a
slight canopy stretched above, broke the fierce rays of the summer sun.

When that fairy mansion was first disinterred from the earth they found
in the garden the shell of a tortoise that had been its inmate.  That
animal, so strange a link in the creation, to which Nature seems to have
denied all the pleasure of life, save life's passive and dream-like
perception, had been the guest of the place for years before Glaucus
purchased it; for years, indeed which went beyond the memory of man, and
to which tradition assigned an almost incredible date.  The house
had been built and rebuilt--its possessors had changed and
fluctuated--generations had flourished and decayed--and still the
tortoise dragged on its slow and unsympathizing existence.  In the
earthquake, which sixteen years before had overthrown many of the public
buildings of the city, and scared away the amazed inhabitants, the house
now inhabited by Glaucus had been terribly shattered.  The possessors
deserted it for many days; on their return they cleared away the ruins
which encumbered the viridarium, and found still the tortoise, unharmed
and unconscious of the surrounding destruction.  It seemed to bear a
charmed life in its languid blood and imperceptible motions; yet it was
not so inactive as it seemed: it held a regular and monotonous course;
inch by inch it traversed the little orbit of its domain, taking months
to accomplish the whole gyration.  It was a restless voyager, that
tortoise!--patiently, and with pain, did it perform its self-appointed
journeys, evincing no interest in the things around it--a philosopher
concentrated in itself.  There was something grand in its solitary
selfishness!--the sun in which it basked--the waters poured daily over
it--the air, which it insensibly inhaled, were its sole and unfailing
luxuries.  The mild changes of the season, in that lovely clime,
affected it not.  It covered itself with its shell--as the saint in his
piety--as the sage in his wisdom--as the lover in his hope.

It was impervious to the shocks and mutations of time--it was an emblem
of time itself: slow, regular, perpetual; unwitting of the passions that
fret themselves around--of the wear and tear of mortality.  The poor
tortoise! nothing less than the bursting of volcanoes, the convulsions
of the riven world, could have quenched its sluggish spark!  The
inexorable Death, that spared not pomp or beauty, passed unheedingly by
a thing to which death could bring so insignificant a change.

For this animal the mercurial and vivid Greek felt all the wonder and
affection of contrast.  He could spend hours in surveying its creeping
progress, in moralizing over its mechanism.  He despised it in joy--he
envied it in sorrow.

Regarding it now as he lay along the sward--its dull mass moving while
it seemed motionless, the Athenian murmured to himself:

'The eagle dropped a stone from his talons, thinking to break thy shell:
the stone crushed the head of a poet.  This is the allegory of Fate!
Dull thing!  Thou hadst a father and a mother; perhaps, ages ago, thou
thyself hadst a mate.  Did thy parents love, or didst thou?  Did thy
slow blood circulate more gladly when thou didst creep to the side of
thy wedded one? Wert thou capable of affection? Could it distress thee
if she were away from thy side?  Couldst thou feel when she was present?
What would I not give to know the history of thy mailed breast--to gaze
upon the mechanism of thy faint desires--to mark what hair--breadth
difference separates thy sorrow from thy joy!  Yet, methinks, thou
wouldst know if Ione were present!  Thou wouldst feel her coming like a
happier air--like a gladder sun.  I envy thee now, for thou knowest not
that she is absent; and I--would I could be like thee--between the
intervals of seeing her!  What doubt, what presentiment, haunts me! why
will she not admit me?  Days have passed since I heard her voice.  For
the first time, life grows flat to me.  I am as one who is left alone at
a banquet, the lights dead, and the flowers faded.  Ah! Ione, couldst
thou dream how I adore thee!'

From these enamoured reveries, Glaucus was interrupted by the entrance
of Nydia.  She came with her light, though cautious step, along the
marble tablinum.  She passed the portico, and paused at the flowers
which bordered the garden.  She had her water-vase in her hand, and she
sprinkled the thirsting plants, which seemed to brighten at her
approach.  She bent to inhale their odor.  She touched them timidly and
caressingly.  She felt, along their stems, if any withered leaf or
creeping insect marred their beauty.  And as she hovered from flower to
flower, with her earnest and youthful countenance and graceful motions,
you could not have imagined a fitter handmaid for the goddess of the
garden.

'Nydia, my child!' said Glaucus.

At the sound of his voice she paused at once--listening, blushing,
breathless; with her lips parted, her face upturned to catch the
direction of the sound, she laid down the vase--she hastened to him; and
wonderful it was to see how unerringly she threaded her dark way through
the flowers, and came by the shortest path to the side of her new lord.

'Nydia,' said Glaucus, tenderly stroking back her long and beautiful
hair, 'it is now three days since thou hast been under the protection of
my household gods.  Have they smiled on thee?  Art thou happy?'

'Ah! so happy!' sighed the slave.

'And now,' continued Glaucus, 'that thou hast recovered somewhat from
the hateful recollections of thy former state,--and now that they have
fitted thee (touching her broidered tunic) with garments more meet for
thy delicate shape--and now, sweet child, that thou hast accustomed
thyself to a happiness, which may the gods grant thee ever! I am about
to pray at thy hands a boon.'

'Oh! what can I do for thee?' said Nydia, clasping her hands.

'Listen,' said Glaucus, 'and young as thou art, thou shalt be my
confidant. Hast thou ever heard the name of Ione?'

The blind girl gasped for breath, and turning pale as one of the statues
which shone upon them from the peristyle, she answered with an effort,
and after a moment's pause:

'Yes!  I have heard that she is of Neapolis, and beautiful.'

'Beautiful! her beauty is a thing to dazzle the day!  Neapolis! nay, she
is Greek by origin; Greece only could furnish forth such shapes.  Nydia,
I love her!'

'I thought so,' replied Nydia, calmly.

'I love, and thou shalt tell her so.  I am about to send thee to her.
Happy Nydia, thou wilt be in her chamber--thou wilt drink the music of
her voice--thou wilt bask in the sunny air of her presence!'

'What! what! wilt thou send me from thee?'

'Thou wilt go to Ione,' answered Glaucus, in a tone that said, 'What
more canst thou desire?'

Nydia burst into tears.

Glaucus, raising himself, drew her towards him with the soothing
caresses of a brother.

'My child, my Nydia, thou weepest in ignorance of the happiness I bestow
on thee.  She is gentle, and kind, and soft as the breeze of spring. She
will be a sister to thy youth--she will appreciate thy winning
talents--she will love thy simple graces as none other could, for they
are like her own. Weepest thou still, fond fool?  I will not force thee,
sweet. Wilt thou not do for me this kindness?'

'Well, if I can serve thee, command.  See, I weep no longer--I am calm.'

'That is my own Nydia,' continued Glaucus, kissing her hand. 'Go, then,
to her: if thou art disappointed in her kindness--if I have deceived
thee, return when thou wilt.  I do not give thee to another; I but lend.
My home ever be thy refuge, sweet one.  Ah! would it could shelter all
the friendless and distressed!  But if my heart whispers truly, I shall
claim thee again soon, my child.  My home and Ione's will become the
same, and thou shalt dwell with both.'

A shiver passed through the slight frame of the blind girl, but she wept
no more--she was resigned.

'Go, then, my Nydia, to Ione's house--they shall show thee the way. Take
her the fairest flowers thou canst pluck; the vase which contains them I
will give thee: thou must excuse its unworthiness.  Thou shalt take,
too, with thee the lute that I gave thee yesterday, and from which thou
knowest so well to awaken the charming spirit.  Thou shalt give her,
also, this letter, in which, after a hundred efforts, I have embodied
something of my thoughts. Let thy ear catch every accent, every
modulation of her voice, and tell me, when we meet again, if its music
should flatter me or discourage.  It is now, Nydia, some days since I
have been admitted to Ione; there is something mysterious in this
exclusion.  I am distracted with doubts and fears; learn--for thou art
quick, and thy care for me will sharpen tenfold thy acuteness--learn the
cause of this unkindness; speak of me as often as thou canst; let my
name come ever to thy lips: insinuate how I love rather than proclaim
it; watch if she sighs whilst thou speakest, if she answer thee; or, if
she reproves, in what accents she reproves.  Be my friend, plead for me:
and oh! how vastly wilt thou overpay the little I have done for thee!
Thou comprehendest, Nydia; thou art yet a child--have I said more than
thou canst understand?'

'No.'

'And thou wilt serve me?'

'Yes.'

'Come to me when thou hast gathered the flowers, and I will give thee
the vase I speak of; seek me in the chamber of Leda.  Pretty one, thou
dost not grieve now?'

'Glaucus, I am a slave; what business have I with grief or joy?'

'Sayest thou so?  No, Nydia, be free.  I give thee freedom; enjoy it as
thou wilt, and pardon me that I reckoned on thy desire to serve me.'

'You are offended.  Oh! I would not, for that which no freedom can give,
offend you, Glaucus.  My guardian, my saviour, my protector, forgive the
poor blind girl!  She does not grieve even in leaving thee, if she can
contribute to thy happiness.'

'May the gods bless this grateful heart!' said Glaucus, greatly moved;
and, unconscious of the fires he excited, he repeatedly kissed her
forehead.

'Thou forgivest me,' said she, 'and thou wilt talk no more of freedom;
my happiness is to be thy slave: thou hast promised thou wilt not give
me to another...'

'I have promised.'

'And now, then, I will gather the flowers.'

Silently, Nydia took from the hand of Glaucus the costly and jewelled
vase, in which the flowers vied with each other in hue and fragrance;
tearlessly she received his parting admonition.  She paused for a moment
when his voice ceased--she did not trust herself to reply--she sought
his hand--she raised it to her lips, dropped her veil over her face, and
passed at once from his presence.  She paused again as she reached the
threshold; she stretched her hands towards it, and murmured:

'Three happy days--days of unspeakable delight, have I known since I
passed thee--blessed threshold! may peace dwell ever with thee when I am
gone!  And now, my heart tears itself from thee, and the only sound it
utters bids me--die!'



Chapter VI

THE HAPPY BEAUTY AND THE BLIND SLAVE.

A SLAVE entered the chamber of Ione.  A messenger from Glaucus desired
to be admitted.

Ione hesitated an instant.

'She is blind, that messenger,' said the slave; 'she will do her
commission to none but thee.'

Base is that heart which does not respect affliction!  The moment she
heard the messenger was blind, Ione felt the impossibility of returning
a chilling reply.  Glaucus had chosen a herald that was indeed sacred--a
herald that could not be denied.

'What can he want with me? what message can he send?' and the heart of
Ione beat quick.  The curtain across the door was withdrawn; a soft and
echoless step fell upon the marble; and Nydia, led by one of the
attendants, entered with her precious gift.

She stood still a moment, as if listening for some sound that might
direct her.

'Will the noble Ione,' said she, in a soft and low voice, 'deign to
speak, that I may know whither to steer these benighted steps, and that
I may lay my offerings at her feet?'

'Fair child,' said Ione, touched and soothingly, 'give not thyself the
pain to cross these slippery floors, my attendant will bring to me what
thou hast to present'; and she motioned to the handmaid to take the
vase.

'I may give these flowers to none but thee,' answered Nydia; and, guided
by her ear, she walked slowly to the place where Ione sat, and kneeling
when she came before her, proffered the vase.

Ione took it from her hand, and placed it on the table at her side.  She
then raised her gently, and would have seated her on the couch, but the
girl modestly resisted.

'I have not yet discharged my office,' said she; and she drew the letter
of Glaucus from her vest.  'This will, perhaps, explain why he who sent
me chose so unworthy a messenger to Ione.'

The Neapolitan took the letter with a hand, the trembling of which Nydia
at once felt and sighed to feel.  With folded arms, and downcast looks,
she stood before the proud and stately form of Ione--no less proud,
perhaps, in her attitude of submission.  Ione waved her hand, and the
attendants withdrew; she gazed again upon the form of the young slave in
surprise and beautiful compassion; then, retiring a little from her, she
opened and read the following letter:

'Glaucus to Ione sends more than he dares to utter.  Is Ione ill? thy
slaves tell me "No", and that assurance comforts me.  Has Glaucus
offended Ione?--ah! that question I may not ask from them.  For five
days I have been banished from thy presence.  Has the sun shone?--I know
it not.  Has the sky smiled?--it has had no smile for me.  My sun and my
sky are Ione.  Do I offend thee?  Am I too bold?  Do I say that on the
tablet which my tongue has hesitated to breathe?  Alas! it is in thine
absence that I feel most the spells by which thou hast subdued me.  And
absence, that deprives me of joy, brings me courage.  Thou wilt not see
me; thou hast banished also the common flatterers that flock around
thee.  Canst thou confound me with them?  It is not possible! Thou
knowest too well that I am not of them--that their clay is not mine. For
even were I of the humblest mould, the fragrance of the rose has
penetrated me, and the spirit of thy nature hath passed within me, to
embalm, to sanctify, to inspire.  Have they slandered me to thee, Ione?
Thou wilt not believe them.  Did the Delphic oracle itself tell me thou
wert unworthy, I would not believe it; and am I less incredulous than
thou I think of the last time we met--of the song which I sang to
thee--of the look that thou gavest me in return. Disguise it as thou wilt,
Ione, there is something kindred between us, and our eyes acknowledged
it, though our lips were silent.  Deign to see me, to listen to me, and
after that exclude me if thou wilt.  I meant not so soon to say I loved.
But those words rush to my heart--they will have way.  Accept, then, my
homage and my vows.  We met first at the shrine of Pallas; shall we not
meet before a softer and a more ancient altar?

'Beautiful! adored Ione!  If my hot youth and my Athenian blood have
misguided and allured me, they have but taught my wanderings to
appreciate the rest--the haven they have attained.  I hang up my
dripping robes on the Sea-god's shrine.  I have escaped shipwreck.  I
have found THEE.  Ione, deign to see me; thou art gentle to strangers,
wilt thou be less merciful to those of thine own land?  I await thy
reply.  Accept the flowers which I send--their sweet breath has a
language more eloquent than words.  They take from the sun the odorous
they return--they are the emblem of the love that receives and repays
tenfold--the emblem of the heart that drunk thy rays, and owes to thee
the germ of the treasures that it proffers to thy smile.  I send these
by one whom thou wilt receive for her own sake, if not for mine. She,
like us, is a stranger; her fathers' ashes lie under brighter skies:
but, less happy than we, she is blind and a slave.  Poor Nydia!  I seek
as much as possible to repair to her the cruelties of Nature and of
Fate, in asking permission to place her with thee.  She is gentle,
quick, and docile. She is skilled in music and the song; and she is a
very Chloris to the flowers.  She thinks, Ione, that thou wilt love her:
if thou dost not, send her back to me.

'One word more--let me be bold, Ione.  Why thinkest thou so highly of
yon dark Egyptian? he hath not about him the air of honest men.  We
Greeks learn mankind from our cradle; we are not the less profound, in
that we affect no sombre mien; our lips smile, but our eyes are
grave--they observe--they note--they study.  Arbaces is not one to be
credulously trusted: can it be that he hath wronged me to thee?  I think
it, for I left him with thee; thou sawest how my presence stung him;
since then thou hast not admitted me. Believe nothing that he can say to
my disfavor; if thou dost, tell me so at once; for this Ione owes to
Glaucus.  Farewell! this letter touches thy hand; these characters meet
thine eyes--shall they be more blessed than he who is their author. Once
more, farewell!'

It seemed to Ione, as she read this letter, as if a mist had fallen from
her eyes.  What had been the supposed offence of Glaucus?--that he had
not really loved!  And now, plainly, and in no dubious terms, he
confessed that love.  From that moment his power was fully restored.  At
every tender word in that letter, so full of romantic and trustful
passion, her heart smote her.  And had she doubted his faith, and had
she believed another? and had she not, at least, allowed to him the
culprit's right to know his crime, to plead in his defence?--the tears
rolled down her cheeks--she kissed the letter--she placed it in her
bosom: and, turning to Nydia, who stood in the same place and in the
same posture:

'Wilt thou sit, my child,' said she, 'while I write an answer to this
letter?'

'You will answer it, then!' said Nydia, coldly.  'Well, the slave that
accompanied me will take back your answer.'

'For you,' said Ione, 'stay with me--trust me, your service shall be
light.'

Nydia bowed her head.

'What is your name, fair girl?'

'They call me Nydia.'

'Your country?'

'The land of Olympus--Thessaly.'

'Thou shalt be to me a friend,' said Ione, caressingly, 'as thou art
already half a countrywoman.  Meanwhile, I beseech thee, stand not on
these cold and glassy marbles.  There! now that thou art seated, I can
leave thee for an instant.'

'Ione to Glaucus greeting.  Come to me, Glaucus,' wrote Ione, 'come to
me to-morrow.  I may have been unjust to thee; but I will tell thee, at
least, the fault that has been imputed to thy charge.  Fear not,
henceforth, the Egyptian--fear none.  Thou sayest thou hast expressed
too much--alas! in these hasty words I have already done so. Farewell.'

As Ione reappeared with the letter, which she did not dare to read after
she had written (Ah! common rashness, common timidity of love!)--Nydia
started from her seat.

'You have written to Glaucus?'

'I have.'

'And will he thank the messenger who gives to him thy letter?'

Ione forgot that her companion was blind; she blushed from the brow to
the neck, and remained silent.

'I mean this,' added Nydia, in a calmer tone; 'the lightest word of
coldness from thee will sadden him--the lightest kindness will rejoice.
If it be the first, let the slave take back thine answer; if it be the
last, let me--I will return this evening.'

'And why, Nydia,' asked Ione, evasively, 'Wouldst thou be the bearer of
my letter?'

'It is so, then!' said Nydia.  'Ah! how could it be otherwise; who could
be unkind to Glaucus?'

'My child,' said Ione, a little more reservedly than before, 'thou
speakest warmly--Glaucus, then, is amiable in thine eyes?'

'Noble Ione! Glaucus has been that to me which neither fortune nor the
gods have been--a friend!'

The sadness mingled with dignity with which Nydia uttered these simple
words, affected the beautiful Ione: she bent down and kissed her.  'Thou
art grateful, and deservedly so; why should I blush to say that Glaucus
is worthy of thy gratitude?  Go, my Nydia--take to him thyself this
letter--but return again.  If I am from home when thou returnest--as
this evening, perhaps, I shall be--thy chamber shall be prepared next my
own.  Nydia, I have no sister--wilt thou be one to me?' The Thessalian
kissed the hand of Ione, and then said, with some embarrassment:

'One favor, fair Ione--may I dare to ask it?'

'Thou canst not ask what I will not grant,' replied the Neapolitan.

'They tell me,' said Nydia, 'that thou art beautiful beyond the
loveliness of earth.  Alas! I cannot see that which gladdens the world!
Wilt thou suffer me, then, to pass my hand over thy face?--that is my
sole criterion of beauty, and I usually guess aright.'

She did not wait for the answer of Ione, but, as she spoke, gently and
slowly passed her hand over the bending and half-averted features of the
Greek--features which but one image in the world can yet depicture and
recall--that image is the mutilated, but all-wondrous, statue in her
native city--her own Neapolis--that Parian face, before which all the
beauty of the Florentine Venus is poor and earthly--that aspect so full
of harmony--of youth--of genius--of the soul--which modern critics have
supposed the representation of Psyche.

Her touch lingered over the braided hair and polished brow--over the
downy and damask cheek--over the dimpled lip--the swan-like and whitish
neck.  'I know now, that thou art beautiful,' she said: 'and I can
picture thee to my darkness henceforth, and for ever!'

When Nydia left her, Ione sank into a deep but delicious reverie.
Glaucus then loved her; he owned it--yes, he loved her.  She drew forth
again that dear confession; she paused over every word, she kissed every
line; she did not ask why he had been maligned, she only felt assured
that he had been so. She wondered how she had ever believed a syllable
against him; she wondered how the Egyptian had been enabled to exercise
a power against Glaucus; she felt a chill creep over her as she again
turned to his warning against Arbaces, and her secret fear of that
gloomy being darkened into awe.  She was awakened from these thoughts by
her maidens, who came to announce to her that the hour appointed to
visit Arbaces was arrived; she started, she had forgotten the promise.
Her first impression was to renounce it; her second, was to laugh at her
own fears of her eldest surviving friend.  She hastened to add the usual
ornaments to her dress, and doubtful whether she should yet question the
Egyptian more closely with respect to his accusation of Glaucus, or
whether she should wait till, without citing the authority, she should
insinuate to Glaucus the accusation itself, she took her way to the
gloomy mansion of Arbaces.



Chapter VII

IONE ENTRAPPED.  THE MOUSE TRIES TO GNAW THE NET.

'DEAREST Nydia!' exclaimed Glaucus as he read the letter of Ione,
'whitest robed messenger that ever passed between earth and heaven--how,
how shall I thank thee?'

'I am rewarded,' said the poor Thessalian.

'To-morrow--to-morrow! how shall I while the hours till then?'

The enamoured Greek would not let Nydia escape him, though she sought
several times to leave the chamber; he made her recite to him over and
over again every syllable of the brief conversation that had taken place
between her and Ione; a thousand times, forgetting her misfortune, he
questioned her of the looks, of the countenance of his beloved; and then
quickly again excusing his fault, he bade her recommence the whole
recital which he had thus interrupted.  The hours thus painful to Nydia
passed rapidly and delightfully to him, and the twilight had already
darkened ere he once more dismissed her to Ione with a fresh letter and
with new flowers.  Scarcely had she gone, than Clodius and several of
his gay companions broke in upon him; they rallied him on his seclusion
during the whole day, and absence from his customary haunts; they
invited him to accompany them to the various resorts in that lively
city, which night and day proffered diversity to pleasure.  Then, as
now, in the south (for no land, perhaps, losing more of greatness has
retained more of custom), it was the delight of the Italians to assemble
at the evening; and, under the porticoes of temples or the shade of the
groves that interspersed the streets, listening to music or the recitals
of some inventive tale-teller, they hailed the rising moon with
libations of wine and the melodies of song.  Glaucus was too happy to be
unsocial; he longed to cast off the exuberance of joy that oppressed
him. He willingly accepted the proposal of his comrades, and laughingly
they sallied out together down the populous and glittering streets.

In the meantime Nydia once more gained the house of Ione, who had long
left it; she inquired indifferently whither Ione had gone.

The answer arrested and appalled her.

'To the house of Arbaces--of the Egyptian?  Impossible!'

'It is true, my little one,' said the slave, who had replied to her
question.  'She has known the Egyptian long.'

'Long! ye gods, yet Glaucus loves her?' murmured Nydia to herself.

'And has,' asked she aloud, 'has she often visited him before?'

'Never till now,' answered the slave.  'If all the rumored scandal of
Pompeii be true, it would be better, perhaps, if she had not ventured
there at present.  But she, poor mistress mine, hears nothing of that
which reaches us; the talk of the vestibulum reaches not to the
peristyle.'

'Never till now!' repeated Nydia.  'Art thou sure?'

'Sure, pretty one: but what is that to thee or to us?'

Nydia hesitated a moment, and then, putting down the flowers with which
she had been charged, she called to the slave who had accompanied her,
and left the house without saying another word.

Not till she had got half-way back to the house of Glaucus did she break
silence, and even then she only murmured inly:

'She does not dream--she cannot--of the dangers into which she has
plunged. Fool that I am--shall I save her?--yes, for I love Glaucus
better than myself.'

When she arrived at the house of the Athenian, she learnt that he had
gone out with a party of his friends, and none knew whither.  He
probably would not be home before midnight.

The Thessalian groaned; she sank upon a seat in the hall and covered her
face with her hands as if to collect her thoughts. 'There is no time to
be lost,' thought she, starting up.  She turned to the slave who had
accompanied her.

'Knowest thou,' said she, 'if Ione has any relative, any intimate friend
at Pompeii?'

'Why, by Jupiter!' answered the slave, 'art thou silly enough to ask the
question?  Every one in Pompeii knows that Ione has a brother who, young
and rich, has been--under the rose I speak--so foolish as to become a
priest of Isis.'

'A priest of Isis!  O Gods!  his name?'

'Apaecides.'

'I know it all,' muttered Nydia: 'brother and sister, then, are to be
both victims! Apaecides! yes, that was the name I heard in...  Ha! he
well, then, knows the peril that surrounds his sister; I will go to
him.'

She sprang up at that thought, and taking the staff which always guided
her steps, she hastened to the neighboring shrine of Isis. Till she had
been under the guardianship of the kindly Greek, that staff had sufficed
to conduct the poor blind girl from corner to corner of Pompeii.  Every
street, every turning in the more frequented parts, was familiar to her;
and as the inhabitants entertained a tender and half-superstitious
veneration for those subject to her infirmity, the passengers had always
given way to her timid steps.  Poor girl, she little dreamed that she
should, ere many days were passed, find her blindness her protection,
and a guide far safer than the keenest eyes!

But since she had been under the roof of Glaucus, he had ordered a slave
